URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/lawreform/TASLRI/2020/30.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:49:52
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Jurors, Social Media and the Right of an Accused to a Fair Trial [2020] TASLRI 30
Jurors, Social Media and the Right of an Accused to a Fair
FINAL REPORT NO. 30
JANUARY 2020
and abbreviations
for ‘At the end of the day’.
common handle on social media platforms such as
to attach to
photographs to indicate that no photographic editing filter has been applied to
#motivation
A popular hashtag on social media platforms such as
which is used to accompany positive,
inspirational and uplifting content.
Acronym for ‘as far as I can tell’.
Acronym for
‘Ask me Anything’. A common post on social
networking site ‘Reddit’, whereby the user encourages and then
answers questions posed by the Reddit community at large.
A copy of computer data (such as a file or the contents of a hard drive).
Also, the act or instance of making a back-up.
short text portion of any digital profile designed to explain who the user is.
It is common to all social media platforms.
of most social media networks can unrestrictedly block other users, typically by
preventing them from sending messages or viewing
the blocker’s information
or profile.
website that contains online personal reflections, comments, and often
hyperlinks, videos, and photographs provided by the writer.
Also refers to a
feature appearing as part of an online publication that typically relates to a
particular topic and consists of
articles and personal commentary by one or more
2010, Facebook introduced a ‘Check-In’ feature on the social media
platform that allowed users to use the GPS on their
mobile phone to let their
‘friends’ know exactly where they are and to comment upon what they
might be doing at that
designed to make readers want to click on a hyperlink, especially when the link
leads to content of dubious value or interest.
Click-through rate
metric for reporting on the number of people who viewed a piece of content then
took an action, such as clicking on an advertisement
or link (used in
‘pay-per-click’ advertising).
Acronym for
‘does anyone else’. Commonly used as the beginning of a discussion
, inviting users to post responses in relation to the
relevant topic/experience.
Dropping the pin
act of letting other users know your particular location in
Google Maps
or any other application that shows your location on a map.
Acronym for ‘End of Thread’. A thread is an online discussion
where a series of responses have been posted as replies
to each other.
‘End of Thread’ refers to the end of such an online
discussion.
In the context of digital technology, the term embed refers to placing
text, images, sound or computer code in a computer file, HTML
document, software
program or electronic device.
Used online in written form (including
) and can also be visually represented by emojis, emoticons and
in memes. It refers to the physical gesture of placing one’s
hand across
one’s face or lowering one’s face into one’s hand/s, covering
or closing one’s eyes. The gesture
is commonly understood as a display of
frustration, disappointment, exasperation, shock, surprise or incredulous
Deliberate disinformation or hoaxes spread commonly online and via social
subscribe to the feed of (someone or something) especially on social
for ‘Fear of Missing Out’.
A common term used in
online forums to refer to what a user aspires to.
word or phrase preceded by the symbol ‘#’ that classifies or
categorises the accompanying text (such as a tweet).
Acronym for
‘hope this helps’. Commonly used in the course of online
communications when a user sends another user information
that is thought to be
useful, often when answering a question.
for ‘In case you missed it’. Commonly used on
Indicating the posting of material that is not new and/or used to draw
someone’s attention to something you think they should
Acronym for ‘I don’t know’.
In 140 characters or less
Traditionally
the character limit for individual text entries – ‘tweets’
– published on social media platform,
person with the ability to influence potential buyers of a product or service by
promoting or recommending the items on social media.
Acronym for ‘in my humble opinion’. Used in posts on social
media and other internet platforms to indicate that material
posted is opinion
as opposed to objective fact.
mailing list software that distributes emails to subscribers on an electronic
mailing list.
for ‘Laughing Out Loud’.
Feed is the constantly updating list of stories in the middle of a
activity and likes from people, pages and groups that the
user follows on
for ‘original content’. Referring to online content that is new,
unique and/or original and was created by the
user posting it.
practice of sending fraudulent electronic communications, commonly emails and
electronic messages, purporting to be from reputable
companies in an attempt to
induce individuals to reveal sensitive personal information such as usernames,
passwords and credit card
Notification
users receive notifications which alert them about
These notifications pop-up on the user’s desktop computer and/or their
mobile phone.
notifications cannot be turned off completely,
however, they can be adjusted in the user’s
for ‘point of view’.
settings on
are settings available to a user to restrict what
content is visible and available to other users.
‘profile’ is an individual’s personal
account where that user can share information about themselves, upload photos
and videos and post updates and maintain a ‘friends’ list.
Acronym for
‘question for you’.
Acronym for
‘question and answer’.
Acronym for ‘reading between the lines’.
data metric that determines the maximum potential audience for any given
action of capturing what is shown on the screen of a device to a static image
file; taking a snapshot or picture of whatever is
showing on the screen of a
computer, mobile, or tablet screen.
act of sending photos, videos and other content to ‘friends’ with
social media accounts.
Status update
‘status’ is an update feature which allows users to
share a small amount of content on their profile, their friends’
news feeds. A ‘status update’ is the act of a
user updating this content.
is a social media functionality commonly used on
that allows users to create a link back to the profile of the
person shown in the picture or targeted by the update.
Acronym for ‘To Be Honest’ used widely in communications on
social media and other internet platforms.
Acronym for ‘too long; didn’t read’. A common comment by
readers posted online to indicate that they didn’t
read a lengthy online
publication. Also used by authors of lengthy online publications to indicate the
availability of a summary
for readers who do not wish to read the entirety of
the publication.
Acronym for ‘today I learned’. Used in writing, for example on
social media, before giving interesting new information.
Timeline is a social media feature introduced by
in 2012. It combines a user’s
profile into one page.
It includes reverse-chronological details, by year, of a user’s
history. It reorganises
stored user information for
display, rather than archival. It was previously more difficult or impossible to
view outdated events,
photos and comments.
Currently popular or widely discussed online, especially on social media
Acronym for ‘to the point’.
‘wall’ is part of a
user’s profile where the user can post status updates and receive
messages from friends. The wall is a public portion of a user’s
visible to the user’s friends. The wall also shows updates of a
user’s recent activity such as comments the
user has posted on other
friends’ walls, the user’s status updates and who the user has
recently friended.
Acronym for ‘what do you mean by that?’
Acronym for ‘word of mouth’. A common reference to online
Information about the
Tasmania Law Reform Institute – ‘
The Tasmania Law Reform Institute (TLRI) was established on 23 July 2001 by
agreement between the Government of the State of Tasmania,
the University of
Tasmania and the Law Society of Tasmania. The creation of the Institute was part
of a Partnership Agreement between
the University and the State Government
signed in 2000. The Institute is based at the Sandy Bay campus of the University
of Tasmania
within the Faculty of Law. The Institute undertakes law reform work
and research on topics proposed by the government, the community,
the University
and the Institute itself.
The work of the Institute involves the review of laws with a view to:
• the modernisation of the law
• the elimination of defects in the law
• the simplification of the law
• the consolidation of any laws
• the repeal of laws that are obsolete or unnecessary
• uniformity between laws of other States and the Commonwealth.
The Institute’s Director is Associate Professor Terese Henning. The
members of the Board of the Institute are Associate Professor
Terese Henning
(Chair), Professor Tim McCormack (Dean of the Faculty of Law at the University
of Tasmania), the Honourable Justice
Helen Wood (appointed by the Honourable
Chief Justice of Tasmania), Ms Kristy Bourne (appointed by the
Attorney-General), Associate
Professor Jeremy Prichard (appointed by the Council
of the University), Mr Craig Mackie (appointed by the Tasmanian Bar
Association),
Ms Ann Hughes (appointed at the invitation of the Institute
Board), Mr Rohan Foon (appointed by the Law Society of Tasmania), Ms
Baumeler (appointed at the invitation of the Institute Board) and Ms Rosie Smith
(appointed at the invitation of the Institute
Board as a member of the Tasmanian
Aboriginal community).
The Board oversees the Institute’s research, considering each reference
before it is accepted, and approving publications before
their release.
Acknowledgments
This Final Report and the preceding Issues Paper were authored by Jemma Holt.
The community engagement and consultation that was conducted
in connection to
this project was also undertaken by Jemma Holt.
This project enjoyed the guidance and support of the TLRI Director, Associate
Professor Terese Henning. It was assisted throughout
by Executive Officer
(Administration), Kira White.
The project benefited from valuable collaboration with the South Australian
Law Reform Institute (SALRI). The TLRI and SALRI share
unique challenges and
opportunities associated with undertaking effective modern law reform in smaller
and South Australia and they are committed to
working together on contemporary and topical law reform projects of common
This is a credit to the TLRI Director, Associate Professor Terese
Henning, the SALRI Director, Professor John Williams, and the SALRI
Director, Dr David Plater.
The TLRI acknowledges the erudite contribution to the project by Dr Plater
and the background research of Lucy Line of the Victorian
Bar and Victoria
Geason of the University of Tasmania.
Both the Issues Paper and the Final Report were edited by Bruce Newey.
This project was funded by a grant from the Law Foundation of Tasmania.
‘THX’ (‘Thanks’)
Executive summary –
140 characters or less’
use social media and/or other internet platforms. They do so in ways
which impact their ability as jurors to be impartial and to return
according only to the evidence presented and tested in the courtroom. They
thereby adversely affect an accused’s
right to a fair trial. This problem
has been documented widely by the courts and the media across Australian and
international jurisdictions.
There has been one documented case in Tasmania in 2015 of juror/s accessing
online information in the course of deliberations. Whilst
one isolated
occurrence might seem negligible, much remains unknown (and unknowable) about
the prevalence of this phenomena and,
therefore, the extent of its effect on an
accused’s right to a fair trial. All indications are that juror misconduct
kind is under-reported; that the reported cases represent the bare
minimum of cases of misconduct of this kind, and an unknown and
number of instances are unreported and therefore undiscovered. However, what
does present itself as a constant, known
quantity is the gravity of the risk:
the risk that an accused’s fundamental right to a fair trial before an
impartial jury
is adversely affected. The risk exists in every single juror in
every single trial. It only takes one act of one juror for the risk
materialise. A risk of such magnitude demands that it be acknowledged and
addressed to retain confidence in the administration
of justice by jury trial,
particularly in circumstances where the general
is that juror
misconduct of this kind is prevalent.
The more well-known intentional and defiant ‘
information
’ scenario of the
errant juror conducting online research
but one facet of the problem. Significantly, juror misconduct of this kind may
be the product of inadvertence alone. Jurors’
use of social media and/or
the internet for entertainment purposes may inadvertently expose jurors to
passive news consumption, the
bias of general online sentiment and/or
unsolicited contact that may have an impact upon their ability to perform their
reasons why a juror may intentionally go online are not always
straightforward either. It may be the product of confusion about and/or
frustration with the trial process and/or a genuine belief that their actions
are in the pursuit of ‘fairness’ or discovering
the truth. Further,
jurors’ habitual use of social media and/or other internet platforms may
cause jurors to fall into misconduct
by way of ‘
information
’. That is, the desire to continuously share and to be constantly
connected causing jurors to publish material online, without
fully appreciating
the consequences of such behaviour in the context of their role and obligations
as a juror.
Despite the wide range of possible juror misconduct of this kind, the
apparent focus of any discussion about this type of misconduct
remains limited
to, or at least focussed on,
the errant juror conducting online research.
It demonstrates a widely held misconception that juror misconduct of this
kind is confined to intentional and defiant ‘
information
uses of the internet.
This is a clearly identifiable shortcoming in the way in which this
phenomenon is currently viewed and addressed. It is a defect that
addressed with relative ease by correctly understanding the nature of the
• It may involve
the internet
social media.
• It may involve
information
information out
social media and/or the internet.
• It may be the product of inadvertence
jurors who believe they are doing the
right thing
The Institute recommends that changes to the law are not necessary. Rather,
the preferred strategy to address juror misconduct of
this kind is to focus on
updating and improving juror education. Pre-empanelment training/ information
for jurors and post-empanelment
directions have been identified as two areas
where, in the Institute’s view, significant work can be done. This is
in recommendations one and two, which, inter alia, recommend that
pre-empanelment juror training/information resources are reviewed
and updated,
and model jury directions are introduced.
Neither should be viewed in isolation. The response cannot and should not
consist of any single measure, but rather a suite of measures
that form an
overall strategy. Pre-empanelment training/information should serve as a
foundation for subsequent information provided
by the trial judge in post
empanelment directions. Both measures should be developed together to ensure
consistency in terminology
and expression used. Fundamental obligations of
impartiality
according to the
’ need to be dissected and explained in a way that goes beyond
abstract notions of ‘fairness’/‘a fair
trial’/‘fairness
to the accused’ so that jurors can fully
grasp the potential implications of ‘
information in
information out
’ uses of social media and other internet
platforms in the context of a criminal trial.
These measures, once updated and implemented, need to be subject to periodic
review and updating as required to ensure they remain
relevant and
List of Recommendations –
at the end of the day
Recommendation 1 –
(a) The current pre-empanelment training/information for jurors in Tasmania
should be updated.
(b) The pre-recorded induction video should:
(i) expressly address jurors’ use of social media and other internet
(ii) specifically cover both ‘
information in
information out
’ uses of social media/the internet (ie it
should not be limited to the well-known ‘
information in
scenario of the
errant juror conducting online research
(iii) provide an explanation of the rationale behind the restrictions in
social media/ internet use. This should not be limited to
the mention of general
notions of ‘fairness’ or ‘fair trial’ or ‘fairness
to the accused’. Such
concepts need to be explained in more accessible
(iv) explain the consequences for the trial participants, for jurors and for
the trial of jurors’ inappropriate use of social
media/the internet.
(c) These matters should be reiterated in the course of the subsequent verbal
(d) The pre-empanelment training/information materials should be reviewed
periodically to ensure they remain current and relevant.
(e) Jurors should be provided with written materials at the pre-empanelment
stage that outline basic information that is contained
in the video and
Recommendation 2
(a) A set of ‘standard’/‘model’ directions to jurors,
similar to those used in New South Wales and Victoria,
regarding the internet
and social media should be adopted in Tasmania.
(b) They should include:
(i) Specific mention of social media;
(ii) Examples of prohibited internet and social media platforms, which
surpasses simply mentioning
(iii) Examples of prohibited activity, which include both
information in
information out
uses of social media and the internet;
(iv) Explanations for the internet/social media restrictions;
(v) Warnings about personal consequences for juror misconduct;
(vi) Reminders to jurors of their obligation to report irregularities and a
step-by-step guide of the reporting process;
(vii) explain the consequences for the trial participants, for jurors and for
the trial of jurors’ inappropriate use of social
media/the internet.
(c) The above information should be reproduced in written form for jurors to
refer to during the course of the trial, both as a written
document given to
jurors and posters/signage in the court precinct and jury room.
(d) The oral directions should to be given at the start of the trial and
repeated in truncated form before lengthy adjournments and
deliberations.
(e) The model directions should to be reviewed periodically to ensure that
the particular social media/internet platforms and activities/uses
included in the directions by way of examples remain current and relevant.
Recommendation 3
The practice of taking mobile phones and other electronic devices away from
jurors during the trial and deliberations should continue.
effectiveness in preventing jurors using social media and the internet is
limited, it otherwise minimises the distraction
of jurors from having their
electronic devices at their disposal.
The dual purpose of this measure should be explained to jurors.
Recommendation 4
The Institute does not recommend any reforms to current laws. The current
contempt laws, as supplemented by the existing offence provisions
Juries Act 2003
(Tas), are adequate for the small role that punitive
measures ought to play in addressing this issue.
Additional offence provisions that specifically address jurors’ use of
the internet and/or social media should not be introduced.
The preferred strategy to address juror misconduct of this kind is to focus
on juror education.
Background and Introduction to this Report –
in case you missed it
This project was referred to the Institute by Ms Kim Baumeler, an Institute
Board member and barrister with extensive criminal jury
trial experience in the
Tasmanian jurisdiction. The reference raises the topical concern of jurors using
social media and other internet
platforms inappropriately during criminal
trials. This issue is a modern concern in Tasmania and elsewhere.
It is a central tenet of the common law criminal justice system that accused
persons have the crucial right to receive a fair trial
before an impartial jury.
A fundamental principle that underpins this right is that jury verdicts must be
determined solely upon
evidence presented and tested within the courtroom, such
that both parties to a criminal trial are aware of and have the opportunity
address any material that may influence the verdict.
A current concern is how to preserve an accused’s right to a fair trial
at a time when social media and other internet platforms
are omnipresent in our
everyday lives. We (the majority of Australians) are continuously online and
engaged; at home, at work and
in-between, on our smartphones. Search engines
are new tools in our problem-solving toolkits. We use them
so routinely that they are viewed as mere extensions of our own investigative,
analytic and decision-making ability. We utilise social media platforms such as
as second nature to find
out more about people who interest us and to communicate with those who are
interested in us. If individuals
continue this instinctual behaviour when they
are jurors sitting in a criminal trial, they thereby risk adversely affecting
the accused’s
right to a fair trial.
The Institute released an Issues Paper on 21 August 2019. It sought to elicit
open discussion on juror misconduct in this contemporary
context. The Institute
invited submissions on this topic and 13 questions were posed in the Issues
Paper to guide responses. These
questions are set out in full in Appendix A of
this Report.
The Institute engaged in consultation with stakeholders, interested parties,
and the community at large from 21 August 2019 to 4 October
2019. To this end,
the Issues Paper was also the subject of public discussion via the media in
nationally,
as well as within the
legal profession via subscription publications in
In response to the Issues Paper and the subsequent consultation, the
Institute received 14 public written submissions and six public
submissions. The Institute also received a number of anonymous verbal
submissions. The Institute received one confidential
submission. These
respondents are listed, in accordance with their publication preferences, in
Appendix B of this Report.
This Report is an expansion of the preceding Issues Paper.
as far as is possible, the nature and gravity of this phenomenon;
explores how and why juror misconduct of this kind occurs and the causes and/or
motivations that underlie juror misconduct of this
the laws and practices which currently exist to safeguard against juror
misconduct of this kind as well as those that exist
to remedy and/or otherwise
deal with such misconduct after it occurs, it also examines the operation and
efficacy of these measures
as well as the possible alternatives; and
discusses where to from here: the recommended reform of the current
laws and practices.
Scope of the
reference – ‘
This reference focuses on juries in criminal trials. This is despite the fact
that civil trials may also be heard before a jury in
and other Australian jurisdictions
and a coronial jury is still available in New South
It also assumes that, in
light of their fundamental and integral role in
trial by jury will
continue in all Australian criminal jurisdictions for the foreseeable future
(with or without the option of trial
It focuses on Tasmania, but
draws upon case examples, research and laws and practices from other Australian
as New Zealand, the UK, and the US.
In the course of examining why juror misconduct of this kind might occur,
this Report explores whether judicial directions may cause
confusion and/or
frustration on the part of jurors that may, in turn, form the underlying
motivation for such misconduct. This discussion
is directed at the potential
shortcomings of judicial directions in equipping lay members of the public for
jury service. It ranges
from post empanelment to summing up and encompasses
housekeeping matters, courtroom procedure, and matters of substantive law. Any
critique of judicial directions in this context, particularly with regard to
possible misunderstanding and misconceptions by jurors
of matters of substantive
law, are limited to deficiencies in form and content, and do not purport to
disturb the fundamental premise
that jurors are
of understanding
judicial directions.
This Report also explores the role and efficacy of judicial directions as a
preventative measure available to safeguard against juror
misconduct of this
kind and as a consequential measure available to remedy such misconduct after it
has been discovered. Similarly,
the discussion of judicial directions in this
context proceeds on the premise that jurors are
of understanding
judicial directions.
This Report touches upon suppression orders (and
in the context of existing preventative measures which may reduce the adverse
effects of juror misconduct of this kind.
Suppression orders (and take-down
orders) are measures that may assist in controlling potentially prejudicial
material on social
media and/or other internet platforms at the pre-trial stage,
as a precautionary safeguard against errant jurors. Suppression orders
contempt) have proved especially topical of late, particularly
as a result of the trial of Cardinal Pell in Victoria, the suppression
made in the course of that matter, and the associated reporting by both local
and international media.
fundamental issue of whether suppression orders (and
have any role in the global digital world and their interaction with the case
for open justice are separate complex issues
that warrant substantial
examination in their own right. The control of pre-trial prejudicial media is
preventative measure which may reduce the adverse effects of
jurors using social media and other internet platforms inappropriately
criminal trials. The efficacy of suppression orders (and
contempt) is considered in this limited respect.
It is acknowledged that most jurors approach their role seriously and
conscientiously
and this Report adopts a practical and realistic approach. It does not purport
to advocate for fundamental change to the criminal
justice system in Tasmania,
such as the discarding of trial by jury for serious offences and/or the
introduction of trial by judge
alone as a rational response to juror misconduct
of this kind.
Nor does it
contemplate the reintroduction of the expensive and disruptive practice of jury
sequestration in routine criminal trials.
Any such option is unrealistic in a
contemporary context.
This Report respects the confidentiality of jury deliberations and does not
seek to gain impermissible entry into the jury room.
In Tasmania, jury deliberations are confidential, as is the situation in
other Australian jurisdictions. It is an offence to publish,
cause to be
published, solicit or obtain the disclosure of ‘any statement made,
opinion expressed, argument advanced or vote
cast in the course of the
deliberations of a jury’.
Similar offences exist in all other Australian
This Report does not seek to undermine or breach these rules of
confidentiality.
‘Checking-in’
What is the Problem?
on the problem
As a starting point, this Report assesses the nature and gravity
of the problem posed by jurors using social media and/or other internet
platforms during criminal trials. It is essential to discern the nature and
gravity of juror misconduct of this kind so to be able
to determine what is
required, if anything, by way of a response.
The right to a fair trial is a ‘central pillar of our
criminal justice system’.
An accused is entitled to a trial before an impartial jury that makes its
determination in accordance with evidence that has been
properly admitted and
tested during the course of the
There exists a
‘long held belief that justice requires both sides in a criminal trial to
know and to be able to address or
answer any material (particularly material
which appears adverse to them) which may influence the
The introduction
of any extraneous information or influence constitutes an irregularity and
undermines the fairness of any trial.
Commentators have coined many terms which refer to the phenomena
of jurors inappropriately using the internet and/or social media
during a criminal trial and the ensuing effect on the accused’s right to a
fair trial: ‘googling
‘internet-surfing
‘trial by google’;
mistrials’;
‘E-jurors’;
‘do-it-yourself or “DIY”
twitter effect’;
‘internet-tainted
injustice’;
and ‘rogue jurors’.
There is no single expression that encapsulates the full range of possible juror
misconduct of this kind.
Essentially, the relevant conduct falls within two main
categories that may be described simply as: ‘
information in
information
Information in
’ denotes jurors using the internet and/or
social media platforms and accessing information relevant to the trial, either
intentionally
or inadvertently. ‘
Information out
jurors using the internet and/or social media platforms to publish information
Of course, it is not always as simple
as the misconduct being either ‘
information in
information out
In this regard, the Chief Justice
of New South Wales, the Honourable Tom Bathurst observed: ‘with social
media, content is not
merely consumed by users, it is also created, organised
and distributed by
There have been documented cases of:
• Jurors’ use of the internet to research legal terms or concepts
or other information relevant to the trial (‘
information
• Jurors’ use of the internet and social media to research the
accused, witnesses, victims, lawyers or the judge (‘
information
• Jurors’ use of the internet and social media to communicate
with people involved in the trial (‘
information in
information out
• Jurors publishing material about the trial on the internet or social
media, which may disclose impermissible bias, prejudice,
predetermination or
other irregularity in the deliberation process (‘
information
• Jurors publishing material about the trial on the internet or social
media, which may elicit impermissible information by
way of a response
information out
information
Particular examples of these forms of misconduct are explored in
turn below, including the impacts of the juror’s misconduct
on the trial
process. The ultimate ramifications of such misconduct are largely determined on
a case-by-case basis. There are many
variables which affect the outcome
including the jurisdiction in which it occurs, the extent of the
‘contamination’ caused
by the misconduct, and the stage at which the
misconduct is discovered.
use of the internet to research legal terms or concepts or other information
relevant to the trial
information
Jurors have been found to have used
the internet to obtain information about charging and
sentencing.
In New South Wales,
a juror sitting in a familial sexual assault trial recounted that:
The spoke woman [sic] mentioned 25yrs jail sentence over and over again...how
did she know the penalty for that crime? Did she look
it up somewhere?...At the
end of the deliberation we all realised we were arguing whether or not it was
fair to send someone to jail
for 25yrs for a sexual encounter with a family
member...Perhaps we [should have] analyse[d] the facts instead. We were the
– the ones who were supposed to come up with a verdict: guilty or
not guilty. Not ‘not guilty’ because the punishment
for the crime
committed would be too
Jurors have taken it upon themselves to source information about
legislative schemes and legislative amendments that were raised in
the course of
evidence, but were not directly relevant to the trial issues (eg a juror on a
child sexual assault trial conducted
an internet search on the requirements for
a working with children clearance and came across relevant legislation in this
that was introduced in
Jurors have also been
found to conduct internet searches on unfamiliar subject matter peculiar to the
factual circumstances of the
particular trial (eg the ‘Fa-Long Gong
movement’).
When jurors
conduct online research on trial-related matters that pique their curiosity,
they undermine the primary rule of admissibility
of evidence; that it is legally
relevant. At best, it can distract jurors from the issues they are required to
determine. At worst,
it can introduce inadmissible and/or prejudicial material
into the jury room.
There appear to be many jurors who turn to the internet to
research legal terminology and legal principles; both actual and imagined
example, ‘obligations of
Jurors have
conducted searches of fundamental terms such as ‘murder’ and
‘manslaughter’, and admitted doing
so to fellow jurors, whilst
reading the material from an iPhone, ‘I’m having trouble determining
the difference between
manslaughter’.
One jury was found
to have sourced information on ‘what is meant by beyond reasonable
doubt’ from five different
A Tasmanian jury
obtained information from a US online legal dictionary website in relation to
‘beyond reasonable doubt’
and ‘circumstantial
Jurors also
tend to resort to the internet in relation to the key terms which make up the
elements of an offence (eg
‘organisation’, ‘intention/al’ and
‘member/ship’).
However, their investigations also extend to the definition of plain English
‘prudent’).
solely for the trial judge to direct jurors on matters of law. When jurors go
online to conduct enquiries on legal terms and
concepts, the reliability and
accuracy of the source is unknown. There is also the risk of obtaining
information from another jurisdiction
on a jurisdiction-specific matter.
Further, the accuracy of their searches will depend on their correct
identification of the legal
term/concept in the first place and, thereafter, not
straying once online.
Jurors appear to conduct internet
this, regardless of
whether an expert witness has given evidence in the trial or
not. Jurors have conducted searches on the retention of body heat in
detachment’
scientific terms related to how blood flows after death (‘
also been found to have searched ‘rape trauma syndrome’ and sexual
‘The Feminist
Position on Rape’ and ‘Rape and the Criminal Justice
information about the types of physical injuries typically suffered by young
sexual assault victims.
have also conducted online research on methylamphetamine
production,
‘generalities
on drug addiction and
information about
different types of prescription
medications,
and mobile phone
In California in 2007,
a juror who was sitting in a murder trial, after hearing expert medical evidence
in the trial, posted on his
blog (under the pseudonym, ‘
Misanthrope
’) information obtained from internet research about the
difference between a medical examiner and a
Obvious problems arise
in relation to the accuracy and reliability of such technical information that
is sourced by jurors from unknown
online sources. Moreover, the use that
potentially inexpert and unassisted jurors make of such information is
completely unknown,
including whether they disseminate the information to fellow
jurors as a source of expert advice.
Despite the ease with which such information may be viewed
privately online, such misconduct has been detected in a number of cases
result of a paper trail.
arguably provides an indication of the degree to which jurors feel compelled to
share such information with fellow jurors once
it is sourced.
On occasion, jurors have accessed the internet for the purpose
trial related enquiries as a precursor to subsequent
more targeted online research. For example, in a 2012 English case, a juror
conducted an internet search for the meaning of ‘grievous’. On her
account, she then conducted a search of the terms
‘Luton’ and
‘crime’, ‘apparently because of her personal concerns about
problems with crime in the
As a result of this
accused’s prior conviction. Because
of its highly prejudicial and often
minimally probative value such information is generally inadmissible at trial
unless it satisfies
very stringent criteria. The consequences for the juror in
this case were severe.
was convicted of contempt and sentenced to six months imprisonment (three months
to serve). The entire jury was discharged,
and the case had to be retried.
use of the internet and social media to research the accused, witnesses,
victims, lawyers or the judge (‘
information
Jurors have searched the internet for information on
and, more specifically, to locate their information-rich ‘profile’
Jurors’ curiosity
victims. One juror explained this
conduct: ‘I just wanted to see his [the
deceased’s] face ... that poor boy and I just wanted to see his face
any injuries, anything, just see him ... put a face to the
It appears that jurors have a particular tendency to use the
internet to conduct searches on the accused. In this way, jurors have
information about an accused’s prior convictions and previous allegations
made against accused, including those in
respect of which the accused was
In many cases, the
previous allegations unearthed by jurors were irrelevant and highly prejudicial
to the case being tried. For example,
in New South Wales in 2002, in a case
where the accused was charged with the murder of his first wife, multiple jurors
internet searches for information about previous allegations that the
same accused had murdered his second wife (for which he was
previously tried and
acquitted).
Further, in Florida
in 2009, a juror in a multiple defendant drug trial discovered via the internet
that one of the defendants had
once been implicated in prescribing medication
that was used in a double suicide. This information had specifically been ruled
inadmissible.
Jurors have also
obtained highly prejudicial information about unrelated
criminal charges that are pending against the
as well as information on an accused’s past outlaw motorcycle gang
affiliations.
Jurors have also obtained information about an accused’s
incriminating post offence conduct. A juror on a murder trial in Florida
the accused and told his fellow jurors, ‘[t]his is a bad
guy. He ran away to Nicaragua after the
Some jurors do not discriminate and have been found to have
Jurors have also
conducted online searches on an accused’s alleged accomplice to learn that
the accomplice had pleaded guilty
to the offences charged at an earlier
Jurors’ online searches have also located information about the history of
the particular prosecution, including the fact that
the present trial was a
retrial and the reasons behind this, such as a hung jury or a successful appeal
against conviction.
It is not always the jurors themselves who undertake the online
research. In a 2014 West Australian murder trial, a juror’s
conducted online searches in relation to the accused and located information
which she then passed onto her
partner, who, in turn, shared the information with his fellow
Jurors’ online inquisitiveness about the parties is not
confined to accessing information that pre-dates the current trial.
other parties in the courtroom invariably have active online presences
themselves, which includes, in some circumstances,
comment about the trial
itself. By way of an example, a prosecutor in a felony trial in Florida in 2010
a ‘poem’ he had composed about the trial
‘to be read to the tune of the TV show Gilligan’s Island’:
Just sit back and you’ll hear a tale, a tale of a fateful trial that
started from this court in St. Lucie County. The lead prosecutor
woman, the 2
chair was totally awesome ... Six jurors were ready
for trial that day for a four-hour trial, a four-hour trial ... The trial
easy enough but then became rough. The judge and jury confused, if not
for the courage of the fearless prosecutors, the trial would
be lost, the trial
would be lost. The trial started Tuesday, continued til Wednesday and then
Thursday with Robyn and Brandon too,
the weasel face, the gang banger defendant,
the Judge, clerk, and Ritzline here in St.
Whilst this post was made by the prosecutor on the evening
after the trial was aborted (due to misconduct by other court staff), it
as an example of material that may be accessible to an errant juror in this
context, or a juror sitting in a subsequent trial
with that prosecutor. It also
highlights the ease with which prohibited communications may occur between
jurors and others involved
in the trial.
use of the internet and social media to communicate with people involved in the
information in
information out
There have been instances of jurors communicating with fellow
jurors over social media during the course of trials and becoming
It is problematic
when a small number of jurors communicate via social media about the trial to
the exclusion of other jurors. In
some instances, jurors who have been
discharged from juries have continued to communicate with the remaining jurors
and sought to
have an input into their deliberations.
In Pennsylvania in 2011, a juror was dismissed from a jury due
to work commitments. That evening she emailed two other jurors:
[I]t was great meeting you and working with you these past few days. If I was
so fortunate to have finished the jury assignment, I
would have found [the
accused] guilty on all 4 counts based on the facts as I heard them. There was a
lot of speculation and innuendo,
but that is the case as I saw it. How wonderful
it would have been to see how others saw it. Please fill me in as you can ... I
like I was robbed. After four days, I should have been able to contribute
in some way ... I want to wish you and the rest of the
jurors very clear
thinking and the will to do the right thing
One of the jurors replied:
Thank you for sharing your thoughts. I am of the same mind and have great
doubt that the defense can produce anything new today that
will change my
thinking. It disturbs me greatly to know that people lie ... Anyway I will share
your message with the gang.
Jurors’ communications via social media are also capable
of undermining the trial process itself. In New South Wales in 2013,
jurors on a long-running fraud trial became
friends. They
communicated with each other and published material about the case, including
‘a digitally altered photo of one
of the jurors wearing a judge’s
wig’, messages about ‘the type of ... proceedings, the unusual
nature of the proceedings’
and messages about ‘people in wigs and
gowns, the length of the proceedings, joy at having a weekend off and concern at
long the trial might
Jurors have even contacted the accused via social media, both
in circumstances where there was an existing social media connection
in circumstances where there was not.
In Tennessee in 2014, a juror in an
aggravated robbery trial was
friends with the accused before the
trial and exchanged private communications with him via
deliberations. The juror posted: ‘It’s looking good’, a post
that was subsequently ‘liked’ by
the accused. The accused then
posted to the juror: ‘I got a Lil girl to live for
In 2010, an English
juror contacted one of the accused via
in a multiple accused
During the trial, the juror and the accused exchanged up to
50 messages via
, including details of jury deliberations and
updates on the jury’s position. While this contact occurred after the
had been acquitted of all charges relevant to her, the trial was not yet
complete in relation to the remaining co-accused. The juror
told the accused,
‘you should know me. I cried with you enough’ and
‘awe fuck nos hw a didnt get caught wiv my nods and
blinks hand signals ... [sic].’ The juror also made mention of criminal
assets confiscation proceedings against the accused, saying, ‘get all your
property back too ...’, to which the accused
replied, ‘I will be
doin ha ha and trying for compo’ and ‘keep in touch Ill get you a
nice pressie if I get anything
out of um ...’ The juror was fully aware
that the communications were prohibited, telling the accused, ‘pleeeeeese
say anything cause ... they could call mmisstrial and I will get
4cked toO [sic]’.
similar vein, one juror in a 2011 civil trial in Florida, sent a
friend request to the defendant. When he was subsequently discharged as a
juror he posted: ‘Score ... I got dismissed!! Apparently
they frown upon
sending a friend request to the defendant ...
Jurors have also contacted witnesses both where there was a
pre-existing social media connection and where there was not. In New York
2010, a juror sitting in a negligent homicide and reckless endangerment trial,
researched two or three witnesses on
. She located the
page of a firefighter witness and sent him a friend
In Tennessee in 2013, a
juror in a murder trial contacted an expert medical witness via
after the jury retired to commence deliberations: ‘A-dele!! I thought
you did a great job today on the witness stand ... I was
in the jury ... not
sure if you recognized me or not!! You really explained things so great!!’
The witness responded: ‘I
was thinking that was you. There is a risk of a
mistrial if that gets out.’ The juror replied: ‘I know ... I
say anything about you...there are 3 of us in the jury from Vandy
and one is a physician (cardiologist) so you may know him as well.
It has been
an interesting case to say the
publishing material about the trial on the internet or social media, which may
disclose impermissible bias, prejudice, predetermination
or other irregularity
in the deliberation process
information
Jurors have published material on social media platforms which
suggests that they have already made their minds up about the guilt
accused, before they have been empanelled on a particular trial. In 2010, a
juror in Victoria posted on his
page, ‘everyone’s
a juror in the US
, ‘Guilty! He’s guilty! I can
in Washington DC in 2010, a juror empanelled on a kidnapping and murder trial
tweeted: ‘Guilty Guilty ... I will not be swayed.
Practicing for jury
Mississippi, a juror sitting in an aggravated assault and felony malicious
mischief trial posted on his
page during the trial, ‘I
guess all I need to know is GUILTY.
in Detroit in 2011,
a juror sitting in a resist arrest trial posted on her
before the close of the prosecution case, ‘actually excited for duty
tomorrow. It’s gonna be fun to tell the defendant
in California in
2011, a juror posted on
, that she thought the accused was
in Michigan in 2014 a juror in a murder trial posted on
‘Not cool that a young man is dead another young man will be in prison for
and in 2016 a juror in a West Australian murder trial posted on
the day the trial was due to commence
‘At Perth District
Court, guilty!’
Jurors have also published material about the lawyers involved
in the trial which suggests that they are approaching their task as
a popularity
contest between the lawyers. In Seattle in 2010, a juror in a robbery trial
posted on her blog that the prosecutor was,
‘Mr Cheap Suit’ and
‘annoying’, whereas defence counsel, ‘just exudes friendly ...
I want to go to
lunch with him ... And he’s
in California, ‘
The Misanthrope
] above), described defence counsel on his
blog as ‘whacked out’ and as having:
a Colombo detective-style of acting stupid and asking questions in the most
condescending and convoluted way that makes many completely
confused and not
knowing what the hell the question was ... we are not getting the eloquence of
the attorneys in the movie
Inherit the
Jurors have also published material that discloses prejudice in
relation to certain types of offending. In London in 2013, a juror
sex offences trial posted on
wasn’t expected to be in a jury Deciding a paedophile’s fate,
I’ve always wanted to Fuck up a paedophile
& now I’m within the
In New South Wales
in 2016, a juror sitting in a trial in Broken Hill, considering the offence of
sexual intercourse taking advantage
of a person’s cognitive impairment,
the day before the guilty verdict was returned:
‘When a dog attacks a child it is put down. Shouldn’t we do the same
with sex predators?’ This post was accompanied by a photograph that showed
images of ‘rooms and implements by which lawful
executions are carried
It should be noted that whether or not the material published
by a juror discloses genuine bias, prejudice, and/or predetermination
entirety of the matter. The requirement of impartiality on the part of jurors
may be adversely affected by both
irregularities.
The appearance as well as the
fact of impartiality is necessary to retain confidence in the administration of
justice. Both the parties
in the case and the community must be satisfied that
justice has not only been done but that it has been seen to be done.
Jurors have also expressed
grievances about their fellow jurors on social media. In California in 2007,
The Misanthrope
] above), described his fellow jurors as
‘liars and bozos’ and said that he had volunteered to be the
foreperson to ‘expedite
Another juror in
California in 2011 who was sitting in a murder trial posted on
that a fellow juror annoyed her so much by cracking her knuckles that she
‘wanted to punch her ...’ She also took photographs
of her fellow
jurors’ shoes and posted comments such as ‘clunky running shoes
which I am pretty sure are not used for
their intended
‘venting’ by jurors may seem petty but otherwise harmless. However,
it may cause doubt as to whether the jury are
capable of deliberating together
and impartially and effectively performing their role. Further, a juror’s
airing of grievances
involves sharing confidential details about jury deliberations. In New York
2015, a juror in a robbery trial posted on
: ‘God help me
... The other jurors don’t trust the police and want to outright dismiss
the confessions as well as the
majority of the rest of the evidence. Tomorrow is
going to be a very
In 2011, an English juror posted on
that the accused was
innocent and that her fellow jurors were ‘scum bags’ for
have otherwise turned to the internet and social media to express frustration
with and/or lack of interest in the trial process.
Similarly, such material may
raise concerns about a juror’s ability to perform his/her role. In 2007 in
California, ‘
The Misanthrope
] above), posted on his blog comparing
court staff to ‘freeway workers ... picnicking alongside
juror sitting in a tax evasion trial in Connecticut took to
complain: ‘Shit just told this case could last 2 weeks. Jury duty
sucks!’, ‘Your honor I object! This is way
too boring. somebody get
me outta here’ and ‘Guinness for lunch break. Jury
juror in a wrongful death civil trial in Missouri posted on
‘Got picked for jury duty ... Most importantly ... the 3:00pm Cocktail
hour is not observed!’ The juror continued: ‘Drunk
and having great
food at our fav neighbourhood hang out’, to which a ‘friend’
replied, ‘I’m still amazed
they allow jurors to nip from a
In 2014, a juror in
Arkansas in a rape and murder trial published multiple
including: ‘Still in the courtroom. Lord I’m ready to go home.
I’m sleepy and tired and my red wine is calling
my name’ and
In 2015 in New York, a juror in a robbery trial
: ‘Everything about this process is
inefficient’ and ‘I’m trying to remain positive and centered
truthfully, I’m dying
Jurors have published material that alludes to the fact that
the jury has reached a verdict (and, in some cases, what that verdict
the verdict has been announced and/or delivered in court. In California in 2007,
The Misanthrope
] above), posted on his blog
‘[t]he first day of deliberation was a productive one ... we left with a
possible verdict, but
we are going to discuss again in the morning to finalize.
It’s possible that by afternoon we will give our
to the judge.’
In 2009, a juror in Arkansas sitting in a civil trial posted on
under the name ‘
Juror Jonathan
’: ‘I just gave away
TWELVE MILLION DOLLARS of somebody else’s money’. Another post read:
‘oh and nobody
buy Stoam. Its [sic] bad mojo and they’ll probably
cease to Exist, now that their wallet is 12m lighter’ (accompanied
company’s website address).
The posts were made
before the verdict on
In Pennsylvania in 2012, a
juror sitting in a high-profile corruption trial posted on
a running commentary on the jurors’ deliberations during
the trial, including, ‘today was much better than expected and
looks promising too!’; ‘[s]tay tuned for the big announcement on
Monday everyone!’ and ‘[t]his is
king back now’.
2011 in Arkansas, a juror sitting in a murder and aggravated robbery trial
while the jury was deliberating: ‘If its [sic]
wisdom we seek ...We should run to the strong tower’ and ‘[i]ts
over’ (an hour before the jury announced
d reached a
publishing material about the trial on the internet or social media, which may
elicit impermissible information by way of a
information out
information
When jurors publish material about jury service on the internet
or social media, they have no control over what material they may
receive by way
of a response. In some instances, the tenor of the material originally posted by
the juror is an accurate predictor
of the type of responses that will probably
be received. For example, in 2011 in Connecticut a juror in a conspiracy and tax
trial posted on
: ‘Jury duty 2morrow. I may get to
hang someone ... can’t wait.’ By way of responses, the juror
received, ‘gettem
while they’re young!!! lol’ and
‘let’s not be too hasty. Torcher first, then hang! Lol
In some cases, jurors post material online about their jury
service with the sole intention to elicit impermissible responses: in
2008, a juror on a child abduction sexual assault trial posted on
, ‘I don’t know which way to go, so I’m holding
a poll ...’
However, in other cases, apparently innocuous material posted
by jurors may elicit unsolicited and inappropriate replies that may
jurors’ impartiality (or perceived impartiality). In Florida in 2012, a
juror sitting in an armed robbery trial
posted multiple tweets and comments on
. The posts included comments about the courthouse, the poor
internet access and bad food. Whilst the posts did not contain any
trial-specific
information, one reply on
wrote: ‘Well make
sure you put the bad guy
In 2013, a juror
in Missouri sitting in a wrongful death civil trial posted on
‘Got picked for jury duty’, ‘Sworn to secrecy as to details of
this case’. A ‘friend’ replied:
‘If he’s cute and
he has a nice butt, he’s innocent!’ The juror further posted:
‘Starting day 8 of
jury service’ and the ‘friend’
replied ‘Remember nice ass =
juror in Virginia in a murder trial posted on
that she was
selected to be a juror. Her stepfather commented: ‘guilty, guilty,
guilty,’ to which she replied, ‘[a]t least they
In this way, a juror (or jurors) can readily get caught up in
online banter that may serve to bring the justice system into disrepute.
US in 2012, three jurors became friends on
and two of those
jurors published material about the trial on their ‘open’
pages. Juror A wrote: ‘[I] had jury duty today and was
selected for the jury ... Bleh! Stupid jury duty!’, and received
responses, one of which stated: ‘Throw the book at ‘em’. Juror
A also posted material about long sitting hours
and the expected duration of the
trial, to which Juror C responded: ‘[H]opefully it will end on [M]onday
...’ Juror B
posted the following during empanelment: ‘Waiting to be
selected for jury duty. I don’t feel impartial’, which
response of: ‘Tell them “BOY HOWDIE, I KNOW THEM GUILTY
ONES!”’ Juror B later posted: ‘Superior
Court in Brockton
picks me ... for the trail [sic]. The[y] tell us the case could go at least 1
week. OUCH OUCH OUCH.’ Juror
B received a response from his wife:
‘Nothing like sticking it to the jury confidentiality clause on Facebook
... Anyway, just
send her to Framingham quickly so you can be home for dinner on
time.’ Juror B also received a response from another friend:
‘I’m with [Juror B’s wife] ... tell them that you asked all
your FB friends and they think
in which a juror might inadvertently elicit unsolicited responses via the
internet or social media are extensive. In the
UK in 2015, a juror in a murder
trial ‘favourited’ a local newspaper report on the trial on his
account. In discharging the jury, Davies J commented on the
potential significance of such a simple online gesture in the social media
This is a professional man and he should have known better. I warned this man
twice not to access social media before the trial. Before
we even got to social
media, there was a warning not to discuss this case with anyone at all. This man
with 400 followers ... by
favouriting a tweet, either if you like it or you want
to save it,
you are inviting a discussion with these 400
Prevalence –
click-through rate
use of social media and other
internet platforms
Australia’s current population is approximately 25.3
Recent Australian
indicate that approximately 87% of Australians use the internet at least once
per day; 60% of Australians use the internet more than
five times per
and Australians own, on
average, 3.5 internet-enabled
It is estimated that 88% of internet users have a social media
and as of September
• 15 million Australians are active
• 9 million Australians are active
• 7 million Australians are active
• 6.4 million Australians are active
• 5.3 million Australians are active
• 5.5 million Australians are active
1.3.3 Facebook
is the most widely used social media platform in
Australia, with 60% of Australians being considered ‘active
Aside from the sheer volume of users of the leading social media
platforms in Australia, the frequency with which such platforms are
astounding. Survey results indicate that 62% of internet users access social
media daily;
and 34% do so
more than five times per day.
Over the relevant age groups:
• 81% of internet users aged 18–29 use social media at least once
per day (55% do so more than five times per day);
• 79% of internet users aged 30–39 use social media at least once
per day (52% do so more than five times per day);
• 69% of internet users aged 40–49 use social media at least once
per day (38% do so more than five times per day);
• 49% of internet users aged 50–64 use social media at least once
per day (19% do so more than five times per day); and
• 30% of internet users aged 65+ use social media at least once per day
(6% do so more than five times per
Whilst social media use and frequency of use is lower in older
age groups, surprisingly, it remains quite
Survey results suggest that, on average,
log on 37 times per week;
users 33 times per week;
users 36 times per week; and
users 23 times per
The average time spent
per visit is 16
and, it is estimated
that the typical
user is spending almost 10 hours per week on
The average
friends is 239; the average number of
followers is 241; the average number of
followers is 187; and
the average number of
friends is 93.
Curiously, across all Australian states and territories, the
frequency of social media use is greatest in Tasmania with 42% of internet
in Tasmania accessing social media more than five times per
Further, the frequency
use is also highest in Tasmania, with
in Tasmania logging on an average of 52 times per week (compared to the national
average of 37 times per
All these figures encompass desktop computer as well as mobile
device access, namely smartphones. It is estimated that 87% of Australians
and use a smartphone.
30 June 2018, there were approximately 27 million mobile phone subscribers in
Social media has also changed the way that the majority of
Australians now consume news and current affairs. As of 2018, 88% of Australian
news consumers were ‘digital news
and 36% of Australian news consumers say they access online news mainly through
mobile phones (‘mobile news
consumers’).
half of Australian news consumers specifically use social media to access news
(52%); 17% use social media as their main
and social media is the
main source of news for those aged between 18–24 years
The role and impact of
non-digital media from traditional media outlets has diminished.
In Tasmania in 2017–2018: 12,366 jurors were summonsed;
3,305 jurors attended for jury service and 1,213 jurors were empanelled.
of 107 criminal jury trials took
It is estimated that
across Australia over 45,000 persons perform jury service each
The jury system is designed to be representative of the
community so that a trial by jury is a trial by ‘one’s
nature of the jury selection process is essential to achieving this end.
Tasmanians are liable for jury service if they are enrolled on
the State electoral roll
they are not disqualified
ineligible.
‘list’ of individuals, the court
selects a sufficient
number of individuals who are issued a summons requiring their attendance for
jury service.
individuals who are summoned but who are subsequently
the individuals who
attend court in response to their summons form a
which individuals are randomly
and, subject to
their being excused,
as part of that
process, they are empanelled as jurors. The jury selection process in other
Australian jurisdictions is
Whilst early Australian studies showed significant disparity
between the age and gender of jurors and that of the general
population,
more recent
studies indicate that juries are now a fair and representative cross-section of
the community in terms of gender and
Although there are no
studies of the representativeness of Tasmanian juries and the Supreme Court does
not collect data on this aspect
of jury service, a 2007–2009 survey of
Tasmanian jurors for the purposes of sentencing research, indicates that they
are roughly
similar in age, gender and country of birth distribution to the
general Tasmanian population.
Jurors are, indeed, the person on the
It follows that they
would tweet, blog, post, share, message, chat, like, follow, and comment like
everyone else.
Research to Date
To the Point
The studies, surveys and other
avenues of inquiry that have been pursued on this topic represent attempts to
examine this phenomenon
from a wide range of perspectives and a variety of data
sources, including:
• asking jurors themselves: United Kingdom
Australia (2004–2006 &
United States
(2011–2014);
United States
United Kingdom
(2012–2013);
• asking judges: United States (2011 &
United States (2012);
New Zealand
• asking other key stakeholders in the criminal justice system: United
States (2012);
• considering reported judgments that deal with the issue: United
States (2010);
• monitoring social media platforms for material posted by jurors:
United States (2010);
• monitoring social media and other internet platforms for material
posted by the world-at-large, which may be seen by jurors:
Asking jurors
United Kingdom: 2010
a study was conducted in the UK with 643 jurors from 62
The trials took place in three different locations (London, Nottingham and
Winchester). The trials included both ‘standard’
trials (less than
two weeks in duration, with little media coverage) and
‘high-profile’ trials (more than two weeks in
duration, with
substantial media coverage before and during the trial). The jurors were asked,
inter alia, about accessing information
relevant to the trial on the
Of the jurors who served on high-profile trials, 38% admitted
came across
material online that was relevant to the trial they were
sitting in, compared to 18% of jurors who served on standard
In terms of the
circumstances in which this occurred, 26% of jurors on high-profile trials
admitted they ‘saw’ material
online relevant to the trial they were
sitting in and 12% admitted to actively seeking out such
information.
In the standard
trials, 13% of jurors admitted they ‘saw’ material online relevant
to the trial they were sitting in
and 5% admitted to actively seeking out such
information.
The results indicate that jurors on high-profile trials were
more likely to seek out information online, compared to the jurors on
cases. Surprisingly, the results also suggest that it was not the younger jurors
who were more likely to seek out material
online: 68% of the jurors who admitted
to this conduct were over 30 years old, and 81% of jurors on high-profile cases
who admitted
to this conduct were over 30 years
Whilst all jurors in this study were
guaranteed anonymity, it is significant that they were being asked to admit to
conduct that was
expressly prohibited by the trial judge as recently as a few
days before the survey was
Participating
jurors were also given the option of admitting only to the lesser option of
merely having
relevant information on the internet, as opposed to
having actively sought out such information. As a result, it is likely that the
results reflect the minimum number of jurors who actively sought out information
on the internet.
Australia: 2004–2006 & 2011
In New South Wales in 2004, a pilot study of 10 criminal trials
was conducted whereby jurors answered a questionnaire following verdict.
2011, a follow up study of a further 10 criminal trials took place. In total, 78
jurors from 20 trials took part in the
The subject trials
occurred in Sydney, Parramatta and Campbelltown in New South Wales.
Of the 78 jurors, 12 jurors (15%) indicated (including, in two
cases, by their actions) the belief that juror investigation and research
‘very acceptable’ in circumstances where a juror is frustrated with
the adequacy of evidence in a
An additional two
jurors were neutral on this topic. These 14 jurors (18%) were spread over eight
of the 20 trials.
these jurors held this view despite acknowledging that they had received clear
judicial directions to the contrary. Further,
six of the jurors were told in no
uncertain terms that such conduct was a
In the two cases where juror misconduct took place, it was not
reported by fellow jurors despite the judge indicating the desirability
so and jurors indicating knowledge of the
misconduct.
United States: 2011–2014
In mid-2011, a US District Court judge commenced an
‘informal survey’ of jurors after they had completed jury service.
The jurors were from criminal and civil federal court trials heard in the
District Court for the Northern District of Illinois and
state criminal trials
heard in the Circuit Court of Cook County. They were asked: ‘were you
tempted to communicate about the
case through any social networks, such as
Facebook, My Space, LinkedIn, YouTube or Twitter? If so, what prevented you from
Of the total 583 respondents, 520 jurors (89%) responded that
they were not so tempted and 47 jurors (8%) responded that they
The survey found 45 of
the 47 jurors who admitted to being tempted stated that they did not succumb to
the temptation, and the remaining
two did not say anything either
The vast majority of the jurors who responded that they were
tempted to communicate about the case via social media said they ultimately
not do so because of the judge’s directions (41 jurors), eg ‘Judge
told us not to communicate’, ‘The
request of the Judge’,
‘The Judge’s orders’ (2 jurors), ‘The Judge’,
‘Direct orders’,
‘I morally thought I should obey the
Judge’, ‘The Judge saying not to’, ‘The Judge’s
admonishment’,
‘The Judge’s instructions’,
‘Instructions not to do it’, ‘Your instructions’,
with judge not to do so’, ‘ask[ed] not to’,
‘Judge’s orders and importance to the case’, ‘Nope.
judge was clear about not sharing the information’, ‘I was
instructed not to, and I tend to do the right thing’,
‘I was tempted
but told not to, so I follow[ed] the rules’, ‘Wanted to but knew I
could not’, and ‘We
were told not to’. Some referred to the
repeated nature of the judge’s directions in particular (eg ‘daily
and ‘repeated directions not
Many of the tempted jurors referred specifically to their
oath/affirmation, eg ‘I took an oath’, ‘My oath’,
‘I follow rules under the oath I made’, ‘I knew it was my duty
to fulfil the oath I took before the court not to
say anything’, ‘My
duty as a jur[or] under oath’, ‘Took oath not to communicate’,
‘My oath not
to tell’, ‘I took this very seriously and wanted
to do what I swore I would’, ‘I swore not to’, and
had to remind myself that this is a job and I made an oath and was going to
follow rules under the oath I made’. Some
jurors expressed insight into
the risks of the conduct (eg ‘I did not want to sway my opinion’,
‘To keep an open
mind’, ‘Afraid I would be bias[ed]’,
and ‘Changing my personal opinion’) and appreciation of the
consequences (eg ‘I didn’t want to ruin the trial or get
arrested or something’ and
Of the 520 jurors (88%) who reported no temptation to
communicate about the case on social media, overwhelmingly, this was attributed
to judicial directions. Others referred more generally to the notion of
fairness, as well as to their oath/affirmation. One juror
candidly responded,
‘came home too late ... [to] think about Facebook’. Another stated
that, whilst she was not tempted,
‘nothing’ could prevent her from
this conduct had she been.
Twenty of the jurors who reported no temptation stated that it was due to their
minimal or complete lack of social media
It was concluded that the survey results show that a
‘sizeable, significant minority’ of jurors reported being tempted
communicate about the case on social
though without doing
so. Further, it was commented that whilst the informal ‘survey data may be
unscientific ... the voices
of actual jurors speak
United States: 2012
In 2012, a survey was conducted in the US with jurors from six
criminal trials and seven civil trials, including the presiding judges
Prospective jurors
from 22 trials were also surveyed (ie those who remained in the jury pool after
the trial jurors and alternate
jurors had been
All of the participating judges viewed juror use of social
media as a ‘moderately severe problem’. When asked to rate
scale from one (not at all severe) to 10 (very severe), more than half the
judges rated independent research by jurors and
juror communication with
outsiders at either four or five. Only one judge gave a rating of seven. Counsel
also rated the problem
of juror use of social media as ‘moderately
severe’, albeit with greater variation in their individual
Of the prospective jurors, 64% had some type of social media
majority of jurors stated that they could refrain from all internet usage for
the duration of the trial if instructed to do so
by the trial judge (86%),
whereas 14% stated that they would not be able to do
No trial juror admitted to inappropriate use of the internet or
social media. However, many prospective jurors were willing to admit
to use the internet to obtain information about legal
terms (44%), the case (26%), the parties involved (23%), the lawyers (20%),
judge (19%), the witnesses (18%), and their fellow jurors (7%). Some jurors also
admitted that they would have
to use the internet to communicate
with family and friends about the trial (8%), connect with another juror (5%),
connect with one
of the trial participants (3%), tweet about the trial (3%),
blog about the trial (3%), or post material about the trial on a social
networking site (2%).
Similarly, trial jurors admitted they would have
internet for case-related research (28%) and for
communications
(29%). The level of interest was comparable between jurors siting on criminal
and civil trials. Jurors who had served
on trials with relatively complex
evidence expressed greater interest in using the internet to conduct
case-related research.
Sixteen jurors from nine different trials admitted to
‘old-fashioned’ juror misconduct in the form of premature
discussions
with other jurors (10%) and discussing the trial with friends and/or
family either face-to-face or over the telephone
United Kingdom: 2012–13
Between 2012 and 2013, 239 jurors were surveyed from 20
different criminal trials conducted in the Greater London Area. This study
conducted by Professor Cheryl Thomas, who also conducted the abovementioned
study that took place in the UK in 2010 (see [
]). The survey asked jurors about
their understanding of permissible and impermissible internet usage during
trial; their awareness
of recent stories about jurors acting improperly
involving the internet; and how they used the internet during trial.
The findings demonstrated that 73% of jurors understood how the
internet could and could not be used when they were serving on a trial,
it also showed that 23% were clearly confused, in some way, about internet
usage. Of those jurors who were confused: 16%
believed they could not use the
internet for any reason at all while serving as a juror; 5% believed there was
no restriction at
all on their internet usage during trial; and 2% believed that
they could look up information about the case as long as it did not
affect their
Thirty-eight percent of jurors were aware of recent cases in
which jurors were prosecuted for impermissible use of the internet, whereas
of jurors were unaware of any such cases.
Seventy-eight percent of the jurors used the internet in some
way during trial. The most common uses were to check personal emails
activity unrelated to their jury service (84%); to find out information about
the court where they were serving (eg travel
routes, contact details etc) (50%);
and for information about what was required of jurors in the course of jury
service (19%).
very small proportions of jurors said they used the internet in ways that could
potentially be legally problematic’:
3% shared their experience of jury
service on social media (eg
; 1% blogged or
chatted online about doing jury service; 7% looked up information about the
prosecution and/or defence counsel; 7%
looked up information about the trial
judge; 1% looked up information about parties involved in the trial (other than
the defendant);
6% looked up information about legal terms used in the case; and
1% visited the crime scene online (eg
Google Earth
other similar site).
Asking judges
United States: 2011 & 2013
In October 2011, a survey was conducted of federal district
court judges in the US to ‘assess the frequency with which jurors
social media to communicate during trials and
deliberations’.
Responses were received from 508 active and senior federal court judges (a
response rate of 53%). The respondents represented all
94 districts and had an
average of 14.6 years of judicial
experience.
A near identical
follow-up survey was conducted in November
On that occasion,
responses were received from 494 active and senior federal judges (a response
rate of 48%). The respondents represented
all 94 districts, as well as the Court
of International Trade and the Court of Federal
On average, the
respondents had 14.8 years of judicial
experience.
In 2013, only 7% of judges detected instances of jurors using
social media to communicate during a trial or deliberation within the
In 2011, this
figure was 6%.
Of the judges
who had detected instances of juror misconduct of this kind, the vast majority
had detected it in only one or two cases
within the two-year
In both 2011 and
2013, juror misconduct of this kind was more commonly reported as occurring
during trials, rather than during jury
deliberations
and it was also
far more common in criminal jury trials than civil jury
In terms of the particular social media platforms that were
used by jurors,
was the most popular in both 2011 and
In 2011, this was
followed by instant messaging services,
, internet chat rooms,
internet bulletin boards and
instant messaging services were again ranked second, followed by jurors’
personal blogs,
and internet chat
The respondents were also asked about the ways in which jurors
used social media. In 2011, there were three reported cases where a
‘friended’ or attempted to ‘friend’ participants in the
case; three cases where a juror communicated
or attempted to communicate
directly with participants in the case; three cases where a juror revealed
aspects of the deliberation
process; and one case where a juror revealed
identifying information about other jurors. There were no reported cases in
which jurors
divulged confidential information about the case. There were also
11 reported instances of ‘other’ uses of social media
They included: five cases of trial-related internet research; four cases of
sharing general trial information such as
the progress of the case; one case of
allowing another person to listen live to evidence in the trial; and one case of
In 2013, there were six reported cases where a juror divulged
confidential information about the case; three cases where a juror communicated
or attempted to communicate directly with participants in the case; two cases
where a juror revealed aspects of the deliberation
process; and one case where a
juror ‘friended’ or attempted to ‘friend’ participants
in the case. There were
no reported cases where a juror revealed identifying
information about other jurors. There were also nine reported instances of
uses of social media by jurors. They included: five cases of
trial-related internet research; three cases of sharing general jury
information and one case of
It was concluded that the results of this study indicate that
cases of juror misconduct of this kind are ‘not a common
occurrence’.
United States: 2012
In 2012, a survey was conducted in the US with jurors from six
criminal trials and seven civil trials, including the presiding judges
All of the participating judges viewed juror use of social
media as a ‘moderately severe problem’. When asked to rate
scale from one (not at all severe) to 10 (very severe), more than half the
judges rated independent research by jurors and
juror communication with
outsiders at either four or five. Only one judge gave a rating of
Australia: 2013
In February 2013, a ‘small
was conducted in Australia to chart the view of ‘key
stakeholders’
issue. A group of 62 judges, magistrates, tribunal members, court workers, court
public information officers, and academics
working in the field of judicial
administration were asked to rank the most important challenge and/or
opportunity that social media
poses for the court system. ‘By far, the
most significant
expressed by
the participants was ‘juror misuse of social media (and digital media)
leading to aborted
New Zealand: 2014
In 2014, the New Zealand Law Commission undertook a survey of
District Court judges who regularly preside over jury
Of the 94 judges, 59 participated in the survey. The survey results showed that
58% of the responding judges ‘had never had
reason to believe that jurors
had used the internet for information sources, and just over 29% thought it had
happened once or twice.
Just over 10% considered they had reason to believe or
had suspected that a juror may have used the internet in some cases. Only
respondent thought it happened in the majority of
Where juror misconduct of this kind had been detected, the most
common reasons for detection were either from material left in the
jury room or
the misconduct being reported by a fellow
These results caused the Law Reform Commission to conclude that
‘the issue is not unduly problematic at this
Asking other key stakeholders in the criminal justice system
United States: 2012 (counsel)
In 2012, a survey was conducted in the US with jurors from six
criminal trials and seven civil trials, including the presiding judges
Surveyed counsel
rated the problem of juror use of social media as ‘moderately
severe’, albeit with greater variation
in their individual
Australia: 2013 (court staff, academics working in judicial
administration)
Considering reported judgments that deal with the issue
United States: 2010
In 2010, Reuters Legal conducted a review of the data from the
online research database and compiled a list of all reported
cases in the US in which internet-related conduct of jurors was the subject
judicial discussion. From these cases, the following data was derived:
• between 1999 and 2010, at least 90 verdicts were the subject of
challenges because of alleged internet-related juror misconduct;
• more than half of those cases occurred between 2008 and 2010;
• between 21 January 2009 and 9 December 2010, there were 28 cases
(both criminal and civil) in which first instance verdicts
were overturned
and/or retrials were ordered; and
• of the cases in which judges declined to declare mistrials, they
nevertheless found internet-related misconduct on the part
Commentators have
put these figures into perspective as approximately 450,000 jury trials were
conducted in the US during the three-year
period between 2008 and 2010
Monitoring social media platforms for material posted by jurors
United States: 2010
In 2010, Reuters Legal ‘monitored’ the social media
, over a three-week period in November-December 2010 for
tweets that were returned when the term ‘jury duty’ was entered
the site’s search function (‘#juryduty’).
It was observed that ‘[t]weets from people describing
themselves as prospective jurors or sitting jurors popped up at the astounding
rate of one nearly every three minutes ... Many appeared to be simple complaints
or about the boredom of
sitting through a trial ... But a significant number included blunt statements
innocence’.
read, for example: ‘Looking forward to a not guilty verdict regardless of
evidence’, ‘Jury duty is a blow.
I’ve already made up my mind.
He’s guilty. LOL.’ and ‘Guilty! He’s guilty! I can
United Kingdom: 2010
In 2010, a ‘snap-shot
was conducted on
. The terms ‘Jury Service’ and ‘Jury Duty’
were searched on
over a 24-hour period. During that period, there
were 260 results returned for ‘Jury Duty’ (which were linked to
that appeared to be predominantly US-based accounts) and 26 results for
‘Jury Service’ (which appeared to consist of
predominantly UK-based
accounts). Of the particular posts, ‘[n]one of the results gave any
details of a given trial and the
majority were complaints that they were
scheduled to attend for jury selection the following day. Some were asking how
of jury duty, one asked whether there was wifi in a particular court
waiting room and a smaller number commented on jury duty that
appeared to be
ongoing.’ The latter included, for example: ‘Jury duty!!! Cross your
fingers I don’t get picked’,
‘Guess who has Jury Duty in the
AM. Sigh. Might as well get this [expletive] over with. You only have to go 1
time, right?
Not true’, ‘5 weeks of Jury Duty later and I’m
back in the saddle. Bring it on, Monday!’, ‘My first
day of classes
starts tomorrow but I was called in for jury duty -__- I hope I get a murder
case or something lol’, ‘I
have jury duty tomorrow :-(’,
‘Hoping that I won’t get called in for jury duty. Fingers
crossed’, and ‘Thanks
to everyone who gave advice on how to not get
picked for jury duty’. Ten accounts were chosen at random to be followed
a period of seven days: six of the accounts were US-based and four were
The results were as follows:
• Juror 1, a female from Washington State, apparently aged 20 years
tweeted: ‘[J]ust one more week of jury duty. cant
wait to tell you all
Previous visible tweets from the preceding
week documented her attendance at the
court house and comments about it being a long day and that it was going to be a
long two weeks.
She was not following anyone and had two followers.
• Juror 2, a female from the US, apparently aged 26 years, tweeted:
‘Ditching jury duty tomorrow. Going to work instead.
duty!’ She was following five people and had nine followers.
• Juror 3 tweeted: ‘[J]ury duty today, [expletive], just give
everyone a gun instant justice’. On day six, a further
tweet read:
‘JUDGE PUTS LADY IN JAIL FOR BRINGING KIDS TO JURY DUTY SHE DIDN’T
HAVE DAYCARE JUDGE NEEDS TO GET HEAD OUT
HIS BUTT’. The account was
following 61 people and had 91 followers.
• Juror 4, a male from New England tweeted: ‘Jury Duty today. No
laptop, no smartphone, T9 txting twitters it is!’
Two further tweets the
same day commented on his boredom. The following day, he posted: ‘Was 2
numbers away from possibly maybe
getting an alternative seat in the jury. I
kinda wanted to be picked’. He followed 98 people and had 54
• Juror 5, a male from Indiana tweeted about ‘the girl from Law
& Order’, and ‘how much of a trial is
fought during the jury
selection phase’. Other tweets commented on mileage and reimbursement of
costs before a final relevant
tweet: ‘Guilty’. He was following 112
people and had 198 followers.
• Juror 6, a male from Florida tweeted: ‘Yay! Jury Duty! ... That
guy looks so guilty!!’ The tweet was removed the
following day. He was
following 49 people and had six followers.
• Juror 7, a female from Scotland tweeted: ‘I will have to tivo I
have stupid jury duty tomorrow’, ‘Morning
all. I’m off to Jury
duty today ... wonder what the case will be???’ She continued to tweet
that same day about her boredom,
the lack of refreshments, and the fact that she
had returned home because the trial had been delayed due to new evidence. She
following 182 people and had 344 followers.
• Juror 8, a female from the Midlands area in England tweeted: ‘I
will have to tivo I have stupid jury duty tomorrow’,
‘About to head
out and catch myself a train to [name of town]. Jury service today. Fun.’
She further tweeted about the
boredom of waiting around and bringing books for
something to do. Subsequent tweets stated, ‘I may be on a 4 week trial. 18
of us have been picked it’ll be narrowed down to final 12 in the morning
looks juicy’, ‘I want to do this case
‘I’m on a 4+ week murder trial eeeeeeek’. She thereafter
tweeted about the days flying past and
that there was lots of information to
take in. She was following 95 people and had 23 followers.
• Juror 9, a female from London tweeted: ‘Week 8 of jury service.
Now am in the not-so-fun part of returning a verdict.
Are they guilty? I
don’t knoooooooow :(’. She was following 347 people and had 209
• Juror 10, a male from UK (London) tweeted: ‘DAY 2 – JURY
SERVICE!!’, ‘DAY 3 – JURY SERVICE!’,
‘DAY 4 - JURY
SERVICE!!’, ‘DAY 5 JURY SERVICE!!’, and ‘JURY SERIVCE IS
DONE BK 2 UNI ON MONDAY’.
A follower asked him ‘what was the outcome
of the case? Can you say...’, to which he responded, ‘Yep Guilty On
majority Of 10:2’. During the observation period, this juror averaged 202
tweets per day (1,416 in total). He was following
112 people and had 494
Whilst this study is of limited validity, it simply aimed to
review whether jurors do indeed tweet about anything relating to their
experience of jury service.
The results speak for themselves in this respect.
Monitoring social media and other internet platforms for material posted
by the world-at-large, which may be seen by jurors
Australia: 2014
In 2014, a discrete case study was undertaken which considered
the trial-related information that was on
during the high-profile
murder trial in Queensland of
R v Baden-Clay
Automated searches were
on Australian
accounts over the five-week period of the trial; from empanelment
to verdict delivery. From the 33,067 tweets obtained, a sample
of 7,427 tweets
were randomly selected. The 7,427 tweets were then categorised as containing
either ‘none’, ‘low’
or ‘high’ levels of
prejudicial information. Tweets containing statements as to guilt were coded as
‘highly prejudicial’.
Tweets containing statements as to innocence
and content criticising or disparaging the accused (but not asserting guilt)
as ‘low-level prejudice’. All other tweets were coded as
containing no prejudicial information. The categorisation and
related coding
were intentionally conservative.
The results showed that tweeting activity was highest at the
times when the court was sitting. It peaked when key witnesses were giving
evidence (including the accused) and during closing addresses. The highest level
of activity was in the lead up to the
Approximately 65% of
the tweets were posted by ‘professional journalists’, with the
remaining 35% posted by other users.
Of the 33,067 tweets that were identified
as trial-related tweets, 5–7% contained prejudicial
information.
The prevalence
of prejudicial material was far more common in the tweets of users who were
professional journalists
The sample tweets that were identified as containing
prejudicial material totalled 446 tweets which were attributable to 263 users.
The majority of the 263 users (73%) posted just one prejudicial tweet, with the
remainder of users posting between two and 14 prejudicial
The prevalence of tweets containing prejudicial material was
described as a ‘non-negligible sum of
prejudice’.
Further, it
was noted that the posting of prejudicial tweets by non-journalists was in
complete disproportion to the posting of prejudicial
material by
journalists.
Significantly, analysis of the
sample tweets also disclosed a ‘distinct trend’ of tweets accepting
and reinforcing the
prosecution case theory, resulting in a social media
discourse that was one-sided and biased towards the
prosecution.
‘RBTL’ (‘Reading between the
As recent commentators have highlighted, it is not possible to
extract any clear and comprehensive data from the body of research
that exists
to date so as to be able to determine the prevalence of jurors’ use of the
internet and social media in Australia
It has been suggested that juror misconduct of this kind is
rare and, accordingly, the media report stories of such conduct at a very
rate. As a result, the belief that juror misconduct of this kind is common is
merely an erroneous assumption based on the overrepresentation
of this phenomena
in the media and, in reality, it is actually far less
However, it should be noted that just because the
of juror misconduct of this kind may be rare, this does not
necessarily mean that such misconduct is, in fact, rare.
In the surveys cited above of US federal court judges in 2011
and 2013, the responding judges were
in acknowledging the
difficulty in detecting jurors’ inappropriate use of social media and the
fact that they rely on others
to bring it to their
overwhelmingly, they conceded that they had
no way of knowing
were using the internet and social media
inappropriately.
Very rarely does juror misconduct of this kind involve an overt
act in the courtroom that is detectable by the presiding trial
Internet sources can
be viewed and shared easily on a screen or from memory and there is no need to
produce a hardcopy of the information
and thereby create an easily detectable
trace that may discovered,
and privacy settings on social media accounts can limit those who can view and
potentially discover and report relevant activity
of jurors (assuming that
jurors are even able to be identified by their accounts).
As is evident from the cases canvassed [
] above, there are a myriad of different
ways in which juror misconduct of this type may be detected. In particular, many
cases appear
to be discovered and reported by mere chance: court staff
discovering a paper trail in th
as a result of post-trial drinks at a hotel with juror/s and
counsel’s son stumbling across material published by a juror on
unrelated to the case coincidentally being a
friend with the
juror and reporting the
‘stalking’ the accused on
and accidentally sending a
there are examples of reports which belie the extent
instances that are not discovered until after a verdict has been delivered.
All indications are that juror
misconduct of this kind is under-reported, at least to some extent; that the
reported cases represent
the bare minimum of cases of misconduct of this kind,
and an unknown and unknowable number of instances are unreported and therefore
undiscovered.
Question for You
To assist the Institute’s inquiry into the nature and
gravity of juror misconduct of this kind, the Institute sought advice
community and key stakeholders on the following questions:
What is your experience of jurors using social media and/or other internet
platforms during a criminal trial?
Based on your experience, what is your assessment of the prevalence of
jurors’ inappropriate use of social media and/or other
internet platforms
during criminal jury trials?
Do you think that such conduct is confined largely to high-profile cases
which have a high level of media coverage and community interest?
also present in a wider range of criminal trials?
Only two specific examples of
juror misconduct of
this kind were reported by respondents.
The Director of Public Prosecutions (Tas), Daryl Coates SC,
referred to ‘the only known
experience’
of jurors using social media and/or other internet platforms during a criminal
trial in Tasmania: the case of
Marshall and Richardson
[2016] TASCCA 21.
In relation
to South Australia, William Boucaut QC, a Barrister in Adelaide, spoke of his
first-hand experience as defence counsel
in a trial where two jurors
independently conducted their own internet research in relation to the
defendants.
It should be noted that both examples deal only with
information in
scenarios, and neither involved the
specific use of social media, but rather, the internet more generally. Indeed,
both examples are
of the more well-known type of juror misconduct of this kind:
the errant juror conducting online research
However, further responses detail jurors’ use of social
media and/or the internet during court adjournments and post-trial.
The Sheriff
of Tasmania, Jim Connolly, responded that ‘jurors have only been observed
using social media [in the court precinct]
prior to entry to the Jury Room, this
is normally ... Facebook, or other similar
The Legal Aid
Commission of Tasmania submitted:
Our lawyers have directly encountered the following internet/social media
behaviours in relation to jury trials:
• Jurors sending social media ‘friend requests’ to
witnesses after a trial;
• A juror sending a social media ‘friend request’ to
counsel after a trial;
• A juror commenting on a social media article about the sentencing of
‘WOM’ (‘Word of Mouth’)
Other responses to this inquiry were anecdotal. The Legal Aid
Commission of Tasmania stated:
Our lawyers have heard anecdotal reports of jurors reading articles relating
to the trial on Facebook sites that have strongly prejudicial
comments attached
In addition to his first-hand experience of such juror
misconduct, William Boucaut QC added, ‘I have heard anecdotally that
member of the Tasmanian legal profession told of the insight obtained when her
husband served as a juror in Hobart. Her
husband reported to her that
‘every morning and after every adjournment’ jurors would share the
results of their internet
and social media searches; searching the
complainant’s name and the name of witnesses. They most certainly
up names of those involved to find out more and shared this
information with other jurors,
This conduct was not reported, nor did it otherwise come to light.
Other responses to Question 1 had a more speculative basis for
juror misconduct of this kind had occurred. A member of the
Tasmanian Bar recounted a first-hand experience as defence counsel for
‘notorious’ defendant in Hobart. At the time of the trial, the
defendant had other pending criminal matters as well
as matters that had
recently resolved by way of guilty pleas; all of which were ‘well known in
a small town like Hobart’.
The practitioner recounted how the evidence at
trial ‘did not go well for the Crown’, yet the defendant was
‘within seconds’ by the jury. Thereafter, many members of
the jury proceeded to sit in the back of the court for sentencing,
‘knowing there would be more to the story, so to speak ... the jury must
have known about his other matters, his
Additional members of the Tasmanian Bar also spoke of their
experiences with similarly ‘notorious’ defendants in Hobart,
example, a defendant charged with a particularly well known instance of violent
offending: ‘he had many, many other instances
of violent offending in the
past; his name was
everywhere.’
suggestion was that it was difficult to imagine the empanelled jurors did not
already know this, or otherwise did not come to
know this throughout the course
of the trial as a result of their active (or inadvertent) use of social media
and/or other internet
platforms. Another member of the Tasmanian Bar recounted a
trial involving a defendant, again, with significant prior convictions.
Following the trial of the defendant and his co-accused, the practitioner
‘later heard’ the jurors had been referring
to the accused
collectively as ‘very bad men’. This comment had ‘made its way
back’ to the
practitioner.
In these cases, the suggestion by respondents was that one or
more jurors had become privy to information about the accused’s
antecedents from a source outside the courtroom, presumed to be via social media
and/or the internet.
The Law Society of Tasmania responded that ‘no
practitioner was able to suggest or had knowledge of jurors using internet
during a trial ... It is within the Society’s experience however
that witnesses post on social media from time to time before
and after giving
evidence on matters relevant to the
Further, ‘although many practitioners were unable to confidently say they
jurors used internet platforms during a trial, there is a strong
consensus that jurors have google searched parties in a trial. Namely
and defence
witnesses.’
‘IDK’ (‘I don’t know’)
Generally speaking, there was a dearth of
of juror misconduct of this kind reported by respondents.
It follows that, somewhat unsurprisingly, when respondents were
asked about their views on the prevalence of juror misconduct of this
starting point, most prefaced their views with some comment about the fact that
it was essentially an unknown quantity.
The Australian Lawyers Alliance commented, ‘the
experience of ALA is that use of social media by jurors is rarely admitted or
brought forth through ordinary trial procedure in Tasmania. Short of a study
surveying juror experiences including use of social
media, there is no way of
knowing the extent to which jurors use social
Dr Kerstin Braun, a Senior Lecturer at the University of
Southern Queensland, who has researched and published on the topic of social
media in the digital age, stated ‘while it is unclear and under researched
how prevalent jurors’ social media use is
in criminal trials, media
reports document that this type of use occurs in different common law
The current scope of the phenomenon, however,
remains speculative
The Sheriff of Tasmania, Jim Connolly, commented,
‘knowledge about jurors using social media ... is obviously very
In their submission, Associate Professor Jane Johnston of The
University of Queensland, Adjunct Professor Anne Wallace and Professor
Keyzer both of La Trobe University, speak of a ‘widespread
in the Australian criminal justice
as opposed to an empirical view.
The Legal Aid Commission of Tasmania commented that ‘the
behaviour is so difficult to measure or rarely
IMHO (‘In my humble opinion’)
Nevertheless, the majority of respondents held views about the
prevalence of juror misconduct of this kind.
The predominant view was that juror misconduct of this kind is
‘prevalent’:
‘a serious issue facing the criminal justice
a ‘very real
and a ‘widespread
The Legal Aid
Commission of Tasmania submitted it ‘does happen, and happens with some
frequency.’
William Boucaut QC, drawing upon his first-hand experience of
juror misconduct of this kind in South Australia, commented: ‘the
that two jurors did it in one trial indicates that the practice might be more
wide-spread than one would think
Many of the respondents who held this view, did so as an
extension of their understanding of the use of social media and other internet
platforms generally. The Law Society of Tasmania stated in their submission,
‘the sheer prevalence of social media strongly
suggests its inappropriate
by jurors during
criminal trials. Further, the Australian Lawyers Alliance responded, ‘it
is the view held by ALA, and that
held by many barristers and solicitors who
practise in the area of criminal law, that social media must be widely used
jurors; simply because of how ingrained its use has become in
modern behaviour. It is contrary to human experience to suppose that
ceases when a person in empanelled as a
In the minority were those of the view that the prevalence of
juror misconduct of this kind was negligible.
The Director of Public Prosecutions (Tas), Daryl Coates SC,
I accept that the jury system is not infallible and that it is likely that at
least some jurors have impermissibly used social media
and the internet pre and
post trial ... in a digital age the risk ... is greater than ever ...
I have no reason to believe that the impermissible use of
social media and the internet by jurors during a trial is generally prevalent
... In my experience, jurors approach their duties
diligently.
Similarly, the Sheriff of Tasmania, Jim Connolly, submitted
‘in our experience, inappropriate use of social media and/or other
internet platforms during criminal trials is very limited and had little, if
any, impact on jury
In response to Question 3, again, the majority of respondents
were of the view that the prevalence of juror misconduct was such that
not confined to high-profile cases which have a high level of media coverage and
community interest, but that it was also
present in a wider range of criminal
The Sheriff of Tasmania, Jim Connolly, offered the simple, yet
telling observation that the only known example of jurors using the
during a criminal trial in the Tasmanian jurisdiction, the case of
and Richardson
[2016] TASCCA 21
, was not a high-profile
The view of Professor Jill Hunter of The University of New
South Wales was that juror misconduct of this kind is not confined to
high-profile
trials. She stated that her response (to this question, amongst
others posed by the Institute’s Issues Paper) was informed
by her research
in this area:
an empirical
study which surveyed Australian jurors from 20 trials in New South Wales in
2004–2006 and 2011. Relevantly, those
trials were ‘broadly
representative of trials that take place daily in
Australia;’
charges and the factual circumstances upon which they were based were not
striking or unique.’
Similarly, Johnston et al submitted that juror misconduct of
this kind, involving both ‘
information in
information out
’ scenarios, is not necessarily confined to
high-profile cases:
research in the UK suggested that such misconduct was more widespread in high
profile cases, and media reports of instances of this
in Australia have often involved high profile cases. However, it is possible
that it may have been the high-profile
nature of a case which drew the attention
of the media to the juror misconduct, and there are other instances of
misconduct in lower
profile cases that have not received publicity.
The type of information that jurors have been reported to have accessed or
posted impermissibly lends some weight to the suggestion
that the profile of the
trial may not always be an influential factor in contributing to such conduct,
at least where it relates
to juror misconduct. For example, as noted in the
[Institute’s] Issues Paper ... the term ‘reasonable doubt’
to be one that jurors commonly search for and is clearly not one that is
specific to a high-profile trial. Neither are medical or
other specialist terms
related to expert evidence. However, it may also be that jurors feel under more
pressure in a higher profile
case and that may, in turn, increase the temptation
to turn to impermissible sources of information when they are struggling to
In terms of jurors using social media to post information about a trial, it
might be reasonable to assume that jurors on a high-profile
case may also feel
that posts about it may be likely to be more interesting to their followers on
social media. However, the examples
given in the [Institute’s] Issues
Paper also illustrate a range of situations where jurors may have simply wanted
out to family and friends about their current activities, or to make a
connection with, or seek information about, someone in the
trial, simply to
satisfy their curiosity.
The Law Society of Tasmania submitted: ‘The Society is of
the view that this conduct is not limited to only higher profile cases
the likelihood of inappropriate conduct and therefore irregularity is higher in
higher profile
A distinction that some respondents drew between high-profile
trials as opposed to other criminal trials is that jurors involved in
high-profile trials are particularly at risk in relation to inadvertent
information in
’ as a result of social media and/or internet
use. The Law Society of Tasmania commented:
jury members are more likely to ‘accidentally’ encounter material
on the internet and social media in relation to ‘big
trials’ that
have received significant publicity. However, active searches for online
material are just as likely to occur
in small trials as they are large
Dr David Plater, Deputy Director of the South Australian Law
Reform Institute and Senior Lecturer at the University of Adelaide Law
is of the unequivocal view that juror misconduct of this kind ‘extends to
the most routine and mundane’ trials.
He reasons:
‘Everyone is now a journalist.’ There are various online forums
and blogs and sites that devote themselves to coverage
of even the most routine
trial or pre court proceedings. The damaging needle in the online haystack is
always available and readily
discoverable. There are many social media platforms
that provide a means for online commentary and
‘research’.
Even those respondents who were not of the view that juror
misconduct of this kind was prevalent, for example, the Director of Public
Prosecutions (Tas), Daryl Coates SC, conceded that the ‘risk is naturally
increased in high profile cases which generate a
high level of media coverage
and community
Similarly, Dr Braun stated, ‘the risk of inadvertent news
consumption may be greater in high-profile cases which generate a
significant
amount of (social) media
attention.’
However, Dr
Braun also explained that, for the very same reasons, the risk of misconduct by
jurors by way of ‘
information out
’ is also increased in
high-profile cases because ‘jurors may also be more willing to post about
their court experiences
or statements by other jurors in high profile cases,
which may be of greater interest to their social media
followers.’
concluded ‘the risk of indirect exposure and active social media use
giving rise to potential violations of jury obligations
may be greater in
high-profile cases.’
Significantly, she concluded, ‘yet, depending on the circumstances of the
individual case at hand, social media use in lower
profile criminal trials
The Law Society of Tasmania raised a
potential peculiarity in this regard when it comes to smaller jurisdictions such
as Tasmania,
pointing out that there might not be such a distinction between
‘high-profile’ and ‘low-profile’ trials such
is the same marked difference in media and community interest. The Law Society
of Tasmania submitted:
in Tasmania, almost every criminal trial attracts media coverage and online
attention ... [however,] [t]he higher profile cases will
also attract greater
mainstream media coverage and
Rather, the Law Society of Tasmania was of the view that
‘the reason it is more widely spread is linked to the causes of such
Society views as arising from the criminal trial process itself rather than the
subject matter. His Honour Justice Pearce
of the Supreme Court of Tasmania is of
a similar view, and, interestingly, sees this as possible basis for the converse
juror misconduct of this kind may even be less likely in high-profile
I think the risk of the conduct occurring does not depend on whether a case
is high profile or not. It applies across the board. I
think that the risk may
even be less likely in a high-profile trial because the evidence is likely to be
more extensive and complete,
and the importance of compliance is likely to be
more apparent to
The Legal Aid Commission of Tasmania concluded that
the extent of such inappropriate use [of social media/the
internet] is very difficult (if not impossible) to accurately measure, use
should be treated as
assumption should be that ... inappropriate social media use will occur in every
The Australian Lawyers Alliance submitted that juror misconduct
of this kind currently poses ‘an unacceptably high risk of miscarriage
justice ... its effect is insidious, and only a relatively small number of
jurors need to use social media in order to produce
miscarriages of justice, and
to erode confidence in the judicial
The Institute endorses this position. The Institute also
highlights that the apparent risk of the inappropriate juror use of social
extends, especially in Tasmania, to both high-profile and routine criminal
In their submission to the Institute, Johnston et al identify
the further point that the prevalence of jurors’
media and other internet platforms during criminal trials does not necessarily
equate to the prevalence with which an accused’s
right to a fair trial is
adversely affected:
the percentage of jurors who use social media and/or internet platforms
inappropriately to access information about the trial in which
they are serving,
does not, in and of itself, indicate whether or to what extent, that information
influenced the jury verdict. It
might seem a logical assumption that such an
influence would follow, but ascertaining the nature and extent of that influence
require further investigation into the process of
deliberation...
The Institute recognises this as yet another unknown quantity
in determining the gravity of juror misconduct of this kind.
His Honour Justice Pearce of the Supreme Court of Tasmania
Just because I don’t know about it doesn’t mean it doesn’t
happen, although it is impossible to say how often. I
think it is unrealistic to
think that during a trial jurors don’t sometimes look things up on the
internet, or become aware
of things relevant to the trial on social media. It is
difficult to resist the temptation to look at maps, or to search for information
In circumstances where much remains unknown (and unknowable)
a constant, known quantity is the gravity of the risk: the risk that an
accused’s fundamental right to a fair trial
before an impartial jury is
adversely affected. The risk exists with respect to every single juror in every
single trial. It only
takes one act of one juror for the risk to
materialise.
In the Institute’s view, the gravity of the risk posed by
juror misconduct of this kind, coupled with the fact that general
perception is
that such misconduct is prevalent, necessitates that this problem is
acknowledged and addressed in order to retain
confidence in the administration
of justice by jury trial.
As far as I can tell
Juror misconduct via the internet and social media platforms may
be either intentional or unintentional, or indeed, somewhere in between.
Commentators have suggested that a more holistic approach, where the underlying
causes of such juror misconduct are identified and
understood, would be
ultimately beneficial when it comes to addressing this
The ensuing discussion of how and why juror misconduct of this
kind occurs and its causes and/or motivations is informed by the insights
obtained from court reports,
media reports,
and research
on this topic to date.
Institute also asked respondents for their insight by seeking responses to the
following question:
Based on your experience, what do you think causes and/or motivates jurors to
use social media and/or other internet platforms inappropriately
criminal trial?
The internet is not the (whole)
Juror misconduct is not
The internet and social
media platforms have simply introduced a new, though dramatically expanded and
instantly available, means
by which juror misconduct can readily
The principle that a
jury’s deliberations, and ultimately its verdict, must be based —
and exclusively based —
on the evidence given in court, applies as much to
jurors engaging in ‘old fashioned’ methods of communication as it
does to internet-based methods of communication.
In his submission, Daryl Coates SC, Director of Public
Prosecutions (Tas), observed, ‘the potential of ‘
information
information out
new issue, “the possibility that a juror might acquire irrelevant and
prejudicial information is inherent in a criminal
[1992] HCA 16
(1992) 173 CLR 592
the English Court
of Criminal Appeal, in considering juror misconduct at first instance,
commented, ‘the problem is therefore
not the internet: the potential
problems arise from the activities of jurors who disregard the long established
principles which
underpin the right of every citizen to a fair
The writing is on the
Whilst juror misconduct is not new, there is much that is novel
Many respondents, when referring to
the nature of juror misconduct of this kind, mentioned only intentional
information in
’ scenarios, in particular, the more
well-known type of juror misconduct of this kind:
the errant juror conducting
online research
. In the Institute’s view, this highlights the general
misconception that juror misconduct that involves social media and/or
internet is confined to intentional conduct on the part of jurors, or, indeed,
this particular scenario of ‘
information in
’. For example,
the Legal Aid Commission of Tasmania stated:
the general use of social media is not the evil that needs to be cured. The
consumption of prejudicial material relevant to the trial
is the problem. Normal
internet and social media use can occur without problematic material being
His Honour Justice Pearce of the Supreme Court of Tasmania,
stated: ‘In my view,
information in
is by far the most important,
and most likely to affect the fairness of the trial ...
information in
much more important than
information out
information out
may sometimes encourage
information
Rather, the very nature of social media and the internet is such
that juror misconduct of this kind may be the product of inadvertence
Simply accessing social media for ‘entertainment’
purposes may be problematic for jurors, and ultimately for the criminal
on which they sit. Passive news consumption is now considered to be a by-product
of social media use. By merely logging on
and gaining access to many social
media platforms, the user is exposed to ‘incidental news’. For
example, on
, a ‘news feed’ is a constantly updating
list in the middle of a user’s homepage. It includes some
interspersed with all other entertainment-related updates:
status updates, photos, videos, links, app activity and likes from people,
and groups that the user follows on
A juror can easily be exposed to trial-related news without
seeking it out, particularly in high-profile trials which attract considerable
media coverage. However, in the midst of the current true crime boom, the
‘misery beat’ of crime reporting is experiencing
a resurgence. More
routine matters are being reported, particularly in smaller jurisdictions such
as Tasmania, and, invariably, by
reporters who publish predominantly
Moreover, as previously noted, in smaller jurisdictions such as Tasmania,
trials are likely to be the subject of media
Further, the ‘news’ may not even be posted in a
user’s feed directly from the news source. It may appear simply
the activity of the user’s ‘friends’. A user’s news feed
can include posts about people that the
user is not even ‘friends’
with and ‘groups’ that the user is not a part of. This is because a
news feed includes posts about their friends’ activity on
, including when the user’s friends comment on posts from
people that the user isn’t friends with and when they comment
groups that the user is not a member
Of course, ‘news’ in this context is not confined to
its traditional meaning. News and current affairs may be shared between
with accompanying comments or opinions and material may be created entirely by
journalists’.
former Chief Justice of Victoria has noted, ‘everyone is now a
journalist’.
Tasmania, there are
The Vigilante
Crime Watch
pride themselves on publishing crime-related news as it is still unfolding and
material that is not necessarily published by
other sources. As at October 2019,
The Vigilante News
Crime Watch
Similar groups
, such as the non-jurisdiction specific
news’/ ‘#nofilter’
A recent survey of Australian news consumers shows that 73%
report having experienced one or more types of ‘
in the last
week. Whilst 65% of news consumers are concerned about fake news they encounter
online, possibly the greater worry is
the fact that 12% didn’t know if
they had encountered any fake news or
Further, it is estimated
that there are 83 million ‘fake’ profiles on
There is relatively little that can be done to determine the
source of much material that is published on the internet and social
platforms, let alone its accuracy and/or reliability. Courts have repeatedly
warned about the sources of content for widely
trusted supposed
‘reference’ sources on the internet such as
There is also content on the internet and social media with far
more sinister intentions. Commentators have identified the prospect
of material
being put online by an accused, or through an
to interfere with the trial process. In November 2010, Lord Judge, the then
Lord Chief Justice of England and Wales, made the point
that ‘Twitter
could be used by campaigners in a bid to influence the outcome of a
applies to any other popular social media platform.
The New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal decision in
(commonly known as the ‘
’ case) highlights the
potential power of social media to focus public bias and prejudice in a targeted
fashion. The fact that
Hughes faced serious sexual charges does not diminish his
vital right to a fair trial. On appeal, Hughes’ lawyer described
as follows:
This was a case where there was ... poisonous vilification of [Hughes] not by
mainstream media, but by social media that involved
the most poisonous and vile
publicity from which no one could ever recover ... There was a deliberate
attempt made by people on social
media to poison the
Hughes’ counsel further noted that, for example, some of
the posts on social media were, ‘lock the pedo up’ and
‘Innocent men don’t hide out in Asia’. Some of the posts
received ‘millions and millions’ of
One post, which stated,
‘hang the pedo’ received more than 220,000 likes
On appeal, Hughes’ lawyer contended that ‘[t]his was a malicious
campaign by people to create an unfair trial for the
accused, and it was done
deliberately’.
it was revealed that the material ‘included comments by one of the
complainants ... She was an active part of it ...
She ran a running commentary
... We now know she did that using a pseudonym so she could not be
identified.’
In Massachusetts in 2017, an accused faced fraud charges in
relation to a company purporting to assist international students gain
to prestigious American boarding schools. Before the accused was even indicted,
a blog about him and his alleged conduct
was thriving online. It continued for
over two years, until the accused was convicted. It contained highly prejudicial
content about
him, his alleged conduct and his upcoming trial, including,
‘I have no doubt that any jury with an IQ above body temperature
convict ... [the accused] ... I only fear that his defense [sic] undoubtedly
tried to seat as many morons as possible in order
to confuse them
During the trial,
it became apparent that the jury who were hearing the trial were not only privy
to the information contained in
the blog, but were also contributing to the
blog. One commentator purporting to be a juror wrote: ‘It’s gone a
week longer
than the judge has hoped ... When I left the jury last week due to
an illness they were 50/50 ... half saw him guilty and the others
didn’t’. This was brought to the Court’s attention and it was
confirmed that the comment was posted by a juror
after she was discharged. Four
days later, a further comment was posted by a second juror: ‘Boy this is
getting comical. I’ve
been following it on and off, and was also on the
jury ... [the juror who previously posted] was sprouting about the ... blog
day one. Its [sic] why she conveniently got “sick” and
didn’t finish her service. Idiot doesn’t describe
the half of
Targeted attempts to interfere with the trial process are not
new, nor are they unheard of in
Indeed, the effects
of targeted social media activity in smaller jurisdictions such as Tasmania can
be especially effective and are
of particular
The internet and
social media platforms make jurors, and the trial process generally, far more
vulnerable to such interference.
The following incident illustrates just how little control a
juror has over avoiding prejudicial material on social media. In Ohio
juror’s sister ‘liked’ a
page which supported
the conviction for the murder of the accused whose trial the juror was sitting
in. This caused this material
to appear in the news feed on the homepage of the
account without the juror doing
It is clear, however, that the source of some of the most
prejudicial material available on social media in relation to an accused
routine cases may simply be the accused’s own social media presence;
material which may be sourced by jurors or, as detailed
above, sourced for them
by others. By way of an example, following a civil personal injury and wrongful
death trial in Maine in 2009,
which resulted in a verdict in the
defendant’s favour, a juror emailed counsel for the plaintiffs. The juror
Did you know your plaintiff[s] advocated the use of mushrooms and weed
smoking, and binge drinking all over the internet? ... It[’s]
what happened but with all the work going into this don[’t] you think you
should have address[ed] this issue and
known such things so they could clean up
their acts before court? I’m just trying to help. [I]f you want more info
and insight
[i] will help
Further, in the UK in 2010, a juror sitting in an aggravated
robbery trial found a photograph of the accused posing with a firearm
social media page entitled, ‘gangster
A juror’s habitual use of social media should not be
downplayed as a significant contributing factor to misconduct of this kind.
2009, a prospective juror in the US tweeted: ‘Wow. Jury duty. First time
ever. Can I be excused because I can’t be
offline for that
The desire to
share continuously and to be connected constantly is the ‘new
for many social
media users and it does not stop just because they commence jury service.
Dr Braun’s submission to the Institute, identifies such
habitual use of social media as a key contributing factor to juror misconduct
Social media use has become part of modern life. Social media is used to stay
connected to friends and family and to express oneself
to other users. While
there is no formally recognised ‘social networking addiction’ or
‘e-communication addiction’
excessive social networking can
incorporate symptoms frequently associated with addiction including inability to
reduce consumption
and relapse. There seems to be a fine line between
unproblematic habitual use and possibly addictive networking.
While it may be easy for some jurors to refrain from accessing their social
media accounts, others, for whom social networking represents
a lifestyle and
integral part of their daily routine, may be unable to curtail their behaviour
during a criminal trial. Social media
may have become too much of a way of life
to abstain from its use during criminal
proceedings.
In 2003, the New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal
pertinently predicted: ‘It may well become the case, as a matter of habit
arising out of the way that ordinary affairs are conducted, that the inevitable
reaction of any person who is summonsed as a juror,
will be to undertake an
online search in relation to the case, to ascertain what it may
In the submission from the Legal Aid Commission of Tasmania,
reference was made to ‘a cultural tendency to “check out”
given person’s online footprint when encountering them for the first
Further, William
Boucaut QC commented, ‘social media and smart phones are so prolifically
present in the community that it
is second nature to go online if we want to
know something’.
Sherriff of Tasmania, Jim Connolly, proffered his view of errant jurors’
motivation as: ‘curiosity ... to ascertain
what type of person the accused
is...to conduct their own investigation of facts arising on the
The Law Society
of Tasmania also submitted that a dominant motivation is, ‘curiosity on
the background of the case, the witnesses
Johnston et al posited that: ‘the impact of social media
contributing to a diminution in the boundaries between individuals’
and private personas, peer pressure and, the ubiquitous presence of this
technology in the lives of many individuals, may
Garth Stevens, a Barrister at Liverpool Chambers (Tas),
highlighted the fact that the use of social media and/or the internet to satisfy
such curiosities ‘does not take any real effort [eg unlike old fashioned
juror misconduct which required, for example,] physically
going to conduct
The simplicity and ease with which social media and/or the internet may be
employed was also the subject of comment by the Australian
Lawyers Alliance:
Social media is easy to use ... a relatively simple tool for a juror to use
who wants to find out more information about the defendant
Interestingly, the habitual social media user who falls into
misconduct as a juror is not confined to a particular stereotype. There
documented examples of ‘
information out
’ blunders in the US
involving variously a judge,
a newspaper
and a television
personality.
Many offending jurors have been unable to explain their
misconduct in any other terms. One US juror explained that one evening after
deliberations had begun, she went home and logged onto
her ‘normal practice’. She ‘impulsively’ typed in one of
the names of the witnesses as well as one
or two other names of witnesses from
the trial. She sent one of the witnesses a friend request. As soon as she had
done so, she knew
she had made a
Another US juror
I continued my personal life as if I was not there to judge a trial ... It
was my first time as a juror, and I was naïve ...
I failed to make the
necessary changes in my daily life ... I feel terrible. I never meant to hurt
anyone. I wasted a lot of people’s
time and money, and I deeply regret
what I did ... sometimes — I suppose I forget it’s so public and
it’s Facebook
and it’s something that I use a lot ... I’m
pretty quiet in my day-to-day dealings with people, so it’s just a
me to, you know, express
‘#motivation
Whilst social media and the internet pose new risks for
unsuspecting jurors to be lured unwittingly into misconduct, they also provide
new and improved means for intentionally errant jurors who are confused and/or
frustrated by the trial process to seek information
outside of the courtroom.
What can be learned from the humble dictionary?
The intentionally errant juror is nothing new. However, the
means available to this class of juror have exponentially increased.
Victorian terrorism trial that involved juror/s’ searching definitions of
legal terms on
Reference.com
, a hard copy dictionary
was also found in the jury room. The jury had used the dictionary to look up the
definition of ‘foster’.
The trial judge dismissed the incident,
Having told the jury that the word ‘fostering’ was an ordinary
English word upon which they needed little or no assistance
from the court, it
is hardly surprising that they resorted to a standard English dictionary. There
is something faintly ridiculous
standard reference source
for assistance on a question of fact
such as the meaning of an ordinary English word
when that is exactly what
any reasonable person would expect them to do
— perhaps especially
after the Judge has told them they would need no assistance from
[emphasis added]
On appeal, the Victorian Court of Criminal Appeal agreed that
there was ‘
something odd
inappropriate or improper for a jury to consult the Concise Oxford Dictionary on
the meaning of an
ordinary English word which they are told is a question for
The Court went on to consider the earlier Victorian case of
v Chatzidimitriou
which also involved a jury’s use of a hard copy dictionary, given to
them by the presiding judge. On appeal, Cummins AJA of
the Court of Criminal
Appeal commented:
Responsible citizens have been consulting the Oxford English Dictionary since
1933 (and the New English Dictionary on Historical Principles
since 1884), if
not the dictionary of Dr Samuel Johnson (A Dictionary of the English Language)
since 1755 or that of Robert Cawdrey
(A Table Alphabetical) since 1604. The two
volume Shorter Oxford English Dictionary held in the Bendigo Court and provided
jury was published in 1959 under the general editorship of the
distinguished C T Onions. It is an authoritative work. Responsible
would be affronted to be told that, in the information age, the law
forbids them
doing as jurors what persons have done since 1933 (or 1884
or earlier) as an aid to understanding
It must be acknowledged that social media and other internet
platforms are a ‘
standard reference source
’ for the vast
majority of Australians who are continuously online and engaged; at home, at
work and in-between on their smartphones.
exactly what any
reasonable person would expect
’ to be the first port of call when
tasked with an unfamiliar problem-solving, investigative, analytic and/or
decision-making
function. Indeed, that same majority are likely to find
something odd
not be able to have such recourse and, moreover, ‘
affronted to be told
that in the information age, the law forbids them as jurors
using social media and/or other internet platforms as they are accustomed.
Trial by jury brings members of the public into the criminal
courtroom of which they have little to no firsthand experience and where
are likely to feel
of the Tasmanian jurors who were interviewed in 2007–2009, their
experience of jury service was the first time that
they had been in a courtroom.
They did not understand the reasons behind many of the formal court procedures
and were acutely aware
that they were amateurs in a world dominated by
professionals.
This sense of bewilderment and intimidation was coupled with the
jurors’ feeling a great sense of responsibility and taking
their task very
Jurors spoke of
the ensuing pressure and stress that they experienced. Jurors described a
‘pressure-cooker
environment’
experience as ‘very emotional’, ‘traumatis[ing]’,
‘overwhelming’, ‘exhausting’,
‘nerve-wracking’, ‘devastating’, ‘daunting’,
‘mortifying’, ‘horrendous’,
intimidating’, ‘very draining’, and
jurors identified the responsibility of reaching a decision of guilt or
innocence as extremely stressful. Many spoke of taking
the stress home with
and losing sleep.
The questions and comments of jurors
in the Tasmanian study made it clear that they suffered misunderstandings and/or
misperceptions
throughout the trial process. In relation to basic legal
principles: they reported struggling with the meaning of ‘beyond
the meaning of ‘forensic disadvantage’ when applying the
Jurors also perceived defence counsel’s compliance with the rule in
Browne v Dunn
as unnecessarily bullying behaviour towards prosecution
witnesses (ie counsel repeatedly suggesting that witnesses were
Jurors also reported
confusion about basic procedural matters such as when the Court of Petty
Sessions was mentioned in evidence
in connection to the procedural history of
the matter, jurors then speculated that the accused had been found not guilty in
other court.
Juror bewilderment even extended to
housekeeping and scheduling matters. In one juror’s trial, the matter was
unexpectedly adjourned
to allow the Court of Criminal Appeal to hand down a
judgment: ‘suddenly at four, we were ... marched out of the [jury
deliberation]
room and there were all these extra judges there and I thought,
Hello ... Why is this happening? Are we taking too long? Are we going
locked up?’
Jurors also
reported that they did not understand what would happen to them if they could
not agree and whether they would have to
stay overnight in a hotel if the
deliberations lasted longer than the sitting
Indeed, a juror sitting
in a 2012 English fraud trial attempted to explain his
further information in relation to the complainants because he ‘only
wanted to find out how long the trial would take as
he was worried that it might
drag on, affecting his job and family
Significantly, one juror who participated in the Tasmanian
study also explained how isolated she felt because she was unable to talk
friends or family, ‘the only people you can talk to about it are each
other [fellow jurors]. You can’t even get
somebody else’s point of
view that you know. Usually we [friends and/or family] discuss
everything’.
a juror sitting in a high-profile corruption trial in Pennsylvania in 2012
posted extensively during the trial on
including a running commentary on deliberations. The juror explained to the
court, when called upon to do so, that the postings were
‘for my benefit
to just get it out of my head, similar to a blog posting or somebody journaling
something’.
Such circumstances may prompt even well-intentioned jurors to
explore other ‘
information in
’ options in order to keep up.
Dr David Plater, Deputy Director of the South Australian Law Reform Institute,
aptly describes:
the increasingly complex and convoluted law and resulting judicial directions
(both from the High Court and Parliament) and the ever
more sophisticated and
complex nature of modern evidence such as DNA and phone intercepts means
criminal trials are ever longer and
In the submissions received from the Australian Lawyers
Alliance, the fact that the trial process is often
‘confusing’
listed as a suggested cause of juror misconduct of this kind. In a similar vein,
but with greater specificity, the Law Society
of Tasmania identified, ‘the
inability of the court to explain BRD [beyond reasonable
as a possible
As an aside, possibly the greatest cause for concern by this
indication of jurors’ difficulties in following the trial process
this means for the accused. As commented by Gaudron J in the High Court case of
As Deane J pointed out in
A system of criminal law cannot be attuned to the needs of the people whom it
exists to serve unless its administration, proceedings
and judgments are
comprehensible by both the accused and the general public
The participation of ordinary citizens, as jurors in the judicial process
renders it necessary that criminal proceedings be understood
by all, including
the accused. It is, thus, fundamental to the law’s guarantee of a fair
‘Fear of missing out
Many of the Tasmanian jurors who were interviewed also found
the experience of being under the control of the court to be disempowering
frustrating. Jurors described feeling ‘like naughty, ignorant children who
were sent to their room for punishment or excluded
from conversations between
the professionals who talked about important matters behind closed
complained of ‘being sent back to the jury room every five
and the fact
that they hadn’t been ‘given the whole story ... we all knew that
something had happened that night, but
we didn’t know exactly what ... [we
felt we were] denied the
Tasmanian jurors also reported:
[the judge] was just bossing us around the whole time ... We were being led
through a maze by the judge and told what to do and what
to think all the time.
Anytime [the unrepresented defendant] opened his mouth it was something we had
to disregard or we were sent
in the room ... It took a lot of our autonomy away
This accords with jurors’ feelings elsewhere. For
example, a juror in New Hampshire in 2009 conducted internet research during
sexual assault trial. He informed fellow jurors about the accused’s prior
convictions for child molestation. After the juror
was convicted of contempt and
fined $1200, he stated defiantly to the media: ‘If it’s
someone’s third offense for
driving while intoxicated, shouldn’t you
know ... If it’s a fourth theft charge, shouldn’t you know?
should [be concerned] that jurors are not told
everything.’
His Honour Justice Pearce of the
Supreme Court of Tasmania commented, with respect to the causes and/or
motivations of juror misconduct
of this kind:
My impression is that, in most cases, it arises because a jury may perceive
gaps in the information they are asked to consider. Although
jurors are directed
that they are to confine their deliberations to the evidence they hear and see
in court, there must be a strong
temptation to look elsewhere for information
they suspect may exist but have not been told about, and to fill in the gaps in
It is clear how such frustration could manifest itself as juror
misconduct. If jurors perceive that they are being denied relevant
without an explanation as to why, they may carry out impermissible research to
‘fill in the gaps’ pursuant
to a misplaced sense of responsibility
to render the ‘right’
Commentators have
highlighted the fact that criminal trials are often unhelpfully portrayed in
media and fiction as a pursuit of
objective or factual truth, which inevitably
gives rise to a ‘clash’ between jurors’ notions of justice and
fundamental premise of a common law criminal
This concept was explored in some detail by Professor Jill
Hunter’s study of jurors in New South Wales in 2004–2006 and
Jurors explained their
frustrations variously as follows:
‘Both the Crown and defence cases left unanswered numerous questions
relating to the circumstances of the alleged crime and
the people involved, esp.
the accused and some witnesses. Our deliberations would have been more
productive and focused had this
additional information been provided. Both sides
were inadequate in their running of the trial.’
‘[A juror] wished on numerous occasions the Crown would supply us [the
jury] with more details and the defence would go down
another path, it felt like
we as the jurors were being deliberately confused.’
‘[A juror] [f]elt counsel could have explored evidence with more
questioning on certain matters.’
‘The decision making process is not easy based upon one
barrister’s perspective & facts put forward. My experience
was that 12
people (jury) were able to uncover many key points missed by both Crown and
defence. If this info was at times available
it may assist with some undecided
[Jurors wanted more evidence:] ‘to make a more accurate verdict’;
‘to make the situation clearer’; ‘[to
make deliberations] more
productive and focussed’; ‘to process information differently and
reach different conclusions’;
to ‘make an informed decision’;
or to ‘fill the gaps’.
‘Only about 20% of the story gets told in court. Alleged crimes
occurred between people who knew each other very well. It was
one person’s
word against another’s. We could have understood the people, their
relationships and their situations better.
We would have liked to hear more in
‘The truth of the matter was that to make a decision based on very few
facts that we had was very hard indeed.’
‘Evidence was incomplete, inadequate, frustrating...’
‘more evidence can help [jurors to make correct decision ... It’s
not true justice if all the facts of a case cannot be
presented ... Keeping
information from jurors is not a fair trial ... [t]he extra information would
‘I felt that the evidence was inadequate — too many gaps —
not enough detail.’
‘Crown was good ... [but] we found we discovered additional key points
in the evidence during
deliberation.’
Indeed, one juror, whilst rejecting the acceptability of jurors
conducting independent inquiries, stated, ‘BUT having been TOTALLY
FRUSTRATED with inadequate evidence in our case I could understand why a juror
may do THIS’. That juror continued, ‘[w]e,
as a jury, felt
absolutely in the dark!! We had no solid factual evidence supported by any
witnesses or police statements. We were
aware that the victim had made
statements to the police, but when we requested them we were told that we were
not allowed to have
Another juror stated that ‘a lot of material was held
back or was not presented as relevant ... if the jury was to make an informed
decision ... [i]t might be useful to allow jurors to ask the judge questions and
have feedback as to why it may not be relevant or
is unknown.’ In that
particular case, the jury were informed why evidence was or was not called, but
only in very broad terms:
‘it was the parties’ right to determine
the calling of
A juror described the trial process as
‘distressing’ because:
The process was not about helping the jury come to a decision but about the
prosecution and defence arguing a point. If it was about
coming to the right
decision, the jury would be part of the process and not just witnesses. We would
be better served if the process
was not only adversarial but sought information
Significantly, those jurors who expressed the view that
independent juror inquiries were acceptable reasoned:
‘[It is n]ot practical to think that things like the internet would not
‘the prosecution seemed inexperienced.’
‘If jurors feel s/he needs to know more about anything in order to have
better understanding/knowledge about something, then
s/he should be able to do
so. That might help the juror to have more accurate verdict later on ... Jurors
should be able to find
out whatever they need as it might help them later
‘There was not sufficient evidence presented.’
‘At any time any additional information either confirming or
eliminating believes [sic] would have added impression to one’s
In total, 33% of jurors surveyed (26 jurors) across 16 of the
20 trials indicated that they perceived their task was to deliver a
verdict that
reflected a determination of objective
Professor Jill Hunter
spoke of an ‘ignorance’ on the part of jurors such that they
‘fail to appreciate the legal
framework of the trial and ... consider they
are seeking objective
This possible motivation was favoured by many of the
respondents to the Issues Paper.
The Australian Lawyers Alliance submitted:
The trial process is ... not adapted to achieve what most jurors might regard
as a just outcome. A juror who intends to do what he
or she regards as
‘justice’ is therefore in the position of attempting to do so in
spite of the obstacles presented by
the trial process and judicial
The Law Society of Tasmania expressed the view that
‘jurors at times feel that adequate information has not been provided and
they have to do their own investigation’. The Society pointed to,
‘ironically, a desire to reach the right decision and
that by securing
further information they are seeking to determine ‘the truth’ of
what occurred as opposed to whether
the charge has been proven by the Crown
beyond reasonable
The Legal Aid Commission suggested that errant jurors were
motivated to use social media and other internet platforms because of
‘frustration
on the part of jurors with the artificiality of the criminal
trial process and the limitations put on the information given to them
provisions of the
Evidence Act 2001
... the “where there is smoke
there is fire” view – a belief that the jury is not being told the
whole story’.
Relevantly, the Australian Lawyers Alliance reasoned that such
conduct ‘is easily justified in the mind of a juror as no more
gathering publicly available
information.’
Some respondents identified the role that defiance alone might
play. Garth Stevens, a Barrister at Liverpool Chambers (Tas) commented
might ‘never have dawned on jurors that they could use the internet and
social media to obtain information relevant
to the trial until they were told
Society of Tasmania similarly submitted, ‘temptation of the forbidden
fruit – some may be drawn to search for
information because they have been
directed not to’.
Law Society also noted that, ‘a juror’s knowledge that the conduct
is unlikely to be detected’ and/or ‘if
detected, is unlikely to lead
to any significant consequences for the individual
further motivating factor of juror misconduct of this kind.
His Honour Justice Pearce was of the view:
It is the obligation of judges to give directions to jurors about proper
access to the internet and social media during a trial, and
if necessary, to
remind jurors of it as the trial proceeds. The most effective direction, as far
as I am able to judge, is by resort
to notions of fairness to both the accused
and the State. In my experience, most jurors appear to take their obligations
Whilst it is apparent that a high proportion of jurors
acknowledge fairness as a key part of their role, it is also apparent that
jurors’ understanding of fairness and, in particular, an accused’s
right to a fair trial, is often flawed.
Professor Jill Hunter’s study of jurors in New South Wales
in 2004–2006 and 2011, concluded:
The study does not support the assessment that the jurors who thought it was
acceptable to breach a judge’s direction were renegades
or inclined to
flout justice. ... There may be a small element of defiance but the total
picture revealed by juror respondents suggests
that they were focused on doing
their task well but often with a flawed appreciation of what justice required.
Support for this view
comes from an additional telling statistic, namely that
the dominant priority expressed by jurors was that they should be fair to
Professor Hunter further observed:
juror comments regularly referred to ‘fairness’, sometimes
linking it to why none of their number should engage in sleuthing.
‘Fairness’ in this context was articulated by jurors as fairness to
both parties or as fairness to other jurors (that
is, in the sense that all
jurors should have the same information base).
On the topic of fairness, jurors in the 2011 trials were asked to identify
the top priorities from a list that described tasks ‘in
room’. The largest group of respondents to answer this question – 20
of the 39 jurors, prioritised ‘ensuring
fairness to the defendant’.
However, a significant amount of ambiguity can surround what a person means by
‘fairness’.
For example, in response to a request to prioritise a
number of considerations, including the aspirations of ensuring ‘innocent
people are acquitted’ and ensuring ‘guilty people are
convicted,’ 14 jurors elected to confirm priority to acquitting
people (consistent with the presumption of innocence and prosecutors’
heavy burden of proof) but nearly as many jurors
– 13 of them –
determined that ‘ensuring guilty people are convicted’ was their
priority. Some may consider
the closeness of juror preferences between these
choices is concerning but the response rate...is insufficient to draw firm
conclusions.
This was not the only indication that, despite jurors’
acknowledgement of the importance of fairness, ‘misconceptions
of justice,
at odds with the fundamental prerequisites of law’s notion of a fair
trial, emerged in relation to approximately
half of the 78 jurors (across 17 of
the 20 trials).’
As mentioned above, this included 33% of jurors who believed
their task is to deliver a verdict that reflects a determination of objective
truth and 15% of jurors who believed that it is justified in certain
circumstances to engage in independent juror inquiry. It also
encompassed 20% of
jurors who believed the prosecution and defence had, or should have equal rights
and obligations, including a
significant number of jurors who indicated that
defence rights should be curtailed.
In relation to the latter, Professor Hunter commented more
widely that ‘rights of the accused were often viewed negatively or
defence was seen as having fallen short of jury expectations to assist with
information gathering.’
To this end, various jurors responded as follows:
‘the balance is totally tilted in favour of the accused person not
having to prove anything except ‘reasonable doubt’,
which is so
broad and unfair to the victim, whose character can be challenged so
ruthlessly.’
‘some laws should be changed to make sure the defendant does not have
as much rights to stop evidence being given to a jury.’
‘[t]he defence objected at many things that we would of [sic] liked to
‘I wondered if the legal loop holes were used to suppress evidence
which may have helped with a verdict. The law benefits the
accused. Every effort
is made to ensure they get a fair trial. We were instructed to find him
‘not guilty’ if there wasn’t
enough strong evidence even if we
thought he was guilty.’
‘[A factor that influenced one juror’s verdict was] the defendant
pleaded guilty to ... [another]
Professor Hunter also identified many juror comments which
appeared to be founded on ‘flawed assumptions about the burden of
and placing equal demands on the prosecution and defence to bring evidence
before the court.’
‘[Without] a clear picture of the accused’s [criminal] history,
it is harder to prove him guilty, even though a case may
have suggestions of a
guilty verdict, if the jury is not convinced with background information then a
guilty verdict is much harder
‘We thought that more questions could have been asked and more
witnesses could have been called, especially by the accused to
back up his
‘[J]urors should be allowed to find out more about the accused if the
evidence is inadequate.’
‘[T]he mention about [particular evidence] ... as brought up by the
defence really tipped the scales in favour of the accused
... Was that fair? He
chose not to testify and pleads not guilty yet gives evidence through his
lawyer? I don’t get
Despite the majority of jurors purporting to acknowledge and
undertake their role in relation to ‘fairness’, in ‘too
jurors’ understanding of ‘fairness’ does not appear to equate
with what the criminal justice system requires
Relevantly, Dr David Plater, Deputy Director of the South
Australian Law Reform Institute provides the following insight:
The motivation or temptation for juries to use social media or conduct
impermissible research is seemingly not a wish to be perverse.
Rather a foray
into history is illustrative. Criminal trials until 30 odd years ago were
relatively swift and simple ... Juries into
century played
an active role in trials and were treated in an inclusive manner as mature
adults. Juries report that they are now
treated in a patronising and inferior
manner and feel like they are treated like children. They are excluded from much
of the evidence
and much of the proceedings. Jurors resent this and feel
frustrated and left out. They are told that, often in a superior manner,
must act only on the material led at trial but are not fully told why this is so
important ... The typical judicial warning
or admonishment asks juries to act
against their modern instinct and understanding and not conduct ... online
research or online
discussions. There are individuals ... who blatantly flout
any order but many of the reported cases of impermissible jury research
commentary that come to light are by individuals who act out of misguided good
faith and a genuine desire to find what they think
is relevant rather than any
perverse or vindictive
In such circumstances, the discussion of general concepts of
‘fairness’ and ‘a fair trial’ does not necessarily
assist jurors in understanding the underlying principles and how they ought to
be applied. Indeed, jurors may easily misunderstand
such abstract notions so
that they may justify accessing social media and/or the internet on the grounds
that such behaviour is consistent
with and in the pursuit of a ‘fair
trial’ and ‘fairness to an accused’.
Current Laws and Practices
hope this helps
There are various laws and practices that currently exist which
address jurors’ use of social media and/or other internet platforms
criminal trials: those that aim to prevent juror misconduct of this kind
preventative
as well as those that exist to remedy
and/or otherwise deal with such misconduct after it occurs
consequential
’). Their operation and impact range from well
before a jury is empanelled to well after a jury is discharged.
of this Report canvasses these laws and practices and
examines the operation and efficacy of these measures as well as possible
alternatives.
Pre-trial control of prejudicial
Suppression
In Tasmania, the courts have the
power to prohibit or restrict the publication of material if it is necessary to
do so in the interests
of the administration of justice. This common law power
exists in the inherent jurisdiction of the Supreme Court and as an implied
of the Magistrates Court.
is not enshrined in statute as it is in other Australian
Such orders are referred to as ‘suppression orders’
or ‘non-publication orders’. They are exceptions to the
‘open-court’ principle whereby court proceedings are generally held
in public and fair and accurate reporting of proceedings
encouraged.
Suppression
laws, designed to operate while a matter is
A criminal case is
said to be pending from the moment that the criminal law is ‘set in
either at the
time of arrest
warrant is issued for arrest,
and it remains pending until the accused is acquitted, all avenues of appeal are
exhausted or the time to lodge an appeal has
Suppression orders
are not granted in Tasmania with the frequency with which they are in some other
Suppression orders are essentially directed at the mainstream
traditional media. Indeed, the list of active suppression orders published
the Supreme Court of Tasmania website is exclusively entitled, ‘
Professional and/or experienced journalists have knowledge and training in this
area, they are bound by in-house and/or industry
wide ethical
publishing practices typically have inbuilt protections to avoid falling foul of
court orders of this kind.
The observation of suppression orders in the ‘new
world’ of social media and other internet platforms, however, is a
For example,
in 2012, following the arrest of a high-profile ‘one-punch’
manslaughter suspect in Sydney, traditional
media organisations were required to
obscure any photographs of the accused that they published while the case was
sub judice.
Either undeterred or unaware, social media users began
posting unobscured photographs of the accused captioned with
and ‘monster’. Further, one anonymous
user opened an account in the name of the accused and used it to
disseminate unobscured photographs of him to journalists and mainstream
organisations.
Whilst non-compliance with suppression orders can amount to
there are inherent problems with the enforcement and prosecution of
contempt cases which involve the internet and, especially, social
media. It can be difficult to identify those responsible when the
publications are published anonymously, the authors may be outside the
publications can prevent full
investigation and prosecution.
The common law power which gives rise to the making of
suppression orders also provides for the making of ‘take-down’
orders in relation to material that has already been published. This includes
material that is available
The same test of it
being ‘necessary for the administration of justice’
However, the potential utility of take-down orders in the
context of material published on the internet and, specifically, social
platforms is also problematic. Take-down orders can quickly be rendered otiose
when the offending information has been widely
published and/or
disseminated
thereafter remains accessible in meticulous archived form.
It has been suggested by commentators that searches should be
conducted of the internet and social media platforms ahead of
in order to identify any prejudicial material that may exist that is potentially
accessible by errant jurors. Some commentators
suggest that this precautionary
measure should be performed by the
prosecution;
others believe
it should be performed by the
Some believe that a
cursory check of
should be one of the first things that counsel
do upon being briefed in any matter simply because it is potentially such a
source of evidence.
In practice, however, in some cases it has fallen to others
involved in the upcoming trial process to do something about online prejudicial
material. Ahead of a murder trial in Victoria, social media was flooded with
messages following the disappearance of the victim,
which then turned to
‘vitriolic abuse’ upon the accused’s arrest. Following a
preliminary court hearing, the victim’s
husband spoke to media outside the
court and declared: ‘And while I really appreciate all the support, I just
would like to
mention that negative comments on social media may hurt legal
proceedings, so please be mindful of
question and
Respondents were asked the following questions regarding
pre-trial control of prejudicial material:
(a) What can and should be done by way of controlling prejudicial material
that is potentially available to jurors on the internet
and social media
platforms at the pre-trial stage?
(b) Whose obligation should it be to attend to these pre-emptive and
precautionary pre-trial measures?
Regarding current practices employed in the Tasmanian
jurors, the Director of Pubic Prosecutions (Tas), Daryl Coates SC,
In most circumstances there is no need to take pre-emptive and precautionary
pre-trial measures to control prejudicial material that
is potentially available
to jurors on the internet and social media platforms at the pre-trial stage ...
Where there is a high level
of community interest or media interest in
circumstances we believe pre-trial publicity will affect the accused’s
a fair trial, this Office will make an application for a suppression
Other legal practitioners also spoke of the practice that has
been utilised on a few occasions in Tasmania where the sentencing remarks
defendant are temporarily removed from the Supreme Court’s publicly
available online database when the same defendant
is facing trial for new
thus limiting the information available online that discloses the
defendant’s criminal antecedents.
Johnston et al argue that the obligation to identify and act
upon prejudicial material that is potentially available to jurors on
internet and social media at the pre-trial stage is an ‘ethical
duty’ that extends to all parties:
There is a strong argument that the pervasiveness of technology makes
technical competence in courtroom technology an ethical requirement
litigators ... We would argue that this duty also extends to knowledge of the
implications of internet and social media technology
for the fair conduct of
criminal trials and extends to lawyers more generally.
Pre-trial measures for controlling prejudicial material that is potentially
available to jurors on the internet and social media platforms
requires, as a
first step, knowledge, and an assessment of, material that potentially falls
within that category. Those tasks need
to be carried out by individuals with the
requisite knowledge and expertise to identify and conduct searches of the
relevant platforms.
In our submission, initial responsibility for conducting, or
arranging for the conduct, of the necessary searches and for assessing
potentially prejudicial impact of such material rests, in the first place, with
defence lawyers, as the defence may be assumed
to have the most obvious
incentive to undertake such inquiries.
It is also strongly arguable that the court has an obligation to ensure that
the defence avails itself of any point of law that might
be available to them
(such as to ameliorate) the effect of any potentially prejudicial material),
particularly when a person is unrepresented.
It is recommended that this topic
could form part of the standard agenda for the initial pre-trial conference in
any criminal cases.
Given the ethical obligation of the prosecution to act
impartially, fairly and assist the court to avoid appellable error, it is
arguable that if the prosecution become aware of such a risk, they should also
draw this to the attention of the
The Law Society of Tasmania stated that whilst ‘the court
has an obligation to ensure that the defendant has a fair trial ...
practical reality is that it will fall to the affected party to seek
Members of the Tasmanian legal profession spoke with the
Institute about the ‘very
social media plays in the early stages of being engaged as counsel in both
criminal (and family law) proceedings. Practitioners
stated that it is
‘important to be across this [online]
That it was
‘routine to discuss social media with
personally viewing what potentially prejudicial material is available online,
what privacy settings are in place, and warning
the client and the
client’s friends and family about the potential consequences of their
online activity before/during/after
proceedings.
The majority of respondents, however, otherwise identified the
flaws inherent in any attempt to control prejudicial material that
potentially available to jurors on the internet and social media platforms at
the pre-trial stage (or any other stage of a criminal
trial, for that
The Director of Public Prosecutions (Tas), Daryl Coates SC,
observed that ‘it would be impossible to meaningfully review all
Plater, Deputy Director of the South Australian Law Reform Institute, frankly
The notion of lawyers or anyone else vetting or checking (either before trial
or at trial) social media sites ... and the wider internet
for prejudicial
online material is mission impossible. It is impracticable and unrealistic. The
chance of finding all such prejudicial
material is non-existent? ... [Aside from
who would conduct these searches] Who would pay for such a
Even if it were possible, as identified in the submission of
Johnston et al:
surveys of this kind will not detect material ... that may not be obviously
prejudicial, but could still have the potential to influence
jurors if they
accessed it ... [such as] the social media profile of defendants, victims,
witnesses, lawyers or judges ... so it
cannot provide a full solution to the
Moreover, the majority of respondents doubted the effectiveness
of suppression orders and/or takedown orders generally when it came
to the realm
of social media and the internet. Dr Plater, Deputy Director of the South
Australian Law Reform Institute, described
these mechanisms as
‘increasingly
in this forum,
explaining further:
It is increasingly difficult to control pre-trial coverage or online
discussion. There are huge issues in enforcement and jurisdiction.
The problem
is not the conventional (or what remains of them) media but rather alternative
media and social media. Everyone is now
journalist.’
The Law Society of Tasmania put these general observations into
context in the Tasmanian jurisdiction:
Essentially there is little that can be done due to unrestrictive media laws
and the global nature of the media environment. Applications
‘suppression’ and ‘takedown’ to manage material online
are difficult to argue and problematic to enforce.
Tasmanian courts are
extremely conservative when considering these applications according to our
members and in the absence of legislative
reform it is highly unlikely that
these tools will be effective in securing a fair trial for an accused. It is
also extremely rare
for Tasmanian courts to grant permanent stay orders which is
another mechanism by which the trial process can be affected by social
Relevantly, Daryl Coates SC, Director of Public Prosecutions
(Tas), stated that the Supreme Court has published only nine suppression
since September 2014.
Johnston et al
also spoke of the
‘limitations’
relying upon suppression (non-publication) and take down orders, detailing that
they ‘prove to be unequal to the technology.’
respondents, Johnston et al stated that it is ‘inevitable that efforts to
deal with prejudicial publicity will be
redirected to the jurors and the manner
in which the trial is
conducted’.
The Legal Aid Commission provided the following comment, with a
similar emphasis on it being a matter to be left to jurors to avoid
inappropriate conduct, albeit with the assistance of education in this
There is no feasible, culturally acceptable way to remove all offending
material from the internet, or to prevent jurors from seeing
material that is
currently on the internet. Any move to censor the internet in such a manner
would be seen as draconian, very unlikely
to be successful, and create unwelcome
intrusion on public discussion ... the policing of the internet for prejudicial
material is
not likely to be an effective strategy for dealing with the problem.
The assumption should be that there is material on the internet,
while the focus
should be on educating jurors about why they should not consume this
Similarly, the Sheriff of Tasmania, Jim Connolly, was of the
view that the impact of any prejudicial material potentially available
online ahead of trial may be effectively dealt with by the self-reporting of
jurors as part of the empanelment process:
There is very little that can be done in relation to the availability and
pervasiveness of information on social media. It is best
left to the presiding
judge to ask if any person empanelled on a jury has any prejudicial knowledge in
relation to the case they
are on. It should be left to the juror to inform the
judge of their possible prejudice.
The Australia Lawyers Alliance
raised the possibility of court lists referring to defendants only by their
initials and making it
an offence to publish the name of a defendant before s/he
has pleaded guilty. The intended result being to prevent comment on social
aimed at identifying the accused person ahead of trial and thereby pre-emptively
controlling the prejudicial material that
is potentially available online to
Another suggestion
was whether trials in their entirety might be conducted, where possible, with
the defendant remaining
From the outset, the Institute acknowledges that suppression
orders (and take down orders) are
preventative measure which may
reduce the adverse effects of jurors using social media and other internet
platforms inappropriately
during criminal
Their interaction
with the case for ‘open justice’ necessitates that they are used
sparingly and reserved for a select
few cases. The Institute also recognises the
fundamental flaws in the application and efficacy of such measures in the global
world. These issues, and the jurisdiction of suppression orders (and
take down orders) and
contempt, more generally, are complex
issues that warrant substantial examination in their own
The Institute agrees with the observations of his Honour
Justice Pearce that: ‘It is impossible to control the material on the
internet and social media. It is only possible to control jurors’ access
In the context of this investigation of jurors’ use of
social media and/or the internet, the Institute is of the view that this
reinforces the fact that the focus in addressing this problem should, in the
usual course, be on the conduct of jurors themselves
and equipping jurors with
the knowledge and understanding to manage their conduct when it comes to the use
of social media and/or
the internet, rather than focussing on the unrealistic
and futile task of controlling social media and the internet at large.
today I learned
Pre-empanelment
information/training of jurors
Material available
to prospective jurors before attending court
In Tasmania, when jurors receive a summons for jury service in
the post, they also receive a pamphlet that includes some basic facts
Information about jury
service is also available to prospective jurors in Tasmania on the
This includes three videos entitled,
Coming to Court for Jury Duty –
How it Works
Being Selected and Serving on a Jury
Payments of
as the following information:
Are you Eligible?
You’ve Received
a Jury Summons
I can’t attend Jury Duty
Work & Reimbursements
Jury Selection
Day of Trial
Similar online
materials for prospective jurors are available in other Australian
There is no express mention of ‘social media’ in the
online materials that are available for prospective jurors in Tasmania.
Being Selected and Serving on a Jury
online video refers to jurors
discussing the case outside the
and conducting
their own research, including via the
In Queensland, both the
to Jury Deliberations
specifically mention social media. In the Australian Capital Territory
Jury Handbook
, social media is mentioned on several occasions,
significantly, covering both ‘
information in
information out
expressly mentioned in the New South Wales online materials, specifically in
relation to ‘
information
In an induction video for prospective jurors in Western Australia, the
restrictions on social media use are explicitly discussed
information in
information out
contexts, including an explanation of the rationale behind the
restrictions.
First Day –
Induction/Orientation
Most Australian jurisdictions provide introductory orientation
material to jurors by way of a video on their first day of
Most supplement this
with written material, such as a booklet or a
In South Australia, jurors’ induction takes up to four
this includes a video
, Introduction to Jury Service
In New South Wales,
the Sheriff’s Officers have standing orders at all court houses to screen
a DVD entitled
Welcome to Jury Service
to prospective jurors prior to
their empanelment. There is also a booklet,
Welcome to Jury Service
is available at all court houses in New South Wales. Sherriff’s officers
have standing orders to distribute this booklet
to jurors after empanelment only
with the concurrence of the presiding
In Queensland, jurors view an eight-part video
In some jurisdictions, this information is also presented
Whilst juror induction/orientation differs between jurisdictions
(eg people with a summons for jury duty at the County Court of Victoria
Melbourne can play pool while they
it can also differ
between metropolitan and regional court locations within jurisdictions. This is
largely due to resources, or rather,
a lack thereof. In some regional areas,
there is nowhere for jury pools to congregate and assemble inside the courthouse
are left to wait outside the
courthouse.
This affects the
consistency of juror induction and orientation across metropolitan and regional
When enquiries were made of Tasmanian jurors, in
some insight
was obtained into the deficiencies in the induction and orientation of jurors in
Tasmania. There was a common complaint
from many jurors that they would have
liked more information. Specifically, they expressed a desire to be informed
early of the need
to appoint a foreperson and on how to get started with their
deliberations.
Indeed, there
is a dearth of information about the deliberation process in the juror induction
materials across most
commented that they were ‘floundering along ... not guided enough ...
There’s nobody in the court that you can
ask questions
little booklet would be helpful ... A bit more, yes, sort of discussion with the
people, prospective jurors about how
Jurors also
found that their induction and orientation did not sufficiently explain the
juror selection process, including what personal
information about each
prospective juror is available to counsel for the purposes of the selection
The importance of juror induction and orientation cannot be
overstated. One in twenty Australians have little or no first-hand experience
a criminal courtroom.
knowledge and understanding that jurors gain as prospective jurors sets the
foundation for their level of engagement as jurors.
It is a valuable first
opportunity to define their obligations and to set the parameters of what they
can and cannot do.
question and
With respect to pre-empanelment training/information provided
to jurors, respondents were invited to respond to the following questions:
(a) How can pre-empanelment juror information/training be improved in
(b) What can be learned from other jurisdictions?
(c) Should pre-empanelment juror information/training expressly address
social media?
(d) Should pre-empanelment juror information/training specifically cover both
information in
information out
uses of the internet/social media?
(e) Should pre-empanelment juror information/training provide an explanation
of the rationale behind the restrictions in social media/internet
In relation to the current practices of pre-empanelment
training/information for jurors in Tasmania, Jim Connolly, the Sheriff of
Tasmania stated:
All jurors in Tasmania are shown an information video upon arrival and prior
to the empanelment process ... those videos can be downloaded
from the Supreme
Court of Tasmania website at www.supremecourt.tas.gov.au/jurors. [Jurors are
also] given a supplementary briefing
by the Deputy Sheriff after watching the
[The video is] in relation to their responsibilities as a juror, which covers
the subject of the use of social media, the internet
and jurors not researching.
It informs jurors not to watch, or read, news in relation to a case they may be
empanelled on.
The Legal Aid Commission of Tasmania further added that the
pre-empanelment video ‘sets out the requirements of jury service
basic functions of the judge, jury and other participants in the trial
In relation to the timing at which juror training/information
begins, Mr Connolly explained the difficulty, in his view, with providing
with too much information too early: ‘Any information provided to jurors
prior to this video, may lead them to looking
at the court list prior to
attending court, thus allowing them time to research accused persons that may be
up for trial.’
Converse views in this respect were held by other respondents.
For example, the Legal Aid Commission of Tasmania suggested that basic
information could and should be made available ‘when they [jurors] receive
call-up for jury duty’ and should ‘be
made available online ...
[with] links to relevant
resources.’
Mr Connolly stated that the topic of jurors’ use of
social media and/or the internet ‘is covered in the jury DVD and ...
briefing, although [he acknowledged that] a possible sterner approach during the
briefing could also
More generally,
Mr Connolly’s view about the current system of pre-empanelment juror
training/information is that it is similarly
open to improvement:
although I believe the current system is sufficient, we should always be on
the look out for ways to improve, or streamline our information/training.
Different jurisdictions throughout the world no doubt have similar issues and
there is no doubt that possible lessons could be learnt
various other jurisdictions, take place to
garner that
information.
The current pre-empanelment training/information provided to
jurors in Tasmania has a focus on ‘
information in
’ scenarios.
Daryl Coates SC, the Director of Public prosecutions (Tas), stated:
During induction jurors are told that they are only permitted to discuss the
case with other jurors on the case, that they cannot
do their own research, and
that in reaching their verdict they must not use any information other than what
they see or hear in the
Similarly, the comments of the Legal Aid Commission regarding
possible improvements to pre-empanelment training/information for jurors
similar focus on ‘
information in
’ and, in particular, the
well-known scenario of the
errant juror conducting online research
[jurors should be provided with] more information about their role ... this
should include details of the nature of extraneous material
on the internet or
on social media they should not view, why they must not view that material, and
the consequences for doing
Most respondents agreed that the pre-empanelment of jurors
should not only address social media expressly, but also specifically cover
information in
information
’ scenarios and provide an explanation of the rationale behind the
restrictions on social media use. Some respondents were of
the view that
pre-empanelment training/information should be ‘enhanced’ to the
point of including an ‘explicit
warning’ about social media and/or
the internet.
Interestingly, Mr Connolly, was of the view that when it comes
to jurors’ use of social media and/or the internet, pre-empanelment
training/information should not go into detail:
Extended discussion about information in and information out, as well as an
explanation of the rationale behind the restrictions should
not be dealt with
pre-empanelment, rather this should be left to the presiding judge and directed
at the empanelled jury.
Professor Jill Hunter submitted that the ‘guiding
principle focus’ of pre-empanelment training/information for jurors
be on ‘guiding jurors to do a good job, not controlling
This would be
achieved by placing an emphasis on ‘explaining a juror’s role on the
trial [and] understanding concepts
of fairness’, rather than merely
providing a list of prohibited conduct without
Some respondents favoured the idea of further supplementing the
video and oral briefing with written materials, for example, a
or other written
material that contains a ‘list of instructions ... for all jury members to
Johnston et al recommended the
possibility of more fundamental changes to the pre-empanelment
training/information for jurors:
a brief pre-trial jury training module [should] be developed which would be
administered in the courthouse once the jury has been
empanelled. This could be
offered ‘live’ by qualified court personnel ... or (less
expensively) in the form of a one-hour
online module where jurors would complete
the package on desktop computers, laptops or tablet devices under the
supervision of court
personnel. Content would not be trial specific, but would
cover the role of the juror, the tasks that each juror must perform, their
statutory obligations, fundamental principles like ‘beyond reasonable
doubt’ and strong guidelines on access to mainstream
and social media as
well as the internet both during the trial and after the trial. Examples of
misconduct and the consequences would
be given. The module would include a
self-test of jurors’ understanding of these principles by seeking their
responses to ‘rogue
juror’ scenarios. Jurors who selected incorrect
answers, would receive a response that advised them why their answer was
be informed of the correct answer and the rationale for the rule or
principle they misunderstood and its importance. This training
would supplement,
rather than replace, the judge’s directions to the
They also recommended the possibility of the changes to the
timing of such training/information:
In our view ... training would be more usefully targeted to jurors who have
been empanelled, rather than delivered to a jury pool
pre-empanelment, as jurors
they are going to sit on a trial, rather than merely aware of
possibility
that they will do so, are much more likely to be
receptive of the
information.
Similarly, his Honour Justice Pearce made the following
comments about pre-empanelment juror training/information in the context of
subsequent directions from the trial judge post empanelment:
The primary source of information ... should lie with the judge. Jurors
listen harder once empanelled ...
Information is and can be conveyed to the entire jury panel before
empanelment, but it seems to me that it means more when given in
the context of
a jury already
empanelled.
The Institute notes that pre-empanelment training/information
for jurors and post empanelment directions to jurors by the trial judge
mutually exclusive. Regardless of whether one is (or may be) more effective than
another, the Institute’s view is that
they may both be made more effective
if viewed as part of a single juror education strategy.
The Law Society of Tasmania suggested that any pre-recorded
training/information material should be reviewed and updated as required,
that the current video used in Tasmania is overdue in this respect:
The pre-empanelment video played to the jury panel should be reviewed
regularly to ensure it remains relevant and up to date with
modern communication
methods. It needs updating to re-enforce the message around social media
posting, research and ‘street
view’. The role of the juror is
explained by the trial judge during opening remarks to the jury including
warnings around the
use of social media. The need to decide a case only on
evidence and that the task is to determine whether a charge has been proved,
rather than a fact finding search for the truth, needs clearer explanation at
the earlier stages of the trial
The Institute agrees that the pre-empanelment
training/information for jurors in Tasmania should be updated, namely, the
the induction video and subsequent verbal briefing. Consideration
should also be given to the development of written materials that
supplement the
video and briefing.
Recommendation 1
(a) The current pre-empanelment training/information for jurors in Tasmania
should be updated.
(b) The pre-recorded induction video should:
(i) expressly address jurors’ use of social media and other internet
(ii) specifically cover both ‘
information in
information out
’ uses of social media/the internet (ie it
should not be limited to the well-known ‘
information in
scenario of the errant juror conducting online research).
(iii) provide an explanation of the rationale behind the restrictions in
social media/ internet use. This should not be limited to
the mention of general
notions of ‘fairness’ or ‘fair trial’ or ‘fairness
to the accused’. Such
concepts need to be explained in more accessible
(iv) explain the consequences for the trial participants, for jurors and
for the trial of jurors’ inappropriate use of social
(c) These matters should be reiterated in the course of the subsequent
verbal briefing.
(d) The pre-empanelment training/information materials should be reviewed
periodically to ensure they remain current and relevant.
(e) Jurors should be provided with written materials at the pre-empanelment
stage that outline basic information that is contained
in the video and
The Institute also agrees with the
view expressed by Dr David Plater, Deputy Director of the South Australian Law
Reform Institute,
that the pre-empanelment training/information for jurors
should not be viewed in isolation. Rather, it plays an important foundational
role for subsequent information provided to empanelled jurors by the trial judge
and can play an important role in jurors’
understanding of such subsequent
information:
There is a need for effective training and information for jurors. There
should not just be reliance upon judicial directions ...
The judge’s
initial warning [to empanelled jurors at the commencement of a trial] should not
come as a sudden bolt out of the
dark but should build on and develop what the
juror has already heard and read before the trial ... the judge’s warning
comment [about social media/internet] should confirm and supplement what
jurors have already gained from initial resources and
oath/affirmation
In Tasmania, after all jurors are selected and empanelled,
jurors must take an oath or make an
affirmation.
oath/affirmation states: ‘
[You and each of you swear by Almighty
God/You and each of you affirm]
... that you will faithfully and impartially
try the issues between the Crown and
[name of the accused]
in this trial
and give a true verdict according to the
juror answers ‘I swear’ or ‘I
Near identical
oath/affirmations exist in all Australian
It has been suggested that the juror oath/affirmation could
provide assistance when it comes to deterring jurors from inappropriately
social media and the internet during trial. This could be achieved by increasing
the formality of the taking of the oath/affirmation
and thereby instilling in
jurors the gravity and solemnity of their role as jurors. A juror, who is in a
courtroom for the first
time, engrossed in the unfamiliar spectacle that is jury
empanelment, and eagerly awaiting the upcoming main event of a criminal
could be forgiven for mistaking the jury oath/affirmation for a mere
administrative process.
The oath/affirmation is likely to be viewed as less than an
empty legal adage if it is, for example, taken individually by
It has also been
proposed that the oath/affirmation could have a written component, which may
have a greater effect on jurors appreciating
the content of the oath/affirmation
as well as its binding nature, if it is required to be signed and is available
to be reviewed
In some US jurisdictions, judges require jurors to sign a
‘statement of compliance’ or a ‘written pledge’
jurors agree to refrain from using social media/the internet while serving as
By way of an example
of what this might look like, below is a ‘Statement of Compliance’
endorsed by the American College
I agree that during the duration of the trial in _________________, I will
not conduct any independent research into any of the issues
or parties involved
in this trial. I will not communicate with anyone about the issues or parties in
this trial, and I will not permit
anyone to communicate with me. I further agree
that I will report any violations of the court’s instructions immediately.
__________________________________
JUROR No. _____
It has also been suggested that upon
a juror being sworn/affirmed, the judge/court could provide jurors with a pro
forma outgoing
message that jurors could use as a ‘status update’ of
sorts to inform and explain changes and/or absences from their
usual social
media presence. For example:
I am sending this note to you as instructed by Judge _____. I am now a sworn
juror in a trial. I am sequestered. This means I am not
allowed to read or
comment upon anything having to do with the subject of the trial, the parties
involved, the attorneys, or anything
else related to my service as a juror.
Please do not send me any materials; don’t e-mail, text, or tweet me any
questions or
comments about this case or my service as a juror. Please do not
text or e-mail me during the course of this trial except in an emergency.
send you a note when I am released from my duty as a
In Tasmania, sworn jurors must also take a
‘supplementary’ oath/affirmation before leaving court on each
occasion when
the trial is
oath/affirmation serves as a reminder against ‘old fashioned’ means
information in
information out
[You and each of you swear by Almighty God/You and each of you affirm] that
you will not discuss with any person other than another
member of this jury any
matter relating directly or indirectly to the evidence in this trial or the
deliberations.
question and
Respondents were asked the following questions in relation to
the current practices of jurors’ oath/affirmation in Tasmania:
(a) Could/should the juror oath/affirmation and its surrounding procedure be
employed to assist in preventing jurors inappropriately
using social media and
other internet platforms during trials?
(b) If so, how might this be achieved?
As stated in the submission of Daryl Coates SC, the Director of
Public Prosecutions (Tas), the juror oath/affirmation in Tasmania
solemn process which ... jurors take very
seriously’.
Institute’s view, this is assisted by the formality created by the
oath/affirmation being taken in open court. However,
William Boucaut QC, a
Barrister from South Australia, explained that this is not the case in all
Australian states:
In South Australia, the oath/affirmation of jurors are taken behind closed
doors as part of the general induction process. The accused
does not get to hear
or see it. This is completely unsatisfactory.
The oath of a juror to properly try the issues in a case should be taken in
open court in each individual case a juror is called upon
to try. If nothing
else, it gives the accused comfort in knowing there is a solemn oath/affirmation
by each individual juror. If
done in open court before the accused, counsel and
judge the process actually takes on a more solemn flavour. This is the practice
in Western Australia. I believe firmly that it should be the case in all
Some respondents suggested that the juror oath/affirmation could
further benefit by being administered to jurors individually. For
example, Dr
David Plater, Deputy Director of the South Australian Law Reform Institute,
recommended that ‘a personalised and
tailored oath is advisable. It may
act only on the
evidence presented at trial and refrain from impermissible
research or online
discussion’.
There are, of course, obvious time constraints associated with
12 (or more) individual jurors having an individual oath/affirmation
administered in turn in open court. Johnston et al submitted an alternate way to
personalise the juror oath/affirmation whilst not
incurring prohibitive time
delays in the process. It draws upon their suggestion for pre-empanelment juror
training/information to
digitalised:
In our view, introducing greater formality into the process by which jurors
take their oath or affirmation could contribute to addressing
the problem of
inappropriate use of social media or other Internet platforms by jurors during
trials ... we believe that the juror
oath/affirmation could be embedded in the
proposed training module undertaken on a computer, Ipad or similar, by every
juror. People
are used to this technology – and, importantly, regularly
tick the ‘I agree’ box – as part of daily life.
online signatures using a pen or even a finger are now commonplace in social
life. As such, we suggest that using a computer
interface is a logical way of
both providing juror information and seeking their
Other respondents shared the view that the juror
oath/affirmation ought to include an express ‘promise’ regarding
social media/internet use during trial. William Boucaut QC, a Barrister
from Adelaide, believes:
the time has come to incorporate into the oath/affirmation a publicly made
promise by each individual juror that they will not conduct
their own enquiries
whether it be on the internet or through any form of media. They should be
called upon to acknowledge that if
they breach this promise they will be held
liable to severe penalties, possibly
imprisonment.
The Legal Aid Commission shared this view that the
oath/affirmation at the start of the trial and at each adjournment ‘be
to include a promise not to search for or read extraneous material on
the internet or social
Jim Connolly, the Sheriff of Tasmania, agreed that ‘this
is an option’ but believed ‘that the judges should make
This could be achieved by amending the jurors’ oath/affirmation by
inserting the words –
‘You and each of you, affirm that you will not discuss with another
person, other than another member of this jury, any matter
relating either
directly or indirectly to the evidence in this trial, or the deliberation. Do
you, and each of you, affirm that you
will not seek any information from any
source (including social media and the internet) about the issues in this trial,
give a true verdict according only to the evidence given, or adduced on
the trial? SAY I
SWEAR/AFFIRM’.
Whilst Mr Connolly’s suggested amendment highlights the
ease with which reference to social media/the internet may be incorporated
the existing oath/affirmation, it also demonstrates the difficulty in settling
upon an appropriate expression in this respect.
Once again, the above amendment
focuses solely on ‘
information in
’ to the exclusion of
information out
’ scenarios.
The Institute favours the option of retaining the current
oath/affirmation content and merely providing jurors with greater context
understanding of its application.
His Honour Justice Pearce suggested that:
There is not a pressing need to amend the form of the oath or affirmation.
However the procedure and directions given about it are
of fundamental
importance in preventing [juror misconduct of this kind]
The Law Society of Tasmania suggested that the oath/affirmation
be incorporated to a greater extent into the trial directions throughout
trial for greater effect:
The current oath/affirmation requires the juror to decide the case in
accordance with the evidence
. That already entails the need to only take
into account evidence admitted on the trial. Referencing the oath[/affirmation]
in directions
to the jury at the commencement of the trial would be more
effective as the judge can use other examples of extraneous materials
they cause prejudice and place social media in the same context. The direction
should be given periodically throughout the
In a similar vein, Johnston
suggested that
the requirement for the current oath/affirmation be ‘accompanied by some
expansion or explanation that drew an
explicit connection between the obligation
to “give a true verdict
according to the evidence
emphasis] and the obligation to refrain from ... inappropriate use [of social
media/internet].’
However, as Johnston et al
continued: ‘whether such reinforcement
would be effective in addressing inappropriate use relating to
information out’
appears less
It is possible that a similar approach can be adopted to the
reference in the juror oath/affirmation to the obligation for jurors
‘faithfully and impartially’ try the issues. Such an obligation may
easily be connected with a juror’s obligation
to be mindful of their
information out
’ activity on social media/the internet such
that it could give rise to actual or perceived bias, prejudice or
predetermination.
Some respondents endorsed the idea that upon a juror being
sworn/affirmed, the judge/court could provide jurors with a pro forma outgoing
message that jurors could use as a ‘status update’ of sorts to
inform and explain changes and/or absences from their
usual social media
presence. For example, Johnston et al commented:
The use of the type of pro forma social media ‘status update’
provided by the judge to the jurors at the time of their
swearing/affirmation
] above], appears to be
a useful, practical suggestion, that could both serve to reinforce the
prohibition on any type of social media
use related to the trial, and provide
jurors with a ready-made tool to apply to avert contact from friends and
contract, and to educate
those individuals
Once again, respondents noted that any assistance that the
juror oath/affirmation could provide when it comes to deterring jurors
inappropriately using social media and the internet during trial is likely to be
largely determined by its supplementation with
other measures such as
pre-empanelment juror training/information and judicial directions to jurors
during the course of the trial.
In this respect, the Legal Aid Commission of
Tasmania concluded: ‘such a promise by itself would not be effective, but
be supported by other
Professor Jill Hunter commented that it should be:
part of a broader repertoire. Turning the oath/affirmation into a process
that is based on an educative approach to committing the
juror to comply with
their obligations.
The Institute prefers this approach. The juror oath/affirmation
already contains the necessary references to jurors acting ‘faithfully
impartially’ and ‘according to the evidence’, which, in
theory, encompass the full range of possible ‘
information in
information out
’ uses of social media and/or the
internet. What is needed is for jurors to understand what acting
‘faithfully and impartially’
and ‘according to the
evidence’ means in practice. These terms and concepts need to be explained
and applied to real
life situations. This is best achieved not by further
convoluting the oath/affirmation itself, at the risk of further confusion,
by effectively incorporating the juror oath/affirmation into pre-empanelment
juror training/information and judicial directions.
Once a jury is empanelled, in the usual course, they receive
introductory directions from the trial judge. These ‘opening
directions’
usually encompass information about the jury’s role,
including what they can and cannot do during a criminal trial. Juries
thereafter directed by the trial judge on an as-needs basis throughout the
course of the trial, up until the judge’s final
directions in the form of
a summing up, before the jury retires to commence deliberations.
In Tasmania, there are no ‘model’ directions such as
those that exist in New South
as well as in many US jurisdictions. (See Appendix D for an example of opening
directions in the Tasmanian jurisdiction, regarding
jurors’ use of the
internet, as well as corresponding excerpts from the summing up in the same
Marshall and Richardson v
The formulation of adequate directions for jurors on the topic
of social media and the internet is not an easy task. By way of an
judicial directions on this topic from a 2014 English case:
Next: use of the internet. There have been problems. Jurors have become
detectives in their own court. And here is the sort of problem.
Last week, at
Kingston Crown Court, a seven-week trial had to be aborted because the jurors
started on the Internet and Googling
people, and the judge found out because the
other jurors reported the errant juror. Seven weeks — I dread to think
cost, in a country which will ill afford the waste of, say,
half-a-million pounds. Now, this case won’t cost that money because
a very short case, but you see the problem we have ... So don’t Google me,
don’t Google the Advocates, don’t
Google the Defendant, or any
witness in the case because that would be wholly improper, because you would be
going outside the observations
of your oath or your affirmation (your solemn
affirmation) to try the case according to the evidence ... We can all find out
amounts of very helpful and totally useless information on the Internet.
Don’t do it. By all means, do your Christmas shopping
on the Internet.
Book your holiday (if you are lucky enough to be going on one next year), but
don’t use the Internet improperly.
The message is loud. It is clear. I
don’t propose to repeat it, but I expect you to behave responsibly because
you are judges.
This direction repeatedly mentions the internet, but completely
omits any reference of social media specifically. It focuses on the
well-known ‘
information in
’ scenario of the
errant juror
conducting online research
. There is no reference at all
information out
’ uses of social media and/or the internet,
nor to the ways in which juror misconduct via social media/the internet may be
product of inadvertence alone. It does not contain any explanation of the
reasons behind the restrictions of jurors’ online
activity. The only
mention as to consequences for juror misconduct of this kind is the public cost
of an aborted trial, this is only
part of the full consequences for the trial
participants and for the trial. Indeed, there is no reference to the potential
consequences
of juror misconduct of this kind on jurors themselves, nor
jurors’ obligation to report misconduct. Whilst the delivery of
direction as a ‘one time only’ direction may be designed to elevate
the importance of the content and to draw jurors’
attention to the content
at that time, jurors need to be reminded about this topic, at the very least,
ahead of deliberations (which,
in some cases, may be weeks/months after the
opening directions).
Directions about
social media specifically
direct message
Commentators have stressed the importance of judicial
directions, particularly opening directions that specifically address the use
the internet and social media. In particular, the importance of jurors being
informed from an early stage about exactly what is
permitted and what
constitutes misconduct in this respect.
Marshall and Richardson v Tasmania
directions specifically mentioned the internet and demonstrate a particular
prohibited ‘
information in
’ example involving the internet
platform, ie the use of
Google Maps
in a dangerous driving
However, there is no
express mention of social media, nor do the directions address
information out
’ uses of the internet/social media.
Significantly, the directions did not expressly mention online legal reference
which is the very material that was ultimately accessed by one or more
jurors in that case.
Both the New South Wales and Victorian model opening directions
are far more comprehensive in this regard. They both mention the internet
specifically social media, as well as covering both ‘
information
information out
misconduct.
The New South Wales model directions
warn against ‘conducting any research using the internet’:
You should keep away from the internet and the other communication sources
which may pass comment upon the issues in this trial. You
may not communicate
with anyone about the case on your mobile phone, smart phone, through email,
text messaging, or on Twitter, through
any blog or website, any internet
chatroom, or by way of any other social networking websites including Facebook,
MySpace, LinkedIn
and YouTube. You should avoid any communication which may
expose you to other people’s opinions or
The Victorian model directions
similarly state:
Most importantly, you must not make any investigations or enquiries, or
conduct independent research, concerning any aspect of the
case or any person
connected with it. That includes research about the law that applies to the
case. You must not use the internet
to access legal databases, legal
dictionaries, legal texts, earlier decisions of this or other courts, or other
material of any kind
relating to the matters in the trial. You must not search
for information about the case on Google or conduct similar searches. You
must not discuss the case on Facebook, Twitter or blogs, or look at such sites
for more information about the case.
You must not discuss the case on social media sites, such as Facebook,
Myspace, Twitter, blogs or anything else like
It is accepted that jurors in a criminal trial are out of their
comfort zone
and, without a
greater understanding of the criminal trial process, they may be prone to a
literal interpretation of directions.
By way of illustrative US examples, a
juror who searched terms on the internet and circulated printed material from
to fellow jurors didn’t think she was doing anything
wrong. She explained: ‘I didn’t read about it in the newspaper
watch anything on TV’.
A juror in Seattle sitting in a robbery trial posted on her blog that the judge
had instructed jurors not to tweet but had ‘made
no mention’ of
Further, a juror
sitting in a murder trial who searched scientific terms related to how blood
flows after death on
, explained, ‘to me it wasn’t
research. It was a
definition’.
In a 2009 Victorian high-profile terrorism case where juror/s
conducted internet searches of various definitions on
Reference.com
, the trial judge acknowledged shortcomings in the
directions given to the jury. The trial judge commented: ‘it is ...
that [the] direction[s] ... were interpreted by the jury as meaning
that they must not seek any information about
case. That is to say,
it is possible that they thought they were being warned not to seek from the
internet or elsewhere information
of having done.’
It has been suggested that the directions that jurors receive
from the outset should aim to ‘itemise’ particular social
media/internet platforms as well as particular uses and activities to provide
jurors with a more comprehensive list of what they
explanation
In response to juror misconduct of this kind, judicial officers
have adopted a range of techniques to increase the effectiveness of
directions on this topic. They include explaining in plain English the reason/s
behind the social media/internet
restrictions.
The rationale
being that some jurors simply may not understand. For example, a juror in
Professor Jill Hunter’s study stated:
[t]his is not allowed by I would very much have liked to do my own research.
Police and lawyers are allowed to look into things but
the jury cannot. I would
like to have had the reason for this explained to
It has also been said that by providing explanations and
encouraging juror understanding of the rationale behind the internet/social
media restrictions, they will be less susceptible to what is called the
‘reactance effect’ where jurors are compelled
to seek additional
information simply because they are aware that forbidden information has been
The New South Wales model directions provide extensive
explanations on the rationale behind the ‘
information in
restrictions on jurors
the result of your inquiries could be to obtain information that was
misleading or entirely wrong. For example, you may come across
a statement of
the law or of some legal principle that is incorrect or not applicable in New
South Wales. The criminal law is not
the same throughout Australian
is part of my function
to tell you so much of the law as you need to apply in
order to decide the issues before you. ...
a person with whom you might speak who is not a fellow juror would, perhaps
unintentionally make some comment or offer some opinion
on the nature of the
charge or the evidence which is of no value whatever. That person would not have
the advantage that you have
of hearing the evidence first-hand, the addresses of
counsel on that evidence and the directions of law from me.
Any comment or opinion that might be offered to you by anyone who is not a
fellow juror might influence your thinking about the case,
perhaps not
consciously but subconsciously. Such a comment or opinion cannot assist you but
can only distract you from your proper
Further, the New South Wales model directions also address some
of the underlying motives that have been identified for juror misconduct
kind and explain how jurors should navigate such situations:
you are not here to determine where the truth lies. You are not simply
deciding which version you prefer: that offered by the Crown
or that from the
defence. You are not investigating the incident giving rise to the charge(s).
You are being asked to make a judgment
or decision based upon the evidence that
is placed before you. Jurors might in a particular case feel frustrated by what
as a lack of evidence or information about some particular aspect of
the case before them. In some rare cases this has led jurors
to make inquiries
themselves to try to fill in the gaps that they perceive in the evidence. But
that is not your function, nor is
it mine ... If you felt that there was some
evidence or information missing, then you simply take that fact into account in
whether on the evidence that is before you the Crown have proved the
guilt of the accused beyond reasonable
The Victorian model directions provide the following by way of
explanation of the ‘
information in
information out
’ restrictions:
You may ask yourself the question: what is wrong with looking for more
information? Seeking out information, or discussing a matter
with friends, may
be a natural part of life for you when making an important decision. As
conscientious jurors, you may think that
conducting your own research will help
you reach the right result. However, there are three important reasons why using
outside information,
or researching the case on the internet, would be
First, media reports, or claims made outside court may be wrong or
inaccurate. The prosecution and defence will not have a chance
to test the
information. Similarly, I will not know if you need any directions on how to use
such material.
Second, deciding a case on outside information, which is not known to the
parties, is unfair to both the prosecution and the defence.
The trial is
conducted according to well established legal principles and it’s not for
you to go looking for other information
or to add to the evidence.
Third, acting on outside information would be false to the oath or
affirmation you took as jurors to give a true verdict according
to the evidence.
You would cease being a juror, that is, a judge of the facts, and have instead
taken on the role of an
investigator.
Whilst plain English is favourable for jury directions, there
are cases which highlight the opposite result; directions which cause
on account of their being too casual and colloquial. A juror who was a German
national who was working as an academic in
the UK conducted internet searches
which revealed the guilty plea of an alleged co-accused. When the judge enquired
the juror said that ‘he did not understand what the
judge meant by saying that the jurors would be “in hot water”
they researched the defendant’. He continued, ‘I have written many
journals so I am used to writing in proper English
and proper sentences and
wouldn’t use words and phrases like being “in hot water” to
describe being in trouble
because it is not correct. ... They don’t mean
anything, definitely not in the context of looking on the internet ... You would
say someone is “in trouble” and the judge should have said
consequences
Courts have also included directions which alert jurors to the
personal consequences of misconduct of this kind (including mentioning
relevant offence provisions).
Marshall and Richardson v Tasmania
, the relevant
directions were ‘emphasise[d]’ and described as
‘important’ and ‘absolutely critical’,
and the general
consequences of causing a mistrial were conveyed. However, there is no warning
given routinely to jurors about the
consequences for a
juror that might engage in such
misconduct.
In the New South Wales model directions, specific and repeated
mention is made of juror misconduct of this kind being a ‘criminal
offence’ and ‘so serious that it can be punishable by
imprisonment’.
In Victoria, the model directions explicitly address the
consequences of breaching instructions:
You may have a question about what could happen if you acted on outside
information or conducted your own research.
The immediate outcome is that the jury may need to be discharged and the
trial may have to start again. This would cause stress and
expense to the
witnesses, the prosecution and the accused. It would also cause stress and
inconvenience to the other jurors, who
will have wasted their time sitting on a
case which must be restarted.
Second, it is a criminal offence for a juror to discuss the case with others
or to conduct research on the case. You could therefore
be fined and receive a
criminal conviction, which may affect your ability to travel to some countries.
Jurors have even been sent
to jail for discussing a case on Facebook.
More broadly, jurors’ conducting their own research undermines public
confidence in the jury system. The jury system has been
a fundamental feature of
our criminal justice system for
In cases where errant jurors had to explain their misconduct,
explanations have been proffered that suggest jurors might mistake judicial
directions on social media and internet as
rather than
incorporation of potential personal consequences would rectify any such
confusion by making it abundantly apparent that compliance
is not optional and,
further, that there are consequences for non-compliance.
Obligation to report
juror irregularities/misconduct
Judicial officers have also
incorporated into their directions reminders to jurors that it is their
responsibility to report any juror
misconduct to the court (preferably before
the trial is
completed).
The Victorian model directions state: ‘If one of your
fellow jurors breaches these instructions, then the duty falls on the
you to inform me or a member of my staff, either in writing or otherwise,
without delay. These rules are so important that
you must report your fellow
further, more detailed directions about ‘Notifying the Judge About
Irregularities’.
Similarly, the New South Wales model
directions state:
If any of you learn that an impermissible enquiry had been made by another
juror or that another juror had engaged in discussions
with any person outside
the jury room, you must bring it to my attention. Similarly, if at any stage you
find material in the jury
room that is not an exhibit in the case, you should
notify me immediately.
The reason for bringing it to my attention as soon as possible is that,
unless it is known before the conclusion of the trial, there
is no opportunity
to fix the problem if it is possible to do so. If the problem is not immediately
addressed, it might cause the
trial to miscarry and result in the discharge of
the jury in order to avoid any real or apparent injustice.
If any of you in the course of the trial suspect any irregularity in relation
to another juror’s membership of the jury, or
in relation to the
performance of another juror’s functions as a juror you should tell me
This might include:
• the refusal of a juror to take part in the jury’s
deliberations, or
• a juror’s lack of capacity to take part in the trial (including
an inability to speak or comprehend English), or
• any misconduct as a juror, or
• a juror’s inability to be impartial because of the
juror’s familiarity with the witnesses or legal representatives
• a juror becoming disqualified from serving, or being ineligible to
serve, as a juror.
You also may tell the sheriff after the trial if you have suspicions about
any of the matters I have just described.
Judicial officers have also favoured repeating the social
media/internet related directions at multiple points throughout the trial,
including before lengthy adjournments and before the commencement of jury
deliberations.
Judges are increasingly choosing to provide jurors with copies
of written directions, which either reproduce oral directions, or are
to supplement oral directions.
It has been suggested that judges provide social media/internet
related directions to jurors in writing so that they can be referred
‘guidelines’ for their social media/internet use throughout the
trial. Commentators have praised written directions
in this context as being
twice as effective as oral
directions.
The New South Wales model directions recommend that each member
of the jury be provided with a written document which can be referred
jury in the course of opening directions and thereafter left with the
In the UK, ‘unequivocal’ written notices are posted
in the jury room and the jury waiting room, which reiterate the written
directions regarding use of the internet, eg ‘[y]ou may also be in
contempt of court if you use the internet to research details
Knowledge/understanding
on the part of the judiciary
A further factor that has been
raised as potentially limiting the effectiveness of jury directions on social
media and the internet
is a deficiency in judges’ knowledge in these
areas. If such directions are given by judicial officers who do not have the
underlying knowledge and understanding of social media and other internet
platforms, it is easy to see how the directions may not
be relevant and may not
resonate with the jury.
There are obvious difficulties in becoming familiar with
fundamentally unfamiliar technology and behaviours, not least the difficulty
recognising the need in the first place. In the words of the then Chief Justice
of Canada, the Honourable Beverley McLachlin,
‘[i]n facing the reality of
modern communications revolution, it is crucial that we understand the
technology and how it is
being used — something lawyers and judges, often
castigated as Luddites, may not find
Survey results from the US in 2012 (of jurors from six criminal
trials and seven civil trials, as well as the presiding judges and
relevantly showed that most judges rated their own technological knowledge as
fairly strong (5.4 average); only one judge
gave a self-rating lower than a 4;
and on average, the lawyers viewed themselves as less technologically
knowledgeable than the judges
(4.4 on a scale of
In the course of enquiring about alleged juror misconduct in a
trial in the US in 2011, a judge asked a juror, ‘[n]ow, it has
brought to my attention that during — during the course of the trial that
you have from time to time, uh, twittered, whatever
that is. Have
Further, in 2011,
a survey of federal court judges in the US enquired about misconduct on the part
of jurors and sought responses
those detected cases. The then-new social networking service
included as an option and, surprisingly, it was ranked highly by the responding
judges, indeed, on equal footing with
. From subsequent comments
it became apparent that the respondents had mistaken
internet search engine, which projects a wide-spread lack of
knowledge of social media platforms and social media generally amongst
participating judges (such that they could mistake a social networking
application for an internet search
It is easy to see how confusion may
result on the part of jurors when judicial officers are drafting and delivering
directions on
social media and the internet without the requisite underlying
knowledge. Further, even in circumstances where the directions are
understood, it is conceivable that jurors might use social media and other
internet platforms inappropriately during the
trial because they think that
their conduct is beyond the purview of the court.
question and
The Institute invited responses to the following questions:
(a) Should ‘standard’ directions to jurors, similar to those used
in New South Wales and Victoria, regarding the internet
and social media be
adopted in Tasmania?
(b) What should these directions include?
(i) Specific mention of social media;
(ii) A comprehensive list of prohibited internet and social media platforms
as well as prohibited activity (‘
information in
information out
(iii) Explanations for the internet/social media restrictions;
(iv) Warnings about personal consequences for juror misconduct;
(v) Reminders to jurors of their obligation to report irregularities;
(vi) Repetition; and/or
(vii) Written directions?
(c) Could/should the underlying knowledge and understanding of the internet
and social media on the part of the judiciary be improved.
If so, how?
Respondents advised that at least some directions at the
beginning of a trial advising jurors to refrain from conducting their own
research is already ‘standard
Jim Connolly, Sheriff of Tasmania, confirmed with respect to
the current practice in Tasmania: ‘All jurors in Tasmania are ...
by trial judges in every trial, including the prohibition on use of social media
or intranet to research the current
In some further
detail, Daryl Coates SC, Director of Pubic Prosecutions (Tas), stated:
In the course of opening directions judges tell jurors that they must reach a
verdict based on the evidence they see and hear in the
court. Judges generally
give examples of what would be impermissible, for example, looking up something
on the internet, going to
the scene of a crime, conducting an experiment, or
speaking to friends and family about the trial. It is common for judges to tell
jurors not to use social media to conduct their own enquiries about a case and
to limit exposure to media reports generally and to
disregard any such
The Legal Aid Commission of Tasmania offered:
Though there are no ‘model directions’ to jurors about their
role, trial judges [in Tasmania] routinely warn the jury
• The must base their decision solely on the evidence they hear in
• The must not discuss with another person, other than a juror,
anything about the evidence on trial or the jury’s deliberations
Trial judges will also usually warn juries against looking on the internet or
social media for information about the trial, although
this is not a universal
His Honour Justice Pearce stated:
In Tasmania, in my experience, directions are given although not in
‘standard’ terms. In my view standard directions are
not necessary,
although most of the matters in ... [question eight] should be addressed. In my
experience they already are, although
not necessarily in the precise terms of
the standard directions given
Respondents in consultation generally agreed that directions to
jurors could be improved. Daryl Coates SC, Director of Public Prosecutions
(Tas), submitted:
having reviewed the extracts from the New South Wales Judicial
Commission’s ‘Criminal Trial Courts Bench Book’ and
Judicial College of Victoria’s ‘Criminal Charge Book’ ...
[included in Appendices E and F of this Report],
I am of the view that
[directions on the topic of social media and/or the internet] could be improved
in Tasmania.
It would be beneficial for jurors to be advised orally and in writing of the
need to reach their verdict solely on the evidence they
have seen and heard in
the trial, the prohibition against making their own enquiries (including
specific reference to the internet
and social media) and discussing the case
with persons other than another member of the jury (either in person or in
writing), the
reasons for these requirements and warnings of consequences that
may flow from
non-compliance.
However, interestingly, Mr Coates SC, was not of the view that
the adoption of model directions is the answer:
there are no standard published judicial directions in this State. Thus, I am
of the view that it would be inappropriate to have a
standard required direction
to jurors regarding the use of social media and the internet...To do so, in the
absence of other standardised
directions, there is no principled reason why this
direction should be treated differently to others such as the presumption
or standard of proof.
This material could, however, be provided to prospective jurors as part of
the general induction given to the jury panel prior to
empanelment.
The majority of respondents did favour model directions which
addressed social media and/or internet use by jurors being adopted in
The Sheriff of Tasmania observed that ‘the standard directions of New
South Wales or Victoria appear to be a useful,
comprehensive guide’, but
ultimately, whether or not model directions were adopted in Tasmania should be
‘a matter for
the judges to
suggested that any set of model directions in Tasmania should be developed by
the Tasmanian Supreme Court in consultation
with the legal
profession.
The Legal Aid Commission submitted:
The adoption of model directions, and for those model directions to be made
freely available to the public, would assist in addressing
this issue.
Despite the lack of a standard set of directions in Tasmania trial counsel
are expected to know what directions are needed ahead of
time. In practice some
counsel use model directions from other Australian jurisdictions, while others
rely on their own formulation.
This leads to unnecessary and undesirable
inconsistency and may prolong matters where there is a dispute about the wording
applied ...
Having Tasmanian model directions will likely improve the quality of advocacy
and the ability of counsel to accurately make submissions
directions should the need arise ...
The model directions contained in the NSW and Victorian Judicial bench books
... provide good examples of the clearer directions with
respect to social media
use by jurors. We support the adoption of updated and improved model directions
by the Tasmanian Supreme
Some respondents commented that the adoption of model
directions would be a mere formality in many respects as they are
‘essentially
already in use’, insofar as judges and counsel in
Tasmania routine refer to such resources on an informal
Model directions which standardise directions on social media
and the internet would eliminate variation in directions and a lack
consistency which otherwise necessarily occurs. The Law Society of Tasmania
confirms, ‘the Tasmania Supreme Court already
gives similar directions but
there is no uniformity between the judges. The Society sees the benefit in
uniform or standard set of
directions which can be added to but not detracted
The Institute
agrees with this view.
In the course of Professor Jill Hunter’s juror study,
observations were also made in respect of the directions given to jurors
topic of social media and/or the internet. Somewhat unsurprisingly, the
‘depth and breadth of judicial directions and
accompanying explanation
varied enormously’ across the trials
Relevantly, there
was also a marked difference between the directions given in the earlier trials
as opposed to the later trials,
following revisions to the model directions on
social media/the internet. The later trials ‘explained in great detail the
for the prohibition ... the earlier trials contained far greater
diversity of detail across a spectrum, ranging from top drawer instructions
one trial judge who provided no real explanation or reason to obey the
instructions other than mentioning that juror misconduct
in the past has
resulted in “big
problems”.’
In line with New South Wales and Victoria, respondents agreed
that model directions should include specific mention social media in
to the internet generally.
Only one respondent opined that directions that specifically mention social
media were ‘not a good idea’. The rationale
being that it
‘makes them think about what’s out
‘never [have] dawned on them that [they] could [use social media in these
ways] until they are told about it ... told
not to do it, that’s what
makes them do it.’
Respondents generally accepted that
model directions on this topic should include some sort of elaboration on
prohibited internet
and social media platforms as well as prohibited activity,
namely, because ‘often [the directions] don’t go further than
Moreover, as
identified by the Legal Aid Commission of Tasmania, ‘a blanket ban on
social media or internet use is unfeasible
and is likely to be
However, any
attempt at a comprehensive list of these would be problematic because
‘these change with such frequency it is
impossible to remain
Indeed, as highlighted by the Law Society of Tasmania, ‘the uniform
directions [see [
] above] reveal how quickly out of step the
courts can become when referencing social media given that MySpace is a
phenomenon of
the early 2000’s that most people under 25 have never
Justice Pearce said he references ‘the usual ones – Google,
Facebook, Twitter,
Respondents also agreed that any model directions needed to
include explanations for the internet/social media restrictions. His Honour
Justice Pearce described this as ‘the most important
direction’.
Connolly, Sheriff of Tasmania, stated ‘compliance with directions about
social media etc is probably more likely if the
rationale is explained. A carrot
rather than a stick!’
Similarly, Dr David Plater, Deputy Director of the South Australian Law Reform
Institute, reasoned:
The premise must be to support and strengthen the role and effectiveness of
judicial directions and to treat jurors in an inclusive
manner as mature adults.
If you treat someone in a patronising manner as an errant child, they will
respond and react
accordingly...
Professor Jill Hunter submitted:
In my view the problem is jurors not understanding their task and why
limitations apply. You will never completely stop jurors googling,
but if they
understand why this is unnecessary and why it is dangerous, it may be possible
to limit it, and also to limit its impact.
The question should be about the type
of directions and the focus of the explanations given to
In terms of what form that explanation might take, the Legal
Aid Commission of Tasmania suggested that the directions about social
the internet:
are couched in terms of ‘fairness’, that it would be unfair for
the jury to consider material that is not in evidence
to the court because it
may contain material that could be adequately addressed by the parties, and
comes with a warning that such
material may be unreliable ...
[And include] a direct warning that a failure to abide by these directions
may result in a mistrial, resulting in delay for the victims,
the accused and
their families and great expense to the
Dr David Plater, Deputy Director of the South Australian Law
Reform Institute, offered:
One suggestion is the practice of the former South Australian Chief Judge to
... explain and personalise the usual warning [regarding
social media/the
internet]; namely how would you feel if you ended up in Risdon Prison on the
basis of prejudicial material found
from outside court by a juror and you had no
inkling of this. The Chief Judge also spoke of why the notion of a fair trial is
vital and what it involves ... he [explained that] he did not expect juries
to stop using the internet during a trial but what was
precluded was
impermissible research,
commentary.
The majority of respondents were also agreed that any model
directions on the topic of social media/internet should include warnings
personal consequences for
His Honour Justice
Pearce confirmed that, currently, warnings about personal consequences for
jurors are often omitted, ‘[a]lthough
warnings are commonly given about
[other consequences such as] unfairness and the potential derailment of the
trial and the consequences
of that for the parties and the witnesses and the
also commented that warnings such as this need to be tempered or, in his view,
omitted from opening directions entirely,
given that they may be
counterproductive to judge/jury rapport building at this early stage:
Part of the role of a judge is to assist and guide the jury through the trial
process, and to earn the jury’s respect. I don’t
think that process
is assisted by heavy handed threats of sanction for improper conduct, especially
as a matter of course at the
start of a trial. A proper explanation that a trial
may have to be aborted if jurors misconduct themselves is
sufficient.
In the Institute’s view, his Honour’s comments
confirm the need for a wholistic approach to juror education. There would
need for trial judges to be heavy handed in the content and/or delivery of their
trial directions if they are merely confirming
and supplementing information
that jurors have already obtained through pre-empanelment
training/information.
There was also consensus on model directions being repeated to
His Honour Justice
Pearce expressed the view that directions should be repeated to jurors only
‘if it appears necessary as
respondents thought this ought to be done by the trial judge at the very least
at the start of each trial and during summing
others thought it ought
to be done as often as on a daily
In this regard,
Johnston et al suggested that court staff could be of assistance in this
respect: ‘jury liaison personnel should
remind jurors on a daily basis,
using a scripted message, that digital and social media use are
forbidden.’
Respondents also favoured model
directions including reminders to jurors of their obligation to report
irregularities.
Honour Justice Pearce stated, ‘Yes. This is already
the Law Society
of Tasmania informed the Institute that ‘[j]udges do not give any
direction of this nature in Tasmania
currently.’
Institute’s view, this apparent difference in experience supports the
proposal that, if there is inconsistency in what
currently happens, it might be
remedied by the introduction of model directions.
Some form of written directions for jurors was recommended by
almost all respondents. Notably, his Honour Justice Pearce suggested
written directions should ‘not
necessarily’
provided to jurors as a matter of course. Suggestions in this respect ranged
from written directions which merely reproduce and
‘reinforce’ oral directions, or written directions in addition to
oral directions.
Johnston et
recommended that any
written materials incorporating jury directions should incorporate simple
diagrams to indicate the limits on the use of social media
using smart phones,
iPads, and other electronic devices; written in plain language and include
reference to specific types of commonly
used social media; and Jurors should
have jury directions with them throughout the
Other suggestions for the form/content of written directions
for jurors on the topic of social media/internet included a written memorandum
provided to jurors prior to final addresses, which includes model directions on
social media and the
Respondents also
suggested that ‘consideration be given to adopting the “question
trial” method of summing up to
maximise the likelihood of the jury
understanding the directions
Other pertinent
observations from respondents in this respect included: it ‘depends how
long’ the written materials are,
and ‘not all jurors can
read’, might it be just as effective if the directions were ‘just
repeated orally’?
Respondents’ comments on written materials for jurors
also extended to written signs, posters and other visual aids in the jury
and/or court precinct
‘signage or ... a document that addresses FAQ for jurors in the jury
rooms should be equipped with signage that explicitly prohibits digital and
social media use in words and
On the topic of judicial directions,
respondents were also asked about the role of the judiciary’s underlying
knowledge and
understanding of the internet and social media. Johnston et al
judges delivering these instructions should be equipped with sufficient
knowledge about the Internet and social media to do so in
a way that accords
with jurors’ real life experience. In our submission training on this
aspect should be freely available
through professional development programs run
by the National Judicial College of Australia and the equivalent state bodies
they exist). All judges who hear criminal trials should be encouraged to
undertake such training, perhaps delivered through a convenient
online module,
which should be regularly updated to keep pace with technological developments.
As two of us recently observed in
the Judicial Officer’s Bulletin:
there is also the need to appropriately resource and support judges to be
digitally media literate, as consumers and analysts but
also potentially as
producers of social media. This requires professional training and development
— to understand and apply
the critical media literacies that ACMA [the
Australian Communication and Media Authority] has identified across any and all
professional
and personal social media use. It will also require the ongoing
review and updating of ethical
guidelines.
The Law Society of Tasmania was of
the view that ‘the judiciary in Tasmania is more than knowledgeable on
this issue.’
Society was also of the view that such knowledge/understanding of social
media/internet was nevertheless not relevant to the
provision of judicial
directions on these topics: ‘The court’s role is to ensure a fair
trial and it is the control of
this activity rather than the specific mechanism
of the activity that is relevant to that
Jim Connolly,
Sheriff of Tasmania, contributed: ‘The professional development needs of
the judiciary are always a matter for
the judges themselves to decide. They
should also be aware of improvements in
technology’.
Justice Pearce commented:
Further education in such matters is never a bad thing. Although most
judicial officers these days have a reasonable understanding
of the internet and
social media, sometimes there are ways in which social media is used which might
be worth further explanation.
The nature of these things is that they quickly
Some respondents highlighted the fact that model directions are
not without limitations. Dr Braun commented:
The impact of social networking directions on jurors is ultimately closely
entwined with jurors’ underlying motives for the
use of social networks
while sitting and deliberating. Where social media has become a lifestyle or
even an addiction, instructions
to refrain from accessing networking sites may
have very little impact on some jurors in practice. In this context, it is
to note that although a number of US states have in place specific
social media jury directions, episodes of jurors’ social
continue to be reported in the media. This suggests that incidences continue
despite jury instructions.
In light of the above, introducing social media jury directions in Tasmania
may not have the potential to curtail jurors’ social
media use during
criminal trials and may remain a fruitless
Johnston et al commented:
it is important to note that instances of juror misconduct in relation to the
use of the Internet and social media have continued
to occur, despite the
introduction of more explicit instructions on these topics that have been
introduced in a number of Australian
that improved judicial instructions on their own are unlikely to provide a
complete answer
to this problem.
... we believe that there may be room to improve directions and to position
them among a suite of measures that form an overall strategy
to address the
problem of juror misconduct is a preferable
In line with the overwhelming
majority of respondents, the Institute recognises the benefit of model
directions on the topic of jurors’
use of social media and other internet
platforms. Such directions would support and strengthen the effect of the
present judicial
directions in Tasmania on this issue.
Recommendation 2
(a) A set of ‘standard’/‘model’ directions to
jurors, similar to those used in New South Wales and Victoria,
regarding the
internet and social media should be adopted in Tasmania.
(b) They should include:
(i) Specific mention of social media;
(ii) Examples of prohibited internet and social media platforms, which
surpasses simply mentioning
(iii) Examples of prohibited activity, which include both
information in
information out
uses of social media and the internet;
(iv) Explanations for the internet/social media restrictions;
(v) Warnings about personal consequences for juror misconduct;
(vi) Reminders to jurors of their obligation to report irregularities and a
step-by-step guide of the reporting process;
(vii) explain the consequences for the trial participants, for jurors and
for the trial of jurors’ inappropriate use of social
(c) The above information should be reproduced in written form for jurors
to refer to during the course of the trial, both as a written
document given to
jurors and posters/signage in the court precinct and jury room.
(d) The oral directions should to be given at the start of the trial and
repeated in truncated form before lengthy adjournments and
deliberations.
(e) The model directions should to be reviewed periodically to ensure that
the particular social media/internet platforms and activities/uses
included in the directions by way of examples remain current and relevant.
sequestration
E-sequestration
Whilst the traditional sequestration of juries is essentially a
‘past practice’
in Australia, a new form of ‘
sequestration
e-sequestration
is widely adopted as a preventative measure to control jurors’ use of the
internet and social media.
In Tasmania, jurors are not permitted to have their phones with
them during the trial or deliberations. As explained in the online
induction materials:
Can I bring a mobile phone or pager?
Yes, but you will have to turn it off during the empanelling process. If you
are empanelled — that is chosen to serve on a jury
— in Hobart, you
will need to leave your mobile phone and other electronic devices such as E
Readers, IPads or laptops with
the receptionist for safe keeping before entering
the courtroom or jury room each day.
Arrangements for safe keeping of your phones and other electronic devices
vary in the different court locations.
The officer in charge of the juries in each location will advise you where to
deposit your phones and other
The same information is included in the
Being selected and
serving on a jury
video available
Similar practices are adopted in the Australian Capital
New South Wales,
and Queensland,
as well as in
New Zealand,
and many US
It is suggested that such measures be coupled with low cost and
low interference measures such as signs/posters/visual aids in the
and/or court
Whilst the taking away of jurors’ mobile phones introduces
an immediate inhibitory step to juror misconduct of this kind, it
away the means on a temporary basis. It has also been queried whether the taking
away of jurors’ phones is akin
to ‘treating jurors like misbehaving
foster jurors’ frustrations and alienation from the trial process.
‘QNA’ (‘question and answer’)
Respondents were asked the following questions regarding the
practice of taking mobile phones and other electronic devices away from
during the trial and deliberations:
(a) How effective is the practice of taking mobile phones and other
electronic devices away from jurors during the trial and deliberations?
(b) Is it a practice that should continue?
Jim Connolly, Sheriff of Tasmania provided the following insight
into the current practices in Tasmania in this respect:
while attending court, jurors are required to surrender their electronic
devices by which they could access social media or the internet
exception is smart watches, which are difficult to identify). ... Their use of
mobile telephone and tablets is limited whilst
in the Court precinct. Some
jurors are required to surrender phones, tablets and laptops prior to entry into
the Jury Room, whereas
other jurors as required to surrender their electronic
devices at a later time prior to court starting. This difference is only due
logistics. Jurors are allowed to have their electronic equipment back during
extended breaks.
The Legal Aid Commission of Tasmania adds:
Mobile telephones and other internet enabled devices are routinely taken from
jurors during the hearing of evidence and during jury
deliberations. The devices
are returned to the jurors during lunch breaks and at the end of each
Of those respondents who addressed this topic, the majority
commented upon the obvious limitations of this practice as a preventative
measure to control jurors’ use of the internet and social media.
His Honour Justice Pearce commented:
It is unrealistic to suggest that access to social media and the internet can
be entirely prevented during a trial. Phones can be
removed during court hours
but not otherwise. There will always be ample access when court is not sitting
— overnight or at
weekends. The only feasible control is by direction to
jurors ... [however] ... I do not suggest that the practice of taking phones
away during the trial and deliberations should change, but the reality is that
the risk is much greater that individual jurors will
access information when
away from court overnight or at weekends, and that the use of phones to access
the internet and social media
during deliberations while the jury is together as
a group is unlikely.
Dr Kerstin Braun submitted:
E-sequestration does not appear to fully address the phenomenon. While taking
away electronic devices during the trial may prevent
jurors from accessing
social media during certain phases of the proceedings nothing prevents
individual jurors from using the internet
and social media when they return home
(unless proceedings are one day only).
E-sequestration may therefore not be very effective in curtailing
jurors’ social media and internet use and few benefits may
be derived from
the continuation of the
Johnston et al go further and suggest that, in addition to the
limitations of the effectiveness of this measure, it may also be
counterproductive
in other ways:
In our view, the obvious limitation of this is that it can only deter
impermissible use while jurors are actually on the court premises
(although it
might add value by reinforcing the prohibition against use of social media and
the Internet in jurors’ mind).
We think that such a prohibition could upset or unsettle jurors who are used
to having tactile connection with their phones.
It is our view that as mobile phones become more and more embedded in
people’s lives, the idea of taking them away from jurors
considered inflammatory (even undemocratic). It might be sufficient to instead
impose a requirement that they are turned
off throughout proceedings, have the
bailiff check they are turned off, and provide an explanation for this at
various times of the
day — at the start of the day, prior to lunch, and
following lunch. Coupled with the knowledge that many of the reported instances
of juror misconduct occur off the premises and out of sitting hours, the idea of
what would be seen as ‘confiscation’
during the court process might
do more harm than good and a ‘turn off your mobile phone’ message
— as required
to all people on airline flights and in movies — might
be more acceptable to most
Dr David Plater, Deputy Director of the South Australian Law
Reform Institute, has a similarly dim view of this practice:
the practice of taking mobile phones from jurors ... is reflective of a wider
paternalistic attitude to juries. Juries need to be
treated as mature
individuals and not distrusted and play an active role in the trial. It is also
a simplistic remedy ... at 5:01pm
the jurors are given their mobile phones back
... the suggestion is luddite and
ineffectual.
The Legal Aid Commission of Tasmania recognised that, at the
very least, this practice is effective in limiting the distractions available
jurors during the trial and reducing the risk of misconduct of this kind during
deliberations:
This is not an effective strategy ... jurors intent on doing so will do so
during those times when their mobile phones are returned
to them — be that
at lunchtime or at the end of the day. That said, removing mobile phones during
the hearing of the evidence
remains an important step in ensuring the jury
members are focussed on the evidence and not distracted by material coming in on
mobile phones. It goes some way to making it clear that jurors need to
carefully consider whether using their mobile phone is permissible.
important to keep mobile phones and devices away from the jury during
deliberations so as to ensure the integrity of the
decision-making
Other respondents also recognised the fact that it serves other
The Law Society of Tasmania was of the view that: ‘It is
very effective’.
Connolly, Sheriff of Tasmania, responded:
we believe that this practice is essential to assure the general public that
they can have confidence that the judicial system is
fair. We believe this also
relieves the juror of the temptation to utilise their devices whilst in court,
or in the jury room deliberating.
However, the Court has no control over
jurors’ use of social media, or the internet when they are not attending
Daryl Coates SC, Director of Public Prosecutions (Tas), stated:
the practice of taking jurors’ mobile phones and electronic devices
during trial and deliberations should continue. It ensures
jurors are not
distracted and subject to influences outside the courtroom during these times.
It is not practicable nor desirable
to restrict jurors’ access to these
devices outside court sitting
The Law Society of Tasmania simply concluded that the
‘benefit far outweighs the loss of autonomy that comes from
and therefore the
practice should ‘most definitely’
Professor Jill Hunter described the fact that she
‘struggles with’ this measure. She commented:
It is obviously stopping use of devices during trial and deliberations, but
not when jurors are away from the court precinct ... [It
should continue] but
one needs to reflect on how it is explained to jurors. It is inadequate without
reasoned explanation.
The Australian Lawyers Alliance was alone in recommending the
rather extreme response of replacing ‘
virtual sequestration
e-sequestration
’ with actual sequestration:
The Australian Lawyers Alliance submits that the practice of taking mobile
telephone and electronic devices from jurors should be
strengthened by
sequestering jurors during the trial ... the ALA concedes that this measure is
among the more extreme options available
In Tasmania, measures have been put in place to mitigate against the use of
extraneous information ... Nevertheless, we believe that
more can be done,
particularly as jurors are not sequestered for the length of the trial and
therefore have access to the internet
and social media
The Institute does not contemplate
the reintroduction of the expensive and disruptive practice of jury
sequestration in routine criminal
trials. Any such option is unrealistic in a
contemporary context. The Institute does, however, recognise the utility of
taking phones
and other electronic devices away from jurors during the trial and
deliberations. If anything, it minimises the distraction of jurors
having their
electronic devices at their disposal. This dual purpose of this practice should
be explained to jurors so that they
are able to understand the utility of this
measure. The Institute is of the view that this practice should continue.
Recommendation 3
The practice of taking mobile phones and other electronic devices away from
jurors during the trial and deliberations should continue.
effectiveness in preventing jurors using social media and the internet is
limited, it otherwise minimises the distraction
of jurors from having their
electronic devices at their disposal.
The dual purpose of this measure should be explained to jurors.
the jury system
Aside from the abovementioned specific preventative measures
employed to address the inappropriate use of the internet and/or social
jurors during criminal trials, the criminal justice system otherwise imparts a
great deal of ‘
’ in the jury system and its
’ protections.
The criminal justice system assumes the efficacy of
In the absence of any
evidence to the contrary,
is assumed that jurors, ‘when properly instructed, will accept and conform
to the direction of the trial judge to decide
the case solely on the evidence
placed before them in the court
‘the experience and wisdom of the law ... that, almost universally, jurors
approach their task
conscientiously’
are ‘faithful to their
Indeed, in 2012,
the High Court of Australia went as far as to declare it is a
‘constitutional fact’ that, even in the
most sensational and highly
publicised of criminal cases, jurors can be relied upon to act only on the
evidence presented at trial
and act in accordance with the trial judge’s
instructions.
Though this
proposition is often questioned by commentators, the jury system ultimately
depends on this premise.
to be honest
Essentially, these assumptions are based solely on the
assurances of their
impartiality and ability
and/or willingness to adhere to judicial directions throughout the trial
process. It has been queried whether
enquiries should be made into the veracity
of such matters both at the outset of a trial and on an ongoing basis throughout
The New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal has recently
ordered an investigation into juror misconduct in relation to a 2016 trial
Broken Hill of a charge of sexual intercourse taking advantage of a
person’s cognitive impairment. The alleged juror misconduct
juror being related by marriage to a complainant in a separate trial who had
alleged the same defendant sexually assaulted
her (the accused was acquitted in
that matter six months earlier). A second juror is also alleged to have been
well acquainted with
and to have ‘socialised regularly’ with a key
prosecution witness. Neither of these matters were disclosed by the jurors
the time of the trial.
Unconscious bias/prejudice is another matter entirely and is far
more elusive.
Questioning of jurors
In the US, jurors are subject to extensive
examinations, or ‘interrogations’, before being empanelled. In
Australia, the right to question prospective jurors has
long existed as an
incident of challenge for
but it has often been
described as a right that is more apparent than real because it can be exercised
only after first establishing
a foundation for the need for a
The idea of
prospective jurors being subject to the American
process has
not found favour in Australian courts:
It is not appropriate for this jurisdiction to adopt the practice followed in
some other countries of permitting in effect a fishing
expedition with each
prospective juror. There must be a sound basis made out on a prima facie footing
to anticipate the probability
of prejudice on the part of the individual
[Challenge for cause] has more attraction in theory than in practice. In
theory, one might think that bias can be detected by questioning
disqualifying those who admit bias. In practice, the efficacy of the procedure
in detecting bias is doubtful. If the procedure
is adopted, it may lead the
jurors to think that the community’s confidence in their impartiality and
sense of responsibility
is heavily qualified. A juror who would not voluntarily
seek to be excused because of bias would not readily confess that bias under
questioning if he [or she] were challenged for cause. Though the procedure is
available, the practice of Australian courts has been
against its adoption. In
the Australian community of today, I think that approach is generally
There is, however, a rarely invoked power available in
Queensland to make inquiries of jurors ahead of their selection if
Prejudicial pre-trial
publicity may amount to such special reasons. This power was exercised for the
first time in 2013 in the high-profile
’) and in the subsequent high-profile trial of
R v Bayden-Clay
2014 (although, there have been other unsuccessful
applications).
There is no
equivalent provision in any other Australian
Regardless of any express power to question jurors,
interventionalist
approach to jury
empanelling.’
Particularly in cases where there has been significant pre-trial publicity. For
example, the Court of Criminal Appeal describes the
proactive role of the court
at first instance in the ‘Rūātoki raid’ case:
Before the jury was empanelled, we understand they were told of the subject
matter of the trial and directed to advise the Judge if
as a result of what they
had read or heard or opinions they had formed, they doubted their ability to try
the case fairly on the
evidence. We accept that not all potential jurors may
have recognised what may well be unconscious prejudice. However, significant
numbers did. We were told that about 60 persons sought to be, and were, excused.
Even after the panel was selected and retired, we
understand that at least one
more came forward and
In the absence of any formal ‘screening’ of jurors
in the courtroom, it remains possible for counsel to make their own
enquiries of
jurors’ publicly available social media presence. Indeed, in April 2014,
the American Bar Association issued a
formal ruling which approves the ethics of
counsel viewing jurors’ publicly available social media profiles and
histories during
proceedings.
question and
On this topic, respondents were invited to respond to the
following questions:
Question 10
(a) Should juror assurances regarding their impartiality and compliance with
judicial directions be accepted at face value?
(b) Should counsel make pre-trial enquiries of jurors’ internet and
social media presence and/or monitor jurors’ internet
and social media
activity during the course of a trial to ensure the veracity of juror assurances
in this respect?
Coates SC, Director of Public Prosecutions (Tas) submitted:
In this State prior to empanelment it is the practice for the judge to have
the nature of the case and a list of the witnesses who
will give evidence on the
trial to be stated to the jury. Following that, jurors are asked if there is
anything about the matter
that would prevent them from impartially trying the
issues on the trial. Jurors who have some knowledge of the case, witnesses or
for some other reason feel they are unable to be impartial are then discharged
(unless there is a reason not to do so). ...
Juror assurances regarding their impartiality and compliance with judicial
directions must be accepted at face value. There is no
other practical or
meaningful way to assess this. Further, it should be assumed that jurors follow
the trial judge’s directions
and will approach their task in accordance
with their oath:
[2010] HCA 20
(2010) 241 CLR 237
Glennon v R
[1992] HCA 16
173 CLR 592.
The structure and formality of the jury trial process is such that jurors
appreciate and respect the importance of their role in the
process ...
The judge’s inquiry regarding jurors’ impartiality is made in
open court, and is immediately followed by the jurors being
sworn in, ‘a
solemn process which ... jurors take very
Australian Lawyers Alliance was in favour of making pre-trial enquiries of
jurors’ internet and social media presence, albeit,
recognising the
‘extreme’ nature of the measure:
The Australian Lawyers Alliance submits that controlling use of social media
is not possible. However, [one of] a number of steps
could be taken to disrupt
the utility of social media to a juror who wishes to find out information ... is
that following arraignment,
defendants should be entitled to a limited form of
questioning of jurors prior to the use of any challenges. This practice is
extensively
used in some jurisdictions in the United States, and would assist in
identifying those jurors who have used social media in connection
with the trial
on which they might be empanelled, or who might be inclined to use it despite
judicial direction to the contrary ...
the ALA concedes that this measure is
among the more extreme options available to law
et al were of the view that:
There may be value in
exercising greater scrutiny of jurors during the selection process, akin to the
Queensland provision that permits
this type of investigation.
This approach could provide the judge with an opportunity to explain the jury
process. Limiting questioning of members of the jury
on their access to, and use
of, social media to the judge may offer one means of identifying potential
problems. It would provide
judges with the chance to identify any jurors whose
use of social media may create problems of conflict before final empanelment,
whilst at the same time affording the judge the opportunity to introduce to the
jury the issues of the potential bias from pre-trial
access and the problems
that may arise from access to social media during the course of the trial. This
can then be reinforced by
judicial instructions on both prejudicial publicity
and social media use. While there would be some additional cost and delay
with using such a process, those disadvantages should be weighed
against the costs associated with a mistrial occasioned by this
misconduct.
Particularly in cases that are high-profile, and/or likely to run for some
time, we suggest that this is an option that courts should
be open to exploring.
The voir dire process which ... is underutilised in Australian jury trials,
provides another avenue by which
such inquiries could be made of jurors. As we
have suggested previously, we regard the obligation to be aware of the risk of
impermissible
use of social media and the Internet as imparting an ethical duty
on defence and possibly also prosecution counsel.
Given the pervasiveness of this technology in our daily lives, there is a
strong argument that fulfilling that duty does require actively
making enquiries
of jurors’ internet and social media presence and/or monitoring their
activity on those media during the course
of the trial; or at least, a potential
to do so, which may be a sufficient deterrent. More difficult to answer is the
question as
to how, and by whom, that activity should be resourced, but at the
end of the day the greater responsibility lies with the prosecution
the fair conduct of the
Society of Tasmania ‘strongly opposed the voir dire
“interrogatory” approach from the United
instead the less invasive measure of simply looking online to obtain an insight
into jurors’ social media presence:
there is nothing unethical in conducting on-line research of potential jurors
from publicly available material. The Society is aware
of practitioners who have
conducted that research with reference to the jury list to assist in determining
whether to challenge a
particular juror. This could include online posts about
their view of crime as well as revealing prejudices relevant to the accused
as gender, gender identity and ethnicity. It should not be a
requirement
for counsel to do so.
majority of respondents, however, did not endorse such pre-trial measures for
various reasons. Daryl Coates SC, Director of Public
Prosecutions (Tas),
I would not support any requirement for counsel to make pre-trial enquiries
of jurors’ internet and social media presence and/or
juror’s internet and social media activity during the course of a trial.
To do so would be impractical (many jurors
do not use their own names in their
profiles and have private settings on their account restricting access) and
would lead to other
complications, for example a prospective juror’s
social media use was seen as ‘undesirable’ the juror may be stood
aside or challenged when they may not otherwise have been. It would involve an
American-style examination of jurors, such an examination
is undesirable as it
is intrusive on individual jurors which could lead to public disquiet with the
justice system; would dramatically
lengthen the trial process; and could lead to
jurors not being representative of the
Connolly, Sheriff of Tasmania, considered the practical implications of such
pre-trial enquiries:
Logistically this would be extremely difficult to implement. Does counsel
conduct a random inquiry, or conduct a complete review of
all jurors? You must
remember that some jurors do not arrange exemptions, or deferment from service
until the actual day of reporting
for service, so, when you consider 300 people
are summonsed and only about 80–100 actually remain on the panel, a lot on
would be wasted checking jurors who will not
Many respondents expressed ethical concerns in this regard. Mr
Connolly, commented, ‘I believe this could lead to a breach of
liberties.’
Plater, Deputy Director of the South Australian Law Reform Institute, similarly
stated that it ‘seems intrusive and
undermines the privacy of potential
The view of Dr
Kerstin Braun was that:
It is theoretically possible that defence or prosecution could monitor
jurors’ social media accounts and posts before and during
criminal trial to ensure that no juror social media misconduct occurs. Such
investigations, however, give rise to difficult
ethical questions in relation to
jurors’ right to privacy which so far have not been addressed in
Australia. In practice, it
is impossible to monitor social media use where
jurors’ social networking profiles are set to private or where jurors use
different networking name. Even where profiles are open to the public it is
unclear how social media use can be detected if jurors
do not actively post but
simply read posts, send private messages or request friends.
In light of complex ethical questions and given that monitoring juror’s
social media use is difficult in practice, counsel should
not monitor
jurors’ social media
Some respondents were more equivocal. Professor Jill Hunter
believed that jurors’ assurances regarding their impartiality and
compliance with judicial directions should ‘not necessarily [be]
accepted’, but the answer is not for counsel to make
enquiries of
jurors’ internet and social media presence and/or monitor jurors’
internet and social media activity during
the course of a
His Honour Justice Pearce was of the view that there should be
some reason to precipitate such enquiries about jurors’ social
media/internet presence and/or activity before or during the trial:
If there is a reason to consider that a juror or jurors, during a trial, may
have acted in a way which suggests a lack of impartiality
or improper access to
information, then a trial judge has an obligation to investigate. What form that
investigation will take depends
on the circumstances of a particular case. In
the absence of such a suggestion, there is no alternative than to take a
oath or affirmation at face
Ultimately,
the Institute does not support the introduction of any formal system which
provides for pre-trial enquiries of jurors’
internet and social media
presence. This is for many reasons, which include juror privacy and practical
considerations such as the
widespread doubts as to the effectiveness of such
questioning and time pressures. Such a measure would be likely to add to the
and length of criminal trial, in the Institute’s view, without any
justifiable return.
it is to be noted that this does not preclude counsel themselves from monitoring
jurors’ internet and social media
presence and activity during the course
of a trial in a more informal way. His Honour Justice Pearce, whilst not of the
such a practice should be endorsed, observes: ‘although there is
no impediment to counsel doing so now if he or she wishes
The Institute views the logistical
and practical difficulties of such online searches as simply too arduous for it
to be adopted by
counsel in any meaningful way. Where such conduct lies with
respect to professional ethical guidelines is a live issue. The Institute
mindful of the human rights implications for the right to privacy of such
investigations, even in circumstances where it is limited
to publicly available
information.
Influencers
In Tasmania, jurors are summonsed
for a specified period of time. During that period, they may be selected and
empanelled as a juror
for a trial, or they may not. They may also be selected
and empanelled on multiple trials during that specified period.
In Tasmania, the Sherriff is tasked with selecting a sufficient
number of jurors to form a jury
The number of jurors
is determined by the number of trials that are listed. The intake of new jury
panels is determined by the court
In other Australian
rather than during intermittent ‘sittings’,
jury panel intakes are
scheduled largely by the calendar
The result of this system is that upon the intake of each new
jury panel, all jurors have been freshly summonsed for that panel and
not yet served as a juror on a criminal trial, unless it has been on a previous
occasion as part of a different jury panel.
It follows that the trials listed at
the beginning of each sitting will have juries that consist of a high proportion
of jurors who
have been empanelled for the first time. As the summons period for
a particular jury panel proceeds, an empanelled jury may thereafter
both jurors who have previously sat on a trial as well as jurors who have not
(ie as jurors finish serving on trials and
are empanelled on second and/or
subsequent trials).
In circumstances where jurors are
empanelled to sit on second and/or subsequent trials during their summonsed
period, they are taking
the juror oath/affirmation for a second/subsequent time,
they are being exposed to criminal trial procedure and legal concepts and
principles for the second/subsequent time, and they are being subject to
judicial directions for a second/subsequent time.
In this respect, respondents were asked the following
Question 11
(a) When jurors sit in more than one trial during their summonsed period,
does such ‘experience’ make them better jurors?
If so, how?
(b) Are jurors who are empanelled for a second and/or subsequent time less
likely to engage in juror misconduct by inappropriately
internet/social media? If so, why?
(c) What influence, if any, do you think that jurors who sit in second and/or
subsequent trials have on their fellow first-time jurors?
Tasmania, the reality is that the ‘same jurors sit on multiple trials in
the same sitting.’ Respondents observed that
this did not affect the
directions that jurors were given; trial judges were nevertheless ‘very
careful to go through directions
despite the fact
that jurors may have been hearing them for a second and/or subsequent time.
Coates SC, Director of Public Prosecutions (Tas), stated:
jurors who sit on more than one trial will, of course, be more familiar with
the process generally, they will be familiar with the
trial directions, the
court routine and are likely to be aware of matters (such as the ability to give
a majority verdict after a
period of time) before other jurors. Without specific
research it is impossible to know whether this prior experience makes them
‘better’ jurors. I see no reason why jurors empanelled for a second
or subsequent times are more or less likely to engage
in misconduct by
inappropriately using the internet or social
Jim Connolly, Sherriff of Tasmania, submitted:
We would say it makes them a better juror, it would make them a more
experienced juror in relation to processes and, maybe, understanding
phrases or words, used by the judge ... No, we do not believe more experience
will make a juror less likely to access, or
use the internet, or social media.
We believe this would be a personal trait if a juror engaged in misconduct by
inappropriately
using the internet or social media ... We believe that any
person who has had previous experience as a juror, may/could influence
less experienced jurors, although this could be overcome with the presiding
judge emphasising that each juror must make their
own decision in relation to a
verdict, after considering all of the evidence
The Law Society of Tasmania commented,
‘some practitioners believe that [second/subsequent] jurors will
have more experience about the procedure and this will help
save time and
‘whether it be a positive or negative influence depends on [the]
individual [jurors].’
Indeed, the Legal Aid Commission of Tasmania warned of encouraging any
‘influence’ by second and/or subsequent jurors
on their fellow
first-time jurors: ‘the adoption of a role, other than foreperson, based
on previous jury experience suggests
an unwarranted authority. The sole
authority for directions about social media use ought to be the presiding
His Honour Justice Pearce submitted:
I have no view about whether jurors who sit on more than one trial are better
jurors. There are competing factors. On the one hand
they are comfortable and
familiar with the process, and have directions repeated. On the other hand, some
are disgruntled about having
been selected again, which carries a risk of
reduced attention and reduced
impartiality.
Whether or not jurors who have been empanelled for a second or
subsequent time are more or less likely to engage in juror misconduct
kind, his Honour simply observed: ‘I do not perceive any
difference.’
In-built protections
According to a survey of US judges in 2011 and 2013, the single
most effective means of detecting juror misconduct of this kind is
misconduct being reported by one or more fellow
This self-regulating
function of juries is two-fold: deterring jurors from engaging in misconduct in
the first place by risk of detection
by fellow jurors and, failing that,
deterring errant jurors from sharing the fruits of any misconduct with fellow
jurors by risk
of certain detection by fellow jurors. If juror misconduct of
this kind occurs, the fact that the misconduct is prevented from wider
contamination of the jury is significant when it comes to the tiered options by
way of remedial measures (ie discharging a single
juror as opposed to
discharging an entire jury and declaring a mistrial).
The English Court of Criminal Appeals has described the concept
of the ‘collective responsibility’ of jurors as follows:
the collective responsibility of the jury is not confined to the verdict. It
begins as soon as the members of the jury have been sworn.
From that moment
onwards, there is a collective responsibility for ensuring that the conduct of
each member is consistent with the
jury oath and that the directions of the
trial judge about the discharge of their responsibilities are followed. Where it
that a member of the jury may be misconducting himself or herself, this
immediately
be drawn to the attention of the trial judge by another,
or the other members of the jury. ...The collective responsibility of the
for its own conduct must be regarded as an integral part of the trial
Integral to the efficacy of these in-built protections is that
jurors are aware of their obligation to report the misconduct of fellow
A 2010 survey of UK
jurors asked whether ‘they would know what to do if something improper
occurred during jury deliberations’.
Almost half (48%) said they either
would not know what to do or were
It has been suggested that the effectiveness of such in-built
protections may be improved. At present, the avenues for juror communications
with the judge and/or the court is regimented and, generally speaking, is very
public in the sense that it necessarily involves a
juror making this
communication in the presence of other jurors. It is thought these circumstances
may dissuade jurors from reporting
the misconduct of fellow jurors.
example, a juror who sat on the
recent high-profile ‘
murder trial in New York spoke
to media after the completion of the trial and, by way of an explanation for not
reporting misconduct
during the trial, stated: ‘I thought we would get
arrested’, ‘I thought they were going to hold me in contempt
didn’t want to say anything or rat out my fellow jurors. I didn’t
want to be that
Some commentators have suggested that the introduction of
‘anonymous’ reporting could improve the likelihood that jurors
report the misconduct of fellow jurors. An anonymous hotline/call centre or
email service have been proffered as possible
In a 2011 murder trial in California, the court received an
anonymous call reporting juror misconduct, namely, the fact that a juror
published material on
could have been made by a fellow juror or, equally, a member of the public who
observed the published material. In any
event, it illustrates the value in
having an anonymous or confidential means for reporting juror misconduct.
The possibility for members of the public to report online
misconduct illustrates that the in-built protections of the jury system
operate by extension if the public is aware of what is, and, what is not,
appropriate juror conduct. In forums such as internet
and social media platforms
which are often closed to the public at large by privacy settings, juror
misconduct may only be detectable
by jurors’ existing
‘friends’. In a high-profile murder trial in Queensland in 2016, a
juror’s online trial-related
posts were admonished:
‘I can’t believe you posted this on Instagram during deliberations.
Do you know how much court
time/money will be wasted if the jury gets dismissed
over this?’, ‘Brainless’, and ‘You are an absolute
I cannot believe you could be stupid enough to do
Similarly, during a rape trial in
Massachusetts in 2001, a juror sent multiple trial-related messages via an
internet Listserv.
received responses from two members; one was a lawyer in New York who replied
that the message was inappropriate and recommended
that the juror inform the
judge of the situation. Whilst the juror did not do so, the lawyer contacted
defence counsel in the trial
and informed them of the juror’s
However, whilst the public may be of assistance in holding
errant jurors accountable, they may equally be encouraging of the misconduct.
juror sitting in a multiple accused murder and attempted murder trial in
California in 2013 posted: ‘This is my secret blog.
I don’t know how
secret it is though. I want to tell secret jury things.’ A comment from a
family member: ‘loved[d]
... [the] hypothetical question to a case that
you can not [sic] talk
New South Wales has codified the
obligation of jurors to report misconduct of fellow
Question 12
(a) How can the efficacy of juror reporting of fellow juror misconduct be
supported and/or improved?
(b) Is public awareness of juror misconduct a viable option for increasing
juror accountability (ie enlisting jurors’ online
‘friends’ to
report juror misconduct they observe on the internet/social media)?
Jim Connolly, Sheriff of Tasmania, advises that the
‘current system’ in Tasmania involves ‘the juror having the
ability to contact either the presiding judge’s staff, or jury
co-ordinator, or one of the Deputy Sheriffs, in relation to
complaint.’ In his view, that system is ‘sufficient’ and
‘works at the current
Similarly, his Honour Justice Pearce observed:
My overwhelming impression is that most jurors take their role and
responsibility very seriously. There is a natural disinclination
‘dob’, but the fact that matters are raised from time to time by
individual jurors indicates to me that they would
report if they thought
necessary. I have received no reports about social media use, although I have
[had] reports occasionally about
other juror conduct, or language difficulties,
or illness and like.
Most respondents otherwise identified problems with the current
system and/or ways in which it might be improved.
The Legal Aid Commission of Tasmania submitted:
Currently it is very difficult for a juror to raise a problem [regarding
either themselves or fellow jurors]. Any such concern raised
requires the juror
to verbally detail their concerns, in front of the Judge, accused, prosecution,
defence lawyers, at least three
court staff, any media present and any members
of the public present in the rear of the court, all while either sitting
by other jurors — one or more of whom may be the subject of the
concern — or by themselves in the jury box. Many people
would struggle to
come forward in such circumstances, particularly if the concern is about a
fellow juror.
Such difficulties with the current reporting system appear to
be borne out by reported instances of juror irregularities being brought
light mere days after the conclusion of the trial. By way of a relatively recent
example in Tasmania, a juror emailed the Sheriff
the day after a verdict in a
Supreme Court fraud trial, complaining of alleged irregularities by other jurors
during the trial and
deliberations.
In Professor Jill Hunter’s juror study, one juror sought,
with respect to their trial experience, ‘[a]n easier way for
other members
of the jury to talk to someone about anything they have heard another jury
member doing ... Court officer cannot be
consulted ... Judge accepts letters but
these are read out with all present ... [the juror suggested a] — Jury
room monitor.’
Community Legal Centres Tasmania also prioritised the ease with
which juror reporting should be able to take place:
In our opinion, measures should be implemented to ensure that jurors are able
to easily report incidents of juror misconduct. An easy
to follow process for
reporting juror misconduct is likely to deter jurors from engaging in misconduct
due to the risk of detection
as well as increasing the chance that jurors do not
share the results of their misconduct with other jurors. With research from the
United Kingdom demonstrating that almost half of all jurors are unaware of what
to do if something improper occurred during jury
deliberations we believe that
current procedures should be reviewed. Options that could be considered include
the installation of
a box in the vicinity of the jury room that notes could be
dropped into, a hotline that people could call or an email address that
anonymous information could be sent
Respondents also favoured anonymity in juror reporting (at
least in the first instance) to encourage this practice. William Boucaust
Barrister in Adelaide, stated:
Jurors should be encouraged to report misconduct on the part of their fellow
[jurors] but I acknowledge this could cause difficulties
because they would not
want to be seen as a snitch or whistle-blower by their colleagues. A process
should be in place that enables
confidential reporting to the trial judge via
the Sheriff so that the reporting juror’s anonymity is protected ...
I strongly suspect that all sorts of misconduct goes unreported because of
the lack of a process which enables discrete
The Legal Aid Commission of Tasmania said:
The ability of jurors to raise concerns in an anonymous fashion, and for
those concerns to be communicated to the court by a third
consideration, may encourage jurors to disclose their
However, some respondents also noted the possible negative
effects of juror reporting and, in particular, anonymous juror reporting.
David Plater, Deputy Director of the South Australian Law Reform Institute,
The suggestion of jurors reporting on their fellow jurors for suspected
misconduct has pros and cons. Yes jurors should perform their
responsibly but to encourage dobbing or snitching is
problematic.
Dr Braun offered:
it can be imagined ... that the existence of juror hotlines can negatively
impact the atmosphere during jury deliberations if jurors
have to fear being
reported and investigated possibly without cause. For this reason, misconduct
hotlines and similar efforts aimed
at increasing the efficacy of juror reporting
could do more harm than
Further, Johnston et al
considered:
Such a service, operating either by phone or email, could be used by jurors
to report cases of fellow jurors accessing social media,
the Internet, or
undertaking other prohibited research. We are persuaded by the arguments put
forward from a range of sources this
approach involves a number of risks,
including creating resentment and tension within the jury, inhibiting frankness
in jury deliberations,
and enabling vexatious reports. We doubted whether, given
the administrative implications and costs involved, that it would be likely
significantly ameliorate the problem and, at best, it could only provide a way
of addressing misconduct after the event, rather
than averting it in the first
Respondents were also asked about the possible role of the
public at large in reporting juror misconduct if/when they observe
irregularities,
particularly online. Jim Connolly, Sheriff of Tasmania,
Public awareness of juror misconduct is a viable option, but the approach to
this should be done carefully. To engage in contacting/enlisting
friends should only be done if the Sheriff is reasonably certain that a juror
has/or is suspected of misconduct. This
should only be done as part of an
investigation by a Sheriff’s officer who has been authorised to conduct
such an investigation.
The Law Society of Tasmania pragmatically added:
Raising public awareness would require an expensive and expansive education
campaign. The better approach is to educate the jurors
themselves.
On this point of juror education, the Law Society also
identified that, currently, ‘there is no direction given to
obligation to report, nor the process of how to go about this. Or, at least,
there is enough inconsistency between this
direction being given and not given.
As a result, the Law Society of Tasmania suggested, as starting point:
The Society would strongly support the implementation of such direction in
line with other states. It is only through this mechanism
that instances of jury
irregularity can be better detected and actively
discouraged.
The Institute agrees with this approach. In circumstances where
there are deficiencies in jurors’ education about their obligation
report irregularities and the process by which this is to occur, rectifying
these matters is an obvious starting point. The recommendation
include in model directions reminders of jurors’ obligation to report
irregularities and a step-by-step guide of
the reporting process — is
already included in Recommendation 2 (see page 96
The efficacy of the system of juror reporting
is inevitably dependent upon jurors being aware of the reporting obligation and
Recommendation 2 reflects that view.
notification
’ – Investigation/Inquiry
When the court becomes aware of juror misconduct, it is
necessary for it to discern exactly what has occurred. The nature and extent
the ‘irregularity’ will determine how the court responds.
The test to be applied in determining whether an irregular
incident involving a juror warrants the discharge of the juror/s or, in
cases, the jury, is whether the incident is such that, notwithstanding any
proposed or actual warning of the judge, it gives
rise to a reasonable
apprehension or suspicion on the part of a fair minded and informed member of
the public that the juror or jury
has not discharged or will not discharge their
task impartially.
appearance as well as the fact of impartiality is necessary to retain confidence
in the administration of justice. Both the parties
in the case and the community
must be satisfied that justice has not only been done but that it has been seen
to be done.
To this end, the court has powers to conduct investigations
and/or inquiries into the irregularity. Such powers exist in the court’s
inherent powers to control the trial process. This includes asking questions of
A statutory power
also exists which allows for the Director of Public Prosecutions to request the
Commissioner of Police to investigate
a complaint about the deliberations of a
The key matters
relevant to the court are confirming the exact conduct that occurred,
determining the extent of the conduct (that
is, how many jurors are directly
and/or indirectly involved), and exploring the impact on the affected
juror’s/s’ ability
to continue to sit as a juror on the trial.
This judicial exercise is a difficult one. To use the simple
example of a juror conducting research online during a trial, whilst
enquiries might be on subject matter that was raised in the course of the trial,
it may otherwise not be strictly relevant
to the determination of the trial
issues. The enquiries may be conducted purely for the sake of satisfying a
personal curiosity,
rather than conducting trial-related research. The
information obtained online by that juror might already be known by other jurors
(as general knowledge) but had not been the subject of discussion in the jury
room in the context of the trial.
Lines of judicial inquiry in this respect are further
complicated when they enter the social media realm where traditional notions
communication and interaction are not necessarily
applicable.
what do you mean by
In 2011, a juror sitting in a murder and aggravated robbery
trial in Arkansas posted on
‘Choices to be made.
Hearts to be broken. We each define the great line.’ Whilst the
juror’s tweet appeared to contemplate
and comment on the inevitable
divisiveness of the verdict, both for the jury and the wider public, the
juror’s comment, at
least in part, was found to be far less controversial.
As the juror explained when he was called upon to do so by the trial judge,
‘“Define the Great Line’ was an Underoath [band] album, and I
thought I’d throw that in there along with
A juror who was sitting in a tax evasion trial in Connecticut in
2011 and posted on
comments about ‘hang[ing]’
someone ahead of jury service, explained his online comments to the court as
all friend stuff’ and that he was ‘[j]ust joking,
joking around’.
During a rape trial in Massachusetts in 2001, a juror sent
multiple trial-related messages via an internet
The messages were
sent via email to a distribution list with over 900 subscribers. One of the
juror’s initial messages read,
‘stuck in a 7 day-long Jury Duty
rape/assault case ... missing important time in the gym ... Just say he’s
lets [sic] get on with our lives!’ Following the responses
received, the juror circulated a subsequent message which sought
those earlier comments, ‘[p]lease understand I was joking ... and do not
take my quote “Just call him guilty
so I can get back in the gym”
(or something like that) seriously ... I should really watch it next time, I got
a 2 page letter
from “Ann” because she took me toooooo
seriously.’
In Western Australia in 2012, the trial judge on an upcoming
manslaughter trial in Bunbury considered trial-related material that
published on social media in the context of an application to relocate the
trial. The court described the online material
us[ing] strong and expletive-filled language to refer to the accused and to
express views regarding her guilt. Some of them also express
negative views
physical harm to the accused and
another expresses a similar view in regards to
defence counsel.
Despite this characterisation, the court held:
The nature of the Internet is that it now records indefinitely what might
once have been transient and ill-considered statements said
in the heat of the
moment. Such statements should not necessarily be seen as any expression of real
intent. The postings were made
on personal Facebook pages and were clearly
intended for a group of friends and not as public statements. Foolish,
exaggerated or
emotional comments made between friends should not be taken out
of context.
A vivid example of just how detached the social media realm is
from traditional notions of communications and interactions, was presented
2009 in Maryland when five jurors became
and were discussing the trial on
excluding the other jurors.
After the presiding judge made enquiries into the matter, one of the jurors
posted on his
page, ‘F--- the Judge’. When the judge
asked the juror about this post, the juror simply replied: ‘Hey Judge,
just Facebook
Courts have considered the significance of
friendships when it comes to jurors. In Kentucky in 2012, two jurors sitting in
a murder trial were found to be
friends with the
deceased’s mother, whose
page contained information about
her daughter’s death.
The Court held that
friendships ‘do not necessarily carry
the same weight as true friendships or relationships in the community ... [s]ome
like the victim’s mother, have thousands of Facebook friends, and
the nature of each friendship varies greatly, from passing
acquaintanceships ...
to close friends and family’. The Court continued: ‘Facebook allows
only one binary choice between
two individuals where they either are
“friends” or are not “friends”, with no status in
between’; what
matters is the actual nature of the
friendship.
Jurors are not
A juror who sat on the recent high profile ‘
murder trial in New York, spoke to media after the
completion of the trial and, in the course of alleging that at least five jurors
were aware of prejudicial inadmissible evidence against Guzman that was
published by the media, namely allegations of drugging and
sexually assaulting
complainants as young as 13 years old, he stated, ‘[t]hat didn’t
change nobody’s mind for sure.
We weren’t really hung up on that. It
was like a five-minute talk and that’s it, no more talking about
The fact that jurors are likely to have an inflated belief
further highlights the difficulties which confront judicial inquiry into juror
misconduct.
The recent South Australian Court of Criminal Appeal case of
R v Catalano
considered the approach of the trial judge upon discovering juror misconduct in
the ‘old fashioned’ form of a juror attending
at a crime scene to
take photographs of lighting and then discussing his findings with three fellow
jurors. After dismissing the
offending juror, the trial judge asked the other
jurors whether ‘they would be able to put the information ... out of their
mind and remove it from [their]
subconscious.’
jurors answered that they could and the trial judge was satisfied to continue
with them as jurors. Upon appeal, the Court stated:
The jurors’ commitment to their duty can only be commended and it could
not be doubted that they would have tried their level
best. However, unlike the
judge, I am not satisfied that when discussion in the jury room turned to ...
[lighting at the scene] ...
they could have exercised such discipline over their
minds so as to stop their thoughts turning to the conversation with [the
juror]. The human mind has no inherent capacity to compartmentalise
information according to its source. When viewing exhibit[s]
..., when listening
to, or joining in, [relevant] discussion in the jury room ... the conversations
with ... [the offending juror]
will in all likelihood have crossed their minds.
Unlike judges, jurors do not have written reasons for their verdicts. They are
practiced in the discipline of ensuring that a factual finding is supported
by, and only by, admissible
juror/s – ‘
In Tasmania, the court has the power to discharge a juror during
the court suspects on reasonable grounds that the juror may
not be able to consider the case
impartially.
A criminal trial
may continue to verdict with a minimum of 10
Similar provisions
exist in other Australian
jury (mistrial) – ‘:(’
In Tasmania, there is also the option for the court to
discharge a jury without giving a verdict if it is expedient to do so in the
interests of justice.
The option of discharging a jury and thereby declaring a mistrial is an
option of last resort. It is described as a ‘nuclear
A mistrial is
a very costly exercise in both time and money, not to mention the effect on the
complainant/s and other civilian witnesses,
whose involvement in the trial can
be a particularly traumatic experience. Such witnesses may be compelled to
testify again.
the trial has completed – ‘
When juror misconduct is alleged for the first time once a
verdict has been delivered and the jury discharged, the avenue for
investigation/inquiry
and redress, if need be, exists in the criminal appeal
The Court of Criminal Appeal has a statutory power to authorise
an investigation or inquiry into the deliberations of a jury and to
evidence in relation to their conduct, including by disclosures from one of
their number.
traditionally, courts have been reluctant to exercise this power or to receive
such evidence. This is because of the principle
that jury deliberations should,
as far as possible, remain confidential. The exception is evidence of
‘extrinsic’ matters,
that is, evidence that may prove juror
misconduct without revealing jury deliberations.
The appeal court will view juror misconduct in the context of a
procedural irregularity at first instance. A finding on appeal that
been an irregularity in the form of juror misconduct will not necessarily lead
to a verdict of guilt being set aside. The
court must be satisfied that there
has been a miscarriage of justice before an appeal is allowed and a verdict is
irregularity to constitute a miscarriage of justice, it must comprise a
‘material irregularity’. This means that
it must have an impact upon
the trial process of such an order that it results in the accused being deprived
of a fair trial.
In the usual course, an appeal court will not inquire into the
effect of the irregularity
upon the jury’s verdict
but will determine the materiality of the influence according to whether the
court considers it was
objectively capable of affecting the verdict. Generally,
the verdict
be set aside
the court is satisfied that
the same verdict would have been returned had the irregularity not been
(deterrence)
Contempt of
At common law, the law of contempt has developed to prevent
and/or punish conduct that interferes with the administration of
Juror misconduct
that compromises an accused’s right to a fair trial will interfere with
the proper administration of justice.
There has been a recent movement in Australia to codify the law
of contempt as it applies to jurors, with a focus on creating specific
provisions. These provisions identify problematic juror conduct, which would
constitute contempt at common law, and make
it the subject of a stand-alone
statutory offence.
Specific offence
In Tasmania, it is an offence for:
• A person to publish, or cause to be published, any statement made,
opinion expressed, argument advanced or vote cast in the
course of the
deliberations of a jury;
• A juror to disclose any statement made, opinion expressed, argument
advanced or vote cast in the course of the deliberations
of a jury during the
course of a trial (except in the course of deliberations with another juror in
that trial).
Similar specific offence provisions exist in other Australian
provisions are potentially applicable to jurors’ ‘
information
uses of the internet/social media, if the content makes
express mention of jury deliberations.
However, there is no legislation in Tasmania proscribing juror
misuse of social media and other internet platforms during criminal
contrary to judicial directions. Instead, this is dealt with by the law of
does anyone else?
In contrast, in New South Wales, Queensland and Victoria,
specific statutory offences target ‘
information in
juror misconduct, making particular mention of use of the internet.
New South Wales
New South Wales has enacted legislation that prohibits jurors
making inquiries ‘for the purpose of obtaining information about
accused or any matters relevant to the
The definition
of ‘making an inquiry’ includes: ‘conducting any research, for
example, by searching an electronic
the internet)’.
offence is punishable by a maximum penalty of 50 penalty units or imprisonment
for two years, or both.
Significantly, juror misconduct under these provisions triggers
mandatory discharge of the offending
In Queensland, there is a similar statutory provision which
makes it an offence for ‘a juror ... [to] inquire about the defendant
the trial’.
provision defines ‘inquire’ as including: ‘search of an
electronic database for information, for example,
by using the internet’
and ‘cause someone else to
The maximum
penalty for this offence is two years imprisonment.
Similarly, in Victoria, legislation prohibits a juror or a
member of a jury panel from making ‘an enquiry for the purpose of
obtaining information about a party to the trial or any matter relevant to the
prohibition includes ‘using the internet to search an electronic database
for information.’
offence is punishable by 120 penalty
In practice
practice, very few cases of juror misconduct are prosecuted, either under the
common law of contempt or under legislated offences.
Commentators have
identified an apparent ‘reluctance’ on the part of the courts to
refer cases of juror misconduct for
prosecution.
explanations for this approach include:
• a hesitation to punish jurors in circumstances where they are
genuinely attempting to fulfil their duties as a juror to the
best of their
ability (ie, in cases of inadvertent or misguided misconduct);
• the fact that jury service is a civic responsibility and jurors
should be encouraged and supported in this role;
• juror misconduct of this kind may, in fact, reflect shortcomings on
the part of the court and the trial judge (by, for example,
failing to equip lay
persons adequately for jury service);
• a perception that if jurors are liable to punishment for misconduct
of this kind, they might be less likely to report misconduct
on the part of
their fellow jurors, and/or they may be less likely to self-report
misconduct;
• the prospect of liability to criminal punishment may deter members of
the public from undertaking jury service.
question and
Respondents were asked the following questions about
punishment for jurors who use social media and/or the internet inappropriately
during a criminal trial:
Question 13
(a) Should jurors be punished for using social media and other internet
platforms inappropriately during criminal trials?
(b) If so, would legislative codification of applicable common law contempt
laws assist in dealing with jurors for misconduct of this
Of the respondents who thought that
jurors should be
punished for using social media and other internet platforms inappropriately
during criminal trials, nearly all believed
that such punishment should be
reserved for a select few cases.
For example, Daryl Coates SC, Director of Public Prosecutions
(Tas), submitted:
In some limited circumstances it may be appropriate for jurors to be punished
for using social media and other internet platforms
inappropriately pre and post
trial or committing other offences under the
Juries Act 2003
for the reasons set out ... [at [
above], a juror should only be punished in circumstances where the contravention
is serious and/or has caused some real (and not
perceived) prejudice to the fair
His Honour Justice Pearce similarly suggested: ‘[i]t
depends on the nature and gravity of the breach, and the effect of
Dr David Plater, Deputy Director of the South Australian Law
Reform Institute, was of the view that:
Jurors are performing a vital civic role and they should not be punished with
the full force of the criminal law for simply doing
their duty as they may
perceive it. The criminal law and sanctions such as specific online offences or
use of contempt of court is
a blunt instrument to deal with a complex problem.
Many jurors [who impermissibly use social media and/or the internet] ... are
and honestly trying their best to reach a considered verdict as they
perceive it ... Jurors should in an appropriate case be punished
misconduct but this should be employed as a last resort for the most blatant and
egregious misconduct. It should not be
the primary
The respondents who agreed that jurors should be punished in
select circumstances, offered varied opinions as to the appropriate
Daryl Coates SC suggested the following amendments to the
offence provisions contained within the
Juries Act 2003
• The Act does not prohibit making inquiries, including on the
internet, about any matters relevant to the trial. The provisions
(NSW) provide a good guide as to what is required [eg]
that Act ... I am of the view that this section should include specific
reference to
obtaining information about any witness.
• The definition of
prohibited matter
could be reviewed ... the
definition could be extended to capture ‘how a juror, or the jury, formed
any opinion or conclusion
in relation to an issue arising in the trial
...’ (the wording of
s 68B(1)(b)
Jury Act 1977
(NSW)). The
current definition does not expressly refer to a juror’s own opinion if
that opinion was not expressed during deliberations.
• Consideration could be given to
... Ultimately this is a
policy issue, but if the intention is to prohibit disclosure of a prohibited
at any time
any purpose
(except for the exceptions
provided in subsection (6)) consideration should be given to removing the words
published to the public
For example, the equivalent
provision in the
Jury Act 1977
(NSW) is ...
Jim Connolly, Sherriff of Tasmania, submitted that because
Juries Act 2003
(Tas)] provides for misconduct
... [c]odification of [the] common law is not
necessary.’
Plater, stated: ‘the idea of specific offences for errant misconduct is
sound but again such offences should be reserved
for the most blatant
misconduct.’
The majority of respondents, however, were much more focussed
on the shortcomings of punitive measures. Respondents highlighted the
jury service was already an ‘onerous task, [which we] want to encourage
[and jurors are] already
reluctant’.
Justice Pearce stated: ‘I would regard it as ineffective to control
compliance by threatening jurors with punishment,
which may also discourage
reporting of breach[es] by other
Dr Braun stated:
It is highly questionable whether such laws will have an impact on jurors in
practice. Jurors can only be punished where social media
use is detected ...
detection of violations will likely occur infrequently [and, therefore] few
convictions can be expected from
the introduction of the new legislation. Penal
legislation may therefore have a very limited deterring effect on jurors in
In addition, risks can be attributed to penalizing jurors’
social media use during criminal trials. The introduction of penalties
social media use may make jury service unattractive to potential jurors ... The
criminalization of jurors’ social media
use appears to offer limited
benefits while risks remain. Specifically penalizing this conduct is therefore
overall undesirable.
Professor Jill Hunter also commented on this matter:
No, there is a natural reluctance on the part of the court to engage in
investigations of jury misconduct let alone criminal sanction.
It would be
already under the
to disclose information and a contempt of
court to breach the oath/affirmation they have made to decide the case according
evidence. The threat of sanction is a more effective tool than sanction
itself in these circumstances. An understanding of the cost
and effect of a
mistrial would also be helpful as an illustration of the seriousness of
misconduct.
I have seen no evidence to support incorporating a criminalising or shaming
approach to meeting the problem. Both just send the problem
underground, or
catch the odd misguided miscreant (which is not the place for the criminal law,
or for public shaming).
Many respondents used interstate examples to highlight their
concerns about the general deterrent effect of specific offence provisions,
particularly s 68C the
Jury Act 1977
(NSW). Johnston et al,
[Punitive measures] only provides a way of addressing past misconduct, unless
such legislation can be seen as having a deterrent effect.
In this respect it is
notable that, although some states have introduced criminal penalties for juror
misconduct that involves contravening
‘not research’ instructions,
instances of inappropriate use by jurors of Internet and social media have
continued to
occur. This suggests that the criminalisation of this type of juror
misconduct may not have had any significant deterrent
Relevantly, Professor Hunter made the following observation
Notably, and despite
, the flow of cases where jurors have engaged in
private enquiry in New South Wales has continued ... That there have been no
prosecutions
in New South Wales under
since it was introduced in late
2004 suggests that the provision may be serving a largely symbolic role on the
statute books.
It is recommended that a review of the benefits of
Jury Act 1977
(NSW) be undertaken to determine whether the goals of criminalising juror
misconduct can be better achieved by other
Johnston et al recommended a conservative approach in
circumstances where there are many new (and soon to be) developments in other
Our submission would be to evaluate how successful the Jury Acts in other
Australian states have been, and whether communication to
jurors about sanctions
should be more clearly spelled out. Following this, it would be prudent to
evaluate international developments,
such as in New Zealand, to determine their
success. ...
New Zealand is moving to codifying the law of contempt, with the Bill
currently in its third reading. It notes: ‘The Bill would
the law of contempt by shifting it into a new
The prosecution and punishment of jurors who have engaged in
misconduct via social media and/or the internet should be limited to
few cases. The Institute agrees with the majority of respondents that this
should occur in only the most egregious cases
of intentional juror misconduct of
this kind. In light of this view, the Institute believes that the current
contempt laws, as supplemented
by the existing offence provisions within the
Juries Act 2003
(Tas), are adequate for the small role that punitive
measures ought to play in addressing this issue. It does not warrant
codification
of these contempt laws in the form of additional specific offence
provisions that address the internet and/or social media, particularly
effect of such measures in other jurisdictions that have adopted this approach
remains to be seen. Moreover, as highlighted
by many respondents, the deterrent
effect of punitive measures must be doubted in circumstances where much juror
misconduct of this
kind is not deliberate and intentional, but rather the
product of a lack of understanding and/or inadvertence.
Further, the Institute believes
that any attempt to settle upon offence provisions which reflect the full range
of possible conduct
that may amount to juror misconduct of this kind is
problematic. The same problems arise as when trial judges attempt to make a
comprehensive
list of prohibited internet and social media platforms as well as
prohibited activity in trial directions: these change with such
frequency it is
impossible to remain
Recommendation 4
The Institute does not recommend any reforms to current laws. The current
contempt laws, as supplemented by the existing offence provisions
Juries Act 2003
(Tas), are adequate for the small role that punitive
measures ought to play in addressing this issue.
Additional offence provisions that specifically address jurors’ use of
the internet and/or social media should not be introduced.
The preferred strategy to address juror misconduct of this kind is to focus
on juror education.
Judge Alone
The scope of this reference states:
This report adopts a practical and realistic approach. It does not purport to
advocate for fundamental change to the criminal justice
system in Tasmania, such
as the discarding of trial by jury for serious offences and/or the introduction
of trial by judge alone
as a rational response to juror misconduct of this
However, it is to be noted that some respondents to the
consultation on this issue advocated for the introduction of trial by judge
alone as an alternative to trial by jury and/or, took the opportunity to make
comment on trial by judge alone as a possible alternative
to jury trials in
In this regard, the Australian Lawyers Alliance stated:
The ALA notes the lack of any mechanism under the Criminal Code whereby a
defendant may elect to be tried by judge alone. The availability
mechanism is critical in relatively high-profile cases where the extent of
social media comment may be such that the defendant
is at a greater risk of not
receiving a fair trial.
Such judge alone trials have proven effective in cases such as the murder
trial of Lloyd Rayney in Western Australian in 2012. A judge-alone
currently sitting in respect of Bradley Robert Edwards for a sequence of alleged
murders in 1996–1997. It is difficult
to imagine that Susan Neill-Fraser
could ever receive a fair trial by a Tasmanian jury if her appeal presently came
before the Supreme
Court were to
Dr David Plater, Deputy Director of the South Australian Law
Reform Institute, submitted:
Tasmania does not have the option of trial by judge alone. This may be a
prudent alternative in cases where there is a fear of intractable
prejudicial
online material. Judges are not infallible but trial by judge alone may be a
preferable alternative option. There could
be an option of allowing an accused,
as in South Australia, to opt for trial by judge alone.
[There is a] bill presently before WA Legislative Council ... This law has
real value. Such a law exists in South Australia ... not
undermining the
venerated institution of trial by jury. Mr McCusker QC, a former WA judge and
Governor, has supported the WA bill
and has been publicly reported as
highlighting its benefits in high profile sensational trials ... or what he sees
as the now routine
use of social media by jurors ... undermining jury
impartiality.
Dr Braun of the University of Southern Queensland,
Due to the great importance of social media to some in society including jury
members, existing approaches to tackling the problem
may not have the desired
result in practice. It is on this basis that more fundamental change to the
criminal justice system in Tasmania,
including, for example, the option for
judge-alone trials in high profile criminal cases, may be required to effect
real change.
Finally, various members of the Tasmanian legal profession also
commented on the topic of possible legislative reform to introduce
judge alone in Tasmania. They advised the Institute that it had ‘already
taken five years of discussions and [has
progressed] nowhere ... [There was] a
meeting five years ago, including the DPP, [and those involved] couldn’t
decide form,
what type of case/test/election or discretion, who gets to choose,
[we are] no closer to mechanism for trial by judge alone [in
Tasmania].’
The Institutes notes these submissions, which advocate, or
otherwise raise the possibility, of trial by judge alone being introduced
Tasmania. The risk of jurors’ inappropriately using social media and other
internet platforms during criminal trials is
but one consideration which may
militate in favour of trial by judge alone being made available, in addition to
a trial by jury,
for indictable offences in Tasmania.
However, the Institute identifies juror education as the
preferred strategy and as an immediate and practical measure to address the
issue of juror misconduct of this kind. Although the Institute recognises that
juror misconduct of this kind remains, as tempered
by these measures, but one of
the issues of the contemporary trial by jury that may be remedied by the
availability of an alternative
of trial by judge alone.
by Jury – ‘
The High Court in
Brownlee v The Queen
, commented
One of the most significant aspects of the history of trial by jury before,
and up to, the time of Federation is that it shows that
the incidents of the
procedure never have been immutable; they are constantly
At that time, the Court reasoned ‘because the danger
itself changes with varying social conditions and methods of
communication’.
Similarly, extra curially, in 1998, in a speech entitled
‘Speaking to a Modern Jury’, the Honourable Michael Kirby concluded:
At the close of a millennium, it is appropriate to reflect upon the enduring
capacity of the jury of citizens to adapt and change
and still to be resilient.
The advocate and the judiciary will adapt and change in order to fulfil their
tasks, so important to a
free society. Whilst juries remain part of the court
system, it will be the duty and privilege of advocates and judges to speak to
them. It will surely not be beyond the skills of advocates and judges of today
to adapt to the changes ... But the beginning of wisdom
is the recognition of
the need for change and of its
The apparent focus of any discussion about jurors
inappropriately using social media and/or the internet during criminal trials is
limited to, or at least focussed on, the more well-known ‘
information
scenario of the
errant juror conducting online
. It demonstrates a widely held misconception that juror misconduct
of this kind is confined to intentional and defiant ‘
information
’ uses of the internet.
In fact, the full breadth of possible juror misconduct of this
the internet
information in
information out
’ uses of social media and/or the
internet; and
• It may be the product of inadvertence
jurors who believe they are doing the
right thing
The relevant ‘danger’ has, indeed, changed.
’: Where to from here?
There is a clearly identifiable shortcoming in the way in which
this phenomenon is currently viewed and addressed. It extends to fundamental
preventative measures such as juror education. It follows that the
Institute’s preferred strategy to address juror misconduct
of this kind is
to focus on updating and improving juror education in the first instance as an
immediate and practical measure.
The response cannot and should not consist of any single
measure, but rather a suite of measures that form an overall strategy. This
reflected in recommendations one and two, which, inter alia
that pre-empanelment juror training/information resources are reviewed and
updated, and model jury directions are introduced.
Neither recommendation should be viewed in isolation.
Pre-empanelment training/information should serve as a foundation for subsequent
information provided by the trial judge in post empanelment directions. Both
measures should be developed together to ensure consistency
in terminology and
expression. Fundamental obligations of ‘
impartiality
according to the evidence
’ need to be dissected and
explained in a way that goes beyond abstract notions of
‘fairness’/‘a fair trial’/‘fairness
accused’ so that jurors can fully grasp the potential implications of
information in
information out
uses of social media and other internet platforms in the context of a criminal
In recommendations one and two, the Institute highlights the
importance of periodic review to ensure that the subject technology and
of that technology are up to date. One can envisage that further technological
advancements will present similar challenges
to the relevance and effectiveness
of directions to jurors and juror education strategies if they are not monitored
and updated in
a timely fashion.
posed by the Institute’s Issues Paper, released 21 August 2019
What is your experience of jurors using social media and/or other internet
platforms during a criminal trial?
Based on your experience, what is your assessment of the prevalence of
jurors’ inappropriate use of social media and/or other
internet platforms
during criminal jury trials?
Do you think that such conduct is confined largely to high profile cases
which have a high level of media coverage and community interest?
also present in a wider range of criminal trials?
Based on your experience, what do you think causes and/or motivates jurors to
use social media and/or other internet platforms inappropriately
criminal trial?
(a) What can and should be done by way of controlling prejudicial material
that is potentially available to jurors on the internet
and social media
platforms at the pre-trial stage?
(b) Whose obligation should it be to attend to these pre-emptive and
precautionary pre-trial measures?
(a) How can pre-empanelment juror information/training be improved in
(b) What can be learned from other jurisdictions?
(c) Should pre-empanelment juror information/training expressly address
social media?
(d) Should pre-empanelment juror information/training specifically cover both
‘information in’ and ‘information
out’ uses of the
internet/social media?
(e) Should pre-empanelment juror information/training provide an explanation
of the rationale behind the restrictions in social media/internet
(a) Could/should the juror oath/affirmation and its surrounding procedure be
employed to assist in preventing jurors inappropriately
using social media
during trials?
(b) If so, how might this be achieved?
(a) Should ‘standard’ directions to jurors, similar to those
used in New South Wales and Victoria, regarding the internet
and social media be
adopted in Tasmania as a matter of course?
(b) What should these directions include?
(i) Specific mention of social media;
(ii) A comprehensive list of prohibited internet and social media
platforms as well as prohibited activity (‘
information in
information out
(iii) Explanations for the internet/social media restrictions;
(iv) Warnings about personal consequences for juror misconduct;
(v) Reminders to jurors of their obligation to report irregularities;
(vi) Repetition; and/or
(vii) Written directions.
(c) Could/should the underlying knowledge and understanding of the internet
and social media on the part of the judiciary be improved?
If so, how?
(a) How effective is the practice of taking mobile phones and other
electronic devices away from jurors during the trial and deliberations?
(b) Is it a practice that should continue?
Question 10
(a) Should juror assurances regarding their impartiality and compliance with
judicial directions be accepted at face value?
(b) Should counsel make pre-trial enquiries of jurors’ internet and
social media presence and/or monitor jurors’ internet
and social media
activity during the course of a trial to ensure the veracity of juror assurances
in this respect?
Question 11
(a) When jurors sit in more than one trial during their summonsed period,
does such ‘experience’ make them better jurors?
If so, how?
(b) Are jurors who are empanelled for a second and/or subsequent time less
likely to engage in juror misconduct by inappropriately
internet/social media? If so, why?
(c) What influence, if any, do you think that jurors who sit in second and/or
subsequent trials have on their fellow first-time jurors?
Question 12
(a) How can the efficacy of juror reporting of fellow juror misconduct be
supported and/or improved?
(b) Is public awareness of juror misconduct a viable option for increasing
juror accountability (ie enlisting jurors’ online
‘friends’ to
report juror misconduct they observe on the internet/social media)?
Question 13
(a) Should jurors be punished for using social media and other internet
platforms inappropriately during criminal trials?
(b) If so, would legislative codification of applicable common law contempt
laws assist in dealing with jurors for misconduct of this
Submissions – ‘
User-generated content
The institute received written submissions from the following
respondents:
1. Australian Lawyers Alliance, authored by
Tasmanian President and Director, Fabiano Cangelosi (Tas)
2. Professor Lorana Bartels, Criminology Program Leader/Lecturer, Australian
National University Centre for Social Research and Methods
3. William Boucaut QC, Barrister, Len King Chambers (SA)
4. Dr Kerstin Braun, Senior Lecturer, School of Law and Justice, University
of Southern Queensland (Qld)
5. Daryl Coates SC, Director of Public Prosecutions, Tasmania (Tas)
6. Community Legal Centres Tasmania, authored by Ben Bartl (Tas)
7. Jim Connolly, Sheriff of Tasmania, Supreme Court of Tasmania
8. Rachael Hews, Director Postgraduate Programs (Acting)/Lecturer/PhD
candidate, Queensland University of Technology (Qld)
9. Professor Jill Hunter, University of New South Wales (NSW)
10. Associate Professor Jane Johnston, The University of Queensland (Qld);
Adjunct Professor Anne Wallace, La Trobe University (Vic);
and Professor Patrick
Keyzer, La Trobe University (Vic)
11. The Law Society of Tasmania, authored by Evan Hughes, President of The
Law Society of Tasmania (Tas)
12. The Legal Aid Commission of Tasmania (Tas)
13. Dr David Plater, Deputy Director, South Australian Law Reform
Institute/Senior Lecturer, School of Law, University of Adelaide
14. The Honourable Justice Robert Pearce, Supreme Court of Tasmania (Tas)
The Institute received verbal submissions from the following respondents:
15. Kim Baumeler, Barrister, Liverpool Chambers (Tas)
16. Sarah Lucas, Solicitor, Craig Rainbird Barristers and Solicitors
17. Philippa Morgan, Barrister, Liverpool Chambers (Tas)
18. Lizzie Phillips, Solicitor, Craig Rainbird Barristers and Solicitors
19. Garth Stevens, Barrister, Liverpool Chambers (Tas)
20. Philippa Willshire, Barrister/Solicitor (Tas)
The Institute also received a number of anonymous verbal submissions:
21. Various (Tas)
The Institute received one confidential written submission.
from the ACT ‘Jury
NOW YOU ARE ON THE JURY
Jurors promise to give their verdict/s according to the evidence. This means
that you should not discuss the case with anyone, even
with members of your
family, and you should not allow anyone to discuss the case with you, except
fellow members of the jury.
Also, you must not make any enquiries or conduct any research of your own on
matters relating to the trial. Do not make searches on
line or visit any place
relevant to the case.
While you are on the jury, you should minimise your use of social media such
as Facebook and, if you are using social media, you must
avoid any mention of
If another member of the jury indicates that he or she has information about
the case obtained in breach of these rules, you should
make a note and hand it
to the Sheriff’s officer, who will refer the issue to the judge. ...
CONFIDENTIALITY AND SOCIAL MEDIA
Juror Privacy
It is an offence to reveal information that identifies, or is likely to
identify a person as a juror in a particular trial. This includes
identifying
yourself as a juror in a trial.
Juries Act 1967
, at section 42C, states that you must not
disclose this sort of information if you are aware that, as a consequence of
your disclosure,
“the information will, or is likely to be,
published”. In this situation, ‘published’ means communicated
or disseminated “in such a way or to such an extent that it is available
to, or likely to come to the notice of, the public
or a section of the
public”. In other words, no one, including the media, is allowed to
broadcast or print information about
the identity of jurors during the trial.
If you are asked to provide that sort of information to anyone whom you
suspect may want to broadcast or print it, or disseminate
it in any other way to
the public, or a sector of the public, you should not provide that information
to them, or you will have committed
an offence.
If you are approached in such a way, you should report the matter immediately
to one of the Sheriff’s officers because whoever
asked you for that
information under those circumstances may have committed an offence.
Jury Deliberations
The law on revealing jury deliberations is also strict. Both during and after
the trial, it is an offence to disclose the deliberations
of the jury to anyone
whom you think may want to broadcast or print that information.
‘Deliberations’ includes any statements made, any opinions
expressed, any arguments advanced, or any votes cast by members
of the jury in
the course of their deliberations.
There are some exceptions to this. The main exception is where something is
said by a juror or jurors in open court. That information
can be disclosed,
subject to any other non-disclosure orders in place regarding that information.
You are also allowed to disclose jury deliberations and identities to a
Commission of Inquiry or the Director of Public Prosecutions,
in the unlikely
event that there is an inquiry into the conduct of a juror or jurors in that
trial, or if someone is authorised by
the Attorney-General of the ACT to carry
out legitimate research into jury matters.
The Use of Social Media
Both during the trial and afterwards, care must be taken when using social
media sites such as Facebook and Twitter.
If you have any concerns regarding the use of social media in the context of
a jury trial, please speak with a Sheriff’s officer
or to the Jury
Management Unit who will be able to assist you.
Excerpts from opening directions in
Marshall and Richardson v Tasmania
(2016) 264 A Crim R 448, [71].
‘Now, at this stage you have heard me emphasise a number of times to
you that your verdict must be based on the evidence and
what the evidence is and
the sort of evidence that you might hear whether it’s sworn evidence or
items the witnesses may produce.
I want to elaborate on that just a little
further. A jury’s verdict must be based on the evidence and nothing
This means no other information source. Of course in our day-to-day lives we
are all used to having access to a range of information
sources such as the
internet. Juries must not have access to any other information source other than
the evidence on the trial. There
have been cases where there has been a mistrial
because a member of the jury has accessed the internet for example or another
information
I’ll pause to give you an example of what would be impermissible.
Let’s say it was a dangerous driving case and there
was a question which
came up in the trial about whether a particular street intersected with another
street, say, Russell Street
or whatever the case may be. The jury’s
decision in that particular trial would have to be based on the evidence and
The jury in that case would not be permitted to undertake any of their own
inquiries. So for example they couldn’t go to the
scene or ask someone
access Google maps for example
to do that. That’s the case no matter how
unimportant it may seem. It’s absolutely critical that the jury’s
in every case are based on the evidence and nothing else.
So important to avoid any other information source and effectively quarantine
yourselves so that your verdict, your consideration
of this matter is based just
on the evidence in this trial.’
from summing up in
Marshall and Richardson v Tasmania
(2016) 264 A
Crim R 448, [70].
‘As I’ve said to you during the course of the trial, if anyone
makes a comment to you about the case outside the courtroom
then you must
completely disregard that, completely ignore that, and any media reporting must
also be ignored by you.’
from the NSW Judicial Commission’s ‘Criminal Trial Courts Bench
Suggested (oral) directions for the opening of the trial following
empanelment
Serving on a jury may be a completely new experience for some, if not all, of
you. It is therefore appropriate for me to explain a
number of matters to you.
During the course of the trial I will remind you of some of these matters if
they assume particular importance
and I will give you further information if
Other sources of information for
Some of what I am about to say to you may sound familiar because it was
referred to in the DVD that you were shown earlier by the
officers. Some of it will also appear in [
a booklet/a document
will receive a little later.
There is a great deal of material that you are being asked to digest in a
short period but the more you hear it the more likely you
are to understand it
and retain it.
The charge(s)
It is alleged by the Crown that [
the accused
] committed the offence of
give details of offence
Name of the accused
referred to throughout the trial as ‘the accused’ as a matter of
convenience and only because [
] has been accused of committing an
] has pleaded ‘not guilty’, that is [
] has denied the allegation made by the Crown and it becomes your
responsibility, as the jury, to decide whether the Crown is able
that charge/those charges
] beyond reasonable doubt.
Where there are multiple charges,
It is alleged by the Crown that [
the accused
] committed a number of
offences. Those charges are being tried together as a matter of convenience.
However, you will, in due course,
be required to return a verdict in relation to
each of them. You will need to consider each charge separately. There is no
requirement that the verdicts must all be the same but this will become
more apparent when you and I are aware of the issues that
you have to
Where appropriate, add
You must not be prejudiced against the accused because [
facing a number of charges. [
The accused
] is to be treated as being not
guilty of any offence, unless and until [
] is proved guilty by your
evaluation of the evidence and applying the law that I will explain to you. The
charges are being tried
together merely because it is convenient to do so
because there is a connection between them. But that does not relieve you of
considering
the charges separately or the Crown of proving each of them beyond
reasonable doubt.
If there are any alternative charges,
The charges in counts [
indicate counts in indictment
] are said to be
in the alternative. What that means is that, if you find the accused to be not
guilty of the first of those charges,
you will then be asked to consider whether
] is guilty or not guilty of the alternative charge. If you find
the accused
] to be guilty of the first of those charges then you will
not be required to make a decision and return a verdict on the alternative
charge. I will say something more about this after the evidence has
Roles and functions
Later in the proceedings I will have more to say to you about our respective
roles and functions. From the outset, however, you should
understand that you
are the sole judges of the facts. In respect of all disputes about matters of
fact in this case, it will be you
and not I who will have to resolve them. In
part, that means that it is entirely up to you to decide what evidence is to be
and what evidence is to be rejected. For that reason you will need to
pay careful attention to each witness as he or she gives their
evidence. You
should not only listen to what the witnesses say but also watch them as they are
giving their evidence. How a witness
presents to you and how he or she responds
to questioning, especially in cross-examination, may assist you in deciding
not you accept what that witness was saying as truthful and reliable.
You are entitled to accept part of what a witness says and
reject other parts of
the evidence.
Each of you is to perform the function of a judge. You are the judges of the
facts and that means the verdict(s) will ultimately be
your decision. I have no
say in what evidence you accept or reject or what arguments and submissions of
counsel you find persuasive.
Nor do I decide what verdict or verdicts you give
in respect of the [charge/charges] before you. That is your responsibility and
you make that decision by determining what facts you find proved and by applying
the law that I will explain.
Of course I also have a role as a judge but, as you would probably have
assumed, I am the judge of the law. During the trial I am
required to ensure
that all the rules of procedure and evidence are followed. During the trial and
at the end of the evidence, I
will give you directions about the legal
principles that are relevant to the case and I will explain how they should be
you to the issues which you have to decide. I may be required by law
to warn you as to how you must approach certain types of evidence.
In performing
your function you must accept and apply the law that comes from me.
Legal argument
It may occur that during the trial a question of law or evidence will arise
for me to decide. I may need to hear submissions from
the lawyers representing
the parties before I make a decision. If that occurs, it is usually necessary
for the matter to be debated
in your absence. If that occurs you will be asked
to retire to the jury room. You should not think that this is so that
information
can be hidden from you. I assure you that any material that the
parties believe is necessary for you to reach your verdict(s) will
before you. The reason you are asked to leave the courtroom is simply to ensure
that counsel can be free to make submissions
to me on issues of law that do not
concern you. It is also to ensure that you are not distracted by legal issues so
that you can
concentrate on the evidence once I have made my ruling. It only
complicates your task if, for example, you were to hear about some
evidence that I ultimately decide is not relevant to the case. So, if a matter
of law does arise during the course of the
evidence, I ask for your patience and
understanding. I assure you that your absence from the courtroom will be kept to
the minimum
time necessary.
Introduction of lawyers
Let me introduce the lawyers to you. The barrister sitting [........] is the
Crown Prosecutor. In a criminal case, the Prosecutor
presents the charge(s) in
the name of the State, and on behalf of the community. That does not mean that
the prosecutor should be
treated any differently than defence counsel, simply
because of [
] function. The Crown’s arguments and
submissions made to you at the end of the trial should not be treated as more
simply because they are made on behalf of the State or the community.
They are no more than arguments presented to you by one of
the parties in these
proceedings and you can accept them or reject them based upon your evaluation of
their merit and how they accord
with your findings of fact based upon the
evidence. By tradition, the Crown Prosecutor is not referred to by
] personal name but as, in this case, [
] Crown. This
is to signify that the prosecutor is not acting in a personal capacity.
The barrister sitting [........] is [
name of defence counsel
] appears for [
the accused
], and will represent
] throughout the trial. Defence counsel will also ultimately put
arguments and submissions to you. Just as with the prosecutor you
should decide
them on their merits and as they accord with your view of the evidence.
Selection of
foreperson/representative
You have been told by my associate that
] you are required to choose a
foreperson/representative
]. That person’s role will simply be to
speak for all of you whenever you need to communicate with me. If your
foreperson/representative
] raises a question with me on the jury’s
behalf, it helps to maintain the anonymity of individual jurors. But any one of
is entitled to communicate with me in writing if necessary. The
foreperson/representative
] also announces your verdict(s) on behalf of
the jury as a whole. We do not require each juror to each give his or her
verdict(s).
But bear in mind that the [
foreperson/representative
not have any more functions or responsibilities than these. You are all equals
in the jury room. You all have the same entitlement
and responsibility in
discussing the evidence and ultimately deciding upon your verdict(s).
How you choose your [
foreperson/representative
] is entirely up to you.
There is no urgency to reach a final decision on that matter, and you can feel
free to change your [
foreperson/representative
] if you wish to do so at
any time. When you have chosen your [
foreperson/representative
she should sit in the front row of the jury box in the seat nearest to me and
that way I will know who you have chosen.
Queries about evidence or procedure
If you have any questions about the evidence or the procedure during the
trial, or you have any concerns whatsoever about the course
of the trial or what
is taking place, you should direct those questions or concerns to me, and only
to me. The Court officers attending
on you are there to provide for your general
needs, but are not there to answer questions about the trial itself. Should you
anything you wish to raise with me, or to ask me, please write a note and
give it to the officer. The note will be given to me and,
after I have discussed
it with counsel, I shall deal with the matter.
Note taking
You are perfectly entitled to make notes as the case progresses. Writing
materials will be made available to you. If you decide to
take notes, may I
suggest that you be careful not to allow note taking to distract you from your
primary task of absorbing the evidence
and assessing the witnesses. Do not try
to take down everything a witness says. It may be more significant to note your
to a particular witness as that may be significant in your later
assessment of the evidence. It may be important, for example, to
reaction of a witness in cross-examination. A note of how you found the witness,
for example whether you thought the witness
was trying to tell you the truth, or
was on the other hand being evasive, might be more important to recall during
your deliberations
than actually what the witness said.
This is because everything that is said in this courtroom is being recorded
so there is the facility to check any of the evidence
that you would like to be
reminded about. You should also bear in mind that after the evidence has been
presented you will hear closing
addresses from the lawyers and a summing-up from
me in which at least what the parties believe to be the more significant aspects
of the evidence will be reviewed. In that way you will be reminded of particular
parts of the evidence.
A transcript of the evidence of every witness will become available only a
daily basis. If you would like to have a copy of the transcript,
either of all
of the evidence, or just of the evidence of a particular witness, then you only
need to ask.
Where appropriate — prior media
If you have read or heard or have otherwise become aware of any publicity
of fundamental importance that you put any such publicity right out of your
minds. Remember that you have
each sworn an oath, or made an affirmation, to
decide this case solely upon the evidence presented here in this courtroom and
the basis of the legal directions I give to you. Before you were empanelled
I asked that any person who could not be objective in
their assessment of the
evidence to ask to be excused. None of you indicated that you had a problem in
that regard. You would be
disobeying your oath or affirmation if you were to
take into account, or allowed yourself to be influenced by, information that has
come to you from something you have read, seen or heard outside the
Media publicity during the trial
It may be that during the trial some report may appear in either the
newspapers or on the radio or television. You should pay no regard
reports whatsoever. They will obviously be limited to some particular matter
that is thought to be newsworthy by the journalist
or editor. It may be a matter
which is of little significance in light of the whole of the evidence and it may
have no importance
whatsoever in your ultimate deliberations. Often you will
find that these reports occur at the start of the trial and often refer
opening address of the prosecutor. They then tend to evaporate until the closing
addresses or the jury retires to deliberate.
Do not let any media reports
influence your view as to what is important or significant in the trial. Further
do not allow them to
lead you into a conversation with a friend or member of
your family about the trial.
The nature of a criminal trial
There are some directions I am required to give to you concerning your duties
and obligations as jurors but first let me explain a
little about a criminal
The overall issue is whether the Crown can prove the charge(s) alleged
the accused
]. The evidence placed before you on that issue is
under the control of the counsel of both parties. In our system of justice the
parties place evidence before the jury provided that it is relevant to the
questions of fact that you have to determine. The parties
decide what issues or
what facts are in dispute. I play no part in which witnesses are called. My task
is only to ensure that the
evidence is relevant: that is, to ensure that the
evidence is of some significance to the issues raised and the ultimate question
whether the Crown has proved the guilt of the accused. Usually there will be no
issue as to whether evidence is relevant but if a
dispute arises about it, that
is a matter I must determine as a question of law. Otherwise I have no part to
play in how the trial
is conducted, what evidence is placed before you or what
issues you are asked to resolve on the way to reaching a verdict.
Onus and standard of proof
The obligation is on the Crown to put evidence before a jury in order to
prove beyond reasonable doubt that [
the accused
] is guilty of the
charge/charges
] alleged against him/her. It is important that you bear
in mind throughout the trial and during the course of your deliberations
fundamental aspect of a criminal trial. The Crown must prove [
] guilt based upon the evidence it places before the jury.
The accused
] has no obligation to produce any evidence or to prove
anything at all at any stage in the trial. In particular [
the accused
does not have to prove that [
] did not commit the offence. [
] is presumed to be innocent of any wrongdoing until a jury is
satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that [
] guilt has been
established according to law. This does not mean that the Crown has to satisfy
you of its version of the facts wherever
some dispute arises. What is required
is that the Crown proves those facts that are essential to make out the
charge(s) and proves
those facts beyond reasonable doubt. These are sometimes
referred to as the essential facts or ingredients of the offence. You will
told shortly what the essential facts are in this particular case.
If known, note the particular issue(s) in dispute and what the Crown has
The expression ‘proved beyond reasonable doubt’ is ancient and
has been deeply ingrained in the criminal law of this State
for a very long
time. You have probably heard this expression before and the words mean exactly
what they say – proof beyond
reasonable doubt. This is the highest
standard of proof known to the law. It is not an expression that is usually
explained by trial
judges but it can be compared with the lower standard of
proof required in civil cases where matters need only be proved on what
called the balance of probabilities. The test in a criminal case is not whether
the accused is probably guilty. In a criminal
trial the Crown must prove the
accused’s guilt beyond reasonable doubt. Obviously a suspicion, even a
strong suspicion, that
the accused
] may be guilty is not enough. A
decision that [
the accused
] has probably committed the offence(s) also
falls short of what is required. Before you can find [
the accused
you must consider all the evidence placed before you, and ask yourself whether
you are satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt
that the Crown has made out its
The accused
] is entitled by law to the benefit of any reasonable
doubt that is left in your mind at the end of your deliberations.
Deciding the case only on the
It should be obvious from what I have just said that you are not here to
determine where the truth lies. You are not simply deciding
which version you
prefer: that offered by the Crown or that from the defence. You are not
investigating the incident giving rise
to the charge(s). You are being asked to
make a judgment or decision based upon the evidence that is placed before you.
Jurors might
in a particular case feel frustrated by what they see as a lack of
evidence or information about some particular aspect of the case
before them. In
some rare cases this has led jurors to make inquiries themselves to try and fill
in the gaps that they perceive in
the evidence. But that is not your function,
nor is it mine. If you or I did our own investigations that would result in a
miscarriage
of justice. Any verdict given, even if it was not actually affected
by those investigations, would be set aside by an appeal court.
result in a waste of your time and that of your fellow jurors, and lead to a
considerable expense to the community and
the parties.
You are judges deciding facts and ultimately whether [
] guilt has been proved beyond reasonable doubt based upon
what material is placed before you during the trial. You must understand
is absolutely forbidden that you make any inquiries on any subject matter
arising in the trial outside the courtroom. To
do so would be a breach of your
oath or affirmation, it would be unfair to both the Crown and the defence and
you would have committed
a criminal offence. If you felt that there was some
evidence or information missing, then you simply take that fact into account
deciding whether on the evidence that is before you the Crown have proved the
guilt of the accused beyond reasonable doubt.
Prohibition against making enquiries outside the
It is of fundamental importance that your decision in this trial is based
only upon what you hear and see in this courtroom: that
is; the evidence, the
addresses of counsel and what I say to you about the law. You must not, during
the course of the trial, make
any inquiries of your own or ask some other person
to make them on your behalf. In particular you are not to use any aid, such as
legal textbooks, to research any matter in connection with your role as a
It is a serious criminal offence for a member of the jury to make any inquiry
for the purpose of obtaining information about the accused,
or any other matter
relevant to the trial. It is so serious that it can be punished by imprisonment.
This prohibition continues from
the time the juror is empanelled until the juror
is discharged. It includes asking a question of any person other than a fellow
or me. It includes conducting any research using the internet.
If the judge considers it appropriate add
You should keep away from the internet and the other communication sources
which may pass comment upon the issues in this trial. You
may not communicate
with anyone about the case on your mobile phone, smart phone, through email,
text messaging, or on Twitter, through
any blog or website, any internet
chatroom, or by way of any other social networking websites including Facebook,
MySpace, LinkedIn
and YouTube. You should avoid any communication which may
expose you to other people’s opinions or views.]
You are not permitted to visit or inspect any place connected with the
incidents giving rise to the charge(s). You cannot conduct
any experiments. You
are not permitted to have someone else make those enquiries on your behalf.
Always keep steadily in your mind your function as a judge of the facts as I
have explained it to you. If you undertake any activity
in connection with your
role as a juror outside the court house, then you are performing a different
role. You have stopped being
an impartial judge and have become an investigator.
That is not a role that you are permitted to undertake. It would be unfair to
both the Crown and [
the accused
] to use any material obtained outside the
courtroom because the parties would not be aware of it and, therefore, would be
to test it or make submissions to you about it.
Further, the result of your inquiries could be to obtain information that was
misleading or entirely wrong. For example, you may come
across a statement of
the law or of some legal principle that is incorrect or not applicable in New
South Wales. The criminal law
is not the same throughout Australian
my function to tell you so much of the law as you need to apply in
order to decide the issues before you.
Discussing the case with others
You should not discuss the case with anyone except your fellow jurors and
only when you are all together in the jury room. This is
because a person with
whom you might speak to who is not a fellow juror would, perhaps unintentionally
make some comment or offer
some opinion on the nature of the charge or the
evidence which is of no value whatever. That person would not have the advantage
that you have of hearing the evidence first-hand, the addresses of counsel on
that evidence and the directions of law from me.
Any comment or opinion that might be offered to you by anyone who is not a
fellow juror might influence your thinking about the case,
perhaps not
consciously but subconsciously. Such a comment or opinion cannot assist you but
can only distract you from your proper
If anyone attempts to speak to you about the case at any stage of the trial
it is your duty to report that fact to me as soon as possible,
and you should
not mention it to any other member of the jury. I am not suggesting that this is
even remotely likely to happen in
this case but I mention it simply as a
precaution and it is a direction given to all jurors whatever the nature of the
I must bring to your attention that it is an offence for a juror during the
course of the trial to disclose to any person outside
the jury room information
conclusion on any issue
raised at the trial.
Bringing irregularities to the judge’s
If any of you learn that an impermissible enquiry had been made by another
juror or that another juror had engaged in discussions
with any person outside
the jury room, you must bring it to my attention. Similarly, if at any stage you
find material in the jury
room that is not an exhibit in the case, you should
notify me immediately.
The reason for bringing it to my attention as soon as possible is that,
unless it is known before the conclusion of the trial, there
is no opportunity
to fix the problem if it is possible to do so. If the problem is not immediately
addressed, it might cause the
trial to miscarry and result in the discharge of
the jury in order to avoid any real or apparent injustice.
Reporting other misconduct and irregularities
If any of you in the course of the trial suspect any irregularity in relation
to another juror’s membership of the jury, or
in relation to the
performance of another juror’s functions as a juror you should tell me
• the refusal of a juror to take part in the jury’s
deliberations, or
• a juror’s lack of capacity to take part in the trial (including
an inability to speak or comprehend English), or
• any misconduct as a juror, or
• a juror’s inability to be impartial because of the
juror’s familiarity with the witnesses or legal representatives
• a juror becoming disqualified from serving, or being ineligible to
serve, as a juror.
You also may tell the sheriff after the trial if you have suspicions about
any of the matters I have just described.
Breaks/personal issues/daily
It is not easy sitting there listening all day, so if at any stage you feel
like having a short break of say five minutes or so, then
let me know. Remember,
I do not want you to be distracted from your important job of listening to the
evidence. If you feel your
attention wandering and you are having trouble
focusing on what is happening in court then just raise your hand and ask me for
short break. I can guarantee that if you feel like a break out of the
courtroom, then others in the courtroom will too. So please
reluctant to ask for a break if you want one.
If you are too hot or too cold, or you cannot hear or understand a witness or
if you face any other distraction while in the courtroom
let me know so that I
can try to attend to the problem.
If any other difficulty of a personal nature arises then bring it to my
attention so that I can see if there is some solution. If
it is absolutely
necessary, the trial can be adjourned for a short time, so that a personal
problem can be addressed.
However, it is important that you understand the obligation to attend every
day the trial proceedings at the time indicated to you.
If a juror cannot attend
for whatever reason then the trial cannot proceed. We do not sit with a juror
missing because of illness
or misadventure. Of course there is no point
attending if you are too ill to be able to sit and concentrate on the evidence
there is an important matter that arises in your personal life. But you
should understand that by not attending the whole trial stops
for the time you
are absent, which will result in a significant cost and inconvenience to the
parties and your fellow jurors.
Outline of the trial
Shortly I will ask the Crown Prosecutor to outline the prosecution case by
indicating the facts that the Crown has to prove and the
evidence that will be
called on behalf of the Crown for that purpose. This is simply so that you have
some understanding of the evidence
as it is called in the context of the Crown
case as a whole. What the Crown says is not evidence and is merely an indication
it is anticipated the evidence will establish.
If there is to be a defence opening add
I shall then ask [
defence counsel
] to respond to the matters raised by
the Crown opening. The purpose of this address is to indicate what issues are in
dispute and
briefly the defence answer to the prosecution’s allegations.
Neither counsel will be placing any arguments before you at this
stage of the
Then the evidence will be led by way of witnesses giving testimony in the
witness box. There may also be documents, photographs and
other material that
become exhibits in the trial.
At the end of all of the evidence both counsel will address you by way of
argument and submissions based upon the evidence. You will
hear from the Crown
first and then the defence.
I will then sum up to you by reminding you of the law that you have to apply
during your deliberations and setting out the issues
that you will need to
consider before you can reach your verdict(s).
You will then be asked to retire to consider your verdict(s). You will be
left alone in the jury room with the exhibits to go about
your deliberations in
any way you choose to do so. If your deliberations last for more than a day then
you will be allowed to go
require jurors to be kept together throughout their deliberations by placing
them in a hotel as used to be the case some time ago.
When you have reached your verdict(s) you will let me know. You will then be
brought into the courtroom and your [
foreperson/representative
] will give
the verdict(s) on behalf of the whole jury. That will complete your functions
and you will then be excused from further
attendance.
Excerpts from the Judicial College of Victoria’s ‘Criminal
– Introductory Remarks
1. A number of studies into the jury system have suggested that it is highly
beneficial for the judge to provide the jury with information
at the beginning
of a trial, to assist them in performing their role.[1]
2. It is suggested that “the process of being empanelled as a member of
the jury can be a thoroughly confusing experience”,
and that the provision
of basic information by the judge at the beginning of the trial can help jurors
to “settle into their
3. The following types of information have been seen to be of assistance to
• Information about the importance of jury duty;
• Information about the roles of the judge, jury and counsel;
• Information about the nature of the trial process and about the
characteristics of the adversary system;
• Instructions concerning the onus and standard of proof and the right
of each accused to separate consideration of his or her
• An introduction to other common concepts that will be used throughout
the trial, such as inferences;
• Guidance about how to assess witnesses and evidence;
• Information about matters such as note-taking and asking
• Procedural suggestions about matters such as electing a foreperson,
arranging a discussion format and deliberation procedures;
• Information about the secrecy and anonymity of jury
deliberations;
• Information about the court and about any local facilities available
4. While the Juries Commissioner provides some of this information to jurors
prior to the trial, it has been suggested that it is
also advantageous for the
judge to address these matters when jurors are beginning to focus more clearly
on their jury service.[3]
5. Studies have shown that jurors who are given such information by the judge
at the beginning of a trial are better able to follow
the evidence presented in
court, and to apply the law to the facts of the case during
deliberations.[4]
6. This is supported by research in cognitive psychology, which has shown
that the more information a person has, the better able
that person is to frame
the information that he or she is about to receive. This enhances recall and
aids in the interpretation of
ambiguous material. It also leads to greater
levels of juror satisfaction.[5]
7. One study has even shown that a judge’s instructions may only have
an effect on the jury’s decision when delivered
at the commencement of the
trial.[6] It is suggested that this is because jurors will usually have already
assessed the evidence
by the time the judge delivers his or her final charge,
and will not be able to retrospectively evaluate and judge the evidence in
accordance with instructions which are first given at that late stage.[7]
8. It is therefore desirable to provide the jury with information such as
that outlined above at the outset of the trial, and again
in summary form during
the judge’s final charge (see, e.g.,
[2007] VSCA 54).
Judges may also wish to give a charge welcoming potential jurors prior to
empanelment.
of this Book contains a number of suggested directions for
use at the beginning of a trial.
9. It is also desirable to give the jury a short break immediately after they
have been empanelled and charged, to allow them to orient
themselves as a group
and familiarise themselves with their surroundings.
10. If a judge is concerned about addressing matters that may not arise
during the trial, he or she should warn the jury that the
preliminary
instructions may touch on issues which are not essential to their decision. In
the judge’s final charge, he or
she should deliver revised instructions,
advising the jury of any changes that have occurred since giving the preliminary
instructions.[8]
See, e.g., Parliament of Victoria Law Reform Committee,
Service in Victoria
, Final Report (1991); New South Wales Law Reform
Commission,
Criminal Procedure: The Jury in a Criminal Trial,
(1986); New Zealand Law Commission,
Juries in Criminal Trials
, Report 69
(2001); Law Reform Commission of Canada,
, Report 16 (1982);
Report of The Royal Commission on Criminal Justice
(1993); Lord Justice
A Review of the Criminal Courts of England and Wales
(2001). See
[2007] VSCA 54.
Parliament of Victoria Law Reform Committee,
Jury Service in
, Final Report (1991).
Lord Justice Auld,
A Review of the Criminal Courts of England
Parliament of Victoria Law Reform Committee,
Jury Service in
, Final Report (1991).
S.M. Kassin and L.S. Wrightsman, “On the Requirements of
Proof: The Timing of Judicial Instruction and Mock Juror Verdicts”
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Criminal Procedure: The
Jury in a Criminal Trial
, Discussion Paper 12 (1985).
– Decide Solely on the Evidence
1. The jury must be directed to base their verdict solely on the evidence
given before them in the trial. In reaching their verdict
they must disregard
any knowledge they may otherwise have acquired about the case (
Glennon v R
[1992] HCA 16
(1992) 173 CLR 592
[1989] HCA 28
(1989) 167 CLR 94
4/3/94 NSW CCA;
R v Vjestica
[2008] VSCA 47).
2. The jury should be told that the following matters constitute
• The answers to questions asked in court;
• Documents and exhibits admitted into evidence;
• Formal Admissions.
3. The jury should also be directed that the following matters do
constitute evidence:
• Questions asked of witnesses (unless the witness agrees with the
proposition) (
R v Johnston
[2004] NSWCCA 58
[1997] NSWSC 160
(1997) 98 A
[1989] SASC 1827
(1989) 52 SASR 424
R v Robinson
• Counsels’ addresses and arguments (
R v Parsons
[1997] NSWSC 160
(1997) 98 A Crim R 300)[1]
• The judge’s addresses and comments (
R v Boykovski
Atanasovski
(1991) A Crim R 436. See Judge’s Summing Up on Evidence
and Issues for further information).
4. It may be desirable to tell the jury that if they disbelieve the answer of
a witness, that does not amount to positive evidence
of the opposite of that
answer. Disbelief of a denial provides no evidence of the fact denied. For a
matter to be sufficiently proven,
there needs to be independent, positive
Scott Fell v Lloyd
[1911] HCA 34
(1911) 13 CLR 230
Edmunds v Edmunds
[1934] VicLawRp 23
[1935] VLR 177
Gauci v Cmr of Taxation (Cth)
[1975] HCA 54
(1975) 135 CLR 81
Steinberg v FCT
[1975] HCA 63
(1975) 134 CLR 640
[1997] NSWSC 160
(1997) 98 A Crim R
5. The judge should tell the jury that if they are aware of any publicity
concerning the case or the accused, this must be placed
out of their minds. They
must focus only on the evidence led in court (
[2004] NSWCCA 37
(2004) 60 NSWLR
R v Vjestica
[2008] VSCA 47.
See ‘Pre-trial Publicity’
below for further information concerning pre-trial publicity).
6. The judge should also tell the jury to disregard any feelings of prejudice
or sympathy they may have in relation to the accused
Glennon v R
[1992] HCA 16
173 CLR 592).
External Communications
7. The jury should be told to avoid speaking to any people in the precincts
of the court (
[2004] NSWCCA 37
(2004) 60 NSWLR 86).
8. The jury should also be told not to discuss the case with anyone other
than their fellow jurors, and to do that only in the privacy
of the jury room
[2004] NSWCCA 37
(2004) 60 NSWLR 86).
9. This includes communicating about the case with court officials.[2] All
questions about the case should be directed to the judge
R v Stretton
[1982] VicRp 21
[1982] VR 251
(1988) 14 NSWLR 327
Jackson & Le
[1994] QCA 46
[1995] 1 Qd R 547
R v Briffa & Portillo
21/4/96 Vic
[2000] VSCA 18
(2000) 1 VR 198.
See Trial Procedure for further information
10. Jurors should be told not to bring mobile telephones or computers into
the jury room (
[2004] NSWCCA 37
(2004) 60 NSWLR 86
R v McCluskey
98 Cr App R 216
[1993] NTCCA 88
(1995) 79 A Crim R 66).
11. It is useful to explain to the jury that one of the reasons for the
prohibition against discussing the case is that most people
will want to make
observations about the case. Such observations will be of no value, since these
people will not have heard or seen
the evidence, or received directions which
are binding upon them, and they will not be subject to the same oath or
affirmation as
the jurors (
[2004] NSWCCA 37
(2004) 60 NSWLR 86).
Juror Enquiries
12. It is an offence for a juror to ‘make an enquiry’ for the
purpose of obtaining information about a party to the trial
or any matter
relevant to the trial, except in the proper exercise of his or her functions as
Juries Act 2000
13. ‘Making an enquiry’ is defined to include:
• Consulting with another person or requesting another person to make
an enquiry;
• Conducting research by any means (including using the internet) (see
‘Independent Research’ below); or
• Viewing or inspecting a place or object that is relevant to the
trial, or conducting an experiment (see ‘Private Views
Experiments’ below) (
Juries Act 2000
14. This offence applies to all jurors from the time they are selected or
allocated as part of the jury panel, until they are either
excused from jury
service, returned to the jury pool or discharged by the trial judge (
15. Jurors are not prohibited from making an enquiry of the court, or another
member of the jury, in the proper exercise of their
functions as a juror
Juries Act 2000
16. Although the
Juries Act 2000
does not specify that judges must
direct the jury about
, this provision should be drawn to their attention
(see, e.g.,
[2010] VSCA 153
DPP v Dupas
R v Rich (Ruling No 7)
[2008] VSC 437).
Independent Research
17. It is highly desirable for judges routinely to instruct the jury not to
undertake any independent research (by internet or otherwise)
concerning:
• The parties to the trial;
• Any other matter relevant to the trial; or
• The law applicable to the case (
[2010] VSCA 153
[2003] NSWCCA 406
(2003) 59 NSWLR 431.
Juries Act 2000
Benbrika v R
[2010] VSCA 281).
18. Judges should not avoid giving such a warning merely because they fear
that it might place the idea in the mind of an inquisitive
juror, and result in
them conducting the kind of research the warning is intended to prevent (
[2003] NSWCCA 406
(2003) 59 NSWLR 431).
19. It is not sufficient to merely direct the jury that they must be true to
their oath, to decide the case on the evidence and to
identify the sanctions
which apply to jurors who disobey the instructions. The judge must explain the
reasons for the prohibition
and how such conduct risks injustice and an unfair
[2013] VSCA 133
[2004] NSWCCA 37
(2004) 60 NSWLR 86
[2003] NSWCCA 406
(2003) 59 NSWLR 431).
20. The main reasons for the prohibition are that:
• Independent research may involve acting on information that is not
tested and may be wrong or inaccurate;
• Independent research will involve acting on information which is
unknown to the parties, which would be unfair. It is not
for the jury to add to
the evidence called by the parties;
• Independent research may lead the jury to take into account legal
principles that do not apply in the jurisdiction.
21. It is not inappropriate or improper for a jury to consult a dictionary
are told is a question
Benbrika v R
[2010] VSCA 281.
R v Chatzidimitriou
[2000] VSCA 91
(2000) 1 VR 493
per Cummins AJA).
Pre-Trial Publicity
36. Where there has been pre-trial publicity about a case, or the people
involved in a case, the judge has a responsibility to avoid
unfairness to either
Glennon v R
[1992] HCA 16
(1992) 173 CLR 592
R v Vjestica
[2008] VSCA
[2009] VSCA 202).
37. In most cases, it will be possible to overcome any potential prejudice
the accused might suffer due to pre-trial publicity by
giving the jury
appropriate and thorough directions designed to counteract such prejudice
[2010] HCA 20
Glennon v R
[1992] HCA 16
(1992) 173 CLR 592
[2008] VSCA 47
[2009] VSCA 202).
[2010] HCA 20
for an example of such directions.
38. In determining whether such a direction will be sufficient to counter the
effects of pre-trial publicity, jurors should not be
regarded as exceptionally
fragile and prone to prejudice. It should be assumed that they approach their
task in accordance with the
oath they take to listen to the directions that they
are given, and to determine guilt only on the evidence before them (
[2010] HCA 20
Glennon v R
[1992] HCA 16
(1992) 173 CLR 592
John Fairfax
Publications Pty Ltd v District Court of NSW
[2004] NSWCA 324
(2004) 61 NSWLR 344
[2008] VSCA 47
[2009] VSCA 202).
39. It is not necessary for a judge to be sure that any possible prejudice
will be remediable by a warning, so long as they take all
appropriate steps
available to secure a fair trial (
Glennon v R
[1992] HCA 16
(1992) 173 CLR 592
[1989] HCA 28
(1989) 167 CLR 94).
40. If a judge determines that a warning alone will be insufficient to
counter the effects of pre-trial publicity, they may conduct
the trial in
whatever manner is appropriate to counter those effects, within the ordinary
procedural constraints. This includes adjourning
the trial until the influence
of prejudicial publicity subsides (
Glennon v R
[1992] HCA 16
(1992) 173 CLR 592
[2009] VSCA 202.
DPP v Dupas
[2010] VSC 409).
41. The balancing of the legitimate interests of the accused and the
prosecution will, in almost every case, mean that if the proceedings
stayed at all, they should only be stayed temporarily and for the minimum period
necessary (
Glennon v R
[1992] HCA 16
(1992) 173 CLR 592
, 4/3/94 NSWCCA;
[2009] VSCA 202).
42. However, there may be extreme cases in which a permanent stay may be
[2010] HCA 20
Glennon v R
[1992] HCA 16
(1992) 173 CLR
43. A permanent stay will only be necessary if there is a fundamental defect
going to the root of the trial of such a nature that
there is nothing the judge
can do in the conduct of the trial to relieve against its unfair consequences
[2010] HCA 20
Glennon v R
[1992] HCA 16
(1992) 173 CLR 592).
44. A permanent stay should not be granted simply because there has been
extensive adverse pre-trial publicity about the accused.
Any unfair consequences
of prejudice or prejudgment arising out of such publicity can be protected
against by thorough and appropriate
directions to the jury (
[2010] HCA 20).
45. In considering whether to grant a permanent stay, judges should take into
account the substantial public interest of the community
in having those who are
charged with criminal offences brought to trial. Fairness to the accused is not
the only consideration bearing
on a court’s decision as to whether a trial
should proceed (
[2010] HCA 20).
Notifying the Judge About Irregularities
46. The jury should be directed that if it becomes apparent to any of them,
in the course of the trial, that another juror has made
an independent inquiry
in relation to any aspect of the case, that should be brought immediately to the
attention of the judge. This
includes discovering that a juror has:
• Made an inquiry about the accused or the background to the offence,
or caused someone else to do so;
• Made a private inspection of a relevant site, conducted a private
experiment, or caused someone else to do one of these things;
• Discussed the case with anyone other than the remaining members of
[2004] NSWCCA 37
(2004) 60 NSWLR 86).
47. The jury should also be instructed that if it becomes apparent to any
juror, in the course of the trial, that any matter which
is not in evidence has
found its way into the jury room, that should similarly be brought immediately
to the attention of the trial
[2004] NSWCCA 37
(2004) 60 NSWLR 86).
48. The jury should be told that the reason why it is necessary for such
matters to be brought to the immediate attention of the judge
is that, unless it
is known before the end of the trial, it may not be possible to put matters
right. This may either lead to an
injustice occurring or a retrial becoming
necessary (
[2004] NSWCCA 37
(2004) 60 NSWLR 86).
49. These directions should be expressed in specific terms, rather than
simply instructing the jury to bring to the judge’s
attention any
behaviour among the jurors that causes concern (cf.
Such a general direction may lead to matters being brought to the
judge’s attention which would involve inappropriate criticism
jurors, or lead to the disclosure of jury deliberations (
[2004] NSWCCA 37
60 NSWLR 86).
If the accused is self represented, the jury should be told that
his or her addresses and arguments are also not evidence.
Jurors may communicate with court officials about administrative
or technical matters (such as setting up equipment) (
Cr App R 302
R v Barnowski
[1969] SASR 386).
– Consolidated preliminary directions
No Outside Information
When you retire to consider your verdict, you will have heard or received in
court, or otherwise under my supervision, all the information
that you need to
make your decision.
Unless I tell you otherwise, you must not base your decision on any
information you obtain outside this courtroom. For example, you
must completely
ignore anything that you have seen or heard in the media about this case or the
people involved in it, or which you
may see or hear. You must consider only the
evidence presented to you here in court
if a view may be conducted
add: ‘or otherwise under my supervision
Most importantly, you must not make any investigations or enquiries, or
conduct independent research, concerning any aspect of the
case or any person
connected with it. That includes research about the law that applies to the
case. You must not use the internet
to access legal databases, legal
dictionaries, legal texts, earlier decisions of this or other courts, or other
material of any kind
relating to the matters in the trial. You must not search
for information about the case on Google or conduct similar searches. You
must not discuss the case on Facebook, Twitter or blogs, or look at such sites
for more information about the case.
You may ask yourself the question: what is wrong with looking for more
information? Seeking out information, or discussing a matter
with friends, may
be a natural part of life for you when making an important decision. As
conscientious jurors, you may think that
conducting your own research will help
you reach the right result. However, there are three important reasons why using
outside information,
or researching the case on the internet, would be
First, media reports, or claims made outside court may be wrong or
inaccurate. The prosecution and defence will not have a chance
to test the
information. Similarly, I will not know if you need any directions on how to use
such material.
Second, deciding a case on outside information, which is not known to the
parties, is unfair to both the prosecution and the defence.
The trial is
conducted according to well established legal principles and its not for you to
go looking for other information or
to add to the evidence.
Third, acting on outside information would be false to the oath or
affirmation you took as jurors to give a true verdict according
to the evidence.
You would cease being a juror, that is, a judge of the facts, and have instead
taken on the role of an investigator.
If one of your fellow jurors breaches these instructions, then the duty falls
on the rest of you to inform me or a member of my staff,
either in writing or
otherwise, without delay. These rules are so important that you must report your
fellow juror.
Add the following shaded section if there is a risk that a juror may
visit the crime scene or attempt a private experiment
For similar reasons, unless I tell you otherwise, you must not visit the
scene of the alleged offence. You also must not attempt any
private experiments
concerning any aspect of the case. As I have explained, you are jurors assessing
the evidence which is led in
the case. You are not investigators, and must not
take into account material that has not been properly presented to you as
Consequences of breaching instructions
You may have a question about what could happen if you acted on outside
information or conducted your own research.
The immediate outcome is that the jury may need to be discharged and the
trial may have to start again. This would cause stress and
expense to the
witnesses, the prosecution and the accused. It would also cause stress and
inconvenience to the other jurors, who
will have wasted their time sitting on a
case which must be restarted.
Second, it is a criminal offence for a juror to discuss the case with others
or to conduct research on the case. You could therefore
be fined and receive a
criminal conviction, which may affect your ability to travel to some countries.
Jurors have even been sent
to jail for discussing a case on Facebook.
More broadly, jurors conducting their own research undermines public
confidence in the jury system. The jury system has been a fundamental
our criminal justice system for centuries.
For all these reasons, it is essential that you decide the case solely on the
evidence presented in court, without feelings of sympathy
or prejudice. You must
not conduct your own research into the case or discuss the case with others who
are not on the jury.
Judges may describe a specific example of the consequences of breaching
instructions
Warnings About Discussing the Case
As judges of the facts, it is also important that you are careful to avoid
any situations that could interfere with your ability to
be impartial, or that
could make you appear to be biased towards one side or the other.
You must therefore be careful not to get into conversation with anyone you do
not know, who you might meet around or near the court
building. Otherwise you
may find yourself talking to someone who turns out to have a special interest in
You must also avoid talking to anyone other than your fellow jurors about the
case. This includes your family and friends. You must
not discuss the case on
social media sites, such as Facebook, Myspace, Twitter, blogs or anything else
like that. Of course, you
can tell your family and friends that you are on a
jury, and about general matters such as when the trial is expected to finish.
But do not discuss the case itself. It is your judgment, not theirs, that is
sought. You should not risk that judgment being influenced
by their views
– which will necessarily be uninformed, because they will not have seen
the witnesses or heard the evidence.
You are free to discuss the case amongst yourselves as it continues, although
you should only do this in the jury room. However, you
should form no conclusive
views about the case until you have heard all of the evidence, listened to
counsel on both sides, and received
my instructions about the law. Keep an open
Consequences of breaching instructions revisited
You have already heard what can happen when jurors disregard the instruction
not to conduct their own research. Similar consequences
can follow if you
discuss the case with others.
You must therefore also let me know if someone tries to discuss the case with
you, or if you learn that one of your fellow jurors
has been discussing the case
with someone outside the jury.
– Consolidated final directions
Review of the Need to Decide Solely on the Evidence
I have told you that it is your task to determine the facts in this case. In
determining the facts, you must consider all of the evidence
that you heard from
the witness box. Remember, it is the answers the witnesses gave that are the
evidence, not the questions they
were asked.
You must also take into account the exhibits that were tendered. These
insert examples
]. When you go to the jury room to decide this
case, [most of/some of] the exhibits will go with you, where you may examine
Consider them along with the rest of the evidence and in exactly the same
way. [However, the following exhibits will not go with
you to the jury room
insert exhibits
If any formal admissions were put to the jury, add the following shaded
In addition, in this case the following admissions were made: [
]. You must accept these admissions as established facts.
Nothing else is evidence in this case. As I have told you, this includes any
comments counsel make about the facts. It also includes:
Identify other relevant matters which do not constitute evidence in the
case, such as transcripts.
It may be appropriate to insert charges relating to these matters
It your duty to decide this case only on the basis of the witnesses’
testimony, [the admissions] and the exhibits. You should
consider the evidence
which is relevant to a particular matter in its individual parts and as a whole,
and come to a decision one
way or another about the facts.
As I have told you, in doing this you must ignore all other considerations,
such as any feelings of sympathy or prejudice you may
have for anyone involved
in the case. You should not, for example, be influenced by [
insert case
specific examples
]. Such emotions have no part to play in your
Remember, you are the judges of the facts. That means that in relation to all
of the issues in this case, you must act like judges.
You must dispassionately
weigh the evidence logically and with an open-mind, not according to your
passion or feelings.
Outside Information
At the start of the trial I also told you that you must not base your
decision on any information that you may have obtained outside
this courtroom.
For example, you must completely ignore anything that you have seen or heard in
the media about this case, or about
the people involved in it. You must consider
only the evidence that has been presented to you here in court.
from the NSW Judicial Commission’s ‘Criminal Trial Courts Bench
Written directions for the jury at the opening of the trial
Nature of a criminal trial
A criminal trial occurs when the Crown alleges that a member of the community
has committed a crime and the accused denies the allegation.
The trial is
conducted on the basis that the parties determine the evidence to be placed
before the jury and identify the issues
that the jury needs to consider. The
jury resolves the dispute by giving a verdict of guilty or not guilty of the
crime or crimes
charged. A criminal trial is not an investigation into the
incidents surrounding the allegation made by the Crown and is not a search
the truth. Therefore neither the judge nor the jury has any right to make
investigations or inquiries of any kind outside the
courtroom and independent of
the parties. The verdict must be based only upon an assessment of the evidence
produced by the parties.
That evidence is to be considered dispassionately,
fairly and without showing favour or prejudice to either party. The verdict
upon the evidence must be in accordance with the law as explained by the
Role of judge and jury
The jury as a whole is to decide facts and issues arising from the evidence
and ultimately to determine whether the accused is guilty
of the crime or crimes
charged in the indictment. These decisions are based upon the evidence presented
at the trial and the directions
of law given by the judge. Before the jury is
asked to deliberate on their verdict counsel will make their own submissions and
based upon the evidence. The jury must follow directions of law stated
by the judge and take into account any warning given as to
particular aspects of
the evidence. Each juror is to act in accordance with the oath or affirmation
made at the start of the trial
to give ‘a true verdict in accordance with
the evidence’. A true verdict is not one based upon sympathy or prejudice
or material obtained from outside the courtroom.
The judge is responsible for the conduct of the trial by the parties. The
judge may be required to make decisions on questions of
law throughout the trial
including whether evidence sought to be led by a party is relevant. The judge
must ensure that the trial
is fair and conducted in accordance with the law. The
judge will give directions of law to the jury as to how they approach their
during their deliberations in a summing up before the jury commences its
deliberations. The judge does not determine any facts,
resolve any issues raised
by the evidence or decide the verdict.
Jury foreperson
The jury foreperson is the representative or spokesperson for the jury. He or
she can be chosen in any way the jury thinks appropriate.
The main function of
the foreperson is to deliver the verdict on behalf of the jury. Sometimes the
jury chooses to communicate with
the judge through a note from the foreperson.
The foreperson has no greater importance or responsibility than any other member
the jury in its deliberations. The foreperson can be changed at any time.
Onus and standard of proof
The Crown has the obligation of proving the guilt of the accused based upon
the evidence placed before the jury. This obligation continues
throughout the
whole of the trial. The accused is not required to prove any fact or to meet any
argument or submission made by the
Crown. The accused is to be presumed innocent
of any wrongdoing until a jury finds his or her guilt proved by the evidence in
with the law.
The Crown has to prove the essential facts or elements that go to make up the
charge alleged against the accused. Each of the essential
facts must be proved
beyond reasonable doubt before the accused can be found guilty. Suspicion cannot
be the basis of a guilty verdict
nor can a finding that the accused probably
committed the offence. The accused must be given the benefit of any reasonable
arising about his or her guilt.
No discussions outside jury room
A juror should not discuss the case or any aspect of it with any person other
than a fellow juror. Any discussion by the jury about
the evidence or the law
should be confined to the jury room and only when all jurors are present. This
is because each member of
the jury is entitled to know the views and opinions of
every other member of the jury about the evidence and the law as the trial
Any discussion with a person other than a juror risks the opinions of a
person, who has not heard the evidence, who has not heard
arguments or
submissions by counsel or who may not understand the applicable law, influencing
the jury’s deliberations and
perhaps ultimately the verdict given. The
opinions of a person who is not a juror are not only irrelevant but they are
as they may depend upon prejudice or ignorance.
Duties of a juror to report irregularities
It is the duty of a juror to bring to the attention of the judge any
irregularity that has occurred because of the conduct of fellow
jurors during
the course of the trial. This should occur immediately the juror learns of the
misconduct. The matters to be raised
• the fact that a juror has been discussing the matter with a person
who is not a juror or making inquiries outside the jury
• that a juror is refusing to participate in the jury’s
• that a juror is not apparently able to comprehend the English
• that a juror appears to lack the ability to be impartial.
Criminal conduct by a juror during and after the trial
1. It is a criminal offence for a juror to make any inquiry during the course
of a trial for the purpose of obtaining information
matters relevant to the trial. The offence is punishable by a maximum of 2 years
imprisonment.
For this offence, ‘making any inquiry’ includes:
• asking a question of any person
• conducting any research including the use of the internet
• viewing or inspecting any place or object
• conducting an experiment
• causing another person to make an inquiry.
2. It is a criminal offence for a juror to disclose to persons other than
fellow jury members any information about the jury’s
deliberations or how
a juror or the jury formed any opinion or conclusion in relation to an issue
arising in the trial, including
any statements made, opinions expressed,
arguments advanced or votes cast during the course of the jury’s
deliberations. The
offence is punishable by a fine.
3. It as a criminal offence for a juror or former juror, for a reward, to
disclose or offer to disclose to any person information
deliberations or how a juror or the jury formed any opinion or conclusion in
relation to an issue arising
in the trial, including any statements made,
opinions expressed, arguments advanced or votes cast during the course of the
deliberations. The offence is punishable by a fine.
Media reports
Members of the jury should ignore any reports of the proceedings of the trial
by the media. The report will obviously be a summary
of the proceedings or some
particular aspect of the evidence or arguments made by counsel. No importance
should be attributed to
that part of the evidence or any argument made simply
because it happens to be reported in the media. Sometimes the material reported
will be taken out of the context of the trial as a whole and may not be fair or
Written directions
of the Act provides
that a direction in law may be given in writing. Such a direction can be given
at any stage in the trial:
[2008] NSWSC 1442
–[30]. It is matter for the exercise of discretion as to whether and
when to give written directions.
It is suggested that in an appropriate case written directions on the
elements of the offences and available verdicts and any other
relevant matter be
given to the jury before counsel address but with a short oral explanation of
the directions.
Any document can be provided to the jury with the consent of counsel, such as
a chronology, or a ‘road-map’ to aid the
jury in understanding the
evidence, especially in complicated factual matters: see
above, as an example.
from the NSW Judicial Commission’s ‘Criminal Trial Courts Bench
Suggested direction following discharge of juror
In criminal trials, justice must
not only be done, but it must appear to be done. That means that nothing should
be allowed to happen
which might cause any concern or give the appearance that
the case is not being tried with complete fairness and impartiality. Because
this great concern which the law has about the appearance of justice, even the
most innocent of misadventures, such as a juror
talking to someone who, as it
turns out, is a potential witness in the case or is associated in some way with
the prosecution or
any one in the defence, can make it necessary for the whole
jury to be discharged.
Fortunately, what has happened in the present case does not make it necessary
for me to do that. It suffices that I have discharged
as members of the jury the
give number: for example, two
] person(s) who, no doubt, you have
noticed are no longer with you. In fairness to [
] person(s), I
should indicate that no personal blameworthiness of any sort attaches to them.
Nevertheless, the appearance of justice
being done must be maintained. What now
will happen is that the trial will continue with the ... [
give number: for
example, 10
] of you who remain, constituting the jury. [
necessary, of course, for you to choose a new foreperson
It is very easy for misadventures to occur. But I do ask you to please be
careful to use your common sense and discretion to avoid
any situation that
might give rise to some concern as to the impartiality of the remaining members
of the jury.
Jessica Howard, ‘Tasmania
Law Reform Institute releases paper on juror’s use of social media during
criminal trials’
The Mercury
(online, 21 August 2019)
<https://www.themercury.com.au
Jemma Holt, ‘Talking Point: Fair Trials Sabotaged in Cyberspace’
The Mercury
(online, 23 August 2019) <
https://www.themercury.com.au/
Kasey Wilkins, ‘Social Media, Internet Use of Jurors Researched by
Tasmania Law Reform Institute’
The Examiner
(online, 21 August
https://www.examiner.com.au/story/6340334/juror-social-media-internet-use-probed/?cs=12
Jemma Holt, ‘Tasmania Law Reform Institute Issues Paper Open For
Submissions’
The Examiner
(online, 23 August 2019) <
https://www.examiner.com.au/story/6331723/social-media-jurors-and-right-to-fair-trial/
The Issues Paper was also the subject of discussion on ABC Radio on 21 August
2019 when author, Jemma Holt, participated in
an interview with Piia Wirsu on
Emily Baker, ‘Jurors
using social media to look up victims and criminals, researcher says’
(online, 21 August 2019)
https://www.abc.net.au/news/2019-08-21/jurors-using-social-media-to-look-up-victims-and-criminals/11435874
Jemma Holt, ‘“Hey
Judge, That’s Just Facebook Stuff” – Social Media, Jurors and
the Right of an Accused
to a Fair Trial’ (2019) 137
Society of Tasmania, 20.
Jemma Holt, ‘Social
Media, Jurors and the Right of an Accused to a Fair Trial’ (2019) 41(8)
The Bulletin
, The Law Society of South Australia, 34.
Supreme Court Civil
Procedure Act 1932
Supreme Court Rules
rr 556, 557. However, no civil jury trials were conducted in 2016–17
or 2017–18: see Supreme Court of Tasmania,
Annual Report
(Report, 2017) 32
<https://www.supremecourt.tas.gov.au/wp-content/uploads/2018/11/SCoT_AnlRpt_1617.pdf>;
and Supreme Court
of Tasmania,
Annual Report 2017–2018
<https://www.supremecourt.tas.gov.au/wp-content/uploads/2019/02/Supreme-Court-Annual-Report-2017-2018-for-web.pdf>.
Except for SA and ACT. NSW:
Supreme Court Act 1970
District Court Act 1973
Supreme Court Rules 1987
(NT) r 47.02;
Juries Act 1962
Supreme Court Act 1995
Court of Queensland Act 1967
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules
(Qld) rr 472, 473 and 475; Vic:
Supreme Court (General Civil
Procedure) Rules 2015
rr 47.02, 47.04;
Juries Act 2000
Supreme Court Act 1935
Rules of the Supreme Court 1971
(WA), ord 32;
District Court of Western Australian Act 1969
Juries Act 1957
Coroners Act 2009
Kingswell v R
[1985] HCA 72
(1985) 159 CLR 264
, 298–303 (Deane J);
Cheng v The Queen
[2000] HCA 53
, 277–278 [80]–[82] (Gaudron J);
Alduqsi v The Queen
[2016] HCA 24
(2016) 90 ALJR 711
, [127]–[141] (Gaegeler J).
There is no option for trial by
judge alone in Tasmania, the Northern Territory and Victoria. The relevant
provisions in the remaining
Supreme Court
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
Criminal Code 1899
(Qld) div 9A; SA:
Juries Act 1927
Criminal Procedure Act 2004
(WA) div 7.
As McHugh J has noted:
‘Put bluntly, unless we act on the assumption that criminal juries act on
the evidence and in accordance
with the directions of the trial judge, there is
no point in having criminal jury trials’:
Gilbert v The Queen
(2000) 201 CLR 414
, 425, [31].
See, eg, Emma Younger,
‘George Pell media contempt case could have “chilling effect”
on open justice, court hears’,
(online, 15 April 2019)
<https://www.abc.net.au/news/2019-04-15/george-pell-guilty-verdict-coverage-media-contempt-case/11002760>.
See Kate Warner, Julia Davis
and Peter Underwood, ‘The Jury Experience: Insights from the Tasmanian
Jury Study’ (2011)
The Judicial Review
The Institute did receive
some submissions from respondents on this topic of trial by judge alone. See
discussion surrounding these
submissions below at [3.13].
Juries Act 2003
Juries Act 1967
Jury Act 1977
Jury Act 1995
Law Consolidation Act 1935
Juries Act 2000
Juries Act 1957
Dietrich v The Queen
[1992] HCA 57
(1992) 177 CLR 292
, 298 (Mason CJ and McHugh J).
[1989] HCA 28
, 98–99 (Mason CJ and Toohey J).
A-G v Fraill
EWCA Crim 1570
Braun, ‘Yesterday is History, Tomorrow is a Mystery – The Fate of
the Australian Jury System in the Age of Social
Media Dependency’ (2017)
University of New South Wales Law Journal
David Harvey, ‘The Googling Juror: The Fate of
the Jury Trial in the Digital Paradigm’
New Zealand Law Review
; J C Lundberg, ‘Googling Jurors to Conduct Voir Dire’ (2012)
Washington Journal of Law, Technology and Arts
Brian Grow, ‘As jurors
go online, US trial go off track’,
December 2010)
<https://www.reuters.com/article/us-internet-jurors/as-jurors-go-online-u-s-trials-go-off-track-idUSTRE6B74Z820101208>.
); Owen Bowcott, ‘“Trial by
Google” a Risk to Jury System, Says Attorney General’,
(online, 7 February 2013)
http://www.theguardian.com/law/2013/feb/06/trial-by-google-risk-jury-system
Thaddeus Hoffmeister,
‘Google, Gadgets and Guilt: Juror Misconduct in the Digital Age’
University of Colorado Law Journal
102, 409–420, citing
John Schwartz, ‘As Jurors Turn to Google and
Twitter, Mistrials Are Popping Up’,
New York Times
(online, 17
March 2009) A1,
http://www.nytimes.com/2009/03/18/us/18juries.html
Meghan Dunn,
Jurors’ and Attorneys’ Use of Social Media During Voir Dire,
Trials and Deliberations
(A Report to the Judicial Conference Committee on
Court Administration and Case Management, Federal Judicial Center, 1 May 2014)
<https://www.fjc.gov/sites/default/files/2014/Jurors-Attorneys-Social-Media-Trial-Dunn-FJC-2014.pdf>.
‘Protect Our Jury
The Herald Sun
(online, 9 May 2010)
<https://www.heraldsun.com.au/news/opinion/protect-our-jury-system/news-story/16189364d06bea263e0b1dc08d2df5cf>.
Hoffmeister (n
), citing John Schwartz, ‘As Jurors Turn
to Google and Twitter, Mistrials Are Popping Up’,
New York Times
(online, 17 March 2009) A1,
http://www.nytimes.com/2009/03/18/us/18juries.html
Ibid, citing Daniel A Ross,
‘Juror Abuse of the Internet’,
New York Law Journal
September 2009).
Peter Lowe, ‘Problems
faced by modern juries’ (2012 Winter)
Bar News: Journal of the NSW Bar
Association
Eric Robinson, ‘The
wired jury: An early examination of courts’ reactions to jurors’ use
of electronic extrinsic
Florida Coastal Law
Jill Hunter,
Study: Jurors Notions of Justice
http://www.lawfoundation.net.au/ljf/site/templates/grants/$file/UNSW_Jury_Study_Hunter_2013.pdf
Mark Pearson, ‘When
Jurors Go ‘Rogue’ on the Internet and Social Media ...’,
(30 May 2013)
<https://journlaw.com/2013/05/30/when-jurors-go-rogue-on-the-internet-and-social-media/>.
David Harvey, ‘The
Googling Juror: The Fate of the Jury Trial in the Digital Paradigm’
New Zealand Law Review
Jane Johnston et al,
‘Juries and Social Media’, 1–29 <
https://www.ncsc.org/~/media/Files/PDF/Information%20and%20Resources/juries%20and%20social%20media_Australia_A%20Wallace.ashx
In the UK in 2007, following
a jury verdict in a trial for charges of manslaughter and possession of a
firearm with the intent to
endanger life, printed materials were discovered in
the jury room that related to charging and sentencing for firearms cases and
sentencing for robbery, homicide and manslaughter. The dates on the documents
indicated that they were sourced on the first day of
deliberations. See
[2007] EWCA Crim 35.
The trial judge dismissed the juror and
proceeded to verdict. The subsequent appeal found that the juror should not have
been discharged,
but the appeal was ultimately dismissed.
NSWCCA 166.
[2010] NSWCCA 325
79 NSWLR 675.
The juror was not dismissed, and the trial proceeded to a verdict.
The convictions were overturned on appeal as the errant juror
should have been
In NSW in 2010, a juror
sitting in a murder and armed robbery trial conducted online research at home
relating to ‘obligations
of law’. The juror took home the indictment
and the written directions as to law to ‘study and make notes’
discussion with the rest of the jury. See
R v Sio (No 3)
R v Sio (No 4)
[2013] NSWSC 1415.
The juror was discharged,
and the trial proceeded to a verdict.
The juror later told fellow
jurors that, based on her research, the difference between the two involved
R v JP (No 1)
[2013] NSWSC 1678
R v JP (No 2)
[2013] NSWSC 1679.
The juror was discharged, and the trial proceeded to
This deceptively simple term
has occasioned the courts great difficulty. The High Court has insisted that it
cannot be defined any
further. See, eg,
[1971] HCA 55
(1971) 126 CLR 28.
In Victoria in 2008, a jury
sitting in an armed robbery and drug trial was discovered to have printed seven
pages from the internet
which contained material from five different sites,
addressing: ‘what is meant by beyond reasonable doubt’. This
was discovered by court staff after the verdict had been delivered and
the jury discharged. See
[2010] VSCA 153
(2010) 28 VR 579
, [57]–[90].
The appeal was dismissed.
In Tasmania in 2015,
following a jury verdict convicting two defendants of aggravated assault and
wounding in Launceston, court staff
discovered three pages of computer printed
material in the jury room. The material was sourced on the internet from a US
online legal
dictionary website and it included information relevant to
‘beyond reasonable doubt’ and ‘circumstantial evidence’.
Marshall and Richardson v Tasmania
[2016] TASCCA 21.
On appeal, the
court confirmed that a procedural irregularity had occurred, but the appeal was
ultimately dismissed.
In South Carolina in 2012, a
juror sitting in a trial concerning violations of animal fighting provisions by
participating in ‘game-fowl
derbies’ and ‘cockfighting’
performed research on
regarding the definition of an element of
the offence (‘sponsor’). See
United States v Lawson
629, 633–34 (4
Cir 2012); 133 S Ct 393 (2012). On appeal a
retrial was granted.
In Victoria in 2010,
multiple jurors on a terrorism trial used the internet to conduct searches on
(for definitions of ‘organisation’,
‘intention’, and ‘member’) and
Reference.com
definitions of ‘membership’, ‘intentional’ and
‘organisation’)
R v Benbrika
[2009] VSC 142
Benbrika v The Queen
[2010] VSCA 281.
The jury was not
In the US in 2010, a jury
foreperson in Florida on a murder/manslaughter trial used his iPhone to
ascertain the definition of ‘prudent’
in an online dictionary and
shared the definition with other jurors during deliberations. See
, 43 So 3d 159, 162–63 (Fla Dist Ct App 2010). The conviction was
overturned on appeal.
R v Folbigg
[2007] NSWCCA 371.
The misconduct was discovered after the jury had been
discharged. On appeal, it was held that irregularities had occurred, but the
appeal was dismissed.
Pennsylvania in 2011, a juror on a murder trial used the internet to research
‘retinal detachment’. The juror conducted
the research during an
overnight break and printed material which she attempted to share with her
fellow jurors during deliberations.
See Michael Sisak, ‘Judge Orders
Dismissed Cherry Juror to Turn Over Research’,
(29 January 2011) <
https://citizensvoice.pressreader.com/the-citizens-voice/20110129
Juror dismissed, and the jury discharged.
Maryland in 2009, a juror sitting in a murder trial conducted online research of
scientific terms related to how blood flows after
algor mortis
Clark v State of Maryland
, No 0953/08 (Md Ct Special App, Dec 3 2009). See
also Steve Lash, ‘Md. Jury’s Wikipedia search voids murder
conviction’
The Daily Record
(online, 7 December 2009) <
https://www.correctionsone.com/ethics/articles/1974049-Md-jurys-Wikipedia-search-voids-murder-conviction/
Conviction overturned on appeal.
Florida in 2010, a jury foreperson on a trial involving drug and rape charges
conducted internet searches on ‘rape trauma
syndrome’ and sexual
assault. She printed material from
and shared the material with
her fellow jurors on the same day that the verdict was delivered. See Susannah
Bryan, ‘Davie police
officer convicted of drugging, raping family member
to get new trial’,
Sun Sentinel
(online, 16 December 2010) <
https://www.sun-sentinel.com/news/fl-xpm-2010-12-16-fl-davie-cop-jurors-query-20101215-story.html
In the UK in 2005, after a
jury had delivered its verdict in a sexual assault case, the jury bailiff
discovered several printed documents
sourced from the internet in the jury room.
The documents were entitled ‘The Feminist Position on Rape’ and
and the Criminal Justice System’ and additionally contained
handwritten notes.
R v Karakaya
[2005] 2 Cr App R 5
[2005] EWCA Crim
Appeal allowed.
In Nevada in 2010, a jury
foreperson on a sexual assault of a minor trial searched online for information
injuries suffered by young sexual assault victims.
See Grow (n
). New trial granted on
Western Australia in 2016, a juror on a drug-related trial researched
methylamphetamine production online. See Heather McNeill,
Overhaul WA Jury System After Juror Dismissed for Facebook Post’.
(online, 13 October 2016) <
https://www.watoday.com.au/national/western-australia/calls-to-overhaul-wa-jury-system-after-juror-dismissed-for-facebook-post-20161012-gs0wwa.html
In the UK in 2005, the judge
in a drug trial received a jury note stating that a juror had ‘used the
internet to research some
generalities on drug addiction and usage and visited
the arrest site.’ The jury asked whether this was ‘okay’?:
R v Hawkins
[2005] EWCA Crim 2842.
Florida in 2009, a jury in a multiple defendant drug trial was discovered to be
conducting extensive internet enquiries about
the trial. Eight of the twelve jurors admitted to conducting online enquiries
relevant to the trial,
including of medical terms as well as the
defendants’ names. One alternate juror admitted to using his mobile phone
purpose during court breaks. See Deirdra Funcheon, ‘Jurors Gone
Miami New Times
(online, 23 April 2009)
<https://www.miaminewtimes.com/news/jurors-gone-wild-6332969>. A mistral
was, unsurprisingly, declared.
California in 2012, a juror on a murder and home invasion robbery trial
conducted internet research over a weekend adjournment
on the topic of cellular
phone records. The juror printed out an article, brought it into the jury room
and discussed it with fellow
Hill v Gipson,
12-CV-00504-AWI-DLB (HC), 2012 WL 3645337 (ED Cal Aug 22, 2012) 2. An appeal
against conviction was dismissed.
, Crim No B205674, 2009 WL 3211030 (Cal App, 2d Dist 2009). See also
Pamela MacLean, ‘Jurors Gone Wild!’,
The Rosenfeld Law Firm,
http://www.therosenfeldlawfirm.com/article-7/
. An appeal was
dismissed, although the court was satisfied that juror misconduct had
R v Marshall
EWCA Crim 35
[2010] VSCA 153
(2010) 28 VR 579
, [57]–[90];
[2009] VSC 142
, [53]–[55];
R v Karakaya
[2005] 2 Cr
[2005] EWCA Crim 346.
See also Sisak (n
Attorney-General v Dallas
[2012] EWHC 156
, [17]. The juror was discharged along with the remaining
balance of the jury. The matter was retried. The juror was convicted of
and sentenced to six months imprisonment (three months to serve).
Attorney-General v
[2012] EWHC 156
In the UK in 2012, a juror
sitting in a fraud trial
information about the victims and shared
this information with his fellow jurors, see Owen Bowcott, ‘Two jurors
jailed for contempt
of court after misusing internet during trials’
(online, 30 July 2013) <
https://www.theguardian.com/law/2013/jul/29/jurors-jailed-contempt-court-internet
The jury was discharged. The ‘googling’ juror was convicted of
contempt and imprisoned for two months.
In the US, jurors on a
sexual abuse trial looked up the
profiles of two victims who had
testified. See Lowe (n
In NSW in 2014, a juror on a
murder trial conducted searches on the internet for a photograph of the
deceased. The juror saw an image
of the deceased’s parents holding a
framed photograph of the deceased (which formed part of a media report). See
R v JH (No 3)
2014 NSWSC 1966
, [8]. The juror was dismissed and the trial
proceeded to verdict. See
Attorney-General v Dallas
[2012] EWHC 156.
juror was discharged along with the remaining balance of the jury. The matter
was retried. The juror was convicted of contempt
and sentenced to six months
imprisonment (three months to serve).
In the UK in 2012, a juror
on an assault trial conducted an internet search into the accused’s prior
acquittal of sexual assault
and communicated the information to her fellow
[2003] NSWCCA 406
(2003) 59 NSWLR 431.
See Funcheon (n
). A mistrial was declared.
In New York in February
2019, a juror who sat on the high-profile murder, conspiracy and drug offence
trial of Joaquin Guzman (‘
’) spoke anonymously with
the media just days after the verdicts were delivered.
He alleged that at least five jurors were aware of
prejudicial inadmissible evidence against Guzman that was published by the
namely allegations of drugging and sexually assaulting complainants as
young as 13 years old. See Keegan Hamilton, ‘Inside
El Chapo’s Jury:
A Juror Speaks For First Time About Convicting the Kingpin’,
(21 February 2019) <
https://news.vice.com
>. As at 1 May 2019,
appeal proceedings were in preliminary filing stages: See Keegan Hamilton,
‘El Chapo’s prosecutors
say our interview with a juror isn’t
enough to get him a new trial’,
(1 May 2019) <
https://news.vice.com/
In South Australia in 2016,
two jurors sitting in a blackmail trial against multiple defendants were
discovered to have conducted
online research relevant to the trial. One juror
had googled a defendant because ‘he had remembered the name ... from an
when he was a bikie club member’. The juror conducted a
recollection. The juror shared this information with two other jurors by
them ‘he thought one of them was a bikie and was in gaol for a “club
incident”’. A second juror conducted
online searches on one of the
defendants because she recognised him from ‘the news and all over the
Registrar of the Supreme Court of South Australia v S;
Registrar of the Supreme Court of South Australia v C
[2016] SASC 93.
jurors were dismissed and the remaining jurors were discharged. Both jurors were
subsequently convicted of contempt, had convictions
recorded and were fined
$3000 each.
See Jane Musgrave,
‘Juror Mischief a Growing Concern’,
Palm Beach Post
13 May 2012)
http://www.palmbeachpost.com/news/juror-mischief-a-growing-concern-2353256.html
The juror was discharged.
In Queensland in 2014, a
juror in a murder trial conducted searches on
on the accused and
the victim. The juror admitted this conduct to a fellow juror. See Tony Keim,
‘Queensland Murder Trial Aborted
as Juror Researches Case on
“Facebook”’,
The Courier Mail
(online, 8 August 2014)
https://www.couriermail.com.au/
Trial was aborted, juror referred to Attorney-General (re potential
prosecution).
See Hardeep Matharu,
‘Professor who caused trial collapse claims he did not understand what the
phrase “in hot water”
The Independent
23 December 2015) <
https://www.independent.co.uk/
Joanne Menagh, ‘Judge “almost speechless with rage” after
third Ronald Pennington trial for 1992 murder aborted’,
(online, 31 July 2014) <
https://www.abc.net.au/
[2003] NSWCCA 406
(2003) 59 NSWLR 431.
[2003] NSWCCA 406
Melissa Holsman,
‘Facebook poem gets prosecutor in hot water; St. Lucie deputy under
investigation in same case’
Sun Sentinel
(online, 22 April 2010)
https://www.sun-sentinel.com
In Maryland in 2009, five
jurors became
friends and were found to be discussing the trial
to the exclusion of the other jurors. After the presiding judge made enquiries
the matter, one of the jurors posted on his
‘F--- the Judge’: Lowe (n
United States v Juror No
, No 10-703, 2011 WL 6412039, 444–5; 866 F Supp 2d 442 (ED Pa
2011). The initiating juror was convicted of contempt and fined
Hills, ‘Jury Getting off Their Facebooks’,
The Daily Telegraph
(online, 12 May 2013) <
https://www.dailytelegraph.com.au/jury-getting-off-their-facebooks/news-story/26e2549a7d9063ae9dae0e2a27683dce
The judge became aware of this conduct two months into the trial after being
alerted by the trial prosecutor. The judge ordered
a court officer to examine
the material to see if it included any prejudicial material. It was ultimately
concluded that the material
was not such so as to warrant the jury being
discharged.
Yolanda Jones, ‘Juror
who communicated via Facebook sentenced’,
Commercial Appeal
February 2015) <
https://www.commercialappeal.com/
Juror convicted of contempt, sentenced to 10 days imprisonment, nine days
suspended (one day to serve); accused indicted on
improper influence of a juror
A-G v Fraill
EWCA Crim 1570
, [2011] 2 Cr App R 21. At the time when the misconduct was
discovered, some verdicts remained outstanding for some defendants. The
discharged, and those matters that were still pending were the subject of a
retrial. The juror was convicted of contempt
and sentenced to eight months
imprisonment.
Robert Eckhart, ‘Juror
jailed over Facebook friend request’
Herald Tribune
(online, 16
February 2012) <
https://www.heraldtribune.com/article/LK/20120216/News/605194743/SH
>; Katie Wiggin, ‘Judge sentences juror to 3 days in jail for
“friending” defendant on Facebook’,
17 February 2012)
<https://www.cbsnews.com/news/judge-sentences-juror-to-3-days-in-jail-for-friending-defendant-on-facebook/>.
This juror was convicted of contempt and sentenced to three days
imprisonment.
People v Rios
1200/06, 2010 WL 625221, (NY Sup Ct Feb 23, 2010). The ground of appeal relating
to the juror’s misconduct was dismissed.
State v Smith
No M2010-01384, 2013 WL 4804845 (Tenn Sept 10, 2013) 2. While there was no
mistrial in this case, the jury verdict was reversed on
Petrie, ‘No-show juror in hot water over “stupid”
The Sydney Morning Herald
(online, 17 April 2010) <
https://www.smh.com.au/national/noshow-juror-in-hot-water-over-stupid-actions-20100416-skli.html
The juror was referred for potential prosecution.
Harriet Alexander,
‘Trial via social media a problem for courts’,
Sydney Morning
(online, 17 April 2013) <
https://www.smh.com.au/technology/trial-via-social-media-a-problem-for-courts-20130416-2hygz.html
‘Prospective Juror
Tweets Self Out of Levy Murder Trial’,
NBC4 Washington
(online, 22
October 2010) <
https://www.nbcwashington.com/news/local/Prospective-Juror-Tweets-Self-Out-of-Levy-Murder-Trial-105553253.html
Shaw v Mississippi
No 2011-KA-01536-COA, 2013 WL 5533080, 14–15.
‘Facebook post gets
Detroit-area juror in hot water’
News.com.au
(online, 31 August
https://www.news.com.au/breaking-news/facebook-post-gets-detroit-area-juror-in-hot-water/news-story/42a3af4b3746d502cc382772b7e5219f
Juror found guilty of contempt of court and fined $250.
‘Facebooking juror
kicked off murder trial’
OC Register
(online, 2 December
https://www.ocregister.com/2011/12/02/facebooking-juror-kicked-off-murder-trial/
Juror discharged.
Frederick Reese, ‘ABA
Says Lawyers Can Track Jurors’ Social Media Activity’
(24 June 2014) <
https://www.mintpressnews.com/aba-says-lawyers-can-track-jurors-social-media-activity/192917/
No mistrial.
). The juror was dismissed.
People v Oritz
Crim No B205674, 2009 WL 3211030 (Cal App, 2d Dist 2009). See also MacLean
). The appeal was dismissed, though the
court was satisfied that juror misconduct had occurred.
‘Jurors jailed for
contempt of court over internet use’,
(online, 29 July
https://www.bbc.com/news/uk-23495785
Juror discharged; trial proceeded to verdict. Juror convicted of contempt,
imprisoned for two months.
Whitcourne, ‘Social media post sparks probe into jury conduct in sex crime
The Sydney Morning Herald
(online, 15 April 2019) <
https://www.smh.com.au/national/nsw/facebook-post-sparks-probe-into-jury-conduct-in-sex-crime-trial-20190414-p51dz4.html
Agelakis v R
[2019] NSWCCA 71:
On 29 March 2019, the NSW Court
of Criminal Appeal ordered an investigation into the alleged juror misconduct,
pursuant to
Jury Act 1977
People v Oritz
Crim No B205674, 2009 WL 3211030 (Cal App, 2d Dist 2009). See also MacLean
). Appeal dismissed, albeit the court
was satisfied that juror misconduct had occurred.
The OC Register
). Juror discharged.
Christina Carrega-Woodby,
Chelsia Rose Marcius and Corky Siemazko, ‘Exclusive: Queens Juror Fined
for Facebook Blabbing’
New York Daily News
November 2015) <
https://www.nydailynews.com/new-york/queens/exclusive-queens-juror-fined-facebook-blabbing-article-1.2421830
Jury discharged. Juror convicted of contempt of court, fined $1000.
People v Oritz
Crim No B205674, 2009 WL 3211030 (Cal App, 2d Dist 2009). See also MacLean
). Appeal dismissed, albeit the court
was satisfied that juror misconduct had occurred.
United States v Ganias
755 F 3d 125 (2d Cir 2014).
Amy St Eve, Charles Burns
and Michael Zuckerman, ‘More from the #jurybox: The latest on juries and
social media’ (2014)
Duke Law and Technology Review
State of Arkansas v
Quinton Riley
, 4 46 SW 3d 187 (Ark, 2014); Elicia Dover,
‘Juror’s Facebook Posts Could Cause Mistrial’,
(online, 9 January 2014) <
https://katv.com/archive/jurors-facebook-posts-could-cause-mistrial
Carrega-Woodby, Marcius
and Siemazko (n
People v Oritz
Crim No B205674, 2009 WL 3211030 (Cal App, 2d Dist 2009). See also MacLean
). The appeal was dismissed, though the
court was satisfied that juror misconduct had occurred. This post followed a
photograph of
an exhibit, a 15-inch knife that was the alleged murder weapon,
that the juror had taken a photograph of during deliberations and
uploaded to
‘Juror reportedly
sends “tweets” during trial’,
NBC NEWS.com
(online, 13
March 2009)
http://www.nbcnews.com/id/29683897/ns/us_news-crime_and_courts/t/juror-reportedly-sends-tweets-during-trial/#.XN5b0I4zaUk
United States v
655 F 3d 288
(3d Cir 2011), 296–8. Appeal dismissed.
Dimas-Martinez v
, 2011 Ark 515 (Dec 8, 2011), 11–15. Convictions reversed on
United States v Ganias
755 F 3d 125 (2d Cir 2014).
Alexander (n
). See also Lowe (n
David Ovalle,
‘Florida City Man Wants New Trial Because of Filmmaker Juror’s
Miami Herald
(online, 23 April 2012)
<markuslaw.com/userimages/heraldcorben.pdf>.
St Eve, Burns and
Zuckerman (n
Scott Shenk,
‘Facebook Post Leads to Mistrial’,
Fredericksburg.com
January 2017)
http://www.fredericksburg.com/news/crime_courts/facebook-post-leads-to-mistrial/article_11b6041e-5c28-527c-b1d1-94564834972c.html
Commonwealth v
81 Mass App Ct 689 (2012), 1 February 2012. See
http://masscases.com/cases/app/81/81massappct689.html
‘Tweet from doctor
on jury derails murder trial for a second time: Man ignored warnings to
“favourite” local newspaper
report about the case’,
Mail Australia
(online, 29 October 2015) <
https://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3294330/Tweet-doctor-jury-derails-murder-trial-second-time-Man-ignored-warnings-favourite-local-newspaper-report-case.html
Figures projected for May
2019, based on estimations from September 2018: see Australian Bureau of
Statistics (‘ABS’),
Population Clock
http://www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/abs@.nsf/0/1647509ef7e25faaca2568a900154b63?opendocument
Yellow Social
Media Report 2018, Part One
– Consumers (Report, June 2018) 4, 9.
David Cowling,
‘Social Media Statistics Australia – September 2019’,
Social Media News
(6 November 2019) <
https://www.socialmedianews.com.au/social-media-statistics-australia-september-2019/
‘Active users’ means users who are active on the relevant social
media platform within a one-month period, namely,
September 2019).
Activity, Australia, June 2018 – Type of Access Connection
No 8153.0, 2 October 2018)
http://www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/abs@.nsf/0/00FD2E732C939C06CA257E19000FB410?Opendocument
‘Digital news
consumers’ refers to those who used the following devices to access online
news in the last week: smartphone,
tablet/e-book, computer/laptop,
connected/smart TV, wearable (smartwatch), or voice activated speaker: Sora Park
et al, ‘Digital
News Report: Australia 2018’ (Report, News and Media
Research Centre University of Canberra, June 2018), 63
http://www.canberra.edu.au/research/faculty-research-centres/nmrc/digital-news-report-australia-2018
Supreme Court of
Annual Report 2017–2018
) 31. This encompasses Hobart, Launceston and
Burnie. No civil jury trials took place in Tasmania in 2017–2018. Similar
were recorded in 2016–2017: 12,130; 2,891 jurors attended; 1,0612
jurors empanelled; and 88 criminal jury trials conducted.
No civil jury trials
were conducted in Tasmania in 2016–2017. See Supreme Court of Tasmania,
Annual Report 2016–2017
Lorana Bartels,
‘Jurors and Social Media: is there a solution?’,
Conversation
31 July 2013
<https://theconversation.com/jurors-and-social-media-is-there-a-solution-15921>.
Anthony Dickey,
‘The Jury and Trial by One’s Peers’
University of
Western Australia Law Review
Juries Act 2003
Electoral Act 2004
Juries Act 2003
s 28(4)(a).
Juries Act 1967
Jury Act 1977
Jury Act 1995
Juries Act 2000
Juries Act 1957
Judiciary Act 1903
(which applies the procedures
of the state or territory to the trial a federal offence).
Kate Warner et al,
‘Gauging public opinion on sentencing: can asking jurors help?’
Trends and Issues in Crime and Criminal Justice
1, 3, citing P
Wilson and J W Brown,
Crime and the Community
(University of Queensland
Press, 1973).
Tasmanian Jury
Sentencing Study
took place between September 2007 and October 2009. Jurors
from the first 51 trials were asked to partake in a questionnaire after
as a juror. Demographic information collected from 257 jurors who completed the
questionnaire was compared with ABS 2006
census data for Tasmania. See Warner,
Davis and Underwood (n
Patrick Devlin,
(Stevens & Sons, 1956) 29.
See Cheryl Thomas,
‘Are Juries Fair?’ (Research Paper No 1/10, Ministry of Justice,
February 2010)
http://www.justice.gov.uk/downloads/publications/research-and-analysis/moj-research/are-juries-fair-research.pdf
See also discussion in Tasmania Law Reform Institute (TLRI),
Jurors, Social
Media and the Right of an Accused to a Fair Trial
(Issues Paper 30, August
2019) [1.5.3]–[1.5.6].
See Hunter (n
). See also discussion in TLRI (n
) [1.5.12]–[1.5.13].
See Amy St Eve and
Michael Zuckerman, ‘Ensuring an Impartial Jury in the Age of Social
Media’ (2012) 11(1)
Duke Law and Technology Review
3; St Eve, Burns
and Zuckerman (n
). See also discussion in
) [1.5.26]–[1.5.31].
See Paula Hannaford-Agor,
David Rottman and Nicole Waters,
Juror and Jury Use of New Media: A Baseline
Exploration
(Report, National Center for State Courts for the Executive
Session for the State Court Leaders in the 21
Century, 2012). See
also discussion in TLRI (n
[1.5.14]–[1.5.18].
Cheryl Thomas, ‘Avoiding the Perfect
Storm’ (2013) 6
Criminal Law Report
See Meghan Dunn,
Juror’s Use of Social Media During Trials and Deliberations
Report to the Judicial Conference Committee on Court Administration and Case
Management, Federal Judicial Center, 22 November
https://www.fjc.gov/sites/default/files/2012/DunnJuror.pdf
). See also discussion in TLRI
[1.5.19]–[1.5.24].
See Hannaford-Agor,
Rottman and Waters (n
). See also
discussion in TLRI (n
[1.5.14]–[1.5.18].
Patrick Keyzer et al,
‘The Courts and Social Media: What Do Judges and Court Workers
Think?’ (2013) 25(6)
Judicial Officer’s Bulletin
also discussion in TLRI (n
) [1.5.25].
See New Zealand Law
Commission,
Contempt in Modern New Zealand
(Issues Paper 36, May 2014).
See also discussion in TLRI (n
[1.5.32]–[1.5.34].
See Hannaford-Agor,
Rottman and Waters (n
). See also
discussion in TLRI (n
[1.5.14]–[1.5.18].
Keyzer et al (n
). See also discussion in TLRI (n
) [1.5.25].
). See also discussion in TLRI (n
) [1.5.7]–[1.5.9].
) See also discussion in TLRI (n
) [1.5.7]–[1.5.9].
Michael Bromby,
‘The Temptation to Tweet – Jurors’ Activities Outside the
Trial’ (Paper presented at the
Jury Research Symposium, Glasgow,
25–26 March 2010).
Rachael Hews and Nicolas
Suzor, ‘“Scum of the Earth”: An Analysis of Prejudicial
Twitter conversations During the
Baden-Clay Murder Trial’
(2017) 40(4)
University of New South Wales Law Journal
See also discussion in
) [1.5.35]–[1.5.39].
Ibid 5, 27. Indeed, two
of these jurors ‘strongly agreed’ that such conduct was ‘very
acceptable’.
St Eve and Zuckerman (n
); St Eve, Burns and Zuckerman (n
St Eve, Burns and
Zuckerman (n
) 78. Sixteen jurors (3%) did
not provide a response.
Hannaford-Agor, Rottman
and Waters (n
). Six judges participated
from California, Connecticut, Florida, Michigan and Texas. The jurors included
trial jurors and ‘alternate’
Ibid. In total, 506
‘prospective jurors’ were surveyed.
Ibid 490–1.
Ibid 4: 33 of 494
) 2: 30 of 508 judges.
Ibid 2. See also Dunn (n
) 4: In 2011, 93% of the judges who had
detected instances of jurors using social media had only detected it in one or
in 2013, 97% of the judges who had detected instances of jurors using
social media had only detected it in one or two cases.
) 2; Dunn (n
) 4. In 2011, 23 judges reported at least one
instance of juror misconduct during trial and 12 judges reported at least one
during jury deliberations. In 2013, 27 judges reported at least one
instance of juror misconduct during trial and seven judges reported
at least one
instance during jury deliberations.
) 2; Dunn (n
) 4. In 2011, 22 judges reported at least one
instance of juror misconduct during a criminal trial and five judges reported at
one instance in a civil trial. In 2013, 21 judges reported at least one
instance of juror misconduct during a criminal trial and
eight judges reported
at least one instance during a civil trial.
) 2–3; Dunn (n
) 4–5. In 2011, the judges reported nine
cases of juror misconduct involving
, compared to 17 cases in
) 2–3; Dunn (n
) 4–5. In 2011, there were seven cases
of juror misconduct using instant messaging services; three cases involving
; three cases involving internet chat rooms; one case involving
internet bulletin boards; and one case involving
): In 2013, there were four cases involving
instant messaging services; three cases involving jurors’ personal blogs;
cases involving
; and two cases involving internet chat
) 2; Dunn (n
Hannaford-Agor, Rottman
and Waters (n
). Six judges participated
from California, Connecticut, Florida, Michigan and Texas. The jurors included
trial jurors and ‘alternate’
Keyzer et al (n
New Zealand Law
Commission (n
Hannaford-Agor, Rottman
and Waters (n
). Six judges participated
from California, Connecticut, Florida, Michigan and Texas. The jurors included
trial jurors and ‘alternate’
Hannaford-Agor, Rottman
and Waters (n
[2014] QSC 154.
Hews and Suzor (n
Hews and Suzor (n
). Searches for keywords such as
‘baden-clay’ and hashtags such as ‘#badenclay’ and
‘#gbc’ (including
variations such as ‘badenclay’ and
baden clay’).
Ibid 1621–2.
); Bartels (n
Jacqueline Connor and
Anne Endress Skove, ‘Dial “M” for Misconduct: The Effects of
Mass Media and Pop Culture on
Juror Expectations’ in Carol R Flango et al
Future Trends in State Courts
(National Center for State Courts,
2004) 104, cited in Patrick C Brayer, ‘The Disconnected Juror: Smart
Devices and Juries
in the Digital Age of Litigation’ (2016) 30
Dame Journal of Law, Ethics and Public Policy Online
See Dunn (n
) 4; Dunn (n
Although this is not
unheard of. ‘A judge in Oregon noticed an unexpected glow on a
juror’s chest while the courtroom
lights were dimmed during video evidence
in an armed robbery trial. The juror ... was texting’: ‘Oregon juror
for texting during trial’
Washington Examiner
(online, 18
April 2013) <
https://www.washingtonexaminer.com/oregon-juror-jailed-for-texting-during-trial
See the ‘final
comment’ of Brett J in
Marshall and Richardson v Tasmania
[2005] 2 Cr App R 5
[2005] EWCA Crim 346
[2010] VSCA 153
, [57]–[90].
[2003] NSWCCA 406
(2003) 59 NSWLR 431.
See, eg, ‘Facebook
post gets Detroit-area juror in hot water’,
News.com.au
(online, 31
August 2010) <
https://www.news.com.au/breaking-news/facebook-post-gets-detroit-area-juror-in-hot-water/news-story/42a3af4b3746d502cc382772b7e5219f
Carrega-Woodby, Marcius
and Siemazko (n
Katie Wiggin,
‘Judge sentences juror to 3 days in jail for “friending”
defendant on Facebook’,
(online, 17 February 2012)
<https://www.cbsnews.com/news/judge-sentences-juror-to-3-days-in-jail-for-friending-defendant-on-facebook/>.
Juror convicted of contempt, sentenced to three days imprisonment. The juror
gave evidence in his contempt proceedings that ‘he
looked up the defendant
... during jury selection ... he was trying to see if the two had any mutual
friends when he accidentally
sent her a friend request’.
See Funcheon (n
). Where the investigation of reported
misconduct by one juror resulted in the discovery of similar misconduct by seven
other jurors.
A mistral was, unsurprisingly, declared.
Coates SC, Director of Public Prosecutions (Tas), Submission #5 (written) to
Juries Social Media and the Right of an Accused to a Fair Trial
October 2019) 1. So too did Jim Connolly, Sheriff, Supreme Court of Tasmania,
Submission #7 (written), to TLRI
Juries Social Media and the Right of an
Accused to a Fair Trial
(3 October 2019).
In Tasmania in 2015,
following a jury verdict convicting two defendants of aggravated assault and
wounding in Launceston, court staff
discovered three pages of computer printed
material in the jury room. The material was sourced on the internet from a US
online legal
dictionary website and it included information relevant to
‘beyond reasonable doubt’ and ‘circumstantial evidence’.
On appeal, the court confirmed that a procedural
irregularity had occurred, but the appeal was ultimately dismissed.
In South Australia in
2016, two jurors sitting in a blackmail trial against multiple defendants were
discovered to have conducted
online research relevant to the trial. One juror
had googled a defendant because ‘he had remembered the name ... from an
when he was a bikie club member’. The juror conducted a
juror shared this information with two other jurors by
telling them ‘he
thought one of them was a bikie and was in gaol for a “club
incident”’. A second juror conducted
online searches on one of the
defendants because she recognised him from ‘the news and all over the
Registrar of the Supreme Court of South Australia v S;
Registrar of the Supreme Court of South Australia v C
[2016] SASC 93.
jurors were dismissed and the balance of the jury discharged. Both jurors were
subsequently convicted of contempt, had convictions
recorded and were fined
$3000 each. See William Boucaut QC, Barrister, Len King Chambers (SA),
Submission #3 (written) to TLRI,
Juries Social Media and the Right of an
Accused to a Fair Trial
(2 October 2019).
The Legal Aid Commission
of Tasmania, Submission #12 (written) to TLRI,
Juries Social Media and the
Right of an Accused to a Fair Trial
(October 2019) 12.
Submission #21 (verbal, various) to TLRI,
Juries Social Media and the Right
of an Accused to a Fair Trial
(8 October 2019).
The Law Society of
Submission #11 (written) to TLRI,
Social Media and the Right of an Accused to a Fair Trial
(8 October 2019)
Lawyers Alliance, Submission #1 (written) to TLRI,
Juries Social Media and
the Right of an Accused to a Fair Trial
(1 October 2019) 4.
Dr Kerstin Braun, Senior
Lecturer, University of Southern Queensland, Submission #4 (written) to TLRI,
Juries Social Media and the Right of an Accused to a Fair Trial
September 2019) 3.
Submission #7 (n
Associate Professor Jane
Johnston, The University of Queensland (Qld), Adjunct Professor Anne Wallace, La
Trobe University (Vic)
and Professor Patrick Keyzer, La Trobe University (Vic),
Submission #10 (written) to TLRI,
Juries Social Media and the Right of an
Accused to a Fair Trial
(2 October 2019) 2.
Submission #12 (n
Professor Jill Hunter,
University of New South Wale, Submission #9 (written) to TLRI,
Juries, Social
Media and the Right of an Accused to a Fair Trial
(13 October 2019);
Submission #12 (n
Submission #10 (n 276) 2.
David Plater, Deputy Director of the South Australian Law Reform
Institute/Senior Lecturer, School of Law, University of Adelaide,
Submission #13
(written) submission to TLRI,
Juries Social Media and the Right of an Accused
to a Fair Trial
(8 October 2019).
Submission #12 (n
Submission #3 (n
Submission #11 (n
Submission #1 (n
Submission #5 (n
Submission #9 (n
) 38, 46–9.
#10 (n 276) 4.
Submission #13 (n
Submission #5 (n
Submission #4 (n
Submission #11 (n
The Honourable Justice
Robert Pearce, Supreme Court of Tasmania (Tas), Submission #14 (written) to
Juries Social Media and the Right of an Accused to a Fair Trial
(November 2019).
Submission #12 (n
Submission #1 (n
Submission #10 (n 276)
Submission # 14 (n
] above. In addition to this research that
has juror misconduct as its focus, this Report also draws upon the insights
obtained from
research with a different emphasis, but which also provides
insight into the ‘jury experience’. See Warner, Davis and
): In the course of a 2007–2009
survey of Tasmanian jurors for the purposes of sentencing research, a sub-set of
respondents
participated in face-to-face interviews. In addition to sentencing
related enquiries, jurors were also invited to share their views
of the jury
experience. Content that was reported by these Tasmanian jurors provides a
valuable insight when it comes to understanding
juror behaviour in this respect.
The challenge of securing
a fair trial before an impartial jury and concerns over the effect of
prejudicial pre-trial publicity are
not new problems. Such concerns date back to
century and were compounded by the 24-hour news cycle in
such notorious cases as OJ Simpson and Lindy Chamberlin. See further, David
Plater and Victoria Geason, ‘“The Prisoners could not have that Fair
and Impartial Trial which Justice Demands”:
A Fair Criminal Trial in
-Century Australia’, accepted for publication in the
forthcoming edition of the
Canterbury Law Review
; Michael Chesterman,
‘OJ and the Dingo: How Media Publicity Relating to Criminal Cases tried by
Jury is dealt with in Australia
and America’
American Journal
of Comparative Law
See, eg, Caren Morrison,
‘Can the Jury Trial Survive Google?’
Criminal Justice
; Roxanne Burd and Jacqueline Horan, ‘Protecting the Right to a Fair
Trial in the 21
Century: Has Trial by Jury Been Caught in the World
Criminal Law Journal
Indeed, more
traditional forms of juror misconduct have not been replaced entirely and still
occur: See, eg,
R v Catalano
[2019] SASCFC 52.
Submission # 5 (n
[2011] EWCA Crim
See discussion of misconduct at [
A-G v Fraill
[2011] EWCA Crim 1570
Submission #12 (n
Submission #14 (n
Marilyn Warren,
‘Open Justice in the Technological Age’ (2014) 40
‘Why am I seeing
posts in my News Feed about people I’m not friends with or groups
I’m not in?’
Facebook Help Centre,
<https://www.facebook.com/help/132021603539177?helpref=related>.
Keyzer et al (n
The Vigilante News
https://www.facebook.com/thevigilantenews/
‘Our stories are obtained through many hours of research, investigations,
and subscribers sending tip-offs in and of course
going out in the field. The
majority are exclusives by us, and we are very proud to be able to provide these
stories to you, and
indeed before other media does if at all. Included in these
stories are topics such as Police reporting, crimes often as they unfold
naming offenders when charges, crimes including, rapes, wounding, arson,
murders, fatal accidents, inquests court lists and sex
offenders named where
possible. The point is that if you are offended or simply don’t like our
page, then don’t read
it! People who continually criticize will be banned
Crime Watch Tasmania
<https://www.facebook.com/Crime-Watch-Tasmania-945220472156416/>.
‘We are not affiliated with the police or government,
just passing on
information for people to watch out for.’
In June 2019, at the time
of writing the preceding Issues Paper,
The Vigilante News
In June 2019, at the time
of writing the preceding Issues Paper,
Crime Watch Tasmania
Oz Crime News
<https://twitter.com/ozcrimenews>. The
Oz Crime News
states: ‘Somali/Sth Sudanese gangs are growing in AUSTRALIA like other
countries. Police/Media censor/downplay gang violence.
You’re being played
Australia.’ As at June 2019,
Oz Crime news
had 5,469 followers. As
at October 2019, at the time of writing, this account was suspended.
Park et al (n
). For the purposes of the survey, six types
were identified: (1) poor journalism (factual mistakes,
dumbed down stories, misleading headlines/clickbait); (2) stories where facts
are spun or twisted to push a particular agenda; (3) stories that are completely
made up for political or commercial reasons; (4)
headlines that look like news
stories but turn out to be advertisements; (5) stories that are completely made
up to make people laugh
(satire); and (6) the use of the term fake news (eg by
politicians, others) to discredit news media they don’t like.
Valuable Facebook Statistics
(Updated May 2019) Zephoria Digital Marketing
http://zephoria.com/top-15-valuable-facebook-statistics/
United States
, 677 F 3d 629, 633–34 (4
Cir 2012); 133 S Ct 393
(2012): ‘Anyone with Web access can edit Wikipedia ... About 91,000
editors from expert scholars to
casual readers regularly edit Wikipedia. Given
the open-access nature of Wikipedia, the danger in relying on a Wikipedia entry
obvious and real. As the “About Wikipedia” material aptly
observes, allowing anyone to edit Wikipedia means that it is
more easily
vandalized or susceptible to unchecked information. Further, Wikipedia aptly
recognizes that it is written largely by
amateurs ... [any given] entry could be
in the middle of a large edit or it could have been recently
vandalized.’
[2015] NSWCCA 330.
Stephanie Gardiner,
‘Hey Dad! actor Robert Hughes’ trial unfair due to
‘putrid’ social media: appeal told’,
The Sydney Morning
(online, 28 September 2015)
<https://www.smh.com.au/national/nsw/hey-dad-actor-robert-hughes-trial-unfair-due-to-putrid-social-media-appeal-told-20150928-gjwdu3.html>.
‘Hey Dad! star
Robert Hughes appeals conviction “poisoned” by social media’
The Guardian
(online, 28 September 2015)
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/sep/28/hey-dad-star-robert-hughes-appeals-conviction-poisoned-by-social-media>.
Gardiner (n
‘Hey Dad! star
Robert Hughes appeals conviction “poisoned” by social media’
United States v Zimny
846 F 3d 458 (1
Cir 2017), 462–463 <
https://casetext.com/case/united-states-v-zimny-8
Ibid. Court ordered
investigation on appeal.
R v Durovic
(unreported, Supreme Court of Tasmania, Slicer J, 12 February 1993). In this
case, the prosecution and several jurors anonymously
received copies of the
accused’s prior convictions. The material was posted to the jurors at
their home addresses.
See Justice Stephen
Estcourt, ‘Around the Nation: Tasmania – Social Media and
Sentencing’ (2017) 91
Australian Law Journal
266, 266: ‘In
August 2016, a Hobart newspaper quoted the Tasmanian Premier as saying in
relation to a convicted double murderer
who was wheelchair-bound with serious
brain damage: ‘We confirm that a person was indeed moved from the Roy
Fagan Centre yesterday
due to threats made against him on social media.’
That move was ‘forced’ upon the Government, notwithstanding the
that the Roy Fagan Centre was approved for use as a hospital or institution for
the purposes of the
Corrections Act 1997
Robinson (n
Wilgus v F/V SIRIUS,
, 665 F Supp 2d 23 (D Me 2009) 24.
Amelia Hill,
‘Judges are resigned to jurors researching their trials online’,
The Guardian
(online, 5 October 2010)
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2010/oct/04/judges-resigned-jurors-online-research>.
Laura Whitney Lee,
‘Comment: Silencing the “Twittering Juror”: The Need to
Modernize Patter Cautionary Jury Instructions
to Reflect the Realities of the
Electronic Age’
De Paul Law Review
Submission #4 (n
[2003] NSWCCA 406
Submission #12 (n
Submission #3 (n
Submission #7 (n
Submission #11 (n
Submission #10 (n 276)
Garth Stevens, Barrister,
Liverpool Chambers (Tas), Submission #19 (verbal) to TLRI,
Juries Social
Media and the Right of an Accused to a Fair Trial
(4 October 2019).
Submission #1 (n
Debra Cassens Weiss,
‘Lawyer May Cite Judge-Juror’s ‘Livin’ the Dream’
E-mails in New Trial Bid’,
ABA Journal
http://www.abajournal.com/news/article/lawyer_may_cite_judge-jurors_livin_the_dream_e-mails_in_a_new_trial_request/
A Californian judge who was selected as a juror on a murder trial, sent four
emails about his jury service to a group of more
than 20 judges. His comments
included, ‘Here I am livin’ the dream, jury duty with Mugridge and
Jenkins! [the two counsel]’
One of the judges who received the emails was
the judge presiding over the trial.
California Bar v
23 January 2009. See also ‘California Bar v
Digital Media Law Project
(31 August 2009)
http://www.dmlp.org/threats/california-bar-v-wilson
Robert J Ambrogi, ‘Lawyer Disciplined Over Blog Posts’,
Legal Blog Watch
(4 August 2009) <
https://legalblogwatch.typepad.com/legal_blog_watch/2009/08/lawyer-disciplined-over-blog-posts.html
A juror who had previously worked as a lawyer sat on a burglary trial in
California and blogged about his experience. He posted
an entry on his blog that
identified the first name of the defendant, the alleged charges and the name of
the judge. He wrote: ‘Nowhere
do I recall the jury instructions mandating
I can’t post comments in my blog about the trial. (Ha. Sorry, will do.)
careful to not prejudice the rights of the defendant -- a stout,
unhappy man by the first name of Donald ...’ and described
the judge as
‘a stern, attentive woman with thin red hair and long, spidery fingers
that as a grandkid you probably wouldn’t
want snapped at you’.
Australia (n
‘Juror under
investigation for friending, chatting with defendant on Facebook’,
Action News 5
(online, 5 August 2014)
<https://www.wmcactionnews5.com/story/26205295/juror-under-investigation-for-friending-chatting-with-defendant-on-facebook/>.
Seth Rogovoy,
‘Twitter Rubs Up Against the Judicial System’,
Rogovoy Report
(10 February 2011)
http://rogovoy.com/news1824.html
. In 2011 a juror on
a rape trial in Massachusetts was discharged after tweeting: ‘Sucks that
you can’t tweet from
the jury box. What’s the fun in that?’
The juror later blogged about the experience: ‘The judicial system –
at least as represented by the Berkshire Superior Court in Pittsfield Mass.
– is light years behind the curve when it comes
to the role of social
media in fomenting and perpetuating democracy’. He was an editor at the
local newspaper.
Dareh Gregorian,
‘Oh, What a Twit’,
New York Post
(online, 29 May 2009) <
https://nypost.com/2009/05/29/oh-what-a-twit/
In 2009, American television personality, Al Roker, attended for jury duty. He
took photographs on his phone of the jury assembly
room, which showed the face
of one prospective juror and other prospective jurors from behind. He posted the
photographs on Twitter
to over 20,000 of his followers. He later acknowledged
that he made a ‘mistake’ and that the posting was
‘inadvertent’.
He later posted: ‘Folks need to lighten up ...
I’m not breaking any laws ... just trying to share the experience of jury
duty. One that I think is important and everyone should take part in’. He
later tweeted: ‘Going back into the courtroom.
iPhone buried deep in my
People v Rios
1200/06, 2010 WL 625221 (NY Sup Ct Feb 23, 2010).
Carrega-Woodby, Marcius
and Siemazko (n
[2009] VSC 142.
Ibid [114] (Bongiorno
Benbrika v R
[2010] VSCA 281
(2010) 29 VR 593
[2000] VSCA 91
(2000) 1 VR 493.
[42] (Cummins
In NSW in 2013, a juror
on a murder trial conducted internet research on the legal definitions of
‘murder’ and ‘manslaughter’.
She obtained material from
the New South Wales Law Society website. When questioned by the judge she
explained, ‘I just needed
to clarify manslaughter murder, murder
manslaughter. I’m lost ...’:
R v JP (No 2)
[2013] NSWSC 1679
Warner, Davis and
Underwood (n
Ibid 355, 358: the jurors
‘reiterated how seriously their fellow jurors had taken their task’;
‘they were very
thoughtful ... very responsible ... [and] ... felt a great
responsibility, a burden of responsibility, about what was going on
Ibid. See also, ‘A
Citizens Duty: Jury Service’,
(ABC Radio National, 1 May
https://www.abc.net.au/radio/programs/overnights/jury-duty/11063800
Warner, Davis and
Underwood (n
Ibid 349. The
direction refers to the ‘forensic disadvantage’
occasioned to an accused as a result of delay in complaint. As a result
delay, an accused is denied the chance to assemble, soon after the incident is
alleged to have occurred, evidence that would assist
to test/meet the
complainant’s evidence.
Ibid 350–1. See
Brown v Dunn
(1893) 6 R 67. The ‘rule’ from
requires counsel to put any matters concerning his or her own case that
are inconsistent with a witnesses’ evidence to that
Warner, Davis and
Underwood (n
Warner, Davis and
Underwood (n
United States v
655 F 3d 288
(3d Cir 2011), 296–8. The court held, that the
material published was ‘nothing more than harmless ramblings with no
prejudicial
effect ... [the comments] were so vague as to be virtually
meaningless’. The appeal was dismissed.
Submission #13 (n
Submission #1 (n
Submission #11 (n
[2000] HCA 53
(2000) 203 CLR 248.
Ibid 338–9.
AnnMarie Timmins,
‘Juror Behind Mistrial Pleads, Pays $1,200’,
Concord Monitor
(10 October 2009); AnnMarie Timmins, ‘Juror Becomes a Defendant’,
Concord Monitor
(26 March 2009).
Submission #14 (n
Caren Morrison,
(2011) 62(6)
Hastings Law Journal
Ibid 16–17, 20,
Submission #9 (n
Submission #1 (n
Submission #11 (n
Submission #12 (n
Submission #1 (n
Submission #19 (n
Submission #11(n
Submission #13 (n
[2017] TASSC 44
, [7]; see also
Brooks v Easther (No 2)
, [19] (Blow CJ). See also
Hogan v Hinch
(2011) 243 CLR 506
Evidence Act
Court Suppression and Non-publication Orders Act
Access to Justice (Federal Jurisdiction) Amendment Act
Open Courts Act 2013
[1913] AC 417;
Russell v Russell
(1976) 134 CLR 495.
James v Robinson
[1963] HCA 32
(1963) 109 CLR 593
, 606, 615.
Packer v Peacock
[1912] HCA 8
(1912) 13 CLR 577
A-G (NSW) v TCN
Channel Nine Pty Ltd
(1990) 20 NSWLR 368
[1910] All ER 915.
Ex parte A-G; Re Truth
and Sportsman Ltd
(1961) 61 SR (NSW) 484
A-G (Qld) v Win Television Qld
[2003] QSC 157.
‘Victoria and South
Australia continue to be the two legal jurisdictions with a remarkable
propensity to make suppression orders
...’: Mike Dobbie (ed),
Criminalising Journalism:
The MEAA Report into the State of Press
Freedom in Australia in 2018
(Report, MEAA, 3 May 2018) 13. ‘In South
Australia, 206 suppression orders were made in 2014–2015 (an increase of
Sean Fenster, ‘Full Court of SA Supreme Court to Determine
Value, Power of Suppression Orders in Digital Age’,
The Advertiser
10 November 2017) <
https://www.adelaidenow.com.au/
‘In Victoria, 1594 suppression orders were made in 2014–2016’:
Farrah Tomatina, ‘Open Justice or the
Suppression State?’,
(online, 24 June 2018) <
https://www.theage.com.au/national/victoria/open-justice-or-the-suppression-state-20180624-p4znd4.html
Supreme Court of Tasmania
<https://www.supremecourt.tas.gov.au/the-court/media/>.
For example, see
Australian Press Council,
Standards of Practice
https://www.presscouncil.org.au/standards-of-practice/
and Australian Press Council,
https://www.presscouncil.org.au/standards/
‘In a professional
media system, checking takes place at multiple levels, eg sub-editors,
production editors and lawyers are
often involved’: Keyzer et al (n
) 4. However, mainstream media does not
live up to this standard. By way of a recent example where
mainstream media recklessly published inaccurate information and inadmissible
evidence during television coverage of a murder trial in Victoria see: Bridget
Rollason, ‘Ballarat murder trial aborted, jury
dismissed after
“reckless” TV report on Karen Ashcroft case’,
(online, 7 June 2019) <
https://www.abc.net.au/news/2019-06-07/jury-dismissed-in-karen-ashcroft-murder-trial/11190536
social media” in Australia prompts clash over accused murderer’,
(12 October 2012)
<https://www.timebase.com.au/news/2012/AT368-article.html>.
Matthew Bevan,
‘Kieren Loveridge: trial by social media’,
20 July 2012)
http://www.abc.net.au/local/stories/2012/07/20/3549930.htm
An offence at common
Fairfax Digital
Australia & New Zealand Pty Ltd v Ibrahim
[2012] NSWCCA 125
(2012) 83 NSWLR 52
demonstrate the point, the court explained: ‘[if] a library holding of a
past issue of a newspaper, book or magazine
(perhaps containing a prejudicial
story about the accused) were thought to be a threat to a fair trial, a superior
court would have
material until the conclusion of the trial. An order preventing access
publication on a website is no different in kind ...’
Globally on
4.75 billion pieces of content shared daily. Further, every
60 seconds: 510,000 comments are posted, 293,000 statuses are updated,
136,000 photos are uploaded. See Noyes (n
Virginia Bell, ‘How
to preserve the integrity of jury trials in a mass media age’ (2006) 7(3)
Judicial Review
John Fairfax
Publications Pty Ltd v
District Court of NSW
[2004] NSWCA 324
(2004) 61 NSWLR 344
, 361 (Spigelman CJ): ‘it may
be desirable for the Crown to conduct searches in advance of a trial and, where
necessary, request
Australian-based websites to remove references to an accused
for the period of a trial.’
See Steven Price,
‘Upcoming Seminar on the Internet and Suppression Issues’,
Law Journal
(10 November 2009)
http://www.medialawjournal.co.nz/?p=309
‘[A]n official should be tasked with sitting down before each trial (and
periodically during it) and Googling the defendant’s
there’s prejudicial material out there, steps should be quickly taken to
have it temporarily taken down.’ See
John Fairfax Publications Pty
Ltd v District Court of NSW
[2004] NSWCA 324
(2004) 61 NSWLR 344.
The publication of
prejudicial information relating to the pending trial of a prominent business
identity was removed from the website
Crikey.com.au at the request of the
Supreme Court’s Public Information Officer: at [11].
Justice Stephen Estcourt
AM, ‘Social Media as Evidence’ (Speech, New Technology and Trial
Practice Workshop, 18–20
March 2019)
<https://www.supremecourt.tas.gov.au/publications/speeches-articles/social-media-as-evidence/>.
See James Farrell,
‘Social Media and the Law’ (2012) 37(4)
Alternative Law
https://www.altlj.org/news-and-views/downunderallover/duao-vol-37-4/448-social-media-and-the-law
Submission #5 (n
Community Legal Centres
Tasmania, Submission #6 (written) to TLRI,
Juries Social Media and the Right
of an Accused to a Fair Trial
(11 October 2019) 2; Submission #21 (n
Submission #10 (n 276)
Submission #11 (n
Submission #21 (n
Submission #5 (n
Submission #13 (n
Submission #10 (n 276)
Submission #13 (n
Submission #11 (n
Submission #5 (n
) 2. See above n
: 206 suppression orders were made in South
Australian in 2014–2015 and 1594 suppression orders were made in Victoria
in 2014–2016.
Submission #10 (n 276)
Submission #12 (n
Submission #1 (n
Kim Baumeler, Barrister,
Liverpool Chambers (Tas), Submission #15 (verbal) to TLRI, ,
Juries Social
Media and the Right of an Accused to a Fair Trial
(8 October 2019).
Scope of the
, xvii–xviii.
The Institute understands
that this aspect is intended to be examined in 2020 by the South Australian Law
Reform Institute as part
of its linked work with TLRI in this area.
Submission #14 (n
Warner, Davis and
Underwood (n
The Supreme Court of Tasmania
, (10 December 2017)
<https://www.supremecourt.tas.gov.au/jurors/>.
‘Jurors’ (n
’ is available online, as well as two videos, ‘
Jury Administration
‘Jury Service in the Australian Capital Territory’,
Supreme Court
of the Australian Capital Territory
<https://courts.act.gov.au/supreme/public/jury_service_in_the_australian_capital_territory>.
NSW: two publications are available online, ‘
Welcome to jury
service: a guide for jurors
Jury Service: a rewarding
responsibility
There is also information available on
Role of a jury
Sent a Notice of
How a jury is selected
can and cannot serve
Applying to be excused
Payment for jury service
Jury summons court
Jury trial and verdict
After the trial
What employers need to
See ‘Jury Service in New South Wales’
Courts and Tribunal Services NSW
http://www.courts.justice.nsw.gov.au/Pages/cats/jury_service/jury_service.aspx
NT: a pamphlet is available online, ‘
Jury Service
Information
’. See ‘For Jurors’,
Supreme Court of the
Northern Territory
http://www.supremecourt.nt.gov.au/jurors/index.htm#q17
Qld: several publications and videos are available online, including a
Juror’s Handbook
Deliberations
’. See Queensland Courts,
Videos and Resources for
https://www.courts.qld.gov.au/jury-service/about-jury-service/videos-and-resources-for-jurors
SA: two brochures are available online, ‘
Jury Information
Employer Obligations’
. There are also six videos
available: ‘
I’ve been selected
How long will I be needed
employee has been selected
Where do I go for jury service
in Adelaide
Introduction to jury service
See ‘For Jurors’,
Courts Administration Authority of South
http://www.courts.sa.gov.au/ForJurors/Pages/default.aspx
Vic: information is available online: ‘
What is jury Service
Notice of Selection
Jury Summons
Attending for jury service
Serving on a
Work and payment
Support for
’. See Juries Victoria <
https://www.juriesvictoria.vic.gov.au/about-juries-victoria/what-is-jury-service
WA: information is available online, including a video ‘
A Fair Trial
– Jury Duty in Western Australia
’. See Department of Justice
Court and Tribunal Services,
<https://www.courts.justice.wa.gov.au/J/jury_duty.aspx>.
‘Jurors are only
permitted to discuss the case with other jurors on the same case ... jurors must
not discuss the case with
any of the people involved in the case ... You must
not even talk about the case to your friends and family. That is because it is
very important that you make up your own mind about your verdict following your
own conscience without the input of people who haven’t
been in court and
heard all of the evidence.’
‘So can I do my own
research on my case when I’m a juror? No, it is crucial that the only
evidence that jurors rely on
is evidence that is presented in court that the
judge has ruled is fair to rely on. You can’t use information from sources
outside the courtroom. If you use information that hasn’t been presented
in court, the person on trial won’t know about
that information, the
lawyers won’t know about that information, they won’t be able to
contradict the information or
explain anything and that would mean it would not
be a fair trial. You must not carry out your own investigations. That means you
can’t visit the scene of the crime, make enquiries about what occurred or
also avoid obtaining
information about the case from sources such as the internet, newspapers or
television.’
‘Do not make your
own inquiries about the case. It would be unfair for you to act on information
that is not part of the evidence
and which the parties have not had the
opportunity to test. For that reason, you must not use the internet or other
material to conduct
research about the case or seek or receive information about
the accused person or about other witnesses or other people associated
case. Keep this in mind when using social media, the internet or talking with
‘Do not make your
own inquiries about the case or defendant (do not use Google; the internet;
Facebook; Twitter or any social
media of any sort).’
See Appendix C.
Department of Justice
(NSW), Courts and Tribunal Services,
Jury summons checklist
http://www.courts.justice.nsw.gov.au/Pages/cats/jury_service/catscorporate_jurysummons-court_checklist.aspx
‘Publishing juror details and sensitive court materials are not permitted,
including on social media’. See also
Department of Justice (NSW) Courts
and Tribunal Services,
Jury Trial and Verdict
http://www.courts.justice.nsw.gov.au/Pages/cats/jury_service/trial_verdict.aspx
‘Do not post any discussion or materials from jury service on social
‘A Fair Trial
– Jury Duty in Western Australia’ (video)
Department of Justice
Court and Tribunal Services
<https://vimeo.com/325575587>. ‘In
particular, it is essential that you do not Google or search the internet about
or anyone connected with the trial before you. It is vitally important
that you resist the temptation to do so. Please keep in mind
that you must not
post any information about your involvement in jury service, or your location,
online, including social media such
as Facebook, Instagram, and Twitter. These
restrictions are to protect you as a juror and to protect the integrity of the
court process.’
Warner, Davis and
Underwood (n
Courts Administration
Authority, ‘Jury Service Helpful Information’
http://www.courts.sa.gov.au/ForJurors/Brochures/Jury_service.pdf
‘Introduction to
Jury Service’
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Okc8iEgfF4Y&feature=youtu.be>.
Judicial Commission of
New South Wales,
Criminal Trial Courts Bench Book – Trial Procedure
(Updated April 2019) [1–475]
<https://www.judcom.nsw.gov.au/publications/benchbks/criminal/the_jury.html#p1-470>.
Queensland Courts (n
Warner, Davis and
Underwood (n
Michael Dulaney and
Damien Carrick, ‘Despite bias and bigotry, the jury system can still
deliver justice, experts say’,
(online, 17 May 2018)
https://www.abc.net.au/news/2018-05-16/how-jury-system-accounts-for-prejudice-and-bias-among-jurors/9763178
‘A Citizens Duty:
Jury Service’ (n
). Eg, courthouses
in regional Queensland and Victoria.
It is to be noted that
all online juror related material is dated December 2017.
Warner, Davis and
Underwood (n
The exceptions being the
Juror’s Handbook
in Victoria and the
Guide to Jury
Deliberations
in Queensland.
Warner, Davis and
Underwood (n
Ibid 351–2.
Submission #7 (n
Submission #12 (n
Submission #7 (n
Submission #12 (n
Submission #7 (n
Submission #5 (n
Submission #12 (n
Submission #7 (n
Submission #9 (n
Submission #11 (n
Submission #12 (n
Submission #10 (n 276)
Submission #14 (n
Submission #11 (n
Submission #13 (n
Juries Act 2003
This procedure is common to the majority of other Australian
empanelment, upon attending for jury service, and in New South Wales, where
there are no specific procedural provisions for the juror
oath/affirmation.
Ibid sch 3.
, sch 1: ‘true verdict according to the
evidence’. NSW:
Jury Act 1977
‘true verdict according to the evidence’. NT:
, sch 6: ‘true verdict according to the evidence’.
Jury Act 1995
‘a true verdict, according to the
evidence’. SA:
Juries Act 1927
, sch 6: ‘true and
honest verdict in accordance with the evidence.’ Vic:
, sch 3: ‘true verdict according to the
evidence.’ WA:
Juries Act 1957
, see also ‘A Fair
Trial Jury Duty in Western Australia’, (video) Department of Justice Court
and Tribunal Services <
https://www.courts.justice.wa.gov.au/J/jury_duty.aspx
‘true verdict on the evidence that you hear in court’.
In Tasmania, there is
provision for all jurors taking an oath to do so at the same time and all jurors
taking an affirmation to do
so at the same time. See
Juries Act 2003
See, eg, in South
Australia, where all prospective jurors are required to take the
oath/affirmation when they attend in obedience
of their summons, before they are
empanelled:
Juries Act 1927
See, eg, Dunn (n
) 8–9; Dunn (n
See Hannaford-Agor,
Rottman and Waters (n
) 8. See also Dunn
) 9: Of the 494 US federal court judges
who participated in the survey, 456 judges had taken ‘preventative
measures’ regarding
jurors’ use of the internet and social media. Of
those judges, 10 had required jurors to sign a ‘statement of
compliance’
or a ‘written pledge’ agreeing to refrain from
using social media while serving as a juror.
St Eve and Zuckerman (n
) citing Jury Committee, American College
of Trial Lawyers, ‘Jury Instructions Cautioning Against Use of the
Internet and Social
Networking’ 1, 6 (September 2010). By way of a further
example of a written pledge used by a US District Court Judge (Scheindlin)
2011: ‘I agree to follow all of the Court’s preliminary
instructions, including the Court’s specific instructions
relating to
Internet use and communication with others about the case ... I agree not to
communicate with anyone about the issues
or parties in this trial, and I will
not permit anyone to communicate with me.’
Ralph Artigliere, Jim
Barton and Bill Hahn, ‘Reining in Juror Misconduct: Practical Suggestions
for Judges and Lawyers’
(2010) 84(1)
Florida Bar Journal
Juries Act 2003
Ibid sch 5.
Submission #5 (n
Submission #3 (n
Submission #14 (n
Submission #10 (n 276)
Submission #3 (n
Submission #12 (n
Submission #7 (n
Submission #14 (n
Submission #11 (n
Submission #10 (n 276)
Submission #12 (n
Submission #9 (n
Judicial Commission of
New South Wales (n
See Appendix
E for relevant excerpts.
Judicial College of
Victorian Criminal Charge Book
(updated 17 April 2019)
http://www.judicialcollege.vic.edu.au/eManuals/CCB/index.htm#1262.htm
See Appendix F for relevant excerpts.
264 A Crim R 448. This case is put forward merely as an example of such
directions in the Tasmanian jurisdiction. It is not
purported to be any
authoritative statement of such directions. However, pertinently, it is also a
case involving juror misconduct
in Tasmania, which relates to the use of the
Attorney General v
[2014] 1 Cr App R 1, [14].
Ibid. See also Appendix
Judicial Commission of
New South Wales (n
). See Appendix E:
[1-490] Suggested (oral) directions for the opening of the trial
following empanelment
Judicial College of
Victoria (n
). See Appendix F:
‘[1.11], Consolidated preliminary directions – No Outside
Information, Warnings About Discussing the
Warner, Davis and
Underwood (n
). Juror dismissed.
R v Benbrika
[2009] VSC 142
, [66]–[67] (Bongiorno J);
Benbrika v R
[2010] VSCA 281
, [192]–[216] (Maxwell P, Nettle and Weinberg JJA). In this case,
members of the jury were given a number of directions as to
not consulting
outside sources, including: ‘you should be wary of any newspaper reports
concerning this case, television reports,
or reports of similar cases here or
anywhere else in the world. You have to decide this case on the evidence that is
led in this
courtroom. It is important that you do not do or attempt to do any
research of your own. The evidence that will be given in this
courtroom is the
evidence you will decide the case on. You must not start reading about Islam or
Muslims or terrorism or anything
of that nature. You must not go to the internet
and seek any information. The information that you have to decide this case will
be given to you in this courtroom. I can’t emphasise this more strongly.
It is extremely important. The reason for that is
Hannaford-Agor, Rottman
and Waters (n
) 8. However, it is
impossible for judicial directions to include an exhaustive list of prohibited
internet/social media platforms,
let alone an exhaustive list of possible ways
they can be misused. For example, in the US, in the context of questioning
jurors ahead
of empanelment, the ‘Ultimate Social Media Website
Interrogatory’ has identified 154 individual internet and social media
platforms: discussed in Justice Stephen Estcourt QC, ‘Using Social Media
in Civil Litigation’
(2016) Spring/Summer 10, 10.
See Dunn (n
) 8–9: Of the 494 US federal court
judges who participated in the survey, 456 judges had taken ‘preventative
regarding jurors’ use of the internet and social media. Of
those judges, 74% responded that they had adopted the specific preventative
measure of ‘[e]xplain[ing], in plain language, the reason behind the
social media ban.’ See also Hunter (n
See, eg, Artigliere,
Barton and Hahn (n
Judicial Commission of
New South Wales (n
). See Appendix E:
‘[1-490] Suggested (oral) directions for the opening of the trial
following empanelment’.
Judicial College of
Victoria (n
). See Appendix F:
‘[1.11] Consolidated preliminary directions – No Outside
Information’.
Ibid. See also Dunn (n
): Of the 494 US federal court judges who
participated in the survey, 456 judges had taken ‘preventative
measures’ regarding
jurors’ use of the internet and social media. Of
those judges, 25% responded that they had adopted the specific preventative
measure of ‘[a]lert[ing] the jury about the personal consequences.’
See also Hunter (n
(2016) 264 A Crim R 448.
See Appendix D.
Judicial Commission of
New South Wales (n
). See Appendix E:
‘[1-490] Suggested (oral) directions for the opening of the trial
following empanelment’. See also
Appendix G:
Written directions for the jury at the opening of the trial’, which
explains in some detail the specific
offence provisions which may apply to
jurors as well as some explanation as to relevant definitions and applicable
maximum penalties.
Judicial College of
Victoria (n
). See Appendix F:
[1.11] Consolidated preliminary directions – Consequences of
breaching instructions’.
Attorney-General v
[2012] EWHC 156
See, eg, United Kingdom
Ministry of Justice,
The Consolidated Criminal Practice Direction
March 2006);
R v Lambeth
[2011] EWCA Crim 157
Practice Direction 55a). See also Ministry of Justice (NZ),
Jury Service
(Courts 099, September 2010) <www.justice.govt.nz> 6, 7.
Judicial College of
Victoria (n
). See Appendix F:
‘[1.11] Consolidated preliminary directions – No Outside
Information’.
See Dunn (n
) 8–9: Of the 494 US federal court
judges who participated in the survey, 456 judges had taken ‘preventative
regarding jurors’ use of the internet and social media. Of
those judges, 70% responded that they had adopted the specific preventative
measure of ‘[i]nstruct[ing] jurors at multiple points throughout the
trial.’ See also Hannaford-Agor, Rottman and Waters
See Thomas (n
). See also Hunter (n
Judicial Commission of
New South Wales (n
). See Appendix E:
‘[1–470] Opening to the jury’. See also Appendix G:
‘[1–480] Written directions for the jury at the opening of the
Attorney-General v
[2012] EWHC 156
The Honourable Beverley
McLachlin, PC, Chief Justice of Canada, ‘The Relationship Between the
Courts and the Media’ (Speech
delivered at Carleton University, Ottawa, 15
September 2011) <
https://www.scc-csc.ca/judges-juges/spe-dis/bm-2012-01-31-eng.aspx?pedisable=true
Hannaford-Agor, Rottman
and Waters (n
Dimas-Martinez v
2011 Ark 515 (Dec 8, 2011), 12.
Goggle Plus
was an internet based social
network owned by Google Inc. It was launched in June 2011 as a competitor to
other networking sites.
It experienced some popularity in its early years, but
it was ultimately shutdown in early 2019 due to low user engagement and software
design flaws that potentially allowed outside access to user data.
Submission #4 (n
Submission #7 (n
Submission #5 (n
Submission #12 (n
Submission #14 (n
Submission #5 (n
Submission #7 (n
Submission #12 (n
Submission #21 (n
Submission #11 (n
Submission #12 (n
) 15; Submission #6 (n
) 2; Submission #10 (n 276) 9; Submission #11
) 4; Submission #13 (n
Submission #19 (n
Submission #12 (n
Submission #11 (n
Submission #14(n
Submission #7 (n
Submission #13 (n
Submission #9 (n
Submission #12 (n
Submission #13 (n
Submission #10 (n 276)
10; Submission #11 (n
) 4; Submission #13
Submission #14 (n
Submission #11 (n
) 4; submission #13 (n
Submission #14 (n
Submission #12 (n
Submission #10 (n 276)
Submission #13 (n
); submission #12 (n
Submission #14 (n
Submission #11 (n
Submission #14 (n
Submission #13 (n
); submission #6 (n
Submission #10 (n 276)
Submission #12 (n
Submission #21 (n
Submission #6 (n
) 44 (Appendix A).
Submission #10 (n 276)
Submission #11 (n
Submission #7 (n
Submission #14 (n
Submission #4 (n
Submission #10 (n 276)
John Fairfax
Publications Pty Ltd v District Court of New South Wales
[2004] NSWCA 324
(2004) 61 NSWLR
‘First Day of
The Supreme Court of Tasmania
, (18 December 2017)
<https://www.supremecourt.tas.gov.au/jurors/first-day-trial/>.
‘All mobile phones
must be turned off prior to entering the courtroom. If you’re selected on
a jury, you must hand in
your mobile phone and other electronic devices to
reception at the earliest opportunity and prior to entering court each day of
trial. You are free to use them, other than for research on the case, during
any break in proceedings.’
Supreme Court of the
Australian Capital Territory,
Jury Handbook
, (27 April 2018)
<https://courts.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0011/967646/Jury-Handbook-27-April-2018.pdf>
are not allowed to take electronic devices such as mobile phones,
laptop computers, tablets, beepers and buzzers into the court room
or into the
jury deliberation room ... Such devices must be handed to the Sheriff’s
officers, who will arrange for their safekeeping
and for their return, either at
the end of the day or (sometimes) during an adjournment.’
Department of Justice
(NSW), Office of the Sheriff,
Jury Service: A rewarding responsibility
(September 2014)
http://www.courts.justice.nsw.gov.au/Documents/j000320_juror_rewarding%20responsibilty_20pp_dl_aw_lores.pdf
16: ‘Mobile Phones: If you are empanelled as a juror, access to your
mobile phone during court hours may be restricted.’
See also Department of
Justice (NSW), Courts and Tribunal Services,
Jury summons court check
): ‘mobile phones may not be used in
the courtroom’.
Juries Victoria,
Serving on a Jury
<https://www.juriesvictoria.vic.gov.au/individuals/serving-on-a-jury>:
‘While you are serving as a juror, you will not
be able to have your phone
or other device on you’. See also ‘A Citizens Duty: Jury
Service’ (n
): ‘when they are
deliberating which means at the end of the trial when they are in the
deliberation room considering their
verdict in Vic their phones are actually
removed from them so literally a judges staff will pass around a box they will
throw their
phones in the box in the morning they pick them up in the afternoon
when they go home. That’s to discourage people from doing
research about the trial ...’
Queensland Courts,
Juror’s Handbook
<https://www.courts.qld.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0007/93814/sd-brochure-jurors-handbook.pdf>
5: ‘Can I bring a mobile
phone? Yes, but you will have to turn it off
while in courtrooms. If you are empanelled — that is, chosen to serve on a
— you will need to leave it with the Bailiff or Registrar before
entering the courtroom or jury room each day.’
Ministry of Justice (NZ)
See, eg, Brayer (n
) 37–39. See also Dunn (n
) 3: In a 2013 survey of federal judges, 30.1%
of respondents indicated that they had confiscated jurors’ phones and
other devices
as a way to prevent juror misconduct during deliberations.
See Dunn (n
) 10; Marilyn Krawitz, ‘Guilty As
Tweeted: Jurors Using Social Media Inappropriately During the Trial
Process’ (Research
Paper No 2012-02, Faculty of Law, University of Western
Australia, 2012) 35.
Submission #7 (n
Submission #12 (n
Submission #14 (n
Submission #4 (n
Submission #10 (n 276)
Submission #13 (n
Submission #12 (n
Submission #11 (n
Submission #7 (n
Submission #5 (n
) 3. See also submission #11 (n
Submission #11 (n
Submission #7 (n
). See also Submission #11 (n
Submission #9 (n
Submission #6 (n
Dupas v The Queen
[2010] HCA 20
(2010) 241 CLR 237
R v Fuller-Love
[2007] EWCA Crim 3414
69 A Crim R 450
, 453–4 (Kirby ACJ).
Dupas v The Queen
[2010] HCA 20
(2010) 241 CLR 237
Gilbert v The
(2000) 201 CLR 414
Dupas v The Queen
[2010] HCA 20
(2010) 241 CLR 237
Gilbert v The Queen
(2000) 201 CLR 414
, 425 [31] (McHugh J): ‘Put bluntly, unless we act
on the assumption that criminal juries act on the evidence and in accordance
with the directions of the trial judge, there is no point in having criminal
jury trials.’
Whitcourne (n
). See also
Agelakis v R
[2019] NSWCCA
On 29 March 2019, the NSW Court of Criminal Appeal ordered an investigation
into the alleged juror misconduct, pursuant to
Jury Act 1977
Challenge for cause
provisions:
Juries Act 1967
ss 34(1)(b)
Juries Act 1962
Jury Act 1995
Juries Act 1927
Juries Act 2003
Juries Act 2000
Criminal Procedure Act 2004
Murphy v The Queen
[1989] HCA 28
(1989) 167 CLR 94
, 102–4 (Mason CJ and Toohey J). See also at
123–4 (Brennan J): ‘[challenge for cause] has more attraction in
than in practice.’
Ibid 98–99 (Mason
CJ and Toohey J).
Ibid 123–4 (Brennan
J). The option of allowing counsel to question potential jurors about potential
bias remains a ‘wholly
exceptional’ remedy:
53 Cr App R 412
, 416 (Lawton J). See also
R v Andrews
[1999] Crim LR 156
R v Bunting and Wagner
[2003] SASC 257
, [14]. The contrast with the
approach in the US where such questioning is routine, and often time consuming,
is ‘very striking’:
Michael Chesterman, ‘Criminal Trial Juries
in Australia: From Penal Colonies to a Federal Democracy’
and Contemporary Problems
, 91. See also Jay Spears, ‘Voir Dire:
Establishing Minimum Standards to Facilitate the Exercise of Peremptory
Challenges’
Stanford Law Review
As noted in
Murphy v The Queen
[1989] HCA 28
(1989) 167 CLR 94
the effectiveness of such
questioning to detect juror prejudice has been doubted: at 123–4 (Brennan
Jury Act 1995
(2013) 2 Qd R 544.
[2014] QCS 154.
[2005] QCA 292
R v Amundsen
[2016] QCA 177.
However, it is to be
noted that provision exists in New South Wales for the judge to examine a juror
on oath in relation to his or
her possible exposure to prejudicial material:
Jury Act 1977
New Zealand Law
Commission (n
Submission #5 (n
Submission #1 (n
Submission #10 (n 276)
Submission #11 (n
Submission #5 (n
Submission #7 (n
Submission #13 (n
Submission #4 (n
Submission #9 (n
Submission #14 (n
Juries Act 2003
See, eg, J A Connolly,
Supreme Court of Tasmania Calendar 2019
https://www.supremecourt.tas.gov.au/wp-content/uploads/2018/12/2019-Calendar-for-Web..pdf
See, eg, South
Submission #19 (n
Submission #5 (n
Submission #7 (n
Submission #11 (n
Submission #12 (n
Submission #14 (n
See Dunn (n
) 6. See also Dunn (n
R v Thompson
[2010] EWCA Crim 1623
See discussion above of
desirability of incorporating into judicial
directions reminders to jurors of their obligation to report juror
irregularities/misconduct:
] and Recommendation 2, (b)(vi).
Hamilton (21 February
See Krawitz (n
OC Register
Alexandra Blucher,
‘Gable Tostee juror’s Instagram posts a sign
must roll with
the times, legal experts say’,
(online, 21 October 2016)
https://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-10-21/tostee-juror-instagram-posts-sign-jury-act-needs-review/7952550
Talia Shadwell, ‘Gable Tostee: How an Instagramming juror nearly
jeopardised trial over Warriena Wright’s death’,
https://www.stuff.co.nz/world/australia/85627461/gable-tostee-how-an-instagramming-juror-nearly-jeopardised-trial-over-warriena-wrights-death
No action against juror, no mistrial.
Glossary and
Abbreviations
Commonwealth v
, 434 Mass 245 (2001), 250. See also
Commonwealth v Guisti
Mass 1018 (2007).
People v Johnson
No F057736, 2013 WL 5366390 (Cal Ct App Sept 25, 2013), 246. This juror was
sitting in a multiple accused murder and attempted murder
trial in California.
She was also carpooling with two fellow jurors and directed one fellow juror to
her blog to look at a photograph
of a rainbow that she had taken.
Jury Act 1977
Submission #7 (n
Submission #14 (n
Submission #12 (n
‘Daycare fraudster
Melissa Higgins calls for retrial due to juror issues’
The Examiner
(online, 25 November 2018)
<https://www.examiner.com.au/story/5776483/daycare-fraudster-melissa-higgins-calls-for-retrial-due-to-juror-issues/?cs=9397>.
Hunter (n 29) 38, 44
(Appendix A).
Submission #6 (n
Submission #3 (n
Submission #12 (n
Submission #13 (n
Submission #4 (n
Submission #10 (n 276)
Submission #7 (n
Submission #11 (n
Webb v The Queen
[1994] HCA 30
1994) 181 CLR 41
There is an exception to
the statutory requirement that jury deliberations are kept confidential that
allows for jurors to disclose
information about the deliberations of a jury in
this context. See
Juries Act 2003
s 58(6)(a)(i).
Juries Act 2003
[2018] NSWCCA 116.
The jury foreperson sent the following note to the judge:
‘Good morning. This morning a juror disclosed that yesterday evening
google/looked up on the internet the requirements for a working with children
check. The juror had previously been a teacher
and was curious as to why they
themselves did not have a check. They discovered the legislation, which was only
introduced in 2013.
I myself have completed a working with children course and
so already know this information but it had not been discussed in the
See above for a
discussion of the importance of underlying knowledge
and understanding of social media and other internet platforms on the part of
the judiciary in the context of judicial directions on social media: [
Dimas-Martinez v
, 2011 Ark 515 (Dec 8, 2011), 11–15, 18.
United States v Ganias
755 F 3d 125, 131 (2d Cir 2014).
Glossary and
Abbreviations
Commonwealth v
434 Mass 245 (2001) 249–250. See
Commonwealth v Guisti
449 Mass 1018
Boyd v The State of
Western Australia
[2012] WASC 388
(19 October 2012) [23]–[24] (Hall
) 49; Grow (n
Sluss v Commonwealth
381 S W 3d 215 (Ky 2012), 221–2.
February 2019) (n
[2019] SASCFC 52.
Juries Act 2003
Bearing in mind that not every trial empanels the minimum 12 jurors to start
with. In Tasmania, the court may empanel up to
two reserve jurors (a total of 14
Jury Act 1977
Juries Act 1927
Juries Act 2000
. In New South Wales, there are model
judicial directions to explain the discharge of one or more juror/s to the
balance of the jury:
See Appendix H.
Juries Act 2003
Robbie Manhus,
‘Responding to Independent Juror Research in the Internet Age: Positive
Rules, Negative Rules, and Outside Mechanism’
(2014) 112(5)
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 409;
Juries Act 2003
s 58(6)(c).
Criminal Code 1924
(Tas) s 402(1).
Marshall and
Richardson v Tasmania
(2016) 264 A Crim R 448, [49] (Brett J), citing
[2012] QCA 155
[2005] NSWCCA 377
(2005) 160 A Crim R 1.
Ibid [51]–[52]
Supreme Court
(Tas) div 3.
Without curtailing the
court’s common law powers to deal with a contempt of court summarily of
its own motion.
Juries Act 2003
Jury Act 1967
(ACT) s 42C; NSW:
Jury Act 1977
Juries Act 1962
Jury Act 1995
Juries Act 2000
Juries Act 2003
Jury Act 1977
s 53A(1)(c).
Jury Act 1995
Juries Act 2000
Johnston et al (n
Submission #5 (n
Submission #14 (n
Submission #13 (n
Submission #5 (n
Submission #7 (n
Submission #13 (n
Submission #21 (n
Submission #14 (n
Submission #4 (n
Submission #9 (n
Submission #10 (n 276)
Submission #10 (n 276)
See discussion at [
Submission #1 (n
Submission #13 (n
Submission #4 (n
Submission #21 (n
Brownlee v The Queen
[2001] HCA 36
(2001) 207 CLR 278
The Hon Michael Kirby,
‘Speaking to the Modern Jury – New Challenges for Judges &
Advocates’ (Speech, Worldwide
Advocacy Conference, The Inns School of Law,
London, 29 June–2 July 1998)
http://www.hcourt.gov.au/assets/publications/speeches/former-justices/kirbyj/kirbyj_london.htm
Mr Connolly also holds
office as the Registrar of the Supreme Court of Tasmania. However, his
submission is made in his capacity
as Sheriff and is not a submission by or on
behalf of the Supreme Court of Tasmania.
Supreme Court of the
Australian Capital Territory,
Jury Handbook
Judicial Commission of
New South Wales (n
Judicial College of
Victorian Criminal Charge Book
Judicial Commission of
New South Wales (n
Judicial Commission of
New South Wales (n
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (3.31 MB)
PDF format (1.39 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter