URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/lawreform/NSWLRCIP/1997/13.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:36:41
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Circulation of Legal Advice to Government - Issues Paper [1997] NSWLRCIP 13
Issues Paper 13 (1997) - Circulation of Legal Advice to Government
Table of Contents
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Summary of issues
1. INTRODUCTION
ISSUES FOR CONSIDERATION
Background to the reference - the Smiles case
Terms of reference
Issues arising from the Smiles case
OUTLINE OF THIS PAPER
2. LEGAL ADVISERS TO GOVERNMENT
THE CROWN SOLICITOR
Commonwealth Attorney-General's Directions
THE LAW OFFICERS
The Attorney General
The Solicitor General
THE CROWN ADVOCATE
OTHER LEGAL ADVISERS
Private Practitioners
Salaried "in-house" lawyers
3. IDENTIFYING THE CLIENT
BRANCHES OF GOVERNMENT
Separation of powers
Legislature
The Crown and the rule of law
The Crown as symbol
The "indivisible" Crown
The reality of multifarious government
Disputes between different branches of government
GOVERNMENT AS A SINGLE ENTITY
Identifying the client
The government as a corporate entity
The government as discrete agencies
The Commission's preliminary view
THE CHANGING NATURE OF GOVERNMENT
4. CIRCULATION OF LEGAL ADVICE TO GOVERNMENT
THE CURRENT POSITION
"Legal advice to government" defined
Circulation of legal advice within government
SHOULD LEGAL ADVICE TO GOVERNMENT BE CIRCULATED?
Arguments for wider circulation
Wider circulation within government
Wider circulation to selected agencies or persons
Wider circulation to the public
Arguments against wider curculation
Wider circulation within government
Wider circulation to selected agencies or persons
Wider circulation to the public
ADVICE EXCLUDED FROM CIRCULATION
EFFECT OF RELEASE ON INTRA-GOVERNMENTAL RELATIONS
Intellectual property issues
5. EXCEPTIONS FOR CIRCULATION
CURRENT LAW AND PRACTICE
Public interest immunity
Legal professional priviledge
Salaried legal practitioners
Legal advice or policy advice?
SHOULD ADVICE TO GOVERNMENT BE SUBJECT TO PROVILEDGE?
Can Ministers claim priviledge against each other?
"Common interest" priviledge
Joint priviledge between partners
A provisional view
6. PRACTICAL ISSUES FOR CIRCULATION OF ADVICE
SHOULD ADVICE BE CIRCULATED OR "MADE AVAILABLE"?
HOW SHOULD ADVICE BE DISTRIBUTED?
RESTRICTIONS ON USE OF THE ADVICE
Issues Paper 13 (1997) - Circulation of Legal Advice to Government
Terms of Reference, Participants and Submissions
History of this Reference (Digest)
Terms of Reference
Pursuant to
Law Reform Commission Act 1967
(NSW), the Attorney General, the Honourable J W Shaw QC MLC, referred, by letter dated 2 July 1996, the following matter to the Law
Reform Commission.
Whether, and in what circumstances, arrangements should be made for the circulation of legal advices received by agencies representing
the Crown to other agencies.
Participants
Pursuant to
Law Reform Commission Act 1967
the Chairman of the Commission constituted a Division for the purpose of conducting the reference. The members of the Division are:
Mr Michael Adams QC
The Hon Justice John Dowd AO
Professor John Goldring*
The Hon Justice David Hodgson
Mr Craig Kelly
(* denotes Commissioner-in-Charge)
Officers of the Commission
Executive Director
Mr Peter Hennessy
Legal research
Ms Catherine Gray
Ms Donna Hayward
Ms Jennifer Lock
Ms Beverley Caska
Desktop publishing
Ms Julie Freeman
Administrative assistance
Ms Helen Levendakis
Honorary consultant
The Hon Justice Keith Mason
Submissions
The Commission invites submissions on the issues relevant to this review, including but not limited to the issues raised in this
Issues Paper
All submissions and inquiries should be directed to:
Mr Peter Hennessy
Executive Director
NSW Law Reform Commission
GPO Box 5199
SYDNEY NSW 2001
[DX 1227 SYDNEY]
Phone: (02) 9228 8230
Fax: (02) 9228 8225
There is no special form required for submissions. If it is inconvenient or impractical to make a written submission you may telephone
the Commission and either direct your comments to a Legal Officer over the telephone, or else arrange to make your submission in
Closing date for submissions
The closing date for submissions is
29 August 1997
. No final decisions will be made by the Commission until after the deadline for submissions has passed.
Use of submissions and confidentiality
If you would like your submission to be treated as confidential, please indicate this in your submission. Submissions made to the
Commission may be used in two ways:
Since the Commission's process of law reform is essentially public, copies of submissions made to the Commission will normally be
made available on request to any person or organisation. However, if you would like all or part of your submission to be treated
as confidential, please indicate this in your submission. Any request for a copy of a submission marked "confidential"
will be determined in accordance with the
Freedom of Information Act 1989
In preparing the final Report, the Commission may also find it useful to refer to and make mention of comments submitted in response
Issues Paper
. However, if a request for confidentiality is made, it will be respected by the Commission in relation to the publication of such
submissions in a Report.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Summary of issues
Table of contents
Issues Paper 13 (1997) - Circulation of Legal Advice to Government
Summary of Issues
History of this Reference (Digest)
When lawyers advise government, who, or what exactly, is the client?
Should legal advice to government be regarded as advice to a single entity (such as a corporation or partnership) or to the particular
department or agency that requests it?
Should the answer to ISSUE 2 depend on the circumstances, including the kind of advice given, or the purpose for which it was obtained?
What impact do privatisation and National Competition Policy have on the practicality of advising government as a single entity?
Should advice of government legal officers provided to partially privatised government agencies (for example, Pacific Power) be treated
in the same way as advice to government?
Can legal advice to government be defined? If so, how?
Should legal advice to government be more widely circulated?
If so, should legal advice be circulated:
within government only; or
to the general public as well?
Should there be categories of advice with different conditions of circulation applying to each category? What are they?
Should certain categories of advice be excluded altogether from circulation?
Is it likely that circulating advice to government more widely would result in more inter-departmental disputes?
If so, do the advantages of disclosure outweigh the disadvantage of an increase in inter-departmental disputes?
Should special provisions be made relating to the intellectual property in legal advice given by private legal practitioners to government,
for example, an implied licence in retainer agreements between the government and private practitioners which permits the government
to publish the advice as it sees fit?
Are there reasons for excluding advice from circulation:
(a) within government; or
(b) to the general public?
If there are reasons for excluding legal advice from circulation, should all such legal advice be so protected or should the protection
only extend to certain categories? How would these categories be determined?
Should a distinction be made between legal advice of a general or policy nature and legal advice concerning actual or possible litigation?
If so, how would this distinction be made?
What should be the basis for excluding certain information from circulation:
(a) it contains matters of legal professional privilege?
(b) it contains matters which it is in the public interest to keep confidential? or
(c) other grounds for protecting information?
Assuming that there are certain categories of advice which should be circulated, should this advice be actively circulated, or merely
made available to those government departments and agencies or members of the public who request the advice?
Who should be subject to the duty either to circulate the advice or make the advice available?
If advice is to be disclosed within government, how should it be disclosed - in a Government Gazette, departmental circulars, newsletter
or elsewhere?
If advice is to be disclosed to the general public, how should it be disclosed - on the Internet, in government newsletters or elsewhere?
What mechanisms could ensure that those government departments or members of the public to whom the advice is relevant actually have
access to the advice?
If legal advice is made more widely available, should any restrictions be placed on the use to which the advice is put?
How feasible is it to ensure that restrictions on the use of legal advice are adhered to?
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Summary of issues
Table of contents
Issues Paper 13 (1997) - Circulation of Legal Advice to Government
1. Introduction
History of this Reference (Digest)
ISSUES FOR CONSIDERATION
1.1 The main matter for consideration in this Issues Paper is whether, and in what circumstances, arrangements should be made for
the circulation of legal advice received by agencies representing the Crown:
to other agencies representing the Crown;
more widely, to the public.
1.2 Significant issues of government policy flow from the main point concerning the circulation of legal advice. In this Issues Paper,
the Commission does not seek to decide those questions, but rather to indicate what they are, and to isolate relevant legal issues.
The specific points raised for discussion are listed at the front of this Issues Paper and are repeated throughout the text.
1.3 The Commission assumes that government, including Ministers, State-owned corporations, departments, other entities and officials
are bound to obey the law and to uphold the rule of law. Parliament is accountable to the electors, while Ministers and officials,
in theory, are accountable through the Parliament and also through the rules of administrative law applied by the courts. This Issues
Paper indicates some areas in which the Commission considers that wider circulation of legal advice to government might further these
ends and, at the same time, improve the efficiency and effectiveness of the operation of government. It seeks comment and information
relevant to these issues.
Background to the reference - the Smiles case
1.4 This reference is the direct result of a recommendation of the Independent Commission Against Corruption (“ICAC”),
arising from its consideration of the case of Mr P M Smiles. In 1992, the Member of the Legislative Assembly for the seat of North
Shore, Mr Smiles, was charged with certain offences under the
Taxation Administration Act 1953
(Cth). The Clerk of the House sought advice from the Crown Solicitor as to whether Mr Smiles’ seat would be vacated if he were
convicted. The
Constitution
(NSW) (“the
Constitution
Act”) provides:
Further disqualifications
13A. If a Member of either House of Parliament:
... (e) is attainted of treason or convicted of felony or any infamous crime,
his seat as a Member of that House shall thereby become vacant.
1.5 The Crown Solicitor advised that:
the offences under the
Taxation Administration Act 1953
(NSW) were “infamous crimes” within the meaning of s 13A(e) of the
Constitution
if Mr Smiles were convicted, the seat would be vacated;
if convicted, Mr Smiles would lose his entitlement to a parliamentary pension; and
various consequences would follow if Mr Smiles, having been convicted, appealed successfully against the verdict and conviction.
1.6 The advice was forwarded to the Speaker on 8 February 1993 and to the Tabling Officers of the House on 9 February 1993, with a
note to them requesting that the advice be kept confidential.
1.7 Mr Smiles was convicted of the offences on 21 December 1993. Later that day he wrote to the Speaker tendering his resignation,
at the same time maintaining his innocence and stating his intention to appeal. The Speaker received the letter the same day. The
next day, 22 December 1993, Mr Smiles applied for a pension under the
Parliamentary Contributory Superannuation Act 1971
(NSW). Normally such applications are handled by the NSW Superannuation Office under a delegation from the trustees of the fund established
under that Act. In this case the Superannuation Office decided, in the light of the public interest in the circumstances, to refer
the matter to the trustees for decision. On 25 January 1994, the trustees (all of whom were Members of Parliament) resolved unanimously
to approve payment of a pension to Mr Smiles. The
Parliamentary Contributory Superannuation Act 1971
(NSW) gives the trustees a discretion to approve the payment of some pensions in a lump sum. In April 1994, they agreed, unanimously,
to exercise this discretion and give approval to Mr Smiles being paid a lump sum.
1.8 In a covering letter to the Chairman of the trustees forwarding his application for a pension, Mr Smiles advised that he had tendered
his resignation to the Speaker. He did not mention his conviction, though this was widely publicised at the time. If Mr Smiles had
ceased to be a Member of Parliament by virtue of his letter of resignation, he would have been entitled to payment of a parliamentary
pension. If, however, he had ceased to be a Member on his conviction by operation of s 13A of the
Constitution
, he would have been entitled only to the contributions he had made to the superannuation fund.
1.9 The trustees did not ask the Speaker or the Clerk if they had received any advice concerning the situation of Mr Smiles and his
entitlement to a pension. Neither the Speaker nor the Clerk volunteered that they had such advice, nor did they seek to make this
advice available to the trustees. It does not seem that the trustees were at any relevant time conscious of the legal issue presented
by the actual circumstances in which Mr Smiles ceased to be a Member of the Parliament. The matter was referred subsequently to the
ICAC, which, after considering the
Constitution
and other relevant legislation, published a report that included the following statement:
The Clerk was advised that the Solicitor General had settled the advice, that it was provided for the benefit of the Clerk and should
not be relied upon by any other person, although the possibility of its release to Members of the House was recognised. This is not
Legal advice is usually prepared for the specific purpose of the particular client. That is one reason why such statements, as well
as disclaimers, are commonplace in legal
1.10 The trustees sought the advice of the Crown Solicitor regarding Mr Smiles’ entitlements on 22 December 1993. The Crown
Solicitor declined to advise and suggested that advice be sought from an appropriate Queen’s Counsel. ICAC found that the trustees
might have sought independent legal advice but decided not to do so, due to the expense involved.
1.11 Other public officials and bodies had received legal advice concerning the effects and consequences of Mr Smiles’ conviction.
The Solicitor General had provided a number of opinions to the Director General of the Attorney General’s Department and the
Director General of the Cabinet Office in which loss of entitlement to a parliamentary pension was clearly stated as a possible consequence
of conviction for an “infamous crime”. ICAC found that both the Premier and the Chairman of the trustees of the superannuation
fund (who was a Cabinet Minister at all relevant times) were aware of the existence of the Solicitor General’s opinions, if
not of the detail of their contents, at the time the trustees considered Mr Smiles’ application, because the general questions
had been the subject of Cabinet briefing papers. However, it was accepted that the Chairman took seriously the need to distinguish
his functions as a Cabinet Minister from those as a trustee, and that there was no dishonesty or corrupt conduct in the way he acted.
1.12 ICAC found that there was no conduct which could be described as “corrupt” on the part of any person. In a second
report, the ICAC examined certain provisions of the
Constitution
and other legislation relating to the loss of parliamentary office.
1.13 ICAC was also asked to advise on whether, and in what circumstances, legal advice to agencies representing the Crown should be
circulated more widely, but recommended instead that this question be referred to the NSW Law Reform Commission.
Terms of reference
1.14 The NSW Government accepted the ICAC’s advice. Accordingly, in November 1996 the Attorney General requested the Commission
to consider:
Whether, and in what circumstances, arrangements should be made for the circulation of legal advices received by agencies representing
the Crown to other agencies.
The expression “other agencies” is not entirely clear. For the purposes of this Issues Paper, the Commission will assume
that it has a wide meaning.
Issues arising from the Smiles case
1.15 Wider circulation of the advice given to the Clerk may have influenced the course of events significantly. If, for example, the
trustees had access to the advice of the Solicitor General and Crown Solicitor, it may not have indicated to them whether or not
to grant Mr Smiles’ application for a parliamentary pension, but it would have alerted them to the possible need to inquire
further into the issue of whether Mr Smiles ceased to be a Member of Parliament because of his resignation or because of the conviction,
and, in any case, whether any act on the part of the Parliament was necessary before either the seat became vacant or Mr Smiles lost
his entitlement to the pension.
OUTLINE OF THIS PAPER
1.16 This paper explores the nature of legal advice to government, some of the legal rules currently relating to circulation or publication
of that advice. It then seeks comment on whether different rules are required, and if so, what those rules should be.
1.17 Chapter 2 identifies the legal advisers to government, namely: the Attorney General; Solicitor General; the Crown Solicitor;
the Crown Advocate; salaried lawyers employed by government agencies and solicitors and barristers in private practice who, from
time to time, provide legal advice to government.
1.18 Chapter 3 looks at the recipient of legal advice provided to government agencies. It examines the government as client, including:
the effect of the application of the theory of separation of powers;
the nature of the different parts of government;
the possible effect of the theory of the “indivisibility of the Crown”; and
the possible consequences of the corporatisation and privatisation of a range of government functions.
1.19 Chapter 4 examines the principal issue of whether advice to government should be more widely available. It then considers whether
there is advice which should be excluded from wider circulation.
1.20 Chapter 5 explains the doctrines of legal professional privilege and public interest immunity, and examines their importance
in determining whether or not legal advice to government should be made public.
1.21 Chapter 6 raises specific practical issues relating to the publication of legal advice that need to be addressed if it is decided
that advice should be circulated. It examines whether a distinction should be made between circulating advice and merely making advice
available, the measures that may be required to ensure that the people or departments to whom the advice is relevant actually receive
the advice, and the means through which advice should be circulated or made available.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Summary of issues
Table of contents
. Terms of Reference dated November 1996.
. The following summary of facts is taken from NSW, Independent Commission Against Corruption
Report on Investigation into Circumstances Surrounding the Payment of a Parliamentary Pension to Mr P M Smiles
(February 1995) (“the ICAC Report”).
. ICAC Report at 4.
. ICAC Report at 4 (emphasis added).
. ICAC Report at 34-35.
. ICAC Report at 8.
. NSW, Independent Commission Against Corruption
Report on Investigation into Circumstances Surrounding the Payment of a Parliamentary Pension to Mr P M Smiles: Second Report
(April 1996) (“the ICAC Second Report”).
. ICAC Second Report at 21.
Issues Paper 13 (1997) - Circulation of Legal Advice to Government
2. Legal Advisers to Government
History of this Reference (Digest)
2.1 The legal advisers to government are principally the Crown Solicitor, Attorney General, Solicitor General, Crown Advocate, salaried
lawyers employed by government agencies and, to a growing degree, barristers and solicitors in private practice. This chapter examines
their respective roles and functions.
2.2 The Director of Public Prosecutions (DPP) provides advice to law enforcement agencies, but this Issues Paper does not deal with
that advice. Most of the advice the DPP provides relates to the conduct of specific matters,
and would be kept confidential on the grounds of privilege considered in Chapter 5. The DPP does issue guidelines on general policy,
but may not issue guidelines relating to particular cases, and must publish all guidelines in his Annual Report.
Those guidelines are already in the public domain.
2.3 There is no legislation establishing the offices of either the Attorney General or Crown Solicitor
in NSW, so common law and practice determine the nature and extent of the functions and roles attaching to those offices.
The common law of England relating to the office of Attorney General in that country may not apply in Australia.
2.4 In NSW, the Attorney General, the Solicitor General, and especially the Crown Solicitor, all see their role, in so far as they
are advocates and legal advisers, primarily as being to serve the executive government, which comprises the Ministers, the Cabinet,
and the departments and agencies that carry out the various non-legislative and non-judicial functions of government.
THE CROWN SOLICITOR
2.5 The Crown Solicitor, and his or her staff, are employed under the provisions of the
Public Sector Management Act 1988
While the office resembles that of the English Treasury Solicitor
in some respects, it is quite distinct.
There is no statutory basis for the office of Crown Solicitor, though special provisions are made in the
Legal Profession Act 1987
(NSW) for the Crown Solicitor and members of his or her staff to be free from some of the requirements of that Act. The Crown Solicitor
holds a practising certificate issued under the Act
and is normally the solicitor on the record when a government department or agency is involved in court proceedings. As the Crown
Solicitor’s Office (“the CSO”) puts it:
The Crown Solicitor’s Office (CSO) provides legal services to the State Government, Government Departments and Administrative
Bodies, and Statutory Authorities. With a few exceptions the Office can be instructed to act in any type of legal matter.
2.6 In matters of constitutional or administrative law, or otherwise concerning the nature and extent of powers and functions of government
departments and agencies, the Crown Solicitor is normally the source of legal advice. This advice is normally given in the form of
a letter of advice from the Crown Solicitor, or an authorised member of the staff of the CSO, to the department or agency concerned.
2.7 If the matter is not clear, the CSO may recommend, or the department or agency may request, that the opinion of the Solicitor
General, or, if the circumstances warrant it, of a barrister in private practice, be obtained. In this respect, the Solicitor General
may perform a role identical to that played by private counsel when the client is not part of the government. The advice received
is passed on to the department or agency in the same way as a private solicitor passes on advice received from counsel to the client.
The department or agency stands in relation to the Crown in very much the same relationship as a private client stands in relation
to his or her solicitor or counsel.
2.8 Until 1995, it was usual for a government agency to employ the Crown Solicitor exclusively for the provision of legal advice and
other legal services. Even before then, some departments and agencies staff (for example, the former Department of Railways) employed
their own legal staff. In July 1995, the Crown Solicitor’s Office was “commercialised”, involving the CSO in greater
competition with private sector practitioners. Since 1995, government departments and agencies have had greater freedom to obtain
legal services from private practitioners. In response to the commercialisation of the CSO, the Premier issued broad guidelines (“the
Premier’s Guidelines”),
which, although far from clear, provide that key areas still need to be referred to Crown Officers because of their complexity or
sensitivity, or the need to be handled centrally on behalf of the government. The Guidelines state that such areas include matters:
with implications beyond an individual Minister’s portfolio;
involving constitutional powers or privileges of the State;
which raise issues fundamental to the responsibilities of government; or
relating to matters falling within the Attorney General’s areas of responsibility.
2.9 The Premier’s Guidelines are reproduced in Appendix A. Similar directions for the provision of legal services to government
departments and agencies exist for the Commonwealth Attorney-General’s Department.
The Commonwealth Directions are reproduced in Appendix B and are discussed further in paragraphs 2.12-2.13.
2.10 Historically, there was an advantage in the requirement that all government departments and agencies obtain their legal advice
from the Crown Solicitor. The same opinion on the law was given to each department or agency, even when those departments or agencies
held differing views on the point of law. The advice of the Crown Solicitor was widely regarded as authoritative and binding and
therefore more likely to put an end to the contention. Now that departments and agencies have either their own salaried legal staff
or the capacity, in certain cases, to contract with lawyers in private practice for the provision of legal advice, there is a greater
possibility that disputes over points of law between various arms of government may become a source of public difference.
2.11 The commercialisation of the CSO presents one other possible problem in the context of this reference. The CSO is now required
to charge fees to departments and agencies for its work, unless that work falls within a closely defined “core” area
of government activity. Thus, if the CSO is asked by several different departments or agencies for advice on the same or similar
subject matter, like private practitioners, it may charge each department a full fee for advice which is substantially the same as
that provided to other agencies. This system of charging provides an incentive to the CSO, similar to the motivation for private
practitioners, to oppose wider dissemination of advice. That advice becomes a “product” of commercial value, and may
have the status of intellectual property.
Commonwealth Attorney-General’s Directions
2.12 The Commonwealth Government has also modified the arrangements under which its departments and agencies receive legal advice,
and has opened up to competition the work previously performed exclusively by the Australian Government Solicitor’s Office.
The Commonwealth Attorney-General’s Department has published Directions about the provision of legal services to government
departments and agencies. These Directions state that the Attorney-General is the first law officer and the legal adviser to Cabinet.
The Directions divide up the legal work of government departments and agencies into categories. One category is for the type of legal
work which departments and agencies can choose to have done by an in-house lawyer or private sector lawyer. Such work includes:
general legal advice, interpretation of legislation, advice on the powers of officers, advice on secrecy provisions, settling minor
claims, advice in specialised areas, and statutory interpretation relating to the expenditure or receipt of public money;
legal agreements or contracts, except those which are to be approved by Cabinet; and
all work in tribunals.
2.13 Legal work which must be carried out within the (Commonwealth) Attorney-General’s Department (which includes the legal
practice formerly conducted by the Australian Government Solicitor) includes:
legal advice to Cabinet;
policy advice in matters within the Attorney-General’s portfolio;
public international law and treaties;
drafting of subordinate legislation;
prosecution services;
constitutional advice;
litigation in courts by or against the Commonwealth, Commonwealth Ministers and other Commonwealth officers or employees and agencies;
matters involving legal agreements which are to be approved by Cabinet;
matters of dispute between Commonwealth departments or agencies;
matters with national security implications; and
government-to-government work, both domestic and international.
THE LAW OFFICERS
2.14 Australia has inherited a number of officials, who, as in England are called “Law Officers of the Crown”
. Traditionally, the Attorney General and Solicitor General are referred to collectively as “Law Officers of the Crown”.
Although the names are the same, the nature and function of the offices in Australia differ significantly from those in the United
Kingdom. In addition, the office and functions of the Solicitor General in New South Wales may be very different from those of a
person with the same title in another State or in another Commonwealth country.
2.15 In England, the Lord Chancellor may be included for some purposes within this group. The role of the Lord Chancellor in England
includes acting as a judge, presiding over the House of Lords when it sits as an appellate court; acting as a senior Cabinet Minister,
and head of the department responsible for the administration of the courts and the civil law. In New South Wales, the Ministerial
functions of the Lord Chancellor are currently exercised by the Attorney General, although at times there have been separate Ministers
for Justice or Courts Administration. In this reference, the Commission is not concerned with the Ministerial functions of the Law
The Attorney General
2.16 The Attorney General’s office was established in NSW in 1823.
Initially, the Attorney General was a lawyer appointed to advise the governor and oversee the administration of criminal law. When
Legislative Councils were appointed to advise Governors, the Attorney General was invariably a member by virtue of the office. As
elected parliaments and ministries replaced appointed Legislative Councils, the Attorney General was selected from the Members of
Parliament, as in England. In NSW the Attorney General has in most instances been a barrister, though some have been solicitors.
2.17 In NSW, the office is given special recognition in the
Constitution
(NSW). Sections 36-37A of that Act provide for arrangements where a Minister of the Crown is unable or unavailable to perform Ministerial
duties. However, s 38 provides that these arrangements do not apply to the Attorney General, recognising the special functions of
the Attorney General as chief legal adviser to government.
2.18 In NSW, the Attorney General has a number of roles. Very few of his or her major functions are expressed in legislation. Many
derive from the English common law, though several are founded in local practice. Among these roles are:
leader of the organised bar;
Cabinet Minister responsible for legal policy and courts;
principal legal representative of the State in court proceedings;
holder of special powers in relation to criminal law enforcement;
representative of the public interest in court proceedings;
legal adviser to Cabinet and to Ministers; and
legal adviser to parliamentary officers.
This Issues Paper is concerned with the Attorney General’s role as legal adviser.
2.19 The Attorney General provides legal advice as a member of Cabinet, where his or her role is to advise on the legal aspects of
policy and political problems and endeavour “to ensure that decisions of the Cabinet are taken with appropriate legal advice”.
2.20 In addition, the Attorney General may provide formal written advice on important legal issues. In Australia, these written advices
from the Law Officers are generally called “advisings”. The Attorney General may also provide informal advice to government,
Ministers and departments when requested. The Commission has confined its attention for the purposes of this reference to formal
written advice.
2.21 While Attorneys General in fact provide legal advice, in Australia it now appears that their role is more as a political adviser
than as a legal adviser. Although in form the Attorney General remains the principal legal adviser to government, in practice, most
technical legal advice at high level is provided by the Solicitor General, and often the Crown Solicitor.
It is not unusual for the Solicitor General’s advice to be adopted formally by the Attorney General and tendered to Cabinet
or a Minister.
The Solicitor General
2.22 The Solicitor General’s office was established in NSW in 1824.
The nature of the position has differed from time to time,
but is now established as a non-political one. The statutes governing the Solicitor General and Crown Advocate do not define the
functions attached to the offices, but refer to the functions of the Attorney General at common law.
Solicitor General Act 1969
(NSW) provides that:
the Governor may appoint a legal practitioner of at least seven years’ standing to be Solicitor General; and
the Solicitor General shall not be a Minister of the Crown.
2.24 Section 3 of the Act provides:
Powers, authorities etc. of Solicitor General
3. (1) The Solicitor General may:
(a) act as Counsel for Her Majesty and may perform such other duties and functions of Counsel as the Attorney General directs;
(b) when the office of Attorney General is vacant, or the Attorney General is absent from the State or is by reason of illness unable
to exercise and discharge his powers, authorities, duties and functions, exercise and discharge any powers, authorities, duties and
functions conferred or imposed on the Attorney General by or under any Act or incident by law to the office of the Attorney General.
2.25 In NSW, the Solicitor General functions within the administrative structure of the Attorney General’s Department and is
under the direction of the Attorney General. In practice, the Solicitor General has a far more limited policy role than the Attorney
General, almost invariably appears on behalf of the State Government in judicial proceedings, and provides many more written and
oral advisings to the government on legal matters. This Issues Paper concentrates primarily on such formal opinions.
THE CROWN ADVOCATE
2.26 The office of Crown Advocate is created by the
Crown Advocate Act 1979
(NSW). There was no such office at common law, so it is probably incorrect to refer to the Crown Advocate as a Law Officer. As with
the role of the Solicitor General, the Governor may appoint a legal practitioner of at least seven years’ standing to the office
of Crown Advocate, and he or she may not be a Minister.
The functions of the Crown Advocate are set out in
The Crown Advocate’s main duty is to assist the Solicitor General in performance of his or her functions. Like the Solicitor
General, the Crown Advocate is formally under the direction of the Attorney General.
OTHER LEGAL ADVISERS
Private practitioners
2.27 Government departments and agencies may obtain legal advice from solicitors and barristers in private practice. While every legal
practitioner has a duty to advise impartially on the law, there is a practical and understandable tendency for some private practitioners,
who are competing for the client’s business, to present advice in ways which are as conducive as possible to the interests
of the client. The pressures of competition for some practitioners may not be entirely consistent with the obligation to give advice
which the client may not welcome. When the legal adviser to government, for example the CSO, was not competing for work, there was
very little possibility that the advice, or the way it was presented, would avoid matters that the client did not want to hear.
2.28 Obtaining advice from private practitioners is also a departure from the former practice of having a single, authoritative source
of advice for the whole of government. An increasing number of government departments and agencies (including the Cabinet Office)
seek advice from private solicitors and counsel in some matters. As the Premier’s Guidelines
suggest that matters that “have implications for Government beyond an individual Minister’s portfolio” must be
referred to the CSO, it is unlikely that advice received by government agencies from private lawyers would ever need to be circulated
beyond the recipient. To the extent that they obtain written advice from private solicitors or counsel, that advice is theirs to
do with as they choose.
There is also a direction from the Premier that matters which raise actual or potential intra-governmental disputes must be referred
to the Solicitor General.
However, where a Minister’s portfolio includes more than one agency, covers the interpretation of legislation, or where more
than one Minister is responsible for administering the same legislation,
there are arguments that such advice should be publicly available. In this Issues Paper, the Commission seeks comment on matters
relevant to these points.
2.29 The Commission suggests that the advice of the Law Officers and the Crown Solicitor, especially on matters of policy, is qualitatively
different from that obtained from private barristers and solicitors. This is especially so in relation to the general interpretation
of legislation, the scope of policy and other matters not connected with specific litigation.
Salaried “in-house” lawyers
2.30 At times, different government agencies have appointed their own separate legal staff, who have no connection with the Attorney
General, Solicitor General, Crown Advocate or Crown Solicitor. In NSW there have been solicitors for the Department of Railways,
for the Department of Main Roads, and for other government departments or agencies. The ethos of the National Competition Policy
and the new structure and organisation of the CSO means that some agencies and government departments look beyond the CSO for legal
advice on a range of matters.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Summary of issues
Table of contents
. Mr N R Cowdery, QC, Director of Public Prosecutions, personal communication 6 June 1997.
Director of Public Prosecutions Act 1987
s 14, 15, 34.
Legal Profession Act 1987
(NSW) makes special provision for the Crown Solicitor, but does not create the office.
. See paras 2.14-2.25 for a fuller discussion on the common law relating to Crown Law Officers.
. In the publicity brochure for the Crown Solicitor’s Office, the Crown Solicitor’s functions are described: “[T]he
CSO [Crown Solicitor’s Office] exists essentially to provide services to the Executive Government and its various agencies”:
NSW, Crown Solicitor’s Office
Crown Solicitor’s Office Legal Services
(Sydney, 1991). A former Solicitor General, the Hon Justice Keith Mason, confirmed this view and also described the practice of the
Crown Law Officers in NSW as being unwilling to provide advice to the Parliament or parliamentary officers without the consent of
the Attorney General: 6 March 1997.
. The office of Treasury Solicitor in England has existed since about 1670: see M Birks,
Gentlemen of the Law
(Stevens & Sons, London, 1960) at 130-131. The office still exists and is responsible for the legal work of the Treasury and
central policy departments. However, other departments (such as the Foreign and Colonial Office) have traditionally employed their
own legal staff who are quite separate from the Treasury Solicitor.
. NSW, Crown Solicitor’s Office
Crown Solicitor’s Office Legal Services
(Sydney, 1991).
. NSW, Premier’s Memorandum to all Ministers No 95-39
Arrangements for seeking legal advice from the Crown Solicitor’s Office
(12 October 1995). See Appendix A.
. Australia, Attorney-General
Directions for the Provision of Legal Services to Government Departments and Agencies
(1 July 1995). (“the Commonwealth Attorney-General’s Directions”). See Appendix B
. Discussed at paras 4.19-4.24
. The most comprehensive account of the history and modern work of the English Law Officers is J LI J Edwards
The Law Officers of the Crown
(Sweet and Maxwell, London, 1964); see also P Archer
The Role of the Law Officers
(Fabian Research Series 339, London, 1978).
. NSW, Attorney General’s Department
A Brief History of the Attorney General’s Department
(March 1996) at 6.
. For example, as representative, at common law, of young children and others suffering from a legal disability, and also as “relator”:
the nominal plaintiff in actions brought by a private citizen to enforce some right held by members of the public generally.
. Legal advice to the Parliament or to either House is usually given by the Solicitor General or the Crown Solicitor to the Clerk,
after the Attorney General has approved. If the advice concerns a dispute between a House of Parliament and a Minister, as in
Egan v Willis
(1996) 40 NSWLR 650
, the Clerk will obtain advice from private barristers or solicitors.
. New Zealand, Solicitor-General
Role of the Attorney-General, Solicitor-General and Crown Law Office and Issues of Importance
(Crown Law Office, Wellington, 1996) at 2.
. J McKechnie “Directors of Public Prosecutions: Independent or Accountable”
(1996-97) 15
Australian Bar Review
. K Mason “The Office of Solicitor General for New South Wales” (1988) (Autumn)
. Mason at 22.
. NSW, Premier’s Memorandum to all Ministers No 95-39
Arrangements for seeking legal advice from the Crown Solicitor’s Office
(12 October 1995) at para (a). See Appendix A.
. See the discussion about issues of copyright in legal advice from private practitioners at paras 4.19-4.24.
. NSW, Premier’s Memorandum to all Ministers No 95-39
Arrangements for seeking legal advice from the Crown Solicitor’s Office
(12 October 1995). See Appendix A.
. For example, both the Attorney General and the Minister for Corrective Services have responsibility for administering the
Sentencing Act 1989
Issues Paper 13 (1997) - Circulation of Legal Advice to Government
3. Identifying the Client
History of this Reference (Digest)
3.1 A fundamental issue arising in this reference is the question of who constitutes the “client” for the purpose of receiving
legal advice. Essentially, the client, as recipient of the legal advice, is the government. However, in NSW, government is manifested
in different forms, depending on the purpose it is fulfilling. In legal terms, the problem of identifying the client arises in a
number of contexts, and the answer may vary from one context to the next. This chapter examines the structure and composition of
government for the purposes of identifying the client, and the legal implications of that structure.
BRANCHES OF GOVERNMENT
Separation of powers
Constitution
(NSW) underpins a system of government in New South Wales that does not embody strictly the “doctrine of separation of powers”.
However, different functions are vested in separate organs of government, so some elements of the theory of separation of powers
do apply to the government of NSW. The law-making power is vested in Parliament and in Ministers who may make regulations subject
to disallowance by either House of Parliament (legislative branch); the law-implementing power is vested in the Sovereign or his
or her representatives, the Ministers and the public service (executive branch); and the function of interpreting law is vested in
the courts (judicial branch). This model is by no means a complete representation of how government actually works: it ignores the
fact that the policy which becomes law is usually formulated by public servants or Ministers; that interpreting rules has an inherent
element of rule-making, and so on.
3.3 The theory of separation of powers has influenced the development of law and raises questions about exactly who is the recipient
of legal advice given by the Law Officers and the Crown Solicitor. Is the advice given to the Governor (as representative of the
Crown), to a governmental body (such as a body established by statute), to a Minister or designated official, to a particular branch
of government, to the government as a whole or to the people who are represented by the government?
Legislature
3.4 The legislature is the branch of government that makes law. Australia has a system of government called “representative
democracy”, in which the legislature is regarded as the supreme branch. The Ministers who control the executive branch of government
are selected from members of the legislature. In political and legal terms, the legislature is important because first, action by
the legislature is often needed before policy becomes law, and secondly, unless the legislature is prepared to support the executive
branch of government, the Ministry has no political power.
3.5 The Attorney General, in practice, is always a Member of Parliament.
Whilst the Solicitor General is a Member of Parliament in the United Kingdom, this is not the case in NSW. In the United Kingdom,
the Attorney General (and the Solicitor General) are the legal advisers to Parliament.
In New South Wales, and other Australian jurisdictions, the Law Officers regard themselves as primarily the advisers of the executive
government, rather than of Parliament.
3.6 The executive branch of government, which includes the Governor, the Ministry, and the public service, initiates and implements
policy. Like all officers of government, the Governor is expected to act in accordance with the law, and may, therefore, from time
to time require legal advice as to what the law requires in particular instances. If the view is taken that the Attorney General
is a political officer, where the advice to the Governor concerns a matter with political implications, either the Governor may not
want the advice of the Attorney, or the government may be unwilling to allow the Governor access to the Attorney.
In this sense, the Governor is in a special position.
While in some cases the Governor may seek advice from the Chief Justice, this course of action may lead to serious political problems.
The Governor might also seek advice from privately retained barristers or solicitors, or from academics.
3.7 The judicial arm of government comprises the courts - the bodies that have the power to make authoritative decisions which finally
resolve disputes and which, after exhausting all available appeal processes, the parties to those disputes cannot question.
While the courts are making decisions in actual disputes, they are also creating a body of rules which binds the whole community.
This is because, from court decisions, general principles can be deduced which influence the way future disputes are resolved. In
constitutional terms the judicial power of government probably extends to all judicial officers while they are exercising judicial
functions. The lawyers who present cases in court contribute to the way judicial power is exercised, but are not themselves part
of the judiciary.
The Crown and the rule of law
3.8 It is a fundamental principle that all Australian governments, especially Ministers, must observe and maintain government according
to law. In order to fulfil this duty, Ministers, who are responsible through Parliament to the people for their actions and are obliged
to uphold the law through their oath of office, must know what the law is, and they seek and receive legal advice for this purpose.
3.9 Ministers and other organs of government cannot escape their duty to observe and maintain the rule of law by compartmentalising
government for the purposes of receipt of legal advice any more than they can avoid political responsibility for their actions by
compartmentalising government. Politically and legally, the government is an entity unless a statute provides for a part of it to
have a separate legal identity. The unity of government for legal purposes is not inconsistent with reorganising government departments
or agencies for the purpose of achieving policy objectives such as greater efficiency in government operations.
The Crown as symbol
3.10 The Crown is a notional entity created by the law for particular purposes. It is the symbol of legitimate authority.
As Hanks puts it:
The term ‘the Crown’ is frequently used to refer to the executive governments in Australia, as it is in the United Kingdom.
Each of these governments is treated by the law as a legal person, enjoying rights and affected by liabilities under the common law
and legislation, capable of suing and being sued and bound by decisions of courts and tribunals.
However, these rights, liabilities and susceptibilities are not identical to those of other legal persons,
whether individuals or corporations. The law recognises a number of important distinctions between the legal status of the government
and that of subjects.
The legal personality of the executive government is represented by the Crown, by the Queen: that is,
the law regards the government as a legal person
and that person is the Queen. However, in this context the terms ‘the Crown’ and ‘the Queen’ have become depersonalised
When we talk of ‘the Crown’ in the context of Australian government in the late 20th century, we refer to a complex system
of which the formal head is the monarch ... We do not refer to a replica of 16th century English government ...
3.11 Seddon says that:
[t]he Crown is in many ways like a corporation. It is governed in Australia in each jurisdiction by a written constitution, it has
perpetual succession, it must necessarily act through natural persons and it takes on a legal status independent from those natural
The “indivisible” Crown
3.12 At one time, the symbolic Crown was represented as being one and indivisible. This was useful in the context of an imperial power
seeking to control a world-wide empire. It was the reason that when war was declared by Great Britain against Germany in 1939, in
the name of King George VI, the Prime Minister of Australia, Sir Robert Menzies, was able to announce credibly to the Commonwealth
Parliament that as a result of that declaration Australia also was at war.
In other respects, however, the development of colonial self-government made it clear that the Executive Government of New South
Wales was quite distinct from that of, say, South Africa or the province of Ontario, as well as from that of the United Kingdom,
although all might symbolically be represented by the same Crown. For the purpose of regarding the Crown or government as a legal
person, in terms of property or litigation rights, and in terms of being a recipient of advice, the indivisible nature of government
may remain important.
3.13 In a federal state, such as Australia, it did not take long for the courts to recognise the functional differences between the
executive governments of the several States and the Commonwealth. The Commonwealth
Constitution
Judiciary Act 1903
(Cth) contemplate that States may sue each other and the Commonwealth.
The reality of multifarious government
3.14 Within a State, however, it is not always clear whether or not the law recognises the functional differences between the various
departments and agencies that make up the government. Some statutes specifically permit, or even oblige, an agency to sue or prosecute
another agency or department. An example of such an agency is the Environment Protection Authority.
3.15 When government was organised in a hierarchical structure, the practice was that disagreement or litigation between the different
branches or agencies that make up the government rarely became public; disagreements between agencies were settled by negotiation
among Ministers or senior officials. Ultimately, the matter could be argued in Cabinet and would be resolved politically, so that
there was a single public voice of government.
3.16 To some extent, government today retains a degree of unity in practice. Despite the existence at times of inter-personal or inter-departmental
rivalry, Ministers do discuss matters of common concern in Cabinet or party caucus meetings and informally. Political reality dictates
that Ministers and their officials will generally pass on to their colleagues information they receive which is of mutual or common
interest, although there is no legal obligation on them to do so.
3.17 The administrative changes introduced in more recent times have seen flatter institutional structures and “privatisation”
or “corporatisation” of many parts of the executive government, supposedly in the interests of competitiveness and efficiency.
Further, the shedding or “outsourcing” of many functions of government has meant that activities which were formerly
carried out by government departments or agencies are now undertaken by private contractors in return for payment by the government.
State Owned Corporations Act 1989
(NSW) provision is made for government-owned trading or business enterprises to be incorporated, and to become largely independent
of the formal structures of the executive government. For the purposes of litigation, these State-owned corporations are certainly
not part of the State,
yet many are still represented and advised by the Law Officers and the Crown Solicitor.
3.18 When State-owned corporations have an independent legal personality, an argument can be maintained that the advice they receive
is owned by that legal entity rather than by the “Crown”. There is no doubt that State-owned corporations have the legal
capacity to sue and to be sued by each other. When, however, the question is asked about a Minister, a department, an official or
a statutory authority which does not have an independent legal personality the position is less clear. There are cases of departments
or agencies being prosecuted for offences. Departments and officials are now liable to suit in negligence.
There is anecdotal evidence about civil actions by one governmental entity against another, especially where one department or agency
seeks contribution or an indemnity from another.
Disputes between different branches of government
3.19 The reality of multifarious government means that there is the potential for disputes to arise between different branches of
government. To take a hypothetical example, the Roads and Traffic Authority (“the RTA”) proposes to build a road in a
certain area. The Environment Protection Authority considers that the proposed road breaches the provisions of a statutory scheme
for environmental protection, while the RTA maintains that it has noted the statutory scheme and considers that the proposed road
complies with the scheme. The dispute may relate to the existence of certain factual material, or it may purely be a difference in
interpretation of the words of the statutory provisions. This type of difference which, in the eyes of both parties, may be one of
principle, is the type of dispute which private parties might litigate in the interest of obtaining a conclusive and authoritative
interpretation of the law. The question arises, then, as to whether different branches of government can or should enter into litigation.
3.20 Traditionally, different branches of the executive government did not settle their disputes in this way. Rather, in the last
resort they relied on the balance of political power between the Ministers responsible for the different agencies. If they sought
legal advice, both sides to the dispute would probably first approach the Crown Solicitor or, through their Minister, the Law Officers.
When Byers and Gill considered the provision of legal services to government, they took the view that the government was an entity
and that it was not in the public interest that different branches of the government should be involved with litigation against each
other. Rather, where a difference of opinion arose, they recommended that the matter should be referred to the Law Officers, whose
opinion should be conclusive.
This was not the view of the government of the day.
GOVERNMENT AS A SINGLE ENTITY
3.21 The government, or any part of it, such as the executive government, may be regarded as a single entity, or a number of different,
and possibly competing, entities. This Issues Paper is concerned with the nature of government for the purposes of circulation of
legal advice, but consideration of that matter requires attention to more general questions about the legal nature of government.
3.22 At common law, the Crown enjoys a range of privileges and immunities in relation to litigation,
most of which are not relevant to this discussion. No matter what part of the executive branch of government might be concerned in
the litigation, it enjoyed those privileges and immunities, so long as it could be brought within the “shield of the Crown”.
The common law rule was that the Sovereign in person could not be a defendant in his or her own courts, and the Attorney General
(in England) or a nominal defendant (in NSW) represented the Crown. Statutes such as the
Judiciary Act 1903
(Cth) were necessary to ensure that the Commonwealth or Ministers could be sued. This rule was one reason why different branches
of government did not engage publicly in legal disputes, at least in the courts.
3.23 When the party to actual or potential litigation was “the Crown”, this party could also be regarded almost automatically
as the client of the Attorney General, Solicitor General, Crown Advocate or Crown Solicitor.
This was the case even though the instructions were received from, and the advice delivered to, particular individual persons who
held office within the executive government: Ministers or public servants.
3.24 No problems arose so long as the advice was relevant only to the particular Minister or official seeking it. However, some advice
given by the Law Officers or Crown Solicitor may be of general application throughout the public sector. For example, advice given
on the interpretation of a provision of a statute applying to all areas of the public sector (for example, the
Public Finance and
Audit Act 1983
(NSW) or the
Freedom of Information Act
(NSW)) would apply equally to many, if not all, government departments and agencies. Other advice, such as that in the Smiles case
described in Chapter 1, in retrospect can be seen to have been relevant not only to the Clerk of the Legislative Assembly, who requested
it, but also to the trustees of the Parliamentary Superannuation Funds and possibly to the parliamentary and Treasury officials responsible
for the administration of the funds invested by the trustees.
Identifying the client
3.25 For some purposes, all these officials might fall within the general scope of the legal expression “the Crown”. However,
it is clear that their interests differed and different persons were exercising a wide range of powers and functions, though at all
times within the public sector. So far as the receipt and distribution of legal advice to government is concerned, it is necessary
to determine exactly who is the recipient of the advice, or “the client”.
The government as a corporate entity
3.26 One view may be that the government is analogous to a corporation or a partnership, in that if advice is given to one subsidiary
corporation or to one partner, it is deemed to be given to the entire corporation or partnership. The logical extension of this view
would mean that when one Minister or official received legal advice, the government as a whole would be deemed to be the “client”.
In this situation, there would be no problem with advice to say, the Ministry of Education and Youth Affairs also being available
to the Department of Health, particularly if it dealt with a subject of common concern (for example, educational standards of health
professionals). The matter is complicated where the advice given to one agency might, if adopted by another agency, involve considerable
expense or exposure to liability, for example, where an advice to the Minister for Transport about liability for damage caused by
dogs on railway stations, if applied to schools, might involve the Department of School Education in significant cost of erecting
dog-proof fences around school grounds.
The government as discrete agencies
3.27 The other approach is to acknowledge that, in practice at least, the government operates as a number of disparate organs. Unlike
a corporation or a partnership, the government is not bound by principles of vicarious liability or statutory fiduciary duties. Instead,
each government organisation has particular responsibility for specific areas of administration, all falling within the umbrella
of the Premier. As such, each government agency requesting legal advice could be seen to be the “client”. In this situation,
it would be at the discretion of that agency whether or not to distribute the advice to other agencies. Taking the above example,
the Ministry of Education and Youth Affairs would be under no obligation to provide the Department of Health with legal advice obtained
by the Ministry.
ISSUES FOR DISCUSSION
When lawyers advise government, who, or what exactly, is the client?
Should legal advice to government be regarded as advice to a single entity (such as a corporation or partnership) or to the particular
department or agency that requests it?
Should the answer to these questions depend on the circumstances, including the kind of advice given, or the purpose for which it
was obtained?
The Commission’s preliminary view
3.28 The Commission has formed the preliminary view that for most legal and administrative purposes there are very strong reasons
why the government should be regarded in law as a single entity. It would follow that advice to any organ or official of the government
should be taken to be advice to the whole of government, even if, for reasons of administrative efficiency or the application of
a policy, various sections of the government are given apparently separate managerial structures. Every part of the government, in
a system of representative democracy, must be accountable to Parliament, which is itself accountable to the people for the operation
of the whole of government. While each government department may separately be accountable financially and administratively, this
should not supplant the basic principle of representative government which is responsible as a whole to the people through Parliament.
THE CHANGING NATURE OF GOVERNMENT
3.29 In recent times, with the “privatisation” and “corporatisation” of parts of the government and public
administration, and the implementation of the National Competition Policy, many functions of government have been “outsourced”
to private contractors. The changing nature of “the Crown” as client of the Law Officers and the Crown Solicitor creates
some problems. Even though it is likely that the structure of government institutions may continue to change, a large core of government
activity will remain, and those engaged in this activity will, from time to time, require legal advice on a range of matters, and
certainly not just on matters related to litigation.
ISSUES FOR DISCUSSION
What impact do privatisation and National Competition Policy have on the practicality of advising government as a single entity?
Should advice of government legal officers provided to partially privatised government agencies (for example, Pacific Power) be treated
in the same way as advice to government?
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Summary of issues
Table of contents
Kable v Director of Public Prosecutions (NSW)
[1996] HCA 24
(1996) 138 ALR 577.
. The special constitutional position of the office of Attorney General in NSW is mentioned at paras 2.16-2.21. This is also the case
in the Commonwealth Government, the United Kingdom, Canada, New Zealand, and all the other Australian States.
The Role of the Law Officers
(Fabian Research Series 339, London, 1978) at 3.
. See paras 2.14-2.25.
. G Barwick
Sir John Did His Duty
(Serendip Publications, Sydney, 1983) at 84-85.
Conventions Relating to Vice Regal Access to the Solicitor General for Legal Advice
(Draft unpublished paper, 1996).
. See D A Low (ed)
Constitutional Heads and Political Crises: Commonwealth Episodes, 1945-85
(MacMillan Press, London, 1988) at 19, 99 and 103; and J A Thomson “Book Review: Sir John Did His Duty” (1983) 6
University of NSW Law Journal
255 at 257.
. As happened in Tasmania in 1989: see G Winterton “Tasmania’s Hung Parliament, 1989"
. The Commonwealth
Constitution
includes express provisions dealing with “judicial power” and these have been interpreted by the courts: see
In Re Judiciary Act 1903-1920 and Navigation Act 1912-1920
[1921] HCA 20
(1921) 29 CLR 257
R v Kirby; Ex parte Boilermakers’ Society of Australia
[1956] HCA 10
(1956) 94 CLR 254
Wilson v Minister for Aboriginal Affairs
(1996) 138 CLR 220
Kable v Director of Public Prosecutions (NSW)
[1996] HCA 24
(1996) 138 ALR 577.
. The Attorney General is the leader of the Bar, but it is not clear if the office carries any special position in relation to the
judiciary. In the United States of America, the Solicitor General (whose position is slightly different from that of the Australian
counterpart) is sometimes regarded as virtually an additional member of the Supreme Court: R M Salokar
The Solicitor General: The Politics of Law
(Temple University Press, Philadelphia, 1992) at 78 and 80.
. See for example, G Marshall
Constitutional Theory
(Oxford University Press, London, 1971) at 20-24.
Constitutional Law in Australia
(2nd ed Butterworths, Australia 1996) at 159-160 (emphasis added); see also G Winterton “The Constitutional Position of Australian
State Governors” in H P Lee and G Winterton (eds)
Australian Constitutional Perspectives
(Law Book Co, Sydney, 1992) 274 at 274.
Government Contracts: Federal, State and Local
(The Federation Press, Sydney, 1995) at 96.
. L Zines “The Growth of Australian Nationhood and its Effect on the Powers of the Commonwealth” in L Zines (ed)
Commentaries on the Australian
Constitution
(Butterworths, Australia, 1977) 1 at 31; A Berriedale Keith
The King and the Imperial Crown: the Powers and Duties of His Majesty
(Longmans, London, 1936) at Chapter 17.
State Owned Corporations Act 1989
Northern Territory v Mengel
[1995] HCA 65
(1995) 185 CLR 307.
. M Byers and M Gill
Review of Legal Services to Government
(Sydney, 1993) at 15-16 (“the Byers and Gill Report”). See also para 4.17
Liability of the Crown
(2nd ed, Carswell, Ontario, 1989) at 9.
. Byers & Gill Report at 7 emphasises the unity of the Crown for this purpose.
Issues Paper 13 (1997) - Circulation of Legal Advice to Government
4. Circulation of Legal Advice to Government
History of this Reference (Digest)
THE CURRENT POSITION
“Legal advice to government” defined
4.1 So far, this Issues Paper has identified the providers of legal advice (the Attorney General, the Law Officers, the Crown Advocate,
salaried legal officers within government and private practitioners) and the recipient of this legal advice (government). Now, in
order to address the main issue of this paper, namely, whether legal advice to government should be more widely circulated, it is
necessary to have a working definition of “legal advice to government”.
4.2 “Legal advice to government” is advice given to government by a legal practitioner (usually one of those identified
in Chapter 2) on a legal issue, including the interpretation or application of legislation or in relation to litigation. Chapter
3 identified the difficulties of regarding the government as a single entity. It follows that the working definition of legal advice
must be imprecise and broad to take into account the ambiguities of the institutions of government, comprising departments, agencies
and State-owned corporations.
ISSUES FOR DISCUSSION
Can legal advice to government be defined? If so, how?
Circulation of legal advice within government
4.3 So far as the Commission is aware, the current practice of most government departments and agencies is to keep any legal advice
received within the department or agency and, indeed, to claim exemption in respect of legal advice when access is sought under the
Freedom of Information Act 1989
SHOULD LEGAL ADVICE TO GOVERNMENT BE CIRCULATED?
4.4 Given the special nature of government as client, and the public interest in having the government speak with one voice, should
the advice of the Law Officers and the Crown Solicitor be circulated more widely:
within government;
to selected agencies or bodies falling outside the government as traditionally defined; or
(if it is not possible to confine the circulation to specified non-government bodies) generally to the public?
Essentially, the issue is whether the legal advice should go beyond the immediate client, being the department, agency or corporation
requesting the advice.
Arguments for wider circulation
Wider circulation within government
4.5 The more general availability of legal advice within government agencies might avoid cost, duplication of effort, clashes of policy
or embarrassment to another section of government, such as that which arose in the Smiles case. It would also assist in upholding
“the rule of law” on the assumption that departments and agencies of government do not knowingly contravene clearly advised
legal restraints. It would also ensure that Ministers could more readily administer their legislation in accordance with the law.
Wider circulation to selected agencies or persons
4.6 With increasing “corporatisation”, “privatisation” and “outsourcing” of activities traditionally
regarded as governmental, many private businesses and individuals are now performing functions whose operations are based in legislation.
While it may be expected that they can and should pay for legal advice they require in the course of their operations, it may be
important for these businesses and individuals to have access to the same type of authoritative advice on matters such as the scope
of particular legislation as is available to officials within government departments and agencies performing similar functions. This
is in the spirit of National Competition Policy. If this ethos of competition is to be fostered fully, and legal advice is essential
to the proper exercise of the function, private contractors or State-owned enterprises operating outside the traditional scope of
government should have access to that advice.
4.7 If this legal advice is circulated to say, contractors performing functions for government, it is not clear whether in law or
in practice it can be confined only to those contractors. It is difficult to envisage policy reasons why any advice which government
might wish to circulate to contractors should not be made available to the wider public, as matters of policy are often unlikely
to be commercially sensitive.
Wider circulation to the public
4.8 It can be argued that if such advice is readily available to the public, the public will have a greater understanding of why powers
and discretions of governments are exercised in a particular way, and would afford an opportunity for the public to make representations
to government to exercise those powers and functions differently. Publication might also ensure that different branches of the government
take a similar approach to the exercise of their powers and functions.
4.9 Wider circulation of advice would also be in the spirit of the
Freedom of Information Acts
, which embody the principle that government information is presumed to be publicly available unless it falls within one of the exemptions
under the Acts, such as legal professional privilege. The impact of legal professional privilege on the release of legal advice to
government is discussed at paragraphs 5.3, 5.9-5.23 and 5.28.
Arguments against wider circulation
Wider circulation within government
4.10 In its submission to the ICAC’s inquiry into the Smiles’ matter, the Attorney General’s Department referred
to problems in circulating legal advice when there are conflicts between different departments or trading entities of the government
arising out of their commercial activities. The Department also referred to situations where there may be political, commercial,
strategic or other policy reasons for keeping legal advice to government confidential. The practical difficulties of disseminating
advice throughout the various departments, agencies and statutory corporations of government were also raised.
Wider circulation to selected agencies or persons
4.11 When functions are transferred from government to the private sector to encourage competition, government agencies which retain
certain functions will either be concerned with “core” policy matters which in any event should remain confidential in
the public interest, or they will be operating as business enterprises in a competitive market so that any advice they receive would
fall outside the scope of “advice to government”.
Wider circulation to the public
4.12 The effect of making the advice of the Law Officers or the Crown Solicitor available to the public may inhibit initiatives by
departments or agencies of government to experiment with, or explore, the limits of their powers and functions. Legal advice tends
to be conservative and it may not be in the best interests of the public government institutions to exercise their powers or functions
in a restrictive way. Failure to seek legal advice, for example, on the interpretation of legislation, may lead officials to be over-cautious
in their approach, thus frustrating the intention of government. It can also be argued that, if departments and agencies know that
legal advice may become available, either within government or more widely, they will be inhibited from seeking legal advice at all,
especially when relevant officials suspect that the advice may impede the course of action they wish to follow. The Commission asserts
that it is a fundamental principle of our system of government that Ministers and those accountable through them to the people will
observe and maintain the rule of law,
and no requirement for the wider circulation of advice should have the effect of preventing or inhibiting them from so doing.
Freedom of Information Acts
recognise that documents used internally are not normally publicly available. It may also be that publication of an internal advice
on government liability will precipitate vast numbers of tort liability claims. Candour of communication within government requires
that all opinions be canvassed and, provided that the final policy documents are available to the public, documents used in preparing
them, including legal advices, should remain confidential.
ADVICE EXCLUDED FROM CIRCULATION
4.14 Given the issues arising from wider circulation (a) within government, and (b) to the general public, there may be arguments
for establishing categories of legal advice to government which may be circulated within different groups of recipients. To some
extent, this is the scheme reflected in the
Freedom of Information Act 1989
(NSW). Another way of looking at this, is that certain categories of advice could be excluded from circulation beyond a certain point.
For instance, advice which is particularly sensitive might be circulated within government, or within Senior Executive Service officials,
but not circulated to the general public. Different classes of government information already exist which are subject to “privilege”
and do not have to be disclosed in certain circumstances. The concept of “privilege” is discussed in Chapter 5. However,
there may also be other grounds for determining the different categories of advice and their differing realms of circulation.
ISSUES FOR DISCUSSION
Should legal advice to government be more widely circulated?
If so, should legal advice be circulated:
(a) within government; or
(b) to the general public as well?
Should there be categories of advice with different conditions of circulation applying to each category?
What are they?
Should certain categories of advice be excluded altogether from circulation?
EFFECT OF RELEASE ON INTRA-GOVERNMENTAL RELATIONS
4.15 A possible consequence of making advice to government departments available more widely may be to increase the occurrence of
inter-departmental disputes over points of law. Within an institution which the law regards as a separate but single artificial person,
such as a corporation or the Crown, it seems logically and procedurally unlikely that the courts could or would entertain litigation
between two integral parts of the same legal entity, without specific statutory provision for such proceedings. If the government
or the Cabinet wants to resolve the dispute in accordance with legal principles rather than as a matter of politics, an authoritative
legal opinion may finally decide the issue.
4.16 Decisions of courts are reported, and as a collection of decided precedent cases, they form part of the general law. Private
legal opinions do not have the status and authority of decisions of the courts, and they are not publicly available. Opinions of
the Law Officers, if written, are recorded and kept in government offices. To the extent that they do not bear directly on actual
or potential litigation or refer specifically to the private affairs of individuals or business, they may develop something of the
status of a body of precedent. Legal advice is often relied upon and applied by the government department that receives it in much
the same way as decisions of the courts. If the advice were readily available, it might
differences of opinion between different arms of government.
4.17 The Byers and Gill Report suggested that, where disputes arose between different departments or agencies of government involving
a legal issue, the opinion of the Attorney General should be final and decisive of that issue.
The Government rejected this recommendation. It took the view that the Premier was the final arbiter of such disputes although noted
that, in appropriate cases, the opinion of the Attorney would be sought and acted upon.
4.18 The Commission seeks views on the likely impact on intra-governmental relations of the release of legal advice requested and
received by government. Given that legal advice provided to government by Crown Law Officers is persuasive and authoritative and
often directly influences government action, the Commission asks whether the public benefit in having access to such legal opinion
outweighs any potential disharmony between government agencies.
ISSUES FOR DISCUSSION
Is it likely that circulating advice to government more widely would result in more inter-departmental disputes?
If so, do the advantages of disclosure outweigh the disadvantage of an increase in inter-departmental disputes?
Intellectual property issues
4.19 Where legal advice is given to government by a private legal practitioner, the law of copyright may also restrict the range of
possibilities for wider circulation of the advice. Copyright is the exclusive right to, amongst other things, reproduce, publish
or make an adaptation of “works”, including literary works.
Legal advice from a barrister or solicitor is almost certainly a “literary work” under the
(Cth) (“the Act”) even though it is not published, if the author was an Australian citizen or resident when the work was
The copyright is in the manner of presentation of the work, rather than its content. The Act does not define “literary work”
other than to say that it includes a table or compilation expressed in words, figures or symbols and a computer program.
4.20 The copyright vests in the author unless either:
the work was created by or under the direction or control of the Crown, in which case copyright is vested in the Crown;
the copyright is assigned to the client.
It would seem that the first exception does not apply to legal advice as barristers and solicitors in private practice are for most
purposes not subject to the direction or control of their client. They are independent professional advisers rather than employees.
Many employees agree, either expressly or impliedly in their contract of employment, that the copyright in any work they produce
in the course of their employment vests in the employer, and this is likely to apply to solicitors employed by private firms, so
that the firm, rather than the individual, is the copyright holder.
4.21 Copyright is infringed when a literary work is reproduced, published or adapted without the licence of the copyright owner.
However, copyright is not infringed by anything done for the purposes of a judicial proceeding.
Fair dealing with a literary work for the purpose of giving professional advice by a legal practitioner or patent attorney does not
infringe copyright in the work. If a government legal officer distributed amongst departments advice provided by a private legal
practitioner, this would probably not infringe the copyright laws, even if no judicial proceeding related to the advice were actually
on foot. However, distribution of the advice to persons outside the government might amount to infringement of copyright.
4.22 It would be possible for a retainer agreement between a client and a lawyer to stipulate that the copyright in any advice provided
be vested in the client, or alternatively for the retainer agreement to include an express or implied licence for the client to use
the advice as he or she thought fit. The Commission does not know if such provisions are used in NSW where government retains private
legal advisers. If such a licence or assignment is not now part of the retainer agreements used by government departments or agencies,
they may wish to consider seriously including such arrangements in future, as there are strong policy reasons why advice produced
at public expense for the purposes of a public body should not be subject to any restriction at the hands of a private party.
4.23 The Crown is bound by the
, but cannot be prosecuted for an offence under it.
The Act does not affect any right or privilege of the Crown.
However, these rights or privileges do not extend any further than those of an owner of copyright in a work. The Crown’s rights
or privileges cannot be infringed by doing an act in relation to a work, without the licence of the Crown, if such an act would not
require the licence of an owner, if the work was subject to copyright.
4.24 Generally, copyright in a literary work is not infringed by the Commonwealth or a State doing any acts done for the services
of the Commonwealth or State.
This would seem to allow the publication and reproduction of legal advice to government relating to matters of government, even if
provided by a private legal practitioner. The Commonwealth or State is obliged to inform the owner of the copyright of the doing
of the act, as well as such information as is required, as soon as possible, unless contrary to public interest.
ISSUE FOR DISCUSSION
Should special provisions be made relating to the intellectual property in legal advice given by private legal practitioners to government,
for example, an implied licence in retainer agreements between the government and private practitioners which permits the government
to publish the advice as it sees fit?
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Summary of issues
Table of contents
Freedom of Information Act 1989
Freedom of Information Act 1982
. NSW, Independent Commission Against Corruption
Report on Investigation into Circumstances Surrounding the Payment of a Parliamentary Pension to Mr P M Smiles: Second Report
(April 1996) at 21.
. See discussion at paras 3.8-3.9.
Freedom of Information Act 1989
Freedom of Information Act 1982
. Recommendation 4: M Byers and M Gill
Review of Legal Services to Government
(Sydney, 1993) (“the Byers and Gill Report”).
Government Response to the Recommendations of the Review of Legal Services to Government
(Sydney, 1993) at 11.
s 31(1)(a).
. This means that they are a “qualified person” for the purposes of the section:
(Cth) is silent on assignment, so that the common law governing assignment of choses in action applies to copyright. The
Conveyancing Act 1919
requires that legal rights in a chose in action be assigned by express notice in writing.
Issues Paper 13 (1997) - Circulation of Legal Advice to Government
5. Exceptions for Circulation
History of this Reference (Digest)
5.1 If there is wider circulation of legal advice to government, should there be restrictions on the use of some legal advice beyond
the immediate client? Some government information is already subject to “privilege” which shields it from disclosure
in certain circumstances. This chapter examines the concept of “privilege” and its relevance to the wider circulation
of legal advice. It also poses the question of whether there should be any other grounds for excluding legal advice from wider circulation.
CURRENT LAW AND PRACTICE
5.2 The policy expressed by governments, and manifested in the
Freedom of Information Act 1989
(NSW) and the
Freedom of Information Act 1982
(Cth), is that government information should be readily available and that citizens should have a right of access to it. This legislation
does provide that certain classes of government documents should not be available more widely, because the public interest requires
that these classes of documents remain confidential to government. For example, there are provisions in the State and Federal
Freedom of Information Acts
that allow for documents which may concern criminal prosecutions and which may be subject to legal professional privilege to be exempt
from production to the public.
5.3 A document produced by a Law Officer or the Crown Solicitor for the dominant purpose of giving legal advice will be subject to
legal professional privilege and thus exempt from disclosure,
whether or not it also gives advice on more general issues of policy or administration. Such documents may also be the subject of
a claim for privilege on the basis that disclosure would be contrary to the public interest.
5.4 The following section addresses the question of whether legal advice to governments, as a matter of law, is, and should be, the
subject of legal professional privilege or some other privilege.
5.5 When the law refers to “privilege” it refers to a situation where a person may be excused from doing something which
others are required to do. A court can require a person to surrender relevant documents to the court unless the documents are subject
to privilege. This section discusses two different types of privilege that are specially relevant to this Issues Paper.
Public interest immunity
5.6 The “public interest privilege” of the executive government is the subject of
Evidence Act 1995
(NSW) which codifies and clarifies the common law as laid down in
Sankey v Whitlam
There, the High Court decided that if the government claims that certain documents or information are privileged from being given
in evidence on the grounds of a countervailing public interest (“public interest privilege”), the court itself may examine
the material to see whether there are reasonable grounds for claiming that privilege.
5.7 Since that case, both State and Federal governments, have enacted
Freedom of Information Acts
. The general public policy now expressly embodied in those Acts is openness of government. In particular, the Acts create, and provide
means of enforcing, citizens’ rights of access to government information. However, the law generally recognises that, at times,
the courts must balance the public interest in access to government information with a competing public interest in confidentiality
of that information to ensure the efficient and effective working of government. Included in this privileged government information
might be the advice given by the Law Officers and the Crown Solicitor.
5.8 The courts have also recognised that there may be cases in which documents or other information created for the purpose of policy-making,
government administration, or other government operations should be protected from public scrutiny. One commentator suggests that
this type of privilege is of recent origin and should be confined to material created in the course of government business which
is conducted in the public interest and may not extend, in his view, to all functions of the modern welfare state.
Legal professional privilege
5.9 When a document is created by a person for the purpose of giving or obtaining legal advice that document is privileged from production
When a private individual seeks the advice of a lawyer, especially in relation to actual or potential litigation, the law does not
compel production of communication between the client and the lawyer as part of the evidence that a court subsequently uses to make
its decision. The High Court stated the reason for this privilege in
Grant v Downs
The rationale of this head of privilege, according to traditional doctrine, is that it promotes the public interest because it assists
and enhances the administration of justice by facilitating the representation of clients by legal advisers, the law being a complex
and complicated discipline. This it does by keeping secret their communications, thereby inducing the client to retain the solicitor
and seek his advice, and encouraging the client to make a full and frank disclosure of the relevant circumstances to the solicitor.
The existence of the privilege reflects, to the extent to which it is accorded, the paramountcy of this public interest over a more
general public interest, that which requires that in the interests of a fair trial litigation should be conducted on the footing
that all relevant documentary evidence is available.
5.10 To the extent that a Law Officer, the Crown Solicitor, or a person employed on their staff gives information to or receives information
from a client (the Crown) for the purpose of preparing legal advice, or for the purpose of litigation, the
Evidence Act 1995
precludes that document from being required to be given in evidence in court. It is clear that the courts give a very wide meaning
to the expression “legal advice”.
The advice need not be directed at actual or impending litigation.
Salaried legal practitioners
Waterford v Commonwealth of Australia
it was suggested (on the basis of comments made in
Attorney General (Northern Territory) v Kearney
that legally qualified people employed on a salary, for example lawyers employed in a government department and “in-house”
lawyers, were not legal practitioners for the purpose of the rules relating to legal professional privilege. It was argued that such
lawyers’ employee relationship compromises their ability to act as independent legal advisers. The majority of the Court had
no difficulty in holding that “salaried” lawyers employed in government departments, especially the Crown Solicitor’s
Office, were in the same position as solicitors or barristers in private practice, and as such their communications were subject
to privilege if they contained legal advice. Justice Brennan (dissenting on this point) took the view that, generally speaking, salaried
lawyers were not lawyers for the purpose of these rules but made an exception for lawyers employed on the staff of the Attorney General
of the Commonwealth or a State. The other members of the Court accepted that lawyers in employment in such offices were covered by
the rules relating to legal professional privilege.
Legal advice or policy advice?
5.12 On first sight it would seem that the government, when represented before the courts, is (or ought to be) in the same position
as any client who employs the services of a lawyer. Some documents prepared by the Law Officers or the Crown Solicitor may relate
specifically to questions which are being litigated or which may potentially be the subject of specific litigation. At other times,
the Law Officers or the Crown Solicitor may be asked to give general advice on the scope or application of legislation or a rule
of common law without any prospect of specific litigation. All this advice could be considered legal advice and may attract legal
professional privilege. Crown Law Officers may also be called on to advise on ways of giving effect to various policy options. This
distinction between legal advice and policy advice distinguishes the government from other clients. These two types of advice were
Waterford’s
5.13 The Court found that it was difficult to distinguish documents produced for the purpose of litigation from those which gave general
legal advice. The majority concluded that legal professional privilege, so far as it applied to government legal advice, was not
restricted to documents relating to actual or possible legal proceedings. The majority view might be put in the words of Justice
In any event, I should think that the public interest is truly served by according legal professional privilege to communications
brought into existence by a government department for the purpose of seeking or giving legal advice as to the nature, extent and
the manner in which the powers, functions and duties of government officers are required to be exercised or performed. If the repository
of a power does not know the nature or extent of the power or if he does not appreciate the legal restraints on the manner in which
he is required to exercise it, there is a significant risk that a purported exercise of the power will miscarry. The same may be
said of the performance of functions and duties. The public interest in minimizing that risk by encouraging resort to legal advice
is greater, perhaps, than the public interest in minimizing the risk that individuals may act without proper appreciation of their
legal rights and obligations. In the case of governments no less than in the case of individuals, legal professional privilege tends
to enhance application of law, and the public has a substantial interest in the maintenance of the rule of law over public administration.
Provided the sole purpose for which a document is brought into existence is the seeking or giving of legal advice as to the performance
of a statutory power or the performance of a statutory function or duty, there is no reason why it should not be the subject of legal
professional privilege.
5.14 On the issue of policy advice, the majority of the Court determined that legal professional privilege could still apply to a
document containing policy or administrative advice, provided the “sole purpose” (according to the test laid down in
Grant v Downs)
of bringing the document into existence was the provision of legal advice. Justices Mason and Wilson stated that:
Matters of policy and legal advice may be intermingled in the one document ...... The appellant’s submission fails to appreciate
that the sole purpose test is a test that looks to the reason why the document was brought into existence. If its sole purpose was
to seek or to give legal advice in relation to a matter, then the fact that it contains extraneous matter will not deny to it the
protection of the privilege.
5.15 Even though the Commonwealth and NSW
Evidence Acts,
, Division 1, have replaced the “sole purpose” test laid down in
Grant v Downs
with a “dominant purpose” test, the majority decision in
Waterford’s
case concerning the purpose for which the advice was created would still apply. Legal professional privilege covers documents which
are brought into existence for the
purpose of giving and receiving legal advice.
5.16 Justice Dawson dissented,
developing an idea which he had advanced in
case, namely, that there was a distinction between documents produced by government in the normal course of its operation and policy-making,
on the one hand, and those produced for litigation. In the context of the questions which the Commission must consider, this distinction
may be very important. Justice Dawson said:
Where, however, a government is engaging, not in the legal process, but in the purely executive function of decision-making, there
is no reason connected with the administration of justice which could require that any advice which it may be given to assist it
in that process should be kept confidential.
5.17 His Honour divided the documents in question in that case into two categories.
First, communications relating to general matters of policy, and secondly, documents created in relation to specific actual or apprehended
litigation. While considering that documents in the second category clearly fell within the area of privilege, His Honour suggested
that the more general policy documents did not, and that for any particular documents it would be possible to separate the legal
advice from more general policy advice.
5.18 On the basis of
Waterford’s
case, it can be concluded that, because of the broad scope of legal professional privilege in Australia, courts are unlikely, without
statutory modification of the law, to distinguish between “legal advice” to government relating to actual or possible
litigation which is analogous to the legal advice generally given to private clients, and the more general advice which Justice Dawson
calls “policy advice”. Therefore, it is likely that any advice produced for the dominant purpose of providing legal advice
to government could be subject to legal professional privilege.
SHOULD ADVICE TO GOVERNMENT BE SUBJECT TO PRIVILEGE?
5.19 There is an obvious argument that documents prepared in the course of advising the government and its agencies on the conduct
of specific litigation, either actual or immediately anticipated, should be protected on the same grounds that a private person enjoys
privilege of confidential communication with his or her legal adviser. The policy underlying this rule of legal professional privilege
is that fair operation of the legal process requires candour of communication between clients and their legal advisers. In this respect,
the government is in no different position from other litigants.
5.20 Nevertheless, a wide range of legal advice is provided by the Law Officers or the Crown Solicitor to the various branches and
departments of government as to the scope of powers and discretions and as to the way in which those powers and discretions might
best be exercised. At times the exercise of those powers and discretions may result in litigation, but in other cases it will not.
Indeed, the function of such advice may specifically be to avoid the possibility of litigation. It could be asserted that the public
has an interest in the way laws are interpreted and implemented by the executive branch of government, as those laws are made by
Parliament on behalf of the public, and the legal advice ought to be in the public domain as much as the texts of the laws. Therefore,
it could be argued that legal advice on such matters is qualitatively different from legal advice to private clients which the Australian
courts find subject to legal professional privilege. This was the argument favoured by Justice Dawson in
Waterford’s
case, but rejected by the majority of the Court.
5.21 Justice Dawson also pointed out that documents relating to general policy might separately be subject to executive or public
interest privilege and that when considering the scope of client legal privilege or legal professional privilege that possibility
should be borne in mind. It could be argued that privileged advice should have only limited circulation. For example, advice which
is subject to public interest immunity might be circulated to other parts of government but no further; and advice which is subject
to “legal professional privilege” might not be circulated any further than the immediate client.
Can Ministers claim privilege against each other?
5.22 It seems that there is no basis upon which any Minister (other than the Attorney General in his or her capacity as legal adviser)
or department could claim legal professional privilege against another Minister or department. If advice is furnished to one Minister
he or she can make it available to all his or her colleagues, without any illegality or impropriety. The following section addresses
some possible ways of dealing with the question of whether privilege can be claimed:
by one government department or agency against another; or
by government agencies, as against the public, in respect of legal advice circulated among departments.
5.23 If Ministers are regarded in the same way as members of a partnership,
they are obliged to share information relating to the joint enterprise (of government), and notice to each is regarded as notice
to all. It would not make sense to allow any single Minister to claim legal professional privilege for advice received against any
other Minister. Withholding legal advice between Ministers may also have dire fiscal consequences should it result in a misuse of
power or a breach of a Minister’s statutory duty.
“Common interest” privilege
5.24 The law may find that legal advice to government might be privileged on some ground other than legal professional privilege.
The law does recognise, in addition to legal professional privilege,
a privilege enjoyed by those who have a common interest. This usually arises when a person is engaged in litigation where several
other parties are also interested. The privilege is that of the client or those with common interest in the litigation.
Common interest does not exist if the individual interests are selfish and potentially adverse.
Partners probably enjoy this privilege against non-partners, but there appear to be no decided cases on this issue. A closely held
or small corporation and its directors may have a common interest.
It is not necessary that the parties have a common solicitor,
nor is it limited to litigation or anticipated litigation.
It is not necessary to identify that the interest between the two parties is so close that they could have used the same solicitor.
Common interest privilege does not exist between parties when they fall into dispute.
5.25 Common interest privilege is distinguished from joint privilege in that it is privilege in aid of anticipated litigation in which
several parties have a common interest.
One party may seek legal advice regarding a certain matter and then disclose the advice to others with an interest in the same matter.
Such disclosure does not amount to waiver of the privilege if the other parties have a sufficiently common interest. The test for
this is not rigidly defined.
All interested parties need not necessarily concur to waive common interest privilege. Waiver is determined by asking whether waiver
by one party has made it unfair for the other parties with the common interest to maintain the privilege.
Joint privilege between partners
5.26 It would seem that if a partnership seeks legal advice about a matter concerning the partnership, all the partners would have
a joint interest in the matter. Implicit in the relationship is the duty or obligation to disclose to other parties the content of
the legal advice. Accordingly, no privilege would attach to such communications as between the partners, but together the partners
are entitled to maintain the privilege as against the rest of the world. All the partners must concur before the privilege can be
A provisional view
5.27 In Chapter 3, the Commission formed the preliminary view that for the purpose of receipt of legal advice, Ministers and departments
should be regarded generally as a single entity, and that legal advice given to any Minister, department, or public agency other
than a business enterprise with an independent legal personality should
prima facie
be regarded as advice given to the whole of government, and as such, it should be available to all organs of government. The Commission
is of the view that for these limited legal purposes, government is analogous to a partnership.
5.28 The Commission has formed the preliminary view that, in relation to legal advice concerning litigation, actual or possible, the
government should not be placed in a different position from other legal persons. However, we see a possible distinction between
legal advice concerning litigation and other legal advice which, while possibly arising out of potentially contentious circumstances,
is of a more general or policy character. Such advice, as a statement of the law, may influence the behaviour of officials in the
same way as a decision of the court. The Commission considers that there is some force in the argument that such advice should be
made public. This would require legislation to give effect to the views expressed by Justice Dawson in his dissenting judgment in
Waterford’s
ISSUES FOR DISCUSSION
Are there reasons for excluding advice from circulation:
(a) within government; or
(b) to the general public?
If so, should all such legal advice be so protected or should the protection only extend to certain categories? How would these categories
be determined?
Should a distinction be made between legal advice of a general or policy nature and legal advice concerning actual or possible litigation?
If so, how would this distinction be made?
What should be the basis for excluding certain information from circulation:
(a) it contains matters of legal professional privilege?
(b) it contains matters which it is in the public interest to keep confidential? or
(c) other grounds for protecting information?
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Summary of issues
Table of contents
Waterford v Commonwealth of Australia
[1987] HCA 25
(1987) 163 CLR 54.
. See generally T M Gault “Public Interest Privileges and Immunities” in P D Finn (ed)
Essays in Law and Government: the Citizen and the State in the Courts
(2nd ed, Vol 2, Law Book Co, Sydney 1996) at 243.
(1978) 142 CLR 1.
. T G Cooper
Crown Privilege
(Canada Law Book Co, Ontario, 1990) at 8-14.
. This is the effect of the
Evidence Act 1995
which codify and somewhat modify the common law.
[1976] HCA 63
(1976) 135 CLR 674
at 685, per Stephen, Mason and Murphy JJ.
Baker v Campbell
[1983] HCA 39
(1983) 153 CLR 52
, per Wilson J at 95; Deane J at 114.
[1987] HCA 25
(1987) 163 CLR 54.
Austin v Deputy Secretary, Attorney-General’s Department
(1986) 67 ALR 585.
[1985] HCA 60
(1985) 158 CLR 500.
Waterford v Commonwealth of Australia
[1976] HCA 63
(1976) 135 CLR 674.
Waterford v Commonwealth of Australia
[1976] HCA 63
(1976) 135 CLR 674.
Waterford v Commonwealth of Australia
at 100-103.
Waterford v Commonwealth of Australia
Waterford v Commonwealth of Australia
Waterford v Commonwealth of Australia
at 102-103.
. See para 3.26.
. See discussion at para 5.9-5.18.
Buttes Gas & Oil Co v Hammer (No3)
[1980] 3 All ER 475;
Bulk Materials Coal Handling Services Pty Ltd v Coal and Allied Operations Pty Ltd
(1988) 13 NSWLR 689.
Ampolex Ltd v Perpetual Trustee Co (Canberra) Ltd
(1995) 37 NSWLR 405
Farrow Mortgage Services v Webb
(1995) 13 ACLC 1329
at 1332 (NSW SC) per Young J;
Pioneer Concrete (NSW) Pty Ltd v Webb
(1995) 18 ASCR 418
at 423 (NSW SC) per Simos J.
Bulk Materials (Coal Handling) Services Pty Ltd v Coal and Allied Operations Pty Ltd
(1988) 13 NSWLR 689
Bank of Nova Scotia v Hellenic Mutual War Risks Association (Bermuda) Ltd (“The Good Luck”)
[1992] 2 Lloyd’s Rep 540 at 542;
Rank Film Distributors Ltd v ENT Ltd I(1994)
[1994] TASSC 166
4 Tas R 281
at 294 per Crawford J.
State of South Australia v Peat Marwick Mitchell
[1995] SASC 5261
(1995) 65 SASR 72.
Network Ten Ltd v Capital Television Holdings Ltd
(1995) 36 NSWLR 289; cf
Bank of Nova Scotia v Hellenic Mutual War Risks Association (Bermuda) Ltd (“The Good Luck”)
[1992] 2 Lloyd’s Rep 540 at 542.
Re Konigsberg (a bankrupt); Ex parte The Trustee v Konigsberg
[1989] 3 All ER 289;
TIA Barca de Panama SA v George Wimpey & Co Ltd
[1980] 1 Lloyd’s Rep 598 (CA);
Leis Hoegh & Co P/L v Petrolsea Inc (“The World Era”) (No 2)
[1993] 1 Lloyd’s Rep 363.
Buttes Gas and Oil Co v Hammer
[1981] QB 223
at 243 per Lord Denning MR.
Farrow Mortgage Services Pty Ltd (in liquidation) v Webb
(1996) 39 NSWLR 60
at 618-620 per Sheller J.
Attorney-General for the Northern Territory v Maurice
[1986] HCA 80
(1986) 161 CLR 475
at 488. See also:
Network Ten Ltd v Capital Television Holdings Ltd
(1995) 36 NSWLR 275.
Farrow Mortgage Services Pty Ltd (in liquidation) v Webb
(1996) 39 NSWLR 60
at 609-610 per Sheller J.
Issues Paper 13 (1997) - Circulation of Legal Advice to Government
6. Practical Issues for Circulation of Advice
History of this Reference (Digest)
6.1 Throughout this paper, the Commission has raised issues concerning the desirability or otherwise of releasing legal advice requested
and received by government. If, after further research and consideration of the responses to this paper, the Commission determines
that legal advice to government should be released, practical questions remain as to how the advice should be circulated. This chapter
seeks views on the more practical issues involved in how legal advice should be released.
SHOULD ADVICE BE CIRCULATED OR MADE AVAILABLE?
6.2 If advice is to be made more widely available, an issue arises as to whether this is a positive or active duty to distribute the
advice to all interested parties or merely a passive obligation to make the advice available on request. Another related issue is
whether this obligation or duty rests on the provider of the advice, the receiver of the advice or some other person.
ISSUES FOR DISCUSSION
Assuming that there are certain categories of advice which should be circulated, should this advice be actively circulated, or merely
made available to those government departments and agencies or members of the public who request the advice?
Who should be subject to the duty either to circulate the advice or make the advice available?
HOW SHOULD ADVICE BE DISTRIBUTED?
6.3 If legal advice to government is to be circulated to various government agencies or to the public generally, the issue of how
the information is made available needs to be considered. One possibility is that all advice given by the Law Officers or the Crown
Solicitor to Ministers and other branches and departments of government should be published or made available on the Internet so
that it is publicly accessible. Advice could also be made available through government circulars or bulletins, or the Government
Gazette. The Commission seeks advice as to how government agencies and members of the public should have access to government legal
ISSUES FOR DISCUSSION
If advice is to be disclosed within government, how should it be disclosed - in a government gazette, departmental circulars, newsletter
or elsewhere?
If advice is to be disclosed to the general public, how should it be disclosed - on the Internet, in government newsletters or elsewhere?
What mechanisms could ensure that those government departments or members of the public to whom the advice is relevant actually have
access to the advice?
RESTRICTIONS ON USE OF THE ADVICE
6.4 If legal advice to government is circulated to selected agencies or persons, such as contractors,
it may be necessary to restrict the use to which the advice is put by these parties. The nature of these restrictions, if any, and
the practicalities of ensuring that they are adhered to are matters on which the Commission seeks comment.
ISSUE FOR DISCUSSION
If legal advice is made more widely available, should any restrictions be placed on the use to which the advice is put?
How feasible is it to ensure that such restrictions are adhered to?
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Summary of issues
Table of contents
. As discussed in paras 3.17, 3.29, 4.6-4.7, 4.11.
Issues Paper 13 (1997) - Circulation of Legal Advice to Government
History of this Reference (Digest)
PREMIER OF NEW SOUTH WALES
MEMORANDUM NO 95-39
Arrangements for seeking legal advice from the Crown Solicitor’s Office
(Memorandum to all Ministers)
Following its “commercialisation” in July of this year, the Crown Solicitor’s Office has recently circulated details
concerning the future provision of legal services to Government.
Although Government agencies now have greater freedom to avail themselves of legal services provided by private practitioners, there
remain certain key areas which, because of their complexity, sensitivity or the need to be handled or managed centrally on behalf
of the Government, still need to be referred to Crown Law Officers. In particular, legal matters of this nature include those which:
(a) have implications for Government beyond an individual Minister’s portfolio;
(b) involve the constitutional powers and privileges of the State and/or the Commonwealth;
(c) raise issues which are fundamental to the responsibilities of Government; or
(d) arise from, or relate to, matters falling within the Attorney General’s areas of responsibility.
As soon as possible after becoming aware of the existence of legal matters which fall within any of the above categories, Ministers
should bring those matters to the attention of the Attorney General. Wherever practicable, such requests for the Attorney General’s
advice should be in writing, containing a summary of relevant facts, identify the precise questions in relation to which advice is
sought, and give an indication of the degree of urgency involved.
12 October 1995
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Summary of issues
Table of contents
Issues Paper 13 (1997) - Circulation of Legal Advice to Government
History of this Reference (Digest)
DIRECTIONS FOR THE PROVISION OF LEGAL SERVICES TO GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS AND AGENCIES
COMMONWEALTH ATTORNEY-GENERAL
1 JULY 1995
APPLICATION OF THESE DIRECTIONS
1. These Directions indicate the areas in which Commonwealth departments and agencies are free to obtain legal services, other than
prosecution services performed by the Director of Public Prosecutions, from sources other than the Attorney-General’s Department
or their own in-house legal staff. The Directions have been considered and endorsed by Cabinet and are binding on those Departments
and agencies to whom they are directed.
2. These Directions distinguish between the position of those agencies that have a close connection to the central functions of Government
and those that have a less central role. A distinction has been drawn between those agencies that operate on the Commonwealth Public
Account and are staffed, or supported, by staff appointed or employed under the
Public Service Act 1922
and those agencies that are resourced under other arrangements indicating a lower level of connection to the Government. The latter
may exercise a choice between use of Government legal services and private sector legal services.
ROLE OF THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL
3. The Attorney-General is the First Law Officer and is the legal adviser to Cabinet.
Judiciary Act 1903
confers responsibilities on the Attorney-General or persons appointed by him to bring suits on behalf of the Commonwealth and, under
the Act, service of legal process is to be made on the Attorney-General or one of the Attorney-General’s appointees.
5. By convention the Attorney-General has the right, subject to any applicable statutory provisions to the contrary, to have access
to any legal advice which may be obtained by any Commonwealth Minister, Department or agency. As part of the exercise of the Attorney-General’s
responsibilities, the Attorney-General may issue or approve guidelines for the provision of legal services to Commonwealth Ministers,
Departments and agencies by in house lawyers and by external legal advisers.
6. All Commonwealth legal services are to be provided within a broad general framework which is consistent with the role of the Attorney-General.
GENERAL DIRECTIONS
7. General Directions for the provision of legal services to Government Departments and agencies are as follows:
(a) All arrangements for the provision of legal services to Commonwealth Departments and agencies must recognise the central role
of the Attorney-General.
(b) The Attorney-General is the First Law Officer and is the legal adviser to Cabinet and has the right, if necessary, to unfettered
access to any legal advice that may be obtained by a Commonwealth Department.
(c) Arrangements for the provision of legal services to the Commonwealth are to ensure delivery of efficient and effective legal services.
(d) Departments and agencies are to comply with these Directions and guidelines issued by the Attorney-General and are responsible
for ensuring compliance by their external legal service providers.
ROLE OF THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL'S LEGAL PRACTICE
8. Legal services will be provided by the Attorney-General’s Legal Practice in three categories:
(a) Charge/Choice - chargeable legal work that can be performed by any lawyer, subject to compliance with guidelines issued by the
Attorney-General;
(b) No Charge/No Choice - the Budget funded work of the Attorney-General’s Department; and
(c) Charge/No External Choice - chargeable legal work that the Government has decided should be performed only by its own employees.
9. Where the Attorney-General’s Legal Practice is unable to provide services required by a Minister, Department or agency of
the kind described above in a no choice area the Attorney-General may agree the basis on which alternative legal services are provided.
USER-CHARGING AND USER-CHOICE
No Charge/No Choice
10. There are some services provided by the Attorney-General’s Legal Practice which are not subject to the user pays system
and in relation to which there is no choice of service provider. These services are the subject of normal Budget funding to the Attorney-General’s
Legal Practice:
(a) legal advice to Cabinet, or to Ministers or Departments on existing or proposed Cabinet Submissions or Cabinet Memoranda and
on legislative proposals or draft legislation;
(b) policy advice on matters within the Attorney-General’s portfolio;
(c) participation by officers of the Attorney-General’s Legal Practice in Government policy, program or administrative development
for the purpose of providing policy advice from the Attorney-General’s portfolio perspective;
(d) public international law and treaties services (subject to standing arrangements with the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade
on responsibilities for delivery of such services);
(e) drafting of subordinate legislation, Proclamations, and other types of legislative instruments; and
(f) prosecution services conducted by agreement on behalf of the Director of Public Prosecutions.
Charge/Choice
11. This type of legal work is done by the Attorney-General’s Legal Practice but departments and agencies will be able to choose
to have such work done by an in-house or private sector lawyer:
(a) general legal advice eg administrative law, most interpretation of legislation or determinations, advice on the powers of officers,
advice on secrecy provisions, settling of minor claims, advice in specialised areas such as social welfare law and questions of statutory
interpretation relating to the expenditure or receipt of public money;
(b) all matters involving legal agreements or contracts other than those referred to in the section below on Charge/No External Choice;
(c) all work in tribunals (eg in the Administrative Appeals Tribunal or more specialised Tribunals; matters before other bodies, such
as Parliamentary Inquiries and the Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission or the Privacy Commissioner).
Charge/No External Choice
12. Subject to statutory exceptions and special arrangements agreed to by the Attorney-General, the Attorney-General’s Legal
Practice is the sole external provider of legal services to Commonwealth Departments and agencies in the following areas:
(a) Constitutional advice
Advice on the provisions of the
Constitution
arising otherwise than for the purposes of a No Charge/No Choice matter or in litigation;
(b) Litigation
Litigation in courts by or against the Commonwealth, Commonwealth Ministers, other Commonwealth officers or employees and agencies
which operate on the Commonwealth Public Account and which are staffed, or supported, by staff appointed or employed under the
Public Service Act 1922
, including:
(i) appeals;
(ii) matters in which the Commonwealth might be vicariously liable;
(iii) matters which, if not settled, could result in damages claims in courts;
(iv) damages claims that may be settled by alternative dispute resolution techniques; and
(v) claims for the non production of evidence or material to courts or tribunals on the grounds of public interest immunity.
(c) Legal Agreements
Matters involving legal agreements which are to be approved by Cabinet.
Maintenance of the Commonwealth’s legal position on the Government Information Technology Conditions (GITC), in conjunction
with other responsible Departments.
(d) Matters on which legal services are to be provided to Ministers or Departments in relation to any area of dispute between Commonwealth
Departments or agencies;
(e) Questions of statutory interpretation of legislation affecting more than one Commonwealth Department or agency;
(f) Matters having national security implications; and
(g) Government to Government work, both domestic and international.
POLICY STATEMENT
13. There are some special responsibilities that the Attorney-General has in relation to the provision of Government legal services.
These include the matters described below:
Judiciary Act 1903
confers responsibilities on the Attorney-General or persons appointed by him to bring suits on behalf of the Commonwealth; under
the Act service of legal process against the Commonwealth is to be made on the Attorney-General or one of his appointees.
(i) The effective conduct of these Ministerial responsibilities requires that the appointees of the Attorney-General be persons who
are responsible to him and not to some other Minister.
(ii) By reason of these responsibilities and his other responsibilities in relation to constitutional matters, the Attorney-General
is able effectively to coordinate Commonwealth litigation and to maintain Commonwealth standards. For example -
as to being a model litigant;
ensuring the Commonwealth maintains a consistent approach in its arguments or submissions in courts; and
ensuring that independent and objective legal advice taking account of all special Commonwealth interests is available to Departments.
(iii) The Finance Directions provide -
for certain responsibilities of the Secretary of the Attorney-General’s Department (and persons appointed by him) in relation
to claims against the Commonwealth; and
coordination of claims work by the Attorney-General’s Department ensures that, where legal liability of the Commonwealth is
in issue, the Commonwealth is adequately protected and, if liability should be conceded, that is done at reasonable cost to the Commonwealth
but consistently with fairness being afforded to the citizen.
(iv) However, there are many small claims which, in accordance with Finance Direction 21/3 can be settled by Departments themselves,
on the basis that a Secretary is satisfied that the Commonwealth is liable.
Government Contracts
- Consistently with the role of the Attorney-General as the legal adviser to Cabinet, any agreement the subject of which is to be
considered by Cabinet is to be the subject of advice from the Attorney-General through the Attorney-General’s Department.
Legislation
- The Cabinet Handbook confers responsibilities on the Attorney-General’s Department in relation to certain advice on new legislative
proposals. Through such means the Department is able to assist Departments and Cabinet by advising on whether legislation is necessary,
and is able to maintain consistency in areas such as rights to review Government decisions and the levels of penalties for offences.
14. Apart from those special responsibilities, there are numerous areas in which the Attorney-General’s Legal Practice acts
as consultant to or provides support for in-house lawyers in Departments. In disputes between Departments or agencies on legal issues,
the Attorney-General’s Legal Practice also assists in providing advice and, in such circumstances, can operate as an independent
means of resolution of such disputes.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Summary of issues
Table of contents
. The exceptions relate to agreements that have a special significance for the Government.
. Subject to the provisions of the Finance Directions in relation to settlement of claims.
. Finance Directions 21/3-21/6 deal with the procedures for the settlement of claims.
. The Attorney-General’s Legal Practice has a primary responsibility for the legal aspects of the GITC and should be consulted
on all questions affecting those conditions.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter