URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/lawreform/TASLRI/2019/28.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:49:50
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Review of the Defence of Insanity in s 16 of the Criminal Code and Fitness to Plead [2019] TASLRI 28
Assessment reports
Review of the Defence of Insanity in s 16 of the Criminal
Code and Fitness to Plead
Final Report no. 28
December 2019
Information
The Tasmania Law Reform Institute was established on 23 July 2001 by
agreement between the Government of the State of Tasmania, the
University of
Tasmania and the Law Society of Tasmania. The creation of the Institute was part
of a Partnership Agreement between
the University and the State government
signed in 2000. The Institute is based at the Sandy Bay campus of the University
of Tasmania
within the Faculty of Law. The Institute undertakes law reform work
and research on topics proposed by the government, the community,
the University
and the Institute itself.
The Institute’s Director is Associate Professor Terese Henning. The
members of the Board of the Institute are Associate Professor
Terese Henning
(Chair), Professor Tim McCormack (Dean of the Faculty of Law at the University
of Tasmania), the Honourable Justice
Helen Wood (appointed by the Honourable
Chief Justice of Tasmania), Ms Kristy Bourne (appointed by the
Attorney-General), Associate
Professor Jeremy Prichard (appointed by the Council
of the University), Mr Craig Mackie (appointed by the Tasmanian Bar
Association),
Ms Ann Hughes (appointed at the invitation of the Institute
Board), Mr Rohan Foon (appointed by the Law Society of Tasmania), Ms
Baumeler (appointed at the invitation of the Institute Board) and Ms Rosie Smith
(appointed at the invitation of the Institute
Board as a member of the Tasmanian
Aboriginal community).
The Board oversees the Institute’s research, considering each reference
before it is accepted, and approving publications before
their release.
Acknowledgments
This Final Report was prepared for the Board by Dr Rebecca Bradfield with
valuable feedback provided by the TLRI Director. The Issues
Paper that preceded
this Report was prepared for the Board by Dr Rebecca Bradfield. Both these
documents were edited and formatted
by Mr Bruce Newey. Valuable contributions to
the project and feedback on drafts of the Issues Paper were provided by the TLRI
and the Reference Group for this project, the Honourable Justice Helen
Wood, Daryl Coates SC, Marita O’Connell, Yvonne Chaperon,
Aaron Groves,
Georgina O’Donnell and Associate Professor Jeremy Prichard. The TLRI
acknowledges the invaluable assistance provided
by the Mental Health Tribunal in
the collection of data for this project. Assistance was also provided by the
Legal Aid Commission.
The project was funded by a grant from the
Solicitors’ Guarantee Fund.
This study has been approved by the Tasmanian Social Science Human Research
Ethics Committee (HREC). If you have any concerns or complaints
conduct of this study, please contact the Executive Officer of the HREC
(Tasmania) Network on +61 3 62266254 or email
human.ethics@utas.edu.au
Executive Office is the person nominated to receive complaints from research
participants. Please quote ethics reference number
[H0016752]. The study
conducted with the assistance of the Mental Health Tribunal in relation to the
collection of data had its own
ethics approval. If you have any concerns or
complaints about the conduct of this aspect of the study, please contact the
Officer of the HREC (Tasmania) Network on +61 3 62266254 or email
human.ethics@utas.edu.au
quote ethics reference number [H0017154].
Terms of Reference
To consider the operation of the law of insanity in Tasmania with particular
reference to:
• the operation of s 16(3) of the
Criminal Code
• whether evidence of insane delusions arising from mental illness
should form the basis of self-defence;
• if insane delusions arising from mental illness form the basis of
self-defence, whether defendants relying on insane delusions
should be liable to
supervision under the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
• if insane delusions arising from mental illness form the basis of
self-defence, whether the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) requires amendment in relation to treatment options for such
defendants.
To consider the operation of the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act
(Tas) and whether changes are needed to ensure that the Act operates
justly, effectively and consistently with the principles that
underlie it. In
particular, the Institute should consider whether:
• the process of determining fitness to stand trial or establishing the
defence of insanity can be improved; and
• the operation of
Criminal Justice (Mental
Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) including in relation to discharge and review of
forensic and treatment orders and whether there is a need for
‘step-down’
Executive Summary
This Report considers two specialised responses for individuals with mental
illness and/or cognitive impairment where their mental
impairment affects their
ability to participate in the ordinary processes of the criminal justice system.
(1) fitness to stand trial; and
(2) the defence of insanity.
Although there may be an overlap in the conditions that give rise to a
finding that a person is unfit to stand trial and a finding
that a person is not
guilty by reason of insanity, the scope of their operation and their legal
requirements are different.
Fitness to stand trial
provision that relates
to the issue of whether the accused has the ability to understand or participate
in his or her trial. It is
concerned with a person’s capacity at the
time of the trial
. It applies where a person’s mental processes are
disordered or impaired, or if for any other reason the person is unable to
understand court processes and make a defence to the charge.
is a matter of
substantive
involving the
determination of a whether a person should not be held criminally responsible on
the ground that he or she lacked the
mental capacity to commit the offence.
Insanity is concerned with an individual’s capacity at the
time of the
. In order to rely on the insanity defence, the person must have a
mental disease (which includes what has in past legislation been
‘natural imbecility’) such that he or she lacked the capacity to
understand the physical character of the act
or to know that the act was one
which he or she ought not do, or, by reason of the mental disease, the person
was deprived of the
power to resist an impulse.
A significant proportion of people within the criminal justice system have
mental and/or cognitive impairments, yet only a small number
of such individuals
rely on unfitness to stand trial or the defence of insanity. More commonly,
people with mental or cognitive impairments
do not rely on the unfitness
procedure or the insanity defence and instead enter a plea of guilty or are
found guilty following a
trial. A focus of this reference has been to consider
barriers that may discourage people from relying on these specialised provisions
when they might otherwise be appropriate. The Issues Paper asked a range of
questions about the operation of the rules relating to
fitness to stand trial
and the defence of insanity in Tasmania. After conducting its review of the
current law, considering the feedback
received to questions asked in the Issues
Paper and examining the research and the developments in other jurisdictions,
the Institute’s
view is that reform is required to the law of fitness to
stand trial, the law of insanity and the structure of the orders that are
available to the court following a finding of not guilty by reason of insanity
(either at trial or a special hearing) or if a finding
cannot be made that the
defendant is not guilty of an offence (at a special hearing).
of this Report details the background to this reference and presents
an overview of the structure of the Report and the scope of
the reference.
of this Report provides an overview of the legislative framework that
sets out the law in relation to the operation of the criminal
justice system for
people with mental health impairments and/or cognitive impairments. Several Acts
set out the law in relation to
the operation of the criminal justice system for
people with mental health impairments and/or cognitive impairments, including
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
Mental Health Act 2013
(Tas) and the
This Part also sets out the distinction between fitness to stand trial and
insanity and considers the principles that underlie the
Criminal Justice
(Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas). These principles are fairness to the
accused and the right to a fair trial, the protection of the community and the
recognition
of the rights of mentally impaired individuals consistent with the
principles of least restriction. These principles are considered
in light of the
obligations that arise under international legal instruments to which Australia
is a signatory including the
International Covenant on Civil and Political
’), and the
Convention on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities
provides an overview of mental health impairments and cognitive
impairments and the criminal justice system. As noted, insanity and
stand trial apply to only a small number of people compared to the number of
individuals with mental health impairments
and cognitive impairments overall who
are involved in the criminal justice system. Individuals with mental health or
cognitive impairments
may not rely on the process of fitness to stand trial or
on the insanity defence but may proceed through the usual criminal justice
process. This is a clear alternative and the possible sentence received (if
found guilty) compared to the consequences of a finding
of unfitness or insanity
are likely to weigh into the decision-making process.
A question considered in the Issues Paper is the relationship between the
‘dangerous criminal’ provisions contained in
Sentencing Act
, Division 3 and the sentencing orders available to the
court under the
Sentencing Act 1997
where an offender found
guilty of an offence may be sentenced to a restriction order, a supervision
order or a treatment order in
cases where the offender appears to be suffering
from a mental illness. The Institute’s view is that a more appropriate
for such an offender – one that will protect the community and
allow the person to obtain appropriate treatment – is
found in the
forensic orders contained in the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act
rather than in indefinite detention as a dangerous
criminal under the
Sentencing Act 1997
(Tas). Based on feedback about
whether a statutory trigger is necessary to facilitate consideration of the
forensic orders, the Institute’s
recommendation is that an amendment to
this effect is unnecessary given the factors relevant to the court’s
sentencing decision
and the matters that courts take into account in any event
in deciding whether to make dangerous criminal declarations.
sets out the current test for determining unfitness to stand trial in
Tasmania and considers the law in other jurisdictions. Unfitness
to stand trial
relates to the issue whether an accused is able to participate in the trial
process, and, as the Institute has previously
written, this ability
‘fundamentally determine[s] whether that person can gain access to justice
and whether justice can in
The current focus of the fitness test is on a person’s cognitive capacity
or intellectual ability to understand features of
the criminal trial. Based on
submissions received and its research, the Institute is of the view that this
test is deficient in that
it does not give adequate recognition to whether the
accused can participate meaningfully in his or her trial. The answer to this
question depends on two inter-linked matters: first, whether the accused has the
capacity to make decisions in relation to key elements
of the trial and, second,
whether the necessary conditions exist or can be created to enable him or her to
exercise that decision-making
The Institute recommends a shift from the current focus on cognitive capacity
to a supported decision-making approach based on facilitating
individual’s ability to exercise his/her decision-making capacity and
effectively participate in the trial. The determination
of an accused’s
decision-making capacity needs to be clearly grounded in relevant determinative
criteria. Consequently, what
these criteria are should also be determined and
specified in reforming the fitness test. The purpose of such criteria is to
courts when applying what might otherwise appear to be a relatively vague
and subjective test. The Institute makes recommendations
in this regard. In
summary, the approach recommended by the Institute has three interrelated
components:
• the reformulation of the fitness test to replace the current
‘Presser’ test with a decision-making test;
• the specification of guidance/criteria in the application of that
test to give it content and avoid subjectivity in its application;
• a requirement for assessment of the need for and, where necessary,
creation of the conditions that optimise and/or enable
people to exercise their
decision-making capacity and therefore participate in trials. These might
include making necessary accommodations
in court processes or providing
decision-making and communication supports through the use of communication
assistants or intermediaries.
These recommendations are made in light of the submissions received, the
Institute’s broader research and the requirement set
out in the terms of
reference that the Institute should consider whether changes are needed to
ensure that the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
operates justly, effectively and consistently with the principles that underlie
sets out the current Tasmanian procedure to determine unfitness to
stand trial, the position in other jurisdictions and makes recommendations
reform the current procedure. Concerns that arise in this area include: the role
of experts and experts’ reports in the
process of determining unfitness to
stand trial, the appropriate decision-maker (judge or jury) in making fitness
determinations
in the Supreme Court, and the appropriateness of the current
procedure for determining fitness in the Magistrates Court. After considering
these issues, this Part makes recommendations about developing best practice
guidelines for the preparation of expert reports to
be used by the court to make
a determination of fitness to stand trial or to enter a guilty plea. The
recommendations highlight the
need for experts to provide information to the
court in relation to supports and accommodations that may help the
decision-making capacity and assist him/her to participate in
the criminal justice process. Other significant recommendations are
determinations of fitness to stand trial in the Supreme Court should be
determined by a judge (rather than a jury) and for the
introduction of a
simplified alternative pathway for appropriate cases in the Magistrates
sets out the procedure following a determination of unfitness to stand
trial in Tasmania and in other comparable jurisdictions. This
concerns the
conduct of the ‘special hearing’. If the court determines that the
defendant is not likely to become fit
to stand trial within 12 months or the
defendant does not become fit to stand trial within 12 months, then the court
holds a special
hearing. The special hearing provides a way to test the
prosecution case and is conducted so that the onus of proof and standard
proof are the same as in a trial of criminal proceedings and in other respects
as nearly as possible as if it were a trial of
criminal proceedings. Key issues
that arise in relation to the special hearing are whether the special hearing
process complies with
the human rights obligations under the
whether there should be provision for a judge-alone process for special
hearings. Based on its consideration of the provisions
Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
, the Institute’s view
is that the provisions do currently allow for the special hearing to be
conducted as far as possible
like an ordinary trial and, crucially, allow for an
individual to be acquitted if the prosecution cannot establish its case beyond
reasonable doubt in a criminal trial.
However, an area of concern was identified in relation to the role of the
legal practitioner in circumstances where the accused is
unable to give
instructions. This creates practical and ethical difficulties for legal
practitioners. Accordingly, aligned with the
Institute’s recommended
approach of facilitating supported decision-making (as set out in
Institute makes recommendations to use intermediaries and communication
assistants in special hearings to assist with the provision
of instructions. In
these cases, the defendant’s rights, wishes and preferences should be
given effect where he or she is capable
of giving instructions. There will be
cases where this is not possible, and in these cases legal practitioners must
act to promote
and uphold defendants’ personal and social wellbeing and in
a way that is least restrictive of their human rights. This reflects
requirements of the
and the National Decision-Making Principles.
Recommendations are also made in
to allow for a special hearing to be
heard by a judge alone where the prosecution and the defence agree in relation
to the defence
of insanity (or, as recommended in this Report, the defence of
mental or cognitive impairment). This should operate with judicial
oversight to
provide appropriate safeguards, so that the court has access to the expert
reports and the power to hear from expert
witnesses. This is consistent with the
Institute’s recommendation in relation to a ‘consent’ defence
or cognitive impairment in
provides an overview of the law of insanity in Tasmania and identifies
concerns in relation to the existing law before considering
options for reform
and outlining recommendations for reform. Extensive scholarly literature has
identified deficiencies with the
law of insanity. An overview of these concerns
is set out in
, including that it contains inappropriate and outdated
terminology (including ‘insanity’ and ‘natural
imbecility’)
and that the nature of the qualifying mental state (mental
disease) is outdated, limited and offensive. Another area of concern in
to the law of insanity in Tasmania is the role of s 16(3) of the
(Tas) and the interrelationship of the defences of insanity and
self-defence. This matter has previously been addressed by the TLRI
again specifically raised in the terms of reference for this project. Based on
its consideration of the literature, the submissions
received and the approaches
taken in other jurisdictions, the key reforms recommended are to retain and
reform the defence of insanity
Criminal Code
(Tas) s16 by:
• Changing the name of the defence of insanity to the defence of mental
or cognitive impairment.
• Changing the scope of the qualifying condition by replacing the term
‘mental disease’ with detailed definitions
of mental impairment and
cognitive impairment.
• Changing the terminology in s 16(1)(a)(i) from ‘understanding
the physical character’ to ‘understanding
the nature and
quality’ of such act or omission.
• Repealing s16(3).
• Making legislative provision for the prosecution to raise the defence
of mental or cognitive impairment against the wishes
of the defendant with the
leave of the court.
• Providing the court with the power to dispense with a trial if the
prosecution and defence agree that the evidence in a case
raises the defence of
mental or cognitive impairment. This should operate with judicial oversight to
provide appropriate safeguards,
so that the court has access to the expert
reports and the power to hear from expert witnesses.
• Ensuring that the same law applies in the Supreme Court and the
Magistrates Court.
Part 8 examines the orders that can be made under the
Criminal Justice
(Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) following a finding that an individual is
not guilty by reason of insanity (either at a trial or a special hearing) or if
finding cannot be made that the defendant is not guilty of an offence (at a
special hearing). An individual is
found guilty of an offence where
he or she is found not guilty by reason of insanity or unfit to stand trial if a
finding cannot
be made at a special hearing that the accused is not guilty.
Accordingly, the person is not ‘sentenced’ for the offence
to the ordinary principles of sentencing. The Terms of Reference require the
Institute to consider the just and effective
operation of the
Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas), in particular the operation of
of the Act, including in relation to the discharge and review of forensic
and treatment orders and whether there is a need for ‘step-down’
options. In light of these considerations, this Part sets out recommendations
for reform that would abolish the current indefinite
detention scheme for
forensic orders and replace it with a new model with the following features:
(1) A limiting term set by the court following a finding of not guilty by
reason of mental or cognitive impairment or where a finding
cannot be made that
the defendant is not guilty.
(2) The limiting term to be set on the basis of the hypothetical sentence
model. This means that the court must nominate a limiting
term, which would be
the court’s best estimate of the length of the sentence that would have
been imposed had the person been
found guilty at a normal trial.
(3) A limiting term to not operate as an absolute limit of the duration of an
order. The DPP should be able to make an application
to the Supreme Court prior
to the expiration of the limiting term for an extension of a restriction order
or a supervision order.
The DPP should also be able to apply for a restriction
order to be replaced with a supervision order instead of an extension of the
restriction order.
(4) A forensic patient to be able to apply to the Supreme Court for a
discharge of a restriction order or the variation or revocation
of a supervision
order prior to the expiry of the limiting term. This reflects the current
process for the review of orders by the
Supreme Court under the
Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(5) The test for making, varying or removing orders under the
Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
to be changed from
‘likely to endanger’ to require determination of whether the
defendant does, or would if released,
pose an unacceptable risk of causing
physical or psychological harm to a person or persons generally.
(6) The test for making, varying or removing orders under the
Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
to be amended to require
the Mental Health Tribunal and the court to have regard to the person’s
recovery or progress in terms
of treatment progression and personal improvement
in making a decision to discharge a restriction order or vary or revoke a
supervision
Recommendations are also made that consideration be given to empowering
courts to make suppression orders in relation to applications
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas). This would be for
the purposes of assisting the long-term recovery of people subject to the Act
and facilitating their reintegration
into the community.
The Institute has also identified barriers to patient reintegration and
release from forensic orders within the Forensic Mental Health
recommends a review be conducted to ensure that appropriate pathways are
available for the gradual reintegration of forensic
patients into the community,
consistent with the principles of least restriction and community safety. In
addition, appropriate rehabilitation
pathways should be developed for people
with cognitive impairments.
Recommendations
1. It is unnecessary to amend to the dangerous criminal provisions contained
Sentencing Act 1997
(Tas) to provide a statutory trigger for
judicial consideration of the appropriateness of making an order under the
Sentencing Act 1997
instead of a dangerous criminal
declaration. (p 25)
2. There is a need to reform the current test for unfitness to stand trial
contained in the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
3. The doctrine of fitness to stand trial should not be abolished in
Tasmania. (p 39)
4. The right to a fair trial should be given legislative recognition as the
fundamental principle governing the determination of whether
a defendant is fit
to stand trial within the meaning of the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment)
5. The TLRI does not support the minimalist reform approach of simply
up-dating the criteria for the current cognitive capacity fitness
test) without making additional reforms to that test. More
profound reform is needed. (p 41)
6. The test for assessing fitness to stand trial in
Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
should be reformed so that its focus is
on the accused’s decision-making capacity as means of determining whether
can effectively participate in the trial rather than on his or her
cognitive capacity. This recommendation is to be understood in
conjunction with
two other factors:
(1) an identification of the key matters about which a person must be able to
make decisions in the trial in order for them to be
able to meaningfully
participate (see Recommendation 8); and
(2) the need for the court to take into account any accommodations and
supports that would assist a person to be able to exercise
their decision-making
capacity in the trial process (see Recommendations 9 and 10). (p 44)
7. Rationality or rational decision-making should not be included in the test
for determining whether a person should be required
to stand trial contained in
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
8. Criteria should be legislatively prescribed to guide assessments of
defendants’ decision-making capacity. These criteria
should consist of
critical understandings and abilities that defendants must have in order to make
key decisions during trials including:
• an understanding of the actual significance and effect of entering a
• the ability to communicate
instructions to his or
her legal practitioner
• the ability to decide whether to give evidence to support his/her
case and his/her ability to give evidence (that is, the
ability to give a
coherent account in his/her defence and to answer questions put to him/her)
• an understanding of the meaning and consequences of a finding of
guilt including that he/she may be punished and in jeopardy
of imprisonment, if
so advised that they are at risk of such a penalty
• an understanding of the nature of the offence(s) with which he/she is
• the ability to understand the nature of the proceedings as a process
to determine whether it has been proved that he/she has
committed the offence(s)
• the ability to understand and follow the substance of the evidence
that may be given at trial
• the ability to understand the course of the proceedings and what is
going on in a general sense at each stage of the trial
process. (p 52)
9. There should be legislative recognition in the
Criminal Justice (Mental
Impairment) Act 1999
of the need for courts to take into account
support measures and accommodations that are available to an individual with a
optimising an accused’s fitness to stand trial in circumstances
where they may otherwise be unfit. Further, the legislation
should specify that
a finding of lack of capacity is only to be made as a last resort, that is, in
the event that support measures
have been exhausted. (p 58)
10. The court’s assessment of the supports and accommodations that may
assist an accused to be fit for trial must be based on
supports/accommodations that are actually available and would be effective to
assist the accused. This should be the subject
of expert reports in relation to
the court’s determination of the fitness to stand trial test. (p 58)
11. There should be a separate test in the
Criminal Justice (Mental
Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) to determine whether a person is fit to enter a
plea of guilty. (p 62)
12. The test for fitness to enter a plea of guilty should reflect the
decision-making and communication approach contained in the
proposed test for
determining fitness to stand trial (see Recommendation 6) with necessary
alterations to reflect the difference
between entering a plea of guilty and
participating in a defended trial. (p 62)
13. The following trial processes are relevant to a person’s
decision-making capacity to be fit to enter a guilty plea (see
Recommendation
• the nature of the offence with which he or she is charged.
• the right to contest that charge.
• the nature of the hearing if he or she entered a plea of not guilty
as a process to determine whether it has been proved that
the person committed
the offence charged.
• the consequences of entering a plea of guilty, including what is
being admitted when a plea of guilty is entered, the effect
of a plea of guilty,
that the court may impose punishment and a general understanding of the
punishment that the person is in jeopardy
of receiving.
• the accused’s understanding of the course of the sentencing
hearing and a general understanding of what is occurring
at each stage and the
right to challenge the facts stated by the prosecution. (p 62)
14. Best practice guidelines should be developed for the preparation of
expert reports to be used by the court to make a determination
of fitness to
stand trial or enter a guilty plea. These should be developed by an expert
working group, which should consider how
to address challenges arising in the
assessment of fitness to stand trial by experts posed by cultural and ethnic
factors, as well
as other communication difficulties. This may include taking
into account the efficacy of psychometric instruments, where relevant,
developed through studies of Western, English-speaking populations. (p 73)
15. The scope of the best practice guidelines should accommodate the proposed
changes to the fitness test and should provide information
to the court in
relation to the supports and accommodations that may support the person’s
decision-making capacity and assist
an individual to participate in the criminal
justice process. (p 73)
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment)
(Tas) should be amended to provide that the investigation into
fitness to stand trial is to be determined by a judge (rather than
the jury). (p
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) should be
amended to allow a magistrate to discharge people without making determinations
of their fitness to stand trial or
their criminal responsibility. (p 80)
18. The power to discharge should operate as follows:
(a) It should apply to summary offences and indictable offences dealt with
summarily. The discharge power should not apply to matters
that are referred to
the Magistrates Court for trial from the Supreme Court by virtue of the
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 308.
(b) The threshold test for the operation of the discretion to discharge
should be that there is a real and substantial question about
defendant’s fitness to stand trial.
(c) Advice in relation to the issue of fitness for the purpose of exercising
the discretion should be provided to the magistrate by
the Court Liaison
Officers. Appropriate resources should be made available to the Court Liaison
Service for this purpose.
(d) The power should operate as a genuine discretion vested in the magistrate
and should not require the consent of the prosecution
and defence.
(e) Legislative guidance as to the factors that are relevant to the exercise
of the discretion to discharge the charges should be
provided and include: (1)
the nature of the offence, (2) the nature of the impairment, (3) the risk to the
community, (4) the treatment,
support or services available to the accused.
(f) The power to discharge should only provide for an unconditional discharge
and not a conditional discharge or the power to order
other therapeutic
intervention by the magistrate. (p 80)
19. The approach taken to the use of intermediaries and communication
assistants in special hearings should reflect the approach recommended
Institute’s Final Report on the establishment of an
Intermediary/Communication Assistant scheme in Tasmania. This will
legislative amendment of the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act
(Tas). (p 90)
20. There should be legislative recognition that, in the conduct of an
investigation into fitness to enter a guilty plea/to stand
trial and in special
hearings, a person’s rights, wishes and preferences should be given effect
where a person is capable of
giving instructions. However, in circumstances
where defendants are not capable of giving instructions even with support, legal
practitioners
must act to promote and uphold the person’s personal and
social wellbeing in a way least restrictive of their human rights.
21. There should be provision in the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment)
(Tas) for a special hearing by a judge alone where the prosecution
and defence agree that the defence of mental or cognitive impairment
established on the evidence. However, safeguards are required and the court
should have the power to review the evidence
(including hearing from expert
witnesses) in order to be satisfied that the evidence establishes the defence of
mental or cognitive
impairment in a case where the prosecution and defence agree
that the proposed evidence establishes the defence. (p 93)
22. The Institute recommends making changes to the current defence of
insanity contained in the
Criminal Code
s 16. (p 114)
23. The Institute does not recommend abolition of the defence of insanity
simpliciter. (p 119)
24. The Institute recommends retaining and reforming the current defence of
insanity. (p 119)
25. The insanity defence in s 16 of the
Criminal Code
(Tas) should not
be wholly replaced by a new defence. (p 125)
26. The name of the insanity defence in s 16 of the
Criminal Code
(Tas) should be changed. (p 128)
27. The name of the defence in s 16 of the
Criminal Code
(Tas) should
be changed to the defence of mental or cognitive impairment. (p 128)
28. The qualifying condition contained in the
Criminal Code
should be changed from a ‘mental disease’ to mental or cognitive
impairment with detailed definition of these
terms included in the section. (p
29. The definition of mental and cognitive impairment should be based on the
definitions set out by the NSWLRC as follows:
Mental impairment means a temporary or continuing disturbance of thought,
mood, volition, perception, or memory that impairs emotional
wellbeing, judgment
or behaviour, so as to affect functioning in daily life to a material extent.
Such mental impairment may arise from but is not limited to the following:
(i) anxiety disorders
(ii) affective disorders
(iii) psychoses
(iv) substance induced mental disorders.
‘Substance induced mental disorders’ include ongoing mental
impairments, but do not include substance abuse disorders
(addiction to
substances) or the temporary effects of ingesting substances.
Cognitive impairment means an ongoing impairment in comprehension, reason,
adaptive functioning, judgement, learning or memory that
is the result of any
damage to, dysfunction, developmental delay, or deterioration of the brain or
Such cognitive impairment may arise from, but is not limited to, the
(i) intellectual disability
(ii) dementias
(iii) acquired brain injury
(iv) drug or alcohol related brain damage
(vi) autism spectrum disorders. (p 145)
30. Section 16(4) of the
Criminal Code
(Tas) should be repealed. (p
31. The legislative definition of mental impairment and cognitive impairment
should not expressly include or exclude personality disorders
from the defence.
Criminal Code
s 16(1)(a)(i) should be amended to
refer to ‘understanding the nature and quality of such act or
omission’. (p 148)
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 16(1)(b) should be retained without
amendment. (p 150)
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 16(3) should be repealed.(p 159)
35. A delusional belief should not form the basis for self-defence and a
provision should be inserted in the
to provide that if a person does
an act or makes an omission as a result of a delusion caused by a mental or
cognitive impairment,
the delusion can only be used as a defence under s 16 of
Criminal Code
(Tas) and cannot be relied on to support a defence of
self-defence under s 46 of the
Criminal Code
(Tas). (p 160)
36. The burden of proof in relation to the defence of mental or cognitive
impairment should remain with the defence in cases where
it is raised by the
defence. (p 162)
The prosecution should have the power to raise the defence of
or cognitive impairment against the wishes of the defendant with
the leave of the court. In this case, the onus of proof should be
prosecution and the standard of proof should be the balance of probabilities. (p
38. The court should have the power to dispense with a trial if the
prosecution and defence agree that evidence establishes the defence
of mental or
cognitive impairment. However, safeguards are required and the court should have
the power to review the evidence (including
hearing from expert witnesses) in
order to be satisfied that the evidence establishes the defence of mental or
cognitive impairment
in a case where the prosecution and defence agree that the
proposed evidence establishes the defence. (p 171)
39. The new defence of mental or cognitive impairment introduced to amend the
current defence of insanity contained in the
Criminal Code
should apply to indictable and summary offences. (p 172)
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) should be
amended by abolishing the indefinite nature of forensic orders and introducing
limiting terms. (p 203)
41. In imposing a forensic order under the
Criminal Justice (Mental
Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas), the court must nominate a limiting term, which
would be the court’s best estimate of the length of the sentence that
would have been imposed had the person been found guilty at a normal trial (a
hypothetical sentence). (p 207)
42. A forensic patient should be able to apply to the Supreme Court for a
discharge of a restriction order or the variation or revocation
of a supervision
order prior to the expiry of the limiting term. (p 207)
43. A limiting term should not operate as an absolute limit on the duration
of an order. There should be power for the prosecution
to make an application to
extend the order. (p 212)
44. The NSW model should be adopted in Tasmania to allow for the extension of
orders beyond the limiting term set by the court, with
appropriate changes to
reflect the Tasmanian approach to decision-making and the role of the Mental
Health Tribunal. The scheme for
the extension of orders should have the
following key features:
(a) The DPP should be able to make an application to the Supreme Court prior
to the expiration of the limiting term for an extension
of a restriction order
or a supervision order. The DPP should also be able to apply for a restriction
order to be replaced with a
supervision order instead of an extension of the
restriction order.
(b) The Supreme Court should make the extension order on the basis of a
twofold assessment of the unacceptable risk of serious harm
to others posed by
the forensic patient if released from detention or supervision and the
inadequacy of other less restrictive means
of managing the risk. This regime
reflects the principles contained in the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment)
, which provides that the ‘court is to apply, where
appropriate, the principle that restrictions on the defendant’s freedom
and personal autonomy should be kept to the minimum consistent with the safety
of the community.’
(c) Considerations that the court should have regard to include:
• the safety of the community
• expert reports
• any certificates issued by the MHT
• the person’s level of compliance with any obligations imposed
while being a forensic patient, especially while they
were on leave
• the view of the court at the time the limiting term was imposed
• a report from the forensic patient’s treatment team which would
include information about the need for ongoing management
of the person and the
reasons why arrangements that do not involve continued supervision or detention
are not appropriate
• a report on the attitudes of victims, if any, and next of kin.
(d) The term of the extension order should be five years subject to further
(e) The MHT should be mandated to conduct annual reviews of the extended
forensic order.
(f) The Supreme Court should have the power to make an interim extension
order if it appears that the limiting term or existing extension
expire before the proceedings are determined and that the matters alleged in the
supporting documentation would, if proved,
justify the making of an extension
(g) The Supreme Court should at any time be able to vary or revoke an
extension order on the application of the DPP or the person
subject to the
forensic order if satisfied that circumstances have changed sufficiently to
render the order unnecessary. (p 215)
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
should be changed to refer to whether the defendant does, or would if released,
pose an unacceptable risk of causing physical or
psychological harm to a person
or persons generally. (p 221)
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
should be amended to require the Mental Health Tribunal and the court to have
regard to the person’s recovery or progress in
terms of treatment
progression and personal improvement in making a decision to discharge a
restriction order, or to vary or revoke
a supervision order prior to the
expiration of the limiting term. (p 222)
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) should not
be amended to introduce a presumption that prior to the expiry of the limiting
term a court cannot discharge a restriction
order or revoke a supervision order
unless the court is satisfied in relation to the risk of harm test. (p 223)
48. There should be a statutory requirement in the
Criminal Justice
(Mental Impairment) 1999
(Tas) for the court to take account of the
certificates and recommendations made by the Mental Health Tribunal with a
presumption
in favour of varying, revoking or discharging a forensic order if
the Mental Health Tribunal has issued a certificate. (p 226)
49. Consideration should be given to the enactment of a new provision in the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) 1999
(Tas) that expressly empowers
courts to make suppression orders and that sets out that the purpose of making
suppression orders is
to enable the long-term recovery of people subject to the
Act and to facilitate their reintegration into the community for the protection
of the community. (p 226)
50. The Tasmanian Government should initiate a review to identify the
barriers in the forensic mental health system to patients’
reintegration
into the community with a view to ensuring that appropriate pathways are
available for the gradual reintegration of
forensic patients into the community,
consistent with the principles of least restriction and community safety. (p
51. As part of the review of the transition pathways from a restriction order
to a supervision order, consideration should be given
to the amendment of the
leave provisions so that an order can be made allowing forensic patients to
leave the SMHU for an extended
period. (p 233)
52. As part of the review, the use of technological solutions to overcome
concerns in relation to risk and community safety should
be considered. (p
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(e) should be amended to provide for a maximum time limit for a conditional
release order of five years. (p 234)
54. Rehabilitation pathways should be developed for people with intellectual
disabilities or cognitive impairments. The Institute
recommends that this matter
be addressed in the review of the ‘step-down’ pathways for forensic
orders. (p 238)
Introduction
Background to
the reference
1.1.1 In its Report,
Review of the Law Relating
Self-defence
(Final Report No 20), the Tasmania Law Reform
Institute (TLRI) recommended that a review of the defence of insanity contained
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 16 should be undertaken. Concerns were
expressed about the extent to which the criminal law reflects contemporary
knowledge about mental illness. Of particular concern was the
relationship between delusions and self-defence and whether mistakes
from insane delusions can ever ground the defence of self-defence. The Report
noted that to permit complete acquittals in
cases of insane delusions does not
enable appropriate treatment to be provided to deluded defendants or take into
account the need
for community protection. Ultimately, the TLRI recommended that
if a person does an act or makes an omission as a result of a delusion
a mental disease, the delusion should only be used as a defence under s 16 of
Criminal Code
and should not be relied on to support a defence of
self-defence under s
1.1.2 Following the TLRI’s recommendations, the then Attorney-General
of Tasmania, the Hon Vanessa Goodwin, requested the TLRI
to provide advice in
the following terms:
To consider the operation of the law of insanity in Tasmania with particular
reference to:
• the operation of s 16(3) of the
Criminal Code
• whether evidence of insane delusions arising from mental illness
should form the basis of self-defence;
• if insane delusions arising from mental illness form the basis of
self-defence, whether defendants relying on insane delusions
should be liable to
supervision under the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
• if insane delusions arising from mental illness form the basis of
self-defence, whether the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) requires amendment in relation to treatment options for such
defendants.
To consider the operation of the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act
(Tas) and whether changes are needed to ensure that the Act operates
justly, effectively and consistently with the principles that
underlie it. In
particular, the Institute should consider whether:
• the process of determining fitness to stand trial or establishing the
defence of insanity can be improved; and
• the operation of
Criminal Justice (Mental
Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) including in relation to discharge and review of
forensic and treatment orders and whether there is a need for
‘step-down’
1.1.3 This research forms part of the
Disability Justice Plan for Tasmania
, which sets out a commitment to safeguard the rights of
forensic mental health patients.
The Plan is premised upon the principles articulated in the United Nations
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
’) and its objective is to develop a justice system in
Tasmania that is responsive to the needs of people with disability and
provides equality before the law and equal access to
1.1.4 In related research, the TLRI has also undertaken a project that
recommends the establishment of an intermediary/communication
assistant scheme
in Tasmania for people with communication needs involved in the criminal justice
The term ‘communication needs’ encompasses a range of communication
needs, including those arising from linguistic and
intellectual development,
physical, mental, intellectual and cognitive impairments and those attributable
to physical and mental
purpose of the scheme is to maximise the opportunities for people with
communication needs to participate in the criminal justice
process by optimising
their communication and comprehension capacities. The implementation of such a
scheme will have clear relevance
to the issues raised in relation to fitness to
stand trial in this Report.
TLRI has also undertaken a review of the
Guardianship and Administration Act
(Tas) and has released a Final Report that makes recommendations for
1.1.5 In preparing the Issues Paper for this reference, the Institute formed
a Reference group consisting of, the Honourable Justice
Helen Wood, Daryl
Coates, SC (Director of Public Prosecutions), Marita O’Connell (then Court
Liaison Officer, Forensic Mental
Health Services), Yvonne Chaperon (President
Mental Health Tribunal), Aaron Groves (Chief Forensic Psychiatrist), Georgina
(Psychologist) and Associate Professor Jeremy Prichard. This
group provided advice on the scope of the project and a preliminary
draft of the
Issues Paper.
Conduct of the
1.2.1 An Issues Paper and an Easy Read Summary of the Issues Paper were
released for consultation in February 2019. This was followed
by a period of
community consultation which closed on 24 May 2019. Thirteen formal submissions
were received, either in writing,
by completing the submission template, or by
making a verbal submission. A list of the submissions received is provided in
9. Submissions received have been taken into account in the development
of the recommendations in this Report and the Institute thanks
all those who
contributed to the review.
Structure of this Report
1.3.1 This Report is divided into several parts:
provides an overview of the legislative framework that sets
out the law in relation to the operation of the criminal justice system
people with mental health and/or cognitive impairments. It sets out the
distinction between fitness to stand trial and insanity
and considers the
principles that underlie the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
provides an overview of mental illness and cognitive
impairments and the criminal justice system.
sets out the current test for determining unfitness to stand
trial in Tasmania and considers the law in other jurisdictions. This
outlines possible options for reform and then makes recommendations for
reforming the test.
sets out the current Tasmanian procedure to determine
unfitness to stand trial, the position in other jurisdictions and outlines
options available to reform the current procedure. This Part also sets out the
Institute’s recommendations for reform.
sets out the procedure following a determination of unfitness
to stand trial in Tasmania and in other comparable jurisdictions. It
examines options for reform of the procedure following a determination of
unfitness to stand trial and makes recommendation
for reform.
provides an overview of the law of insanity in Tasmania and
identifies concerns in relation to the existing law and considers options
reform. This Part also sets out the Institute’s recommendations for
examines the orders that can be made under the
Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) following a finding that a person
is not guilty by reason of insanity (either at a trial or a special hearing) or
if a finding
cannot be made that the defendant is not guilty of an offence (at a
special hearing). It identifies concerns in relation to the existing
considers options for reform. This Part also sets out the Institute’s
recommendations for reform.
Scope of the
1.4.1 This Report considers two specialised responses for people with mental
illness and/or cognitive impairment where their mental
impairment affects their
ability to participate in the ordinary processes of the criminal justice system:
(1) fitness to stand trial; and
(2) the defence of insanity.
In examining the law of insanity, this Report considers the interaction of
evidence of an individual’s mental health and/or
cognitive impairment with
other defences, in particular the law of self-defence and the law of
intoxication. It also examines the
orders that may be made following a special
hearing in circumstances where a person has been found to be not fit to stand
after a person has been found not guilty by reason of insanity. A key
point to observe is that a person is
guilty of an offence where he or she is found not guilty by reason of insanity
or unfit to stand trial if a finding is not
able to be made at a special hearing
that the person is not guilty. Accordingly, the person is not
‘sentenced’ for the
offence according to the ordinary principles of
sentencing. Instead, the dispositions available to the judge or magistrate rely
an assessment of the future risk posed by the person to inform the exercise
of judicial discretion.
1.4.2 This Report examines the operation of fitness to stand trial and
insanity provisions for individuals with mental health and/or
impairments. The use of terminology and the scope of definitions are problematic
given that medical and legal definitions
may differ depending on the purpose and
context in which they are
1.4.3 This Report does not involve a review of the
Mental Health Act 2013
(Tas) but does consider the interaction between the criminal justice system
and that Act. In addition, it does not review the
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
(Tas) but, as noted earlier, the TLRI has undertaken
a separate review of that Act.
Further, this Report does not review the Diversion List that operates in the
Magistrates Court for individuals who have mental health
and/or cognitive
impairments.
Institute’s recommendations in relation to the recognition of supports and
accommodation in the test for fitness to stand
trial should be read in
conjunction with the recommendations contained in the Institute’s previous
Facilitating Equal Access to Justice: An Intermediary/Communication
Assistant Scheme for
This Report
recommended the introduction of an expert intermediary/communication assistant
scheme in Tasmania for people with communication
needs involved in the criminal
justice system.
and Principles
Introduction
2.1.1 This Part contains an overview of the legislative framework that sets
out the current law in relation to the operation of the
criminal justice system
for people with mental health and/or cognitive impairments. It sets out the
distinction between fitness to
stand trial and the defence of insanity and also
considers the principles that underlie the
Criminal (Justice Mental)
Impairment Act 1999
Brief overview
of legislative framework
2.2.1 In Tasmania, several Acts set out the law in relation to the operation
of the criminal justice system for people with mental
health and/or cognitive
impairments. These include:
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
Establishes:
• the process and criteria for determining if a person is unfit to
stand trial;
• the procedure for a special hearing following a finding of
unfitness to stand trial;
• the findings available at a special hearing;
• the consequences of a finding that an accused is not guilty by
reason of insanity (either following an ordinary trial or a
special hearing) or
where a finding cannot be made that the defendant is not guilty;
• the process and criteria for the discharge of a restriction order,
and the variation or revocation of a supervision order.
The Criminal Code
• Sets down the law and procedure for determining if an accused is
not guilty by reason of insanity.
Mental Health Act 2013
• for the management of involuntary patients (including people placed
on a treatment order);
• for the management of forensic patients (including people placed on
restriction and supervision orders);
• the procedure for the review of orders by the MHT.
Sentencing Act 1997
• contains the process and criteria for making an assessment order,
treatment, supervision and restriction order in respect
of offenders found
guilty of an offence.
2.2.2 Some individuals who have mental health
and/or cognitive impairments who may be unfit to stand trial and/or who may be
to rely on the insanity defence, might opt instead to participate in the
Diversion List (if
An outcome of the Diversion List is to modify and improve court processes to
reflect the court’s aspiration to improve access
to justice for
individuals with mental health problems or cognitive
disabilities.
While a person is
engaged with the diversion program, a treatment plan is developed for them and
their compliance with that plan
is relevant to the final disposition made by the
court. This may include the prosecution withdrawing the charges or the person
a lesser sentence than they would have received if their case had been
heard according to the ordinary court
Another aim of the Diversion List is to achieve long-term savings for the court
and community by reducing reoffending. A concomitant
result is the reduced
number of special hearings under
Criminal Justice (Mental
Impairment) Act 1999
For example, in an evaluation of the Diversion List conducted in 2009, it was
reported that a benefit had been a decrease in the
need for special hearings in
the Magistrates Court.
2.2.3 A Diversion List has operated in the
Magistrates Court in Tasmania since the implementation of a pilot program in
2007. This has now been expanded to Launceston, Burnie and Devonport.
The Diversion List is a pre-sentence ‘problem-solving’
approach that
uses the provisions of the
Bail Act 1994
(Tas) and the
Sentencing Act
(Tas) to divert eligible individuals to mental health, disability and
other welfare services in order to address the underlying issues
criminal offending where they have been charged with summary offences or minor
indictable offences that can be tried
The Diversion List
targets repeat offenders where the nature of their offending is usually not
serious enough to warrant a prison
sentence or a community service
In 2011, it was reported
that an average of 500 Hobart defendants are referred by the court to Forensic
Mental Health Court Liaison
Officers each year for assessment and as of April
2011, 231 individuals had been referred to the
2.2.4 In addition, as discussed further in
, a significant proportion
of defendants have mental and/or cognitive impairments, and, as noted, only a
small number of such people
rely on unfitness to stand trial and/or the defence
of insanity. Many more people with mental and/or cognitive impairments do not
rely on the unfitness procedure or the insanity defence and instead enter a plea
of guilty and/or are found guilty following a trial.
Accordingly, in
understanding the operation of the criminal justice system in relation to people
with mental and/or cognitive impairments,
it is important to understand the role
of impairment as a sentencing factor. This is discussed at [3.3].
Understanding
fitness to stand trial and the defence of insanity
2.3.1 Although there may be an overlap in the conditions that give rise to a
finding that an individual is unfit to stand trial and
a finding that an
individual is not guilty by reason of insanity, the scope of their operation and
their legal requirements are different.
The difference
between insanity and fitness to stand trial
2.3.2 As shown in Table 2.1 below, fitness to stand trial is a
provision that relates to the issue of whether the accused has
the ability to understand or participate in his or her
It is concerned with the
accused’s capacity at the
time of the trial
. It applies where a
person’s mental processes are disordered or impaired, or if for any other
reason the person is unable to
understand court processes and make a defence to
Case example (unfit but no issue of insanity)
D was found unfit to stand trial for offences of arson and attempted arson by
agreement of the prosecution and defence. D has Alzheimer’s
Following a special hearing conducted before a jury, the jury returned a verdict
that they were unable to find D not guilty.
D was released unconditionally.
2.3.3 In contrast, insanity is a matter of
substantive
involving the determination of a whether an accused should not be held
criminally responsible on the ground that he or she lacked
the mental capacity
to commit the
Insanity is concerned with an accused’s capacity at the
time of the
. In order to rely on the insanity defence, the accused must have a
mental disease (which includes natural imbecility) such that the
person lacked
the capacity to understand the physical character of the act or know that the
act was one which he or she ought not
do, or, by reason of the mental disease,
the person was deprived of the power to resist an
Case example (no issue of fitness but insanity)
D was charged with murder. He suffered from schizophrenia or a schizophrenic
condition which resulted in an acute psychosis. Expert
evidence was given that
this disorder deprived him of the capacity to know the acts were ones which he
ought not to do. Following
a jury trial, D was found not guilty by reason of
insanity. D was detained in a secure mental health unit under a restriction
2.3.4 Consequently, an accused may be unfit to stand trial but not insane for
the purposes of the insanity defence, or fit to stand
trial but insane, or unfit
and insane.
Case example (unfit and insanity)
D was charged with assaulting a police officer. D suffered from severe
schizophrenia. Following a finding that D was unfit to stand
trial, at the
special hearing, the jury found that D was not guilty on the grounds of insanity
because D was incapable of knowing
that his acts were ones he ought not to do. D
was detained in a secure mental health unit under a restriction order.
Table 2.1: Process and timing of determining unfitness to stand trial and
the insanity
Unfitness to stand trial
Issue to be determined
Whether the accused is fit to stand trial
Whether the accused is not guilty by reason of insanity
Relevant time
Time of trial
Time of offence
Investigation into unfitness
Trial or special hearing (if the person is unfit)
Relevant legislation
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
Criminal Code
The criminal
justice pathway
2.3.5 Figure 2.1 contains a flowchart that sets out the criminal justice
pathway where an accused’s mental health and/or cognitive
raises issues of fitness to stand trial and/or insanity.
Figure 2.1: Criminal justice pathway where an accused’s mental
health and/or cognitive impairment raises issues of fitness to
stand trial
and/or insanity
Figure 2.1 shows that the same dispositions are available to the court
(1) an accused is found not guilty by reason of insanity following a trial
(where the person was fit to stand trial); or
(2) where an accused is found not guilty by reason of insanity or a finding
could not be made that an accused was not guilty following
a special hearing
(unfit to stand trial).
These orders are a restriction order, a supervision order, conditional
release or unconditional
It is important to note
that these dispositions are
sentences of the court and
from a finding of guilt (unlike the ordinary trial where sentencing
orders follow a finding of guilt).
2.3.6 In addition, under the
Sentencing Act
(Tas), the court can make a treatment order, a supervision order or a
restriction order (in addition to or instead of any sentence
it may impose), in
respect of an offender who has been found guilty of an offence. However, in this
case, the offender has been found
guilty and the orders are imposed as a
sentence. This power exists where the offender is suffering a mental illness
that requires
were seven offenders identified in the Mental Health Tribunal
(‘MHT’) data as being subject to restriction or supervision
imposed as part of a sentence.
Case examples
D suffered from schizophrenia and was found guilty of wounding. At the
sentencing hearing, D was released under the supervision of
the Chief Forensic
Psychiatrist on conditions including in relation to taking medication,
submission to treatment and attendance
at drug and alcohol rehabilitation
D suffered from schizophrenia and pleaded guilty to arson and setting fire to
vegetation. D was sentenced to 13 months’ imprisonment
and, on release, a
restriction order detaining him in a secure mental health unit until the order
was discharged by the Supreme Court.
principles underlying the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
Background to
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
2.4.1 In 1999, the
Criminal Justice (Mental
Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) made significant changes to the law that applies
to individuals with mental illness and/or cognitive impairment in Tasmania.
was part of a package of reforms that followed from a review of the
Health Act 1963
(Tas) and sought to address deficiencies that existed in the
previous law. Formerly, the procedural law on the insanity defence, fitness
plead and disposition of individuals were contained in the
Criminal Code
Mental Health Act 1963
(Tas). Under these provisions, if a
person had been found unfit to stand trial or found not guilty by reason of
insanity then:
Criminal Code
required a judge to make an order that the
person was to be dealt with as a mentally disordered person who had become
subject to the
criminal process. There was no discretion in relation to
(2) When the judge made the order, the Attorney-General was required to
specify an institution in which the person was to be detained,
which was a
Special Institution at Risdon Prison.
(3) When the Attorney-General made the order, the
Criminal Code
stated that the person was to be treated for the purposes of
Mental Health Act 1963
as having been admitted in pursuance of a
hospital order made together with a restriction order.
(4) Once the Attorney-General made the order the person could only be
released by the Governor acting on the advice of the Executive
Council and on
the recommendation of the Mental Health Review Tribunal. The decision as to
whether or not to accept the recommendations
of the tribunal was generally made
by Cabinet.
This was ‘akin to a sentence for the term of the defendant’s
natural life’ (at least for some people) given that
the decision to
release a person ‘was for practical purposes in the hands of the State
Cabinet and therefore subject to political
pressure from a community with little
compassion for, or understanding of, mental
However, while there is a lack of statistics, it has been reported that the
‘Governor’s pleasure regime’ did allow
for the release of some
people after relatively short periods of
2.4.2 Changes were made in the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act
(Tas) in relation to two key issues to address these concerns:
Procedures for a special hearing were created where an accused was
found unfit to stand trial
. Previously, if a person was declared unfit, then
they were detained under a restriction order, ‘notwithstanding the fact
these persons have not been convicted of any offence and irrespective of
both the seriousness of the mental illness, and whether
or not they are a danger
to the public’.
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas), a special hearing
was created to ‘determine the external facts of the case — excluding
the question of intention
— to ascertain whether the basic prosecution
case can be proved beyond reasonable
At the special
hearing, the following findings are available: not guilty, not guilty of the
offence charged on the grounds of insanity,
or that a finding cannot be made
that the defendant is not
It is noted that
following a special hearing, there is no provision to find that the defendant is
The process for determining the appropriate disposition order for
persons found unfit to stand trial or not guilty by reasons of insanity
court was given a discretion in relation to the disposition options ranging from
an unconditional release order up to the making
of a restriction order. The
court, rather than the executive, was also given the power to revoke or
discharge orders. There was a
power for a person to make an application to the
Supreme Court for release every two years and for review hearings to be
annually by the MHT. Under these provisions, if the MHT is of the view
that a restriction order or a supervision order is no longer
required, it issues
a Certificate that allows the person to apply to the Supreme Court for the
release of the restriction order or
the revocation of the supervision order. The
purpose of this was to provide for the eventual release of persons found unfit
trial or not guilty by reason of
Accordingly, while the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) did not make any
changes to the defence of insanity in the
Criminal Code
(Tas), it did
make significant changes to the consequences of a finding that an individual was
not guilty by reason of insanity.
2.4.3 In making these changes, the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment)
(Tas) was intended to modernise the law in relation to mental
impairment and to recognise the rights of defendants while at the same
protecting public safety.
reflects the background to the unfitness to stand trial doctrine that ‘was
largely incorporated into modern law as a humanistic
measure to protect accused
persons with disabilities, offer a mechanism to test the prosecution, and divert
individuals to relevant
treatment’.
Principles that
underlie the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
2.4.4 The Terms of Reference require the TLRI to consider whether changes are
needed to the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
ensure that it operates justly, effectively and consistently with the principles
that underlie it. The principles that can
be identified from the legislative
provisions and background to the implementation of the Act are: fairness to the
accused person
and the right to a fair trial, the protection of the community
and the recognition of the rights of mentally impaired defendants
with the principles of least
restriction.
2.4.5 In addition, the TLRI’s consideration
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) is informed by
the obligations that arise under international legal instruments to which
Australia is a signatory including
International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights
sets out the right to a fair trial, the right to be treated with
dignity and humanity, the right to equality before the law and the
right not to
be discriminated against. The
sets out the requirement for
substantive equality for accused persons with disabilities, including the
prohibition of discrimination
on the basis of disability, the right to equal
recognition before the law, the right to access to justice and the right to
and security of the
In understanding the
human rights implications of current insanity and fitness to stand trial laws,
the TLRI has been assisted by
the considerable work that has been undertaken by
the Melbourne Social Equity Institute (and associated researchers) in this
Submissions provided by Equal Opportunity Tasmania (‘EOT’), the
Mental Health Council of Tasmania and Queensland Advocacy
Incorporated also
contained detailed consideration of the human rights perspective in this
Fairness to an accused person and the right to a fair trial
2.4.6 Fundamental principles underpinning the
Criminal Justice (Mental
Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) are fairness to an accused person and the right
to a fair trial. This reflects the historical basis for the requirement that
individual must be fit to stand trial. As observed by the VLRC, ‘this
principle is based on the “central precept of
our criminal law ... that no
person shall be convicted of a crime otherwise than after a trial according to
Australian Law Reform Commission (‘ALRC’) has summarised the
justifications for the rule that a person who is unfit
to stand trial cannot be
tried as follows:
• [to] avoid inaccurate verdicts—forcing the defendant to be
answerable for his or her actions when incapable of doing
so could lead to an
inaccurate verdict;
• [to] maintain the ‘moral dignity’ of the trial
process—requiring that a defendant is fit to stand trial
recognises the
importance of maintaining the moral dignity of the trial process, ensuring that
the defendant is able to form a link
between the alleged crime and the trial or
punishment and is accountable for his or her actions; and
• [to] avoid unfairness—it would be unfair or inhumane to subject
someone to the trial process who is
In his submission to this reference, Jamie Walvisch addresses the basis on
which it is appropriate for a person to stand trial for
his or her alleged
actions. He writes ‘that to properly be able to stand trial, a person
needs to be capable of answering for
his or her own
observes that:
This follows from the nature of the criminal trial, which aims to call those
who are accused of perpetrating public wrongs to account.
In doing so, the
polity addresses the accused as a ‘responsible agent’ — as
‘someone who can be called to
answer the charge, and to answer for the
wrongdoing if [he or] she is proved to have committed it; as someone who is
capable of thus
answering...’ If the accused lacks the capacities
necessary to understand the charge or to account for his or her actions (e.g.,
due to a mental illness), then he or she cannot properly engage in the criminal
trial, and must not be held
responsible.
2.4.7 In addition to providing that a person who is unfit to stand trial is
not subject to the normal trial procedure, the
Criminal Justice (Mental
Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) sets out a process for providing a fair hearing
to test the evidence against a person found unfit to stand
In order to address
concerns about the imposition of orders on a person who has not been established
to have committed an offence
and without the opportunity of an acquittal, the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) provides for a
special hearing. The Act provides that special hearings are ‘to be
conducted so that the onus of proof
and standard of proof are the same as in a
trial and in all other respects as nearly as possible as if it were a trial of
proceedings’.
a special hearing, the defendant can raise any defence that could be raised if
the special hearing were an ordinary trial and
the defendant is entitled to give
In addition, the
defendant’s legal representatives are able to challenge
Following the special
hearing, the jury can make a finding that the person is not guilty, which has
the same effect as if the accused
was acquitted following an ordinary trial
process, or a finding that the accused is not guilty by reason of insanity or
that a finding
cannot be made that the defendant is not guilty of the
Least restrictive alternative
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
expressly states that the court is to apply the principle that
‘restrictions on the defendant’s freedom and personal
should be kept to the minimum consistent with the safety of the
community’.
As noted by
The principle of least restriction is fundamental to considering the
protection of the community, as the rehabilitation of people
subject to the CMIA
Crimes (Mental Impairment and Unfitness to be Tried) Act 1997
through successful community reintegration is the best way to ensure protection
of the community, as well as restoring the
person to a state in which they can
be a functioning member of that
This principle applies to the decision of the court in relation to which
dispositions to impose on an individual, the conditions of
such an order and the
decision as to whether to discharge or vary the order. In reviewing forensic
orders under the
Mental Health Act 2013
(Tas), the MHT must also have
regard to this principle.
Community protection
2.4.9 Connected with the principle of least restrictive alternative is the
need for community protection. A key focus of the
Criminal Justice (Mental
Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) is the need to protect community safety,
including the need to recognise the interests of victims and family members.
to reflect the interests of a person with mental health and cognitive
impairment within the criminal justice process and the needs
of the community
and victims was articulated in the Butler Report:
It is fundamental for all mental health consumers, including forensic
patients, to be accorded basic rights and treated with humanity
and respect.
They should not be discriminated against on the grounds of mental illness.
Where, however, a person has committed a
serious criminal act, particularly a
violent act, consideration must also be given to the fundamental rights of
others to protection
2.4.10 Community protection is reflected in the
Criminal Justice (Mental
Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) with the court being directed to have regard to
whether the defendant is, or would if released be, likely to endanger another
person or other persons
The court is also
directed to have regard to the nature of the defendant’s mental impairment
or other condition or
disability,
and a court must not
discharge a restriction order, release a defendant or significantly reduce the
degree of supervision, unless
it has considered expert reports on the condition
of the defendant and the possible effect of the proposed action on the behaviour
of the defendant.
In reviewing
forensic orders under the
Mental Health Act 2013
(Tas), the MHT must also
have regard to these principles.
Community protection is also a factor relevant to the operation of the insanity
defence (as discussed at [
2.4.11 Related to community protection, a significant factor that is
recognised under the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
is the rights of victims and family members. Before varying or discharging an
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) provides
that the court must be provided with a report stating the views of the next of
kin of the defendant and the victims
of the defendant’s conduct, so far as
is reasonably ascertainable.
Mental Health Impairments and
Cognitive Impairments and the Criminal Justice System
Introduction
3.1.1 Insanity and fitness to stand trial apply to only a small number of
individuals compared to the number of defendants with mental
cognitive impairments overall who are involved in the criminal justice system.
This Part provides an overview of mental
illness and cognitive impairments and
the criminal justice system.
Overview of
mental illness and cognitive impairments and the criminal justice system
3.2.1 Research has concluded that there ‘is strong evidence that people
with cognitive and mental health impairments are over-represented
throughout the
criminal justice
In 2015, the Australian Institute of Health and Welfare reported that 49 per
cent of prison entrants had disclosed that they had
been told by a doctor,
psychiatrist, psychologist or nurse that they had a mental health disorder
(including drug or alcohol
In Victoria, it has been
estimated that ‘approximately 55% of offenders at court suffer some form
of mental impairment’.
There are also high rates of cognitive impairment identified in individuals in
Victorian research has
found that people with intellectual disabilities are at increased risk of having
a history of criminal charges,
particularly for violent and sexual
The Law Council of
Australia has observed that ‘[b]etween 50 to 78 per cent of prisoners have
experienced a psychiatric disorder
compared with 11 per cent of the general
population, and 20 per cent of prisoners have an intellectual disability
compared with 2
to 3 per cent of the general
population’.
context, Gooding and his colleagues have written that, ‘[a]lthough there
are significant issues with data collection,
[this finding] echo[s] a growing
body of international research suggesting people with cognitive disabilities are
significantly over-represented
... in the criminal justice systems of Western,
high-income countries’.
International research also indicates that the prevalence of mental health
impairments in individuals in contact with the criminal
justice system is much
higher than rates in the general
population.
Bagaric and Edney
indicate that ‘most studies which have been undertaken to measure the
prevalence of mental disorders among
criminal offenders suggest that it is very
high: ranging from approximately one-third to half of criminal
offenders’.
3.2.2 In its submission, Community Legal Centres Tasmania (‘CLC
Tas’) highlighted the growing prison population in Tasmania
overrepresentation of persons with cognitive or mental health impairments in the
criminal justice system. CLC Tas noted that
Australian Institute of Health and
Welfare research found that ‘40% of Tasmanian prison entrants are referred
to prison mental
health services; the second highest rate in
Australia’.
As noted below
], there have been concerns
raised about whether Risdon Prison has appropriate and adequate provision to
meet the mental health care
needs of the Tasmanian prisoner population.
3.2.3 Higher involvement in the criminal justice
system, however, does not reflect a simple relationship between impairment and
Instead, ‘it is frequently the product of impairment together with
other factors, such as disrupted family backgrounds, family
violence, abuse,
misuse of drugs and alcohol, and unstable
Other factors
that have been identified include the ‘deinstitutionalisation of mentally
ill people ... and the limited capacity
of community-based mental health
services to address the needs of mentally ill
offenders’.
Further, as
Cunneen et al observe, ‘for people with mental and cognitive impairment,
the majority of research finds no inherent
link between these illnesses or
disabilities and crime, but a strong causal link between disability and
incarceration’.
the risk of being drawn into the criminal justice system is not spread evenly
for those with mental and cognitive impairments,
as ‘it is only those who
are seriously socially disadvantaged (homeless mentally ill persons in
particular) and from racialised
communities who are likely to be
imprisoned’.
Mental health
impairment and cognitive impairment as sentencing factors
3.3.1 Although a review of the relevance of mental health impairment and
cognitive impairment as a sentencing factor is beyond the
scope of this
reference, it is important to be aware of the operation of the sentencing
process for several reasons. First, an accused
with a mental health or cognitive
impairment may not rely on the process of fitness to stand trial and/or on the
insanity defence
but may proceed through the usual criminal justice process.
This is a clear alternative and the possible sentence received (if found
compared to the consequences of a finding of unfitness or insanity are likely to
weigh into the decision-making process.
As discussed below, there has been a
marked shift in relation to the types of mental health and cognitive impairments
that may mitigate
sentencing and this broadening of approach, together with the
sentencing discount that a guilty plea attracts, may make a guilty
plea a more
attractive option from an accused’s point of view given that the sentence
imposed by the court may be less restrictive
than if the person relies on
unfitness to stand trial and/or insanity and is placed on a restriction or
supervision order.
3.3.2 However, it needs to be borne in mind that
the nature of the deprivation of liberty and the treatment services that a
will receive in prison are not the same as a person detained at the
Secure Mental Health Unit (SMHU) or a supervision order in the
Concerns have been raised about the level of services available for prisoners
with mental health needs at the Risdon Complex
and a taskforce has been
established to investigate the
As noted by CLC Tas, the
2015 Australian Institute of Health and Welfare report into the health of
prisoners in Australia, found
that of those Tasmanian prisoners with a mental
impairment, 54% are discharged with either no improvement or with deteriorating
health compared to when they were
The Custodial
Inspector Tasmania has recently reported that ‘current mental health
services do not meet the needs of the Tasmanian
population.’
issues identified were understaffing, lack of mental health leadership in the
prison, no formal service level agreement
with the Forensic Mental Health
Service, a lack of dedicated spaces that are conducive to the provision of
mental health care in
the prisons, and the need for ongoing training and support
for correctional officers to allow them to ‘understand and manage
with mental health
3.3.3 Another factor that makes it important to be aware of the sentencing
approach to mental health and cognitive impairments is
that if changes are made
to the test for fitness to stand trial (such as the use of supports,
accommodations and intermediaries),
which would assist people to be fit for
trial or if the concept of fit to enter a plea was adopted in
then the approach
taken to the accused’s impairment at the sentencing stage will be
important. Walvisch has argued that ‘great
care would need to be taken to
ensure that the accused person’s impairment be properly taken into account
in the sentencing
process’ and that it would be a concern ‘if such a
system were implemented which assisted an accused to face charges
at trial, only
to abandon him or her at the sentencing
In his submission,
Walvisch reiterated his concern that ‘in implementing such measures, great
care should be taken to ensure
that the accused person’s impairment is
properly taken into account in the sentencing
3.3.4 In Tasmania, as with other jurisdictions, an offender’s mental or
cognitive impairment is relevant to the sentencing
While it is not known
what number of offenders raise mental health impairment or cognitive impairment
as mitigating factors at sentencing
(or, as discussed at [3.2], the number of
offenders with mental health impairment or cognitive impairments who are
involved in the
criminal justice system), it is likely that this may affect a
significant proportion of offenders. Anecdotally, it appears that there
an increase in the number of sentencing submissions in Tasmania that rely on
expert reports outlining impairment. This raises
complex issues. Bagaric and
Edney have written that ‘the sentencing of mentally impaired offenders is
one of the most complex
and acute issues in the criminal justice
3.3.5 The difficulty that arises in sentencing offenders with mental health
or cognitive impairment stems from the number of offenders
who suffer some form
of mental or cognitive impairment and the need to reconcile the tension between
two competing considerations:
the nature of the condition that may reduce the
moral culpability of the offender that may justify a more lenient sentence on
one hand, and, on the other, the nature of the condition that may indicate
that the offender is ‘a more intractable subject
for reform than one who
is not so affected or even as one who is so likely to offend again that he [or
she] should be removed from
society for a lengthy or indeterminate
As recognised in
Veen v The Queen
a mental abnormality which makes an offender a danger to society when he is
at large but which diminishes his moral culpability for
a particular crime is a
factor which has two countervailing effects: one which tends towards a longer
custodial sentence, the other
towards a shorter. These effects may balance out,
but consideration of the danger to society cannot lead to the imposition of a
severe penalty than would have been imposed if the offender had not been
suffering from a mental
abnormality.
Accordingly, in the circumstances of a case, the nature of the
offender’s mental or cognitive impairment may be such that protection
the community carries greater weight in the exercise of the sentencing
discretion. This involves balancing the offender’s
culpability and the
need to protect the community. This complexity has been recognised by the
Tasmanian Court of Criminal
3.3.6 More recently, the principles set out by the Victorian Court of Appeal
R v Verdins
adopted in Tasmania in relation to the mitigation of
These principles
recognise that an offender’s impaired mental functioning, whether
temporary or permanent, is relevant to sentencing
in at least six ways:
1. to reduce the offender’s moral culpability, thereby affecting the
punishment that is just in the circumstances and the importance
of denunciation
as a sentencing consideration;
2. to influence the kind of sentence that should be imposed, or the
conditions under which it should be served;
3. to moderate or eliminate the need for general deterrence as a sentencing
consideration;
4. to moderate or eliminate the need for specific deterrence as a sentencing
consideration;
5. to make a sentence weigh more heavily on the offender than on a person in
normal health, thereby affecting the determination of
a proportionate sentence;
6. to create a serious risk of imprisonment having a significant adverse
effect on the offender’s mental health, suggesting
the need to reduce the
The decision in
was a change from the pre-existing position
‘that only “[s]erious psychiatric illnesses”’ needed to
into account by a sentencing
and so expanded the relevance of mental impairment as a factor relevant to
sentencing. However, following
, the extent to which the
principles applied to personality disorders was unclear and subsequent decisions
were inconsistent in this
3.3.7 The application of the
principles to personality
disorders was considered by the Victorian Court of Appeal in
Director of
Public Prosecutions v
In this case,
the court indicated that the
principles did not apply to the
personality disorder that affected the accused (dependent personality disorder)
but indicated that
this did not mean that the ‘personality disorder should
be completely disregarded by the sentencing
There are also
unresolved issues in relation to the application of the
principles as it is unclear whether the judgment was intended to exclude all
personality disorders (the broad interpretation) or only
those that were similar
in some way to dependent personality disorder (narrow
interpretation).
This ambiguity
has not been resolved by subsequent higher court cases in other
However, in
Tasmania it has been observed that the Court of Criminal Appeal appeared to
apply a narrow interpretation (that is, excluding
only personality disorders
that are similar to dependent personality disorder and not all personality
disorders) and so this is the
interpretation of the law that applies in
It is also clear that
a further limitation of the
principles exists in relation to
self-induced impairment (such as a mental impairment resulting for drug or
alcohol use).
3.3.8 Despite this uncertainty, it is clear that the court’s view was
that a rigorous assessment of the evidence was required.
The court expressed the
view that it was inappropriate to apply a mechanistic approach such that if an
offender suffered from any
impaired mental functioning the
principles were automatically attracted. Instead, the court stated that
careful consideration should be given to the evidence to determine
whether the
offender suffered from an impairment of mental functioning, and if so, whether
there was a connection between the impairment
and the person’s moral
culpability or the need for general and specific deterrence. This meant that
there needed to be a ‘realistic
connection’ between the impairment
and the offence or that it ‘caused or contributed’ to the offence or
was ‘causally
Further, it must be shown
that the mental impairment affected the offender’s ability to appreciate
the wrongfulness of the
conduct, or obscured his or her intent to commit the
offence, or impaired his or her ability to make calm and rational choices or
think clearly at the time of the
The ability of the
court to make this rigorous assessment is clearly dependent on the nature of the
information contained in the
expert reports received by the court. Further, the
information contained in the expert report, in more serious cases of mental or
cognitive impairment, may trigger an exploration of whether the appropriate
pathway for the offender is an order under the
Sentencing Act 1997
(restriction, supervision and treatment orders) rather than a sentencing
order under
–(h) of the
Sentencing Act 1997
3.3.9 Under the
Sentencing Act 1997
, an offender who is
found guilty of an offence may be sentenced to a restriction order, a
supervision order or a treatment order
in cases where the offender appears to be
suffering from a mental illness.
In a case where a person is found guilty, the court makes a restriction order
upon receiving a report from the Chief Forensic Psychiatrist,
psychiatrist, that the person appears to be suffering from a mental illness that
requires treatment, that such treatment
can be obtained by admission to and
detention in a secure mental health unit, that the person should be admitted as
a patient for
the person’s own safety and the Chief Forensic Psychiatrist
recommends the proposed
There is also power
for the court to make a treatment order or a supervision order, subject to the
receipt of an expert report.
its research, the TLRI identified nine cases in the Supreme Court between 2001
and 2016 where an offender was sentenced under
Sentencing Act 1997
(Tas) to either a sentence of imprisonment combined with a supervision order
(five cases) or imprisonment combined with a restriction
order (two cases) or a
supervision order (two cases). In eight cases, the offender entered a plea of
guilty and in one case, the
offender was found guilty by a jury of one offence
(the issue was whether the offender was guilty of attempted murder or attempted
wounding) and entered a plea of guilty to another charge.
3.3.10 The other context in which an offender’s mental condition at the
time of the offence is relevant to the imposition of
sentence, and, again, the
nature of the information contained in any reports provided to the court is
central to the exercise of
judicial discretion, is in making a dangerous
criminal declaration under the
Sentencing Act 1997
dangerous criminal provisions in the
Sentencing Act 1997
Division 3 allow the court to make a dangerous criminal declaration which
provides for indefinite detention and so an offender is
ineligible for release
until the declaration is
discharged.
One of the pre-conditions to making an order is the requirement that the judge
is of the opinion that the declaration is warranted
for the protection of the
Section 19(2)
out a non-exhaustive list of factors that are relevant to the making of the
declaration including medical opinion. It has been
stated that the
‘existence of a mental disorder making a convicted person prone to commit
random and impulsive acts of violence
would be a most material factor in
assessing whether to make a
declaration’.
interaction of an offender’s mental health and the dangerous criminal
provisions can be seen in the case of
McCrossen v
applicant’s complex mental health state was exacerbated by his indefinite
detention and long history of incarceration.
Expert reports to the court
highlighted the rehabilitative benefit to the offender that would result from
his being discharged from
the Dangerous Criminal Declaration and instead treated
in the secure mental health unit under the
Mental Health Act 2013
as an involuntary civil patient. This was the approach to the offender’s
rehabilitation that was taken by Wood J in making
an order discharging the
declaration:
What this case has demonstrated is that the indeterminate nature of the
sentence was in itself crushing and counterproductive in terms
applicant’s rehabilitation. Since there has been talk of the order being
lifted, the applicant has made significant
progress in a short time. To offset
these crushing effects, a prison system would have to be vigilant and have a
committed and co-ordinated
approach to an individual’s rehabilitation.
Questions may be asked about whether more could have been done from the
by the prison system to promote the applicant’s rehabilitation
in a committed way which recognised the applicant’s profound
difficulties
and mental health condition. His potential for reform cannot be doubted, noting
the marked significant improvement away
from the prison during his admissions to
the Wilfred Lopes Centre, particularly in 2009.
3.3.11 It may be that in cases where the basis for the need for community
protection arises from the nature of the offender’s
mental impairment, a
more appropriate pathway for the offender that will protect the community and
allow the offender to obtain appropriate
treatment may be found in the forensic
orders contained in the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
rather than in indefinite detention as a dangerous criminal
Sentencing Act 1997
(Tas). This point was made clearly by the
High Court in
Chester v The
where the court
expressed the view that indefinite detention as a dangerous criminal should not
‘be contemplated when in due
course it may be more appropriate that there
be a justice’s order ... for reception into and detention in an approved
of a person suffering from mental
3.3.12 On this basis, in the Issues Paper the Institute identified that a
possible reform may be to amend the dangerous criminal provisions
contained in
Sentencing Act 1997
(Tas). The proposed reform provides a statutory
trigger for judicial consideration of the appropriateness of making an order for
for assessment with a view to making a restriction, supervision or
treatment order under the
Sentencing Act 1997
, rather than
making a dangerous criminal declaration. The Issues Paper asked:
Should there be an amendment to the dangerous criminal provisions contained
Sentencing Act 1997
(Tas) to provide a statutory trigger for
judicial consideration of the appropriateness of making an order under the
Sentencing Act 1997
instead of a dangerous criminal
declaration?
3.3.13 Five submissions addressed this issue with
two opposed to an amendment to the dangerous criminal provisions in the
Sentencing Act 1997
(Tas) to provide a statutory trigger for judicial
consideration of the appropriateness of making an order under the
instead of a dangerous criminal declaration.
3.3.14 The DPP and O’Connell both opposed such an amendment but
provided different reasons for their opposition. In her submission,
O’Connell opposed any change to the
Sentencing Act 1997
provisions on the basis that ‘the premise that there is a correlation
between dangerous criminals and mental illness is
a discriminatory one’.
Further, O’Connell’s view was that ‘any supervision by the
Chief Forensic Psychiatrist
should be limited to cases where the defendant has a
major mental illness’.
3.3.15 The DPP opposed an amendment to provide a statutory trigger because he
considered it to be unnecessary. He submitted that if
an order under the
Sentencing Act 1997
was appropriate (instead of a dangerous
criminal declaration), this is likely to be readily apparent at the time of
sentencing and
the court would have the benefit of the expert reports provided
at this time to facilitate the making of the appropriate sentencing
3.3.16 In contrast, Walvisch supported an amendment to the dangerous criminal
provisions to:
make it clear that mental health problems per se do not provide a basis for
making a ‘dangerous criminal’ declaration,
even if those mental
health problems are likely to result in violence; but that a consistent failure
to manage one’s mental
health, despite known risks of violence, may be
taken into account (along with the reasons for that failure).
He considered that it was unjust and highly stigmatising to label an
individual a ‘dangerous criminal’ where the
‘dangerousness’
arises from mental health problems over which the
person had no control. Further, in circumstances ‘where the alleged
“dangerousness”
arises from mental health problems over which the
offender has no control, appropriate treatment is more likely to reduce any
to the public than indefinite imprisonment’. In addition, making a
dangerous offender order on the basis of a person’s
mental illness appears
to be contrary to Australia’s international human rights obligations on
the basis that ‘it discriminates
against offenders based on their mental
health’. However, Walvisch considered that it may be appropriate to label
individuals
as ‘dangerous criminals’ if they consistently fail to
manage their own mental health for insufficient reasons. Sufficient
reason would
include ‘a lack of access to appropriate, affordable mental health
treatment; and a lack of insight into one’s
mental health problems or the
risks it poses’.
3.3.17 EOT directly supported amendment to the
Sentencing Act 1997
(Tas) to include a statutory trigger for judicial consideration of the
appropriateness of making an order for referral for assessment
subsequent making of a restriction, supervision or treatment order. In
EOT’s view, this is consistent with reforms
proposed by the TLRI in its
consideration of the dangerous criminal
legislation
and Article 25 of
which has the effect that people with mental illness should have
access to care, treatment and rehabilitation where this is required.
3.3.18 The Institute agrees that it is stigmatising and discriminatory to
perpetuate a stereotype of people who experience mental
illness as violent or to
conflate mental illness with
dangerousness.
Further, as
], there is a complex
relationship between mental illness or impairment and crime with research
showing that there is no necessary
link between mental and cognitive impairment
and crime but rather between disability and incarceration. The Institute also
that individuals with mental impairment who are sentenced by the court
should have access to appropriate treatment and that the court
should give
consideration to whether treatment in a health setting is more appropriate than
imprisonment. In asking for feedback
offender provisions and
Sentencing Act 1997
(Tas) (which
provides for the imposition of forensic orders or treatment orders), the
Institute did not intend to suggest that individuals
with mental illness were
more likely to be dangerous offenders or, conversely, could not be the subject
of a dangerous criminal declaration.
Rather, the Institute was concerned to
ensure that courts give appropriate consideration to legal responses other than
people with mental illnesses to be dangerous criminals under the
Sentencing Act 1997
However, based on the feedback received
from the DPP, the Institute agrees that an amendment to this effect is
unnecessary given
the factors relevant to the court’s sentencing decision
and the matters courts take into account in deciding whether to make
criminal declarations.
3.3.19 This Report is not a review of the dangerous offender provisions in
general, however, the submissions received from ForensiClinic
and EOT made
observations in relation to the need to change the dangerous criminal provisions
on the basis that the provisions as
a whole were in need of reform. For example,
ForensiClinic wrote that:
The current legislation is limited in scope, and does not easily allow for a
clear method of determining when applications should
be made, and for whom. The
legislation also does not allow for risk management processes at the point of
removal of the declaration.
The DPP also suggested that amendment may be necessary to facilitate the
making of a supervision order for an offender who has been
declared to be a
dangerous criminal in circumstances where he or she has subsequently developed
mental health issues while in prison,
which would prevent the order being
discharged.
3.3.20 As noted, the Institute has previously reviewed the dangerous criminal
provisions in the
Sentencing Act 1997
, Division 3 and made
10 recommendations for substantial reforms to address problematic aspects of the
indefinite detention regime.
These include recommendations in relation to a
legislative statement of the factors to be considered in determining whether to
a declaration and the ability to impose pre- and post-release
conditions on discharge. Accordingly, the Institute reiterates its
observations in relation to the need to reform.
Recommendation
1. It is unnecessary to amend to the dangerous criminal provisions contained
Sentencing Act 1997
(Tas) to provide a statutory trigger for
judicial consideration of the appropriateness of making an order under the
Sentencing Act 1997
instead of a dangerous criminal
declaration.
Reliance on unfitness to stand trial and
insanity in Tasmania
3.4.1 The TLRI has sought to identify information in relation to cases where
unfitness to stand trial and insanity were raised by
using a number of
• data obtained from the Director of Public Prosecutions Annual
• data obtained from the MHT;
• data obtained from the Supreme Court;
• a survey of sentencing cases using a search of the TLRI database and
the online sentencing database at the Inglis Clark Library;
• data obtained from the Department of Justice.
3.4.2 Table 3.1 sets out information from the Office of the Director of
Public Prosecutions (‘DPP’). It shows that in
2006–2007 to 2017–2018, there were 31 people who were found insane
or unfit to stand trial in the Supreme
Court. These data also show that such
cases only account for a small number of cases dealt with in the Supreme Court
when compared
with cases that are finalised by way of a sentence following
conviction (4347 cases). In this period, individuals found unfit to
stand trial
or insane made up 0.7 per cent of
Table 3.1: Person tried, Supreme Court
Convictions
Found insane or unfit to plead
Source: DPP Annual Reports
3.4.3 The TLRI conducted a survey of Supreme Court sentencing cases using the
TLRI sentencing database and a sentencing search on
the Inglis Clark Library
website for the period 2005–June 2018. This was supplemented by details
provided by the Supreme Court
and the MHT. This study located 45 cases where an
individual was found unfit to stand trial and/or not guilty by reason of
There were 17 cases
where the person was unfit to stand trial and 27 cases where the person was fit
for trial but found not guilty
by reason of insanity at trial. In one case, it
was not clear whether the person was unfit to stand trial and/or not guilty by
of insanity.
3.4.4 Table 3.2 shows the most serious offence for those persons identified
in this survey of sentencing cases with the offences ranging
from murder to
being found prepared for the commission of a
Table 3.2: Insanity or unfit to stand trial, 2005–June 2018, by most
serious offence
Offence category
No of cases
Homicide and related offences
Acts intended to cause injury
Sexual assault and related offences
Property damage
Robbery/burglary
Related weapons and explosive offences
Public order offences
Harassment (stalking)
Threatening behaviour
Driving offences
Magistrates
3.4.5 Table 3.3 sets out information provided by the Department of Justice in
relation to the number of findings of not guilty by
reason of insanity and unfit
to stand trial in the Magistrates Court from
that only a small number of individuals successfully rely on insanity or are
found ‘not guilty’ (that is, a
finding cannot be made that the
accused is not guilty) following a finding of unfitness to stand trial.
Table 3.3: Magistrates Court 2013–14 to 2017–March
2017–Mar 2018
No Finding – Mental Impairment
Not Guilty – Insanity
*includes one Youth Justice case
Using online search databases, the TLRI found three cases in the Magistrates
Court, where the defendant relied on the defence of
In two of these
three cases, the defendant was found not guilty by reason of
These cases
involved assault and destroying
and dangerous
driving, failing to stop after being involved in a crash and evade police, as
well as common assault.
3.4.6 These numbers are very low. However, although difficult to capture in
official data, anecdotally, it is reported that there
are a significant number
of defendants in the Magistrates Court who have mental health or cognitive
impairment problems. Some of
these individuals may participate in the Diversion
List, and many others proceed through the ordinary criminal process. In
the data do not indicate those who have not successfully relied on
insanity or been found fit to stand trial (when the issue of fitness
was raised)
and those who are unfit to stand trial and are subsequently acquitted at the
special hearing.
to Stand Trial: Making an Assessment of Unfitness
Introduction
5.1.1 Unfitness to stand trial relates to the issue whether an accused is
able to participate in the trial process, and, as the Institute
has previously
written, this ability ‘fundamentally determine[s] whether that person can
gain access to justice and whether
justice can in fact be
Accordingly, the
basis used to make a finding of fitness or unfitness will have significant
consequences on an individual level.
The aim should be to maximise an
individual’s participation in the trial and provide a separate process for
those who are not
able to make decisions in their own trials even with the
provision of appropriate accommodations and supports.
5.1.2 Unfitness to stand trial is concerned with an assessment of the
accused’s ability at the
time of the trial
rather than at the time
of the offence. There is a presumption that those accused of committing crime
are fit to stand trial unless
it is established that they are unfit to stand
trial. This is determined on the balance of
probabilities.
The issue of
fitness may be raised by the prosecution, the defendant or the court (on its own
initiative) and may be raised at any
time after the accused has been charged,
including after the trial has
In order for a
court to conduct an investigation into a defendant’s fitness to stand
trial, there must be a real and substantial
question in relation to their
In circumstances
where evidence of a person’s fitness to stand trial is raised, a judge can
only accept a plea of guilty if
satisfied that no reasonable jury, properly
instructed, could find the person unfit to stand
5.1.3 The Terms of Reference request that the TLRI consider whether the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) operates justly,
effectively and consistently with the principles that underlie it. In
particular, the TLRI has been asked
to consider whether the process of
determining fitness to stand trial can be improved. There are several aspects to
this question
including the test that is used to make a finding of unfitness,
the procedure that is used to determine unfitness and the nature
of the special
hearing that follows a finding of unfitness. These are all interrelated issues
that need to be addressed in order
to facilitate access to justice for
individuals with mental health and cognitive impairments, as well as to ensure
that the community
is appropriately protected.
of this Report makes
recommendations about the process by which a determination of fitness to stand
trial is made and
makes recommendations for the conduct of special
hearings. This Part makes recommendations in relation to the test used to
fitness to stand trial. The Institute stresses that all these
recommendations need to be viewed as a package of reforms that work
together to
address concerns about the current approach to fitness to stand trial.
5.1.4 This Part addresses a key component of the process for determining
fitness to stand trial — the test applied by the court
when determining
whether defendants are fit or unfit to stand trial. This Part sets out the
current test for determining unfitness
to stand trial in Tasmania and considers
options for reform set out in the Issues Paper as well the submissions received
consultation process.
5.1.5 The current focus of the fitness test is on a person’s cognitive
capacity or intellectual ability to understand features
of the criminal trial.
Based on submissions received and its research, the TLRI is of the view that
this test is deficient in that
it does not give adequate recognition to whether
the accused can participate meaningfully in his or her trial. The answer to this
question necessarily depends on two key interrelated matters, first whether the
accused has the capacity to make decisions in relation
to key elements of the
trial and, second, whether the necessary conditions exist or can be created to
enable him or her to exercise
that decision-making capacity. Accordingly, in
this Part, the Institute recommends a shift from the current focus on cognitive
to a supported decision-making approach based on facilitating an
individual’s ability to exercise his/her decision-making capacity
effectively participate in the trial. The determination of an accused’s
decision-making capacity needs to be clearly grounded
in relevant determinative
criteria. Consequently, what these criteria are should also be determined and
specified in reforming the
fitness test. The purpose of such criteria is to
guide courts when applying what might otherwise appear to be a relatively vague
and subjective test. The Institute makes recommendations in this regard. In
summary, the approach recommended by the Institute has
three interrelated
components:
• the reformulation of the fitness test to replace the current
‘Presser’ test with a decision-making test;
• the specification of guidance/criteria in the application of that
test to give it content and avoid subjectivity in its application;
• a requirement for assessment of the need for and, where necessary,
creation of the conditions that optimise and/or enable
people to exercise their
decision-making capacity and therefore participate in trials. These might
include making necessary accommodations
in court processes and/or providing
decision-making supports through the use of communication
assistants/intermediaries.
5.1.6 These three components work together. Accordingly, in the discussion
that follows, this Report examines these three interlocked
components of the
recommended revised test: the test itself, the criteria underpinning its
application and the need to assess available
accommodations and supports that
may create conditions that optimise and render an accused’s
decision-making capacity a reality.
the test for determining unfitness to stand trial: the current test
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
out the test to determine if a person is unfit to stand trial:
(1) A person is unfit to stand trial for an offence if, because the
person’s mental processes are disordered or impaired or
for any other
reason, the person is –
(a) unable to understand the nature of the charge; or
(b) unable to plead to the charge or to exercise the right of challenge; or
(c) unable to understand the nature of the proceedings; or
(d) unable to follow the course of the proceedings; or
(e) unable to make a defence or answer the charge.
(2) Notwithstanding subsection (1)(e), a person is not unfit to be tried if
the only reason that the person is unable to make a defence
or answer a charge
is that he or she is suffering from memory loss.
5.2.2 These criteria reflect the
criteria, set out in the Victorian case of
where seven
factors were identified as relevant to the determination of fitness:
• ability to understand the charge;
• ability to plead to the charge and exercise the right to challenge
• ability to understand the nature of the proceedings;
• ability to follow the course of the proceedings in broad terms;
• ability to understand the substantial effect of any evidence;
• ability to make a defence or answer to the charge;
• ability to instruct counsel.
In order to be unfit to stand trial, an accused only needs to satisfy one of
the criteria, set out above, as each criterion stands
5.2.3 In Tasmania, there is little case law on the operation of the test.
However, guidance can be sought from other jurisdictions
as indicated in the
following extract from the DPP’s prosecution guidelines:
Where fitness to stand trial is an issue requiring investigation, the
principles discussed by Smith J in
R v Presser
[1958] VicRp 9
[1958] VR 45
[1958] VicRp 9
cited with approval in
Ngatayi v R
[1980] HCA 18
(1980) 147 CLR 1
at 8, are of
consequence when considering the criteria laid out in
‘A mere lack of formal education, a mere lack of familiarity with court
forms and procedures, would not, of course, render a
man unfit to be tried, but
he may, upon the test of fitness for the purposes of the section that has been
laid down in the cases,
be held unfit to be tried when he is far from being
insane in the colloquial sense. Dixon, J, as he then was, mentioned in
Sinclair v R
[1946] HCA 55
(1946) 73 CLR 316
, that it does not seem to have been
noticed by the text writers how high a degree of intelligence the test might
demand if it were
literally applied. But he is not there, in my view, suggesting
that it should be applied in any extreme sense, or in any over-literal
needs, I think, to be applied in a reasonable and commonsense fashion. And the
question, I consider, is whether the accused,
because of mental defect, fails to
come up to certain minimum standards which he needs to equal before he can be
tried without unfairness
or injustice to him.
He needs, I think, to be able to understand what it is that he is charged
with. He needs to be able to plead to the charge and to
exercise his right of
challenge. He needs to understand generally the nature of the proceeding,
namely, that it is an inquiry as
to whether he did what he is charged with. He
needs to be able to follow the course of the proceedings so as to understand
going on in court in a general sense, though he need not, of course,
understand the purpose of all the various court formalities.
He needs to be able
to understand, I think, the substantial effect of any evidence that may be given
against him; and he needs to
be able to make his defence or answer to the
charge. Where he has counsel he needs to be able to do this through his counsel
any necessary instructions and by letting his counsel know what his
version of the facts is and, if necessary, telling the court
what it is. He need
not, of course, be conversant with court procedure and he need not have the
mental capacity to make an able defence;
but he must, I think, have sufficient
capacity to be able to decide what defence he will rely upon and to make his
defence and his
version of the facts known to the court and to his counsel, if
5.2.4 Although there is no express reference in
the Tasmanian provision to the requirement that the accused be able to give
provide an account of his or her version of the facts or provide
instructions to a legal practitioner, these requirements may be
implicit in the
requirement that the accused be able to make a
Similarly, there is
no requirement in the Tasmanian provision for a person to understand the
substantial effect of the evidence.
However, the requirement that a person
follow the course of the proceedings has been interpreted to mean that the
defendant is able
to follow the evidence: ‘The accused must have at least
a rudimentary understanding of the reception of evidence adverse to
him, whether
orally or by
5.2.5 The DPP’s guidelines also recognise the need for the court, in
determining a person’s fitness to stand trial, to
take account of any
accommodations that can be made to enable the person to participate in the trial
process. These include such
accommodations as ‘regular breaks, slowing the
pace of proceedings, monitoring the type and length of questioning of witnesses,
including the defendant, and allowing for adjournments where
necessary’.
approach reflects Australian decisional law that accepts the availability of
support as a relevant factor in the determination
of whether someone is unfit to
stand trial. In
Refshauge J
stated that:
Where steps can reasonably be taken to accommodate the difficulties of the
accused, including adjournments, ‘one-on-one’
assistance to follow
the proceedings, insistence on brief, clear questions to the accused if he or
she is examined on oath, an opportunity
for the accused to narrate his or her
version of events without interruption and the like, the implementation of these
the accused is not unfit to plead:
Kesavarajah v The Queen
(1994) 181 CLR 230
at 246; 111,
[2008] NSWDC 23
R v Tuigamala
[2007] NSWSC 493
However, the requirement to take into account accommodations or supports is
not yet recognised in Tasmanian legislation as a matter
relevant to an
assessment of fitness to stand trial.
The position in
other jurisdictions
5.2.6 All Australian jurisdictions have
legislation dealing with fitness to stand trial, and although there are some
variations, the
criteria are broadly similar to the
criteria (as
set out at [
This is also the approach in England and Wales and New
These factors focus
on an accused’s cognitive capacity, particularly the capacity to
‘understand, comprehend and assist
counsel, in order to allow a
satisfactory level of participation in the court
The test is not
concerned with whether a person is able to act in their own best interests or
engage in rational
However, it is noted that the position in South Australia provides an exception
to this in that the test for fitness set out in the
Criminal Law
Consolidation Act
(SA) s 269H provides that the accused is mentally unfit to
stand trial if his or her mental processes are so disordered or impaired
or she is unable to:
• understand, or respond
, to the charge or
allegations on which the charge is based; or
• exercise or give
instructions about the exercise of
procedural rights (such as, for example, the right to challenge jurors); or
• understand the nature of the proceedings, or to follow the evidence
or the course of the
proceedings.
The need for reform
5.3.1 Law reform bodies in several jurisdictions have considered the need to
reform fitness to stand trial tests and procedures, identifying
a number of
problems in their formulation and application. The ALRC has summarised the key
criticisms of the test as follows:
(1) The test, by focusing on intellectual ability, generally sets too high a
threshold for unfitness and is inconsistent with the
modern trial process. There
is undue emphasis on a person’s intellectual ability and too little focus
on a person’s decision-making
(2) The test is difficult to apply to individuals with mental illness because
the criteria were not designed for
(3) A defendant may not be unfit to stand trial even where the court takes
the view that he or she is incapable of making decisions
in his or her own
In relation to the last two matters, the following illustration is provided
by the Law Commission of England and Wales:
A defendant, A (who has paranoid schizophrenia), has a good understanding of
the trial process and understands the purpose of the
proceedings and roles
played by the different parties. A is also able to instruct his representative
and could give evidence. However,
as a result of his highly delusional state he
is convinced that if he pleads not guilty he will be destroyed by the devil. He
no insight into his condition and insists on pleading guilty to an assault
charge even though the evidence suggests that he may have
acted in lawful
self-defence. Under the current test the defendant would be likely to be found
fit to plead.
This example echoes the concerns of the VLRC that a person with a mental
illness ‘may have a factual understanding of the nature
of the trial.
However, their delusional beliefs may hinder their capacity to make decisions
concerning their trial, or to make such
decisions in an appropriate
5.3.2 Some criticisms of fitness to stand trial relate to the practical
operation of the current test with concerns being expressed
and subjective
application.
Criticisms in this regard have focused on the difficulties facing experts in
assessing an accused’s fitness to stand trial
resulting from the vagueness
of most legal formulations of the test and the opaque nature of the assessment
Freckelton contends
that ‘decision-making in this area is effectively delegated to clinical
evaluators making low visibility
and essentially unreviewed decisions pursuant
to a vague open-textured
conducted in other jurisdictions has identified similar concerns about the
assessment process undertaken by experts. In
England and Wales, empirical
research has found that there is considerable variability in clinicians’
assessments and a failure
by some clinicians to address all the criteria for
unfitness to stand trial.
Comparable findings have been made in Australia. For example, White et al have
found, in a study of assessment reports in New South
Wales, that ‘there
was significant variability in the practices and assessment methods of
‘large number of experts (67.6%) failing to address all six elements of
criteria, with some experts failing to address any of
5.3.3 Other commentators have criticised current
approaches to fitness on human rights grounds. They argue that fitness to stand
should be abolished in order to accord with the requirements of the
. This is because the adoption of a separate legal process for people
with disabilities is inherently
discriminatory.
In particular, it is argued that it is contrary to a number of
articles including Art 12 of the
which sets out
the right to ‘equal recognition before the law’ for people with
disability,
Art 13 which sets out ‘the right to access to justice on an equal basis
with others’,
14, which prohibits the deprivation of liberty on the basis of a
disability.
Accordingly, the United Nations Committee on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities (‘UNCRPD’) ‘has directed countries
to abandon the
emphasis on identifying the point at which a person should be deemed unfit to
plead, and instead places an obligation
on States Parties to provide support to
the exercise of legal
In this context, Minkowitz asserts that the
Views all measures by which a person is treated unequally in legal
proceedings or in the adjudication of responsibility, including
the insanity
defence, unfitness to plead and incompetence to stand trial, as well as the
disposition to forensic psychiatric institutions,
as inherently suspect and
discriminatory based on disability. Therefore it is necessary to abolish these
measures in order to comply
with the equality and non-discrimination obligations
under various provisions of the
5.3.4 Others do not consider that the
requires the abolition of
the doctrine of fitness to stand
These commentators
instead argue that the uncertain yet potentially significant implications of the
for the current doctrine establish the need for its significant
For example,
Arstein-Kerslake et al have argued that:
One challenge is ensuring that there is a process that protects the rights of
persons with cognitive disabilities to legal capacity
on an equal basis with
others. This would, at a minimum, require that unfitness to plead regimes are
disability neutral on their
face and in their application. This will likely
require a dismantling of unfitness to plead regimes and the construction of a
that never denies legal capacities but instead provides support for the
individual to participate in a trial and a court structure
that ensures fairness
of the trial proceedings without depending on the accused’s particular
abilities to enforce those
On this basis, it is argued that the focus of the current inquiry on
identifying ‘“the line” over which someone
is incapable of
expressing a valid will or undertaking some function’ should be abandoned.
Instead the inquiry should ‘turn
to the support and accommodations
necessary to enable every person with a disability to function as a legal
Accordingly, Gooding argues that ‘the measure of a person’s
decision-making capability, or their legal capacity, [should]
no longer [be]
their inherent abilities, but rather the range and quality of supports and
accommodations around
This approach
concentrates on supports and accommodations that may be available ‘[to
legal processes accessible rather than creating a
“special” alternative measure’ for people with cognitive
difficulties.
5.3.5 While the need to identify supports and accommodations that may
facilitate participation in the trial process for as many people
as possible has
been recognised by various law reform bodies (as discussed at [
]), there is less agreement about the
approach that should be taken in ‘hard’ cases — that is, cases
where people
are not able to participate in the proceedings even with
In such cases,
Arstein-Kerslake et al write that:
A system should exist where the individual is not denied his or her legal
capacity to participate in the trial, but is instead provided
with an advocate
who has responsibility of interpreting the will and preference of the individual
to the best of that person’s
ability and to convey that to the court and
the relevant professionals involved in the trial process. Any such system must
be non-discriminatory
in order to encompass all individuals — those with
disabilities and those without disabilities — who are unable to
participate
in the trial process and also to protect the rights of persons with
disabilities to be free from discriminatory
These authors argue that reforms to the law should ensure that ‘[w]here
there is a question of whether the accused can stand
trial, the ensuing
procedure must not take place on the basis of disability alone and must not
serve to create a segregated criminal
justice process that only applies to
persons with cognitive
disabilities’.
contrast, law reform bodies have taken a different approach to the
interpretation of the
and have understood it as only requiring that
the test for unfitness should incorporate the use of supports and
accommodation.
This approach
still retains a threshold functional test to determine whether a person is able
to participate in the trial process
and operates to divert some individuals into
a special procedure.
5.3.6 In light of this commentary the TLRI sought feedback on the need to
reform the doctrine of fitness to plead in Tasmania. In
the Issues Paper, the
Institute asked the following questions:
Does the current test for unfitness to stand trial contained in the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
continue to be a
suitable basis for determining unfitness to stand trial?
Are there any difficulties that arise from the current application of the
criteria contained in the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
For example, are there difficulties with the test that give rise to a
subjective interpretation of the criteria by medical experts?
Is the current test under-inclusive and not able to appropriately reflect the
issues that arise for individuals with mental illness?
5.3.7 Only one submission received by the
Institute suggested that the current approach to fitness to stand trial in
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) does not
require reform. The DPP acknowledged that the test does involve subjective
interpretation, but did ‘not believe
changing the criteria would enhance
experts’ ability to assess an accused’s fitness to stand
trial’. The other
submissions received by the Institute supported reform.
Most supported fundamental change to the approach for determining fitness
stand trial. However, only minimal reform was proposed by ForensiClinic who
agreed that the current criteria are suitable with
one exception – the
ability to exercise the right to challenge jurors.
5.3.8 Based on the submissions received and its review of the expert
commentary, the Institute’s view is that there is a need
to reform the
current test for unfitness to stand trial contained in the
Criminal Justice
(Mental Impairment) Act 1999
so that it provides a more suitable
basis for determining unfitness to stand trial.
Recommendation
2. There is a need to reform the current test for unfitness to stand trial
contained in the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
Approaches to
5.4.1 Several options for reform were outlined in the Issues Paper including
the abolition of the doctrine or, alternatively, reformulating
and refocusing
the current test for determining fitness to stand trial. Broadly speaking, the
approaches to reformulating the current
test considered in the Issues Paper were
(1) give explicit statutory recognition to the fundamental principle that
underpins the operation of the test — the right to
a fair trial;
(2) retain the current test with its focus on the defendant’s cognitive
capacity as in the
approach but update and expand its
(3) change the focus of the test from cognitive capacity to the
defendant’s decision-making capacity and/or include in the decision-making
capacity test a requirement for
decision-making;
(4) specify the criteria to be applied in assessing an accused’s
decision-making capacity;
(5) require the courts, in assessing an accused’s decision-making
capacity, to have regard to the available supports and accommodations
enable them to exercise that capacity.
Abolition of the doctrine
5.4.2 As discussed at [
commentators have argued that fitness to stand trial should be abolished in
light of the obligations under the
Accordingly, the Issues Paper
sought feedback on this question.
Should the doctrine of fitness to stand trial be abolished in Tasmania?
If so, how should the law be changed to ensure that individuals who are not
able to participate in the trial process (even with the
provision of supports)
receive a fair trial?
5.4.3 Seven submissions to the Institute
addressed these questions either by directly answering them or implicitly by
proposing reforms
to the current
None of these
submissions supported the complete abolition of the doctrine of fitness to stand
trial in Tasmania. However, six of
the submissions identified problems with the
current test and set out proposals for its
5.4.4 Submissions that contained the strongest support for the fitness to
stand trial doctrine tended to focus on fairness principles
and the need to
ensure that people are genuinely able to participate in the criminal justice
process. This critique was particularly
concerned with the injustice of
subjecting people to a criminal process that they cannot properly engage in. For
example, ForensiClinic
wrote that:
fitness to stand trial is an important matter to establish for defendants
with major mental illness, and neurological/intellectual
impairments. It is
important for all defendants to have the opportunity to participate fairly in
proceedings that may have a significant
bearing on their lives.
Similarly, Walvisch wrote that:
the purpose of the criminal trial should be to call to account those who are
accused of perpetrating public wrongs. If the accused
lacks the capacities
necessary to understand the charge that has been brought against him or her, or
to account for his or her actions
(despite the provision of appropriate supports
...), then he or she cannot properly engage in the criminal trial and must not
held responsible.
5.4.5 Other submissions centred on the fair trial implications of fitness to
stand trial processes. For example, EOT observed that
fair trials may simply not
be possible in some cases, regardless of the efforts made to achieve
defendants’ participation.
After reviewing the literature, EOT noted
whilst improvements to the way in which people with disability are assisted
to exercise legal capacity may greatly minimise the circumstances
person is deemed unfit to plead, there [are] likely to remain occasions [when]
supports will not be enough to guarantee
a fair trial.
5.4.6 Walvisch also focussed on the fair trial implications of particular
procedures. Whilst he strongly supported the provision of
accommodations (see discussion at [4.4.50] – [4.4.65]), he argued that
suitable supports would not be sufficient to
allow participation in some cases.
He dismissed suggestions that human rights principles might be met in such cases
by giving legal
representatives the power to interpret defendants’
purported will and preferences. He wrote that in these cases, ‘it
not be acceptable for the trial to proceed with the use of an advocate who has
the “responsibility of interpreting the
will and preference of the
individual to the best of that person’s ability”, as suggested by
Arstein-Kerslake et
view was that:
While such an advocate would be of great assistance in many other legal fora,
they would be incapable of
for the accused’s actions in
the ways required for a criminal trial to properly proceed. This is a role that
only an individual
is able to perform for themselves (with appropriate
5.4.7 In contrast, Queensland Advocacy Incorporated (‘QAI’)
suggested that suitable supports would enable all people to
participate.
Nevertheless, QAI submitted that the current test for fitness to stand trial is
inherently discriminatory towards people
who have intellectual impairment but
did not recommend that the doctrine should be abolished. Instead QAI recommended
significantly reformed, stating that:
It is not controversial to suggest that even some lawyers, let alone those
with no legal training, struggle to understand trial processes,
yet the courts
do not even apply the tests for fitness to run-of-the-mill defendants. The
fitness tests are discriminatory because
they treat some people with disability
less favourably, placing an undue emphasis on a defendant’s cognitive
capacity to understand
specific aspects of the legal proceedings and trial
process. The tests place too little emphasis on a person’s decision-making
5.4.8 QAI criticised the justification for the fitness test in its current
form ‘to shield the person from harm, mischief, exploitation
abuse’ as offering protection at the expense of autonomy:
people with intellectual impairments are no less capable than anyone of
making decisions about their own lives, even if their cognitive
impairment means
that (all other things being equal) they may be less capable of understanding
the relevant criminal law and trial
process. Impairment on its own, however
defined, is not, nor should be a basis on which to deny anyone participation in
proceedings.
As noted, it was QAI’s view that appropriate legal supports and, if
needed, decision-making support would ensure that ‘all
people with
intellectual impairments are capable of participating in a trial
5.4.9 After considering the submissions received, and noting the obligations
created by the
, the Institute’s view is that while there is a
need to reform the test for determining fitness (as outlined below), the
of fitness to stand trial should not be abolished in Tasmania.
Recommendation
3. The doctrine of fitness to stand trial should not be abolished in
Reforming fitness to stand trial
5.4.10 Although the Institute does not consider that the doctrine of fitness
to stand trial should be abolished, it does recommend
that the basis of the test
should be fundamentally reformed. The options in this regard were set out at [
] and considered in detail in the
following sections.
Explicitly grounding the fitness test in the right to a fair trial
5.4.11 In its review of the options available to reform the
test, the NSWLRC recommended that the requirement for a fair trial should be
statutorily prescribed as the overarching foundational
principle to be applied
in its application.
requirement is also made explicit in the Crimes (Mental Impairment and Unfitness
to be Tried) Amendment Bill 2016
(Vic). A fair trial requirement could be
incorporated into the assessment of fitness to stand trial in the
Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas), and the Institute sought
Should the test of unfitness to stand trial contained in the
Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
include an overarching
requirement of a fair trial in the application of the criteria?
5.4.12 There was only limited support in the submissions received for the
statutory specification of the right to a fair trial as
the fundamental
principle governing determinations of fitness to plead. The DPP stated that such
a requirement should not be included
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment)
because there is no need to do so, ‘[t]he right to
a fair trial [being] implicit in the criminal law’. In contrast, Walvisch
stated that ‘courts should always be aiming to ensure that an
accused’s trial is fair’ and so it is appropriate
to make statutory
provision to this effect. However, he considered that it should not be the sole
touchstone for the application
of the test due to its vagueness. Instead, he
stated that ‘effective participation’ more clearly addresses the key
of ‘the accused’s ability to account for his or her actions in
the trial process and will provide better guidance to
expert witnesses and
decision-makers’.
5.4.13 The Institute is of the view that while the right to a fair trial
implicitly governs all criminal proceedings in Tasmania,
there is value in
making explicit legislative provision to this effect in the context of the
fitness to stand trial doctrine. Doing
so serves declaratory and educative
purposes for the general community which, unlike the legal profession, may not
be aware of its
implicit application. It will also promote the explicit and
consistent consideration of this principle in this context. Further,
it may help
to ensure that other concerns, like case management considerations or the
assumed best interests of the accused are not
substituted for or allowed to
become a proxy for the right to a fair trial. Accordingly, the Institute
recommends that an overarching
requirement for a fair trial be included in the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
Recommendation
4. The right to a fair trial should be given legislative recognition as the
fundamental principle governing the determination of whether
a defendant is fit
to stand trial within the meaning of the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment)
Retention of the current Presser test but with up-dated criteria
5.4.14 One approach to reform has been simply to review and update the
current Presser criteria. This involves only modest reform
because it does not
require any alteration of the fundamental nature and basis of the test. This is
the approach recommended by the
NSWLRC and the VLRC.
5.4.15 In the Issues Paper, the Institute sought feedback on whether any
changes need to be made to the current criteria in the Presser
What changes to the criteria contained in the
Criminal Justice (Mental
Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) can be made, if any, to enhance the ability of
experts to assess an accused person’s fitness to stand trial?
5.4.16 There were seven submissions that addressed the question of the
criteria that should be relevant to the assessment of fitness
to stand trial.
However, most did so in conjunction with recommending more profound reform to
the nature and focus of the test itself.
One submission did not favour any
reform to the current criteria with or without further reforms to the test. As
noted earlier, the
DPP did not consider any additional criteria are required or
that any change is necessary to the current criteria. ForensiClinic
the current criteria but made an exception in relation to the requirement that
the accused be able to challenge jurors,
which it submitted should be removed.
ForensiClinic wrote that:
In our view, it does not sit well with the assessment of other capacities.
Jury selection is a more sophisticated process relying
on legal acumen, other
than the defendant being able to advise if they know one of the potential
This change was also the recommended by the VLRC for Victoria because the
decision to challenge jurors is usually exercised by counsel
or by the accused
on advice from counsel.
5.4.17 As already noted, other submissions that recommended changes to the
Presser criteria did so concomitantly with recommending
profound reform to the
focus of the test. These changes are detailed below. The majority of submissions
received supported this more
extensive reform rather than simply revising the
Presser criteria. In accord with these views the Institute does not support
reforming the test’s current criteria without more fundamental
reform to it. The form that any such reform should take is examined
following sections where the adoption of a decision-making model, whether that
model should include a rationality requirement,
what criteria should be applied
in making determinations under that model and what conditions should supplement
and support its application
are considered.
Recommendation
5. The TLRI does not support the minimalist reform approach of simply
up-dating the criteria for the current cognitive capacity fitness
test) without making additional reforms to that test. More
profound reform is needed.
Decision making capacity/effective participation
5.4.18 Possibly the most significant reform to the test in
that has been
advocated by commentators and endorsed by respondents to the Issues Paper is to
move the focus of the test from cognitive
capacity to decision-making capacity
as a means of assessing effective participation in the trial. A prominent
proponent of this
reform, the Law Commission of England and Wales recommended
replacing the
test (the English equivalent of the
test) with a test of decision-making capacity that focuses on an assessment
of the defendant’s capacity to participate effectively
Its view was that the
lack of emphasis on decision-making capacity in the test for fitness is
difficult to reconcile with the requirements
of Art 6 of the
Convention on Human Rights
, which stipulate that an accused be able to
participate effectively in his or her
The Law Commission
also considered that a test of decision-making capacity and effective
participation would modernise the current
approach and replace it with one that
better reflects ‘current medical understanding and legal practice in the
field of incapacity.’
The Law Commission’s recommended model comprises a ‘process’
or ‘functional’ approach, focusing on
the decision-making processes
of the accused, rather than an ‘outcome’ or ‘status’
approach, focusing on
the rationality of the
5.4.19 The decision-making test was also said to
be consistent with the test of decision-making capacity in the
Capacity Act 2005
The Law Commission also relied on the approach in this Act when recommending
that an accused should be found to lack capacity only
if he or she is unable:
• to understand the information relevant to the decisions that he or
she will have to make in the course of his or her trial;
• to retain that information; to use or weigh that information as part
of the decision-making process; or
• to communicate his or her
5.4.20 This is also the ALRC’s preferred approach. Accordingly, the
ALRC has recommended that the
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth) be amended to provide
that a person is unfit to stand trial if he or she cannot be supported to:
(a) understand the information relevant to the decisions that they will have
to make in the course of the proceedings;
(b) retain that information to the extent necessary to make decisions in the
course of the proceedings;
(c) use or weigh that information as part of the process of making decisions;
(d) communicate the decisions in some
The ALRC reasoned that making decision-making ability, in the context of the
particular criminal proceedings, central to the question
of fitness is mandated
5.4.21 Concerns about a focus on decision-making capacity and effective
participation centre principally on the possibility that it
may introduce too
much subjectivity into the assessment process, with concomitant problems for
expert assessments.
was endorsed in the review conducted by the Attorney General’s Department
in Western Australia.
NSWLRC further suggested that an ‘effective participation’ approach
may not only create uncertainty but also be over-inclusive
and so result in too
many people being found to be unfit. The NSWLRC, therefore, did not recommend
adoption of this model.
5.4.22 It has been argued that the assessment of an accused’s capacity
based on a ‘functional’ approach is problematic
because it violates the right to equal recognition before the law
for people with disabilities.
Despite these concerns, the ALRC maintains that ‘it is not practicable to
do away completely with some functional tests of
ability that have consequences
for participation in legal
processes’.
the ALRC stated that:
The integrity of a criminal trial (and, arguably, the criminal law itself)
would be prejudiced if the defendant does not have the
ability to understand and
participate in a meaningful way. It may also breach the person’s human
rights by denying them a fair
trial, implicating arts 12 and 13 of the
Instead, the ALRC recommended a test that takes into account an
accused’s fitness to stand trial in the context of the supports
accommodations that may be made available to maximise his or her
decision-making/participation capacity.
5.4.23 Based on this commentary, the Institute sought feedback on whether a
decision-making approach should be adopted in Tasmania
Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
Should the test of unfitness to stand trial contained in the
Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
include consideration of an
accused person’s decision-making capacity and/or ability for effective
participation?
5.4.24 While respondents to the Issues Paper expressed a range of views about
possible changes to the fitness to stand trial test,
predominantly, submissions
supported replacing the current test which focuses on defendants’
intellectual ability with a test
that requires assessment of their
decision-making capacity. QAI justified this proposition on the basis that the
current test unfairly
discriminates against people with intellectual
disabilities because it focuses on ‘their ability to understand rather
their ability to function or to do something’. QAI submitted that the
test for fitness to stand trial ‘should not be
a de facto test of a
person’s cognitive capacity: that is, it should not be about a
person’s intellectual ability to
comprehend specific aspects of legal
proceedings and trial process’, because this contravenes obligations under
Instead, QAI recommended that the test ‘should focus on a
person’s decision-making ability, with support, and in the context
particular criminal proceedings which they face’. Accordingly, QAI
supported the ALRC approach (set out above) with
its focus on decision-making
5.4.25 Walvisch similarly supported the ALRC and the Law Commission of
England and Wales recommendations that the fitness assessment
should focus
(1) The accused’s capacity to
the relevant trial
(2) The accused’s capacity to
make decisions
relevant to his or
her trial; and
(3) The accused’s capacity to
communicate
those decisions to the
court or his or her lawyer.
Walvisch favoured this model because it more closely aligns with the
rationale for the fitness to stand trial test itself:
While the ability to understand trial processes is important, the accused
must also be able to account for his or her actions. This
requires more than
mere intellectual understanding. It also requires the accused to be able to make
decisions relevant to the trial,
and to be able to effectively communicate those
The Australian Lawyers Alliance (‘ALA’) and EOT also expressed
support for the ALRC decision-making model.
5.4.26 The Institute acknowledges that there are
concerns that adoption of a decision-making test of fitness to stand trial may
in a greater degree of subjectivity in the application of the test with
associated problems for expert assessment. Both the DPP and
ForensiClinic
expressed objection to the decision-making model on this basis, arguing that it
constitutes too broad and vague a basis
of assessment and that it may therefore
increase the number of people found to be unfit.
5.4.27 However, on balance, the Institute considers that the current
cognitive capacity
Criminal Justice (Mental
Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) should be replaced by a test that focuses on
defendants’ decision-making capacity. This reflects a decisive shift from
the current emphasis on ‘mere factual understanding’ (passive
participation) to more active participation in the trial
through an assessment
of defendants’ decision-making
Further, the
determination of fitness to stand trial based on decision-making capacity
reflects the approach to capacity in the
Mental Health Act 2013
which is also based on a person’s decision-making
Accordingly, the
Institute recommends that that the central focus of the test in
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) should be on the
defendant’s decision-making capacity as a means of determining whether he
or she can effectively participate
in the trial. The Institute considers that
concerns about the breadth, subjectivity and potentially inconsistent
application of a
decision-making test can be addressed by legislating guideline
criteria for its application. The Institute also considers that concerns
this test may increase unfitness findings may be ameliorated by requiring that
it be applied in light of the supports and accommodations
that can be provided
to defendants to enable them to exercise their decision-making ability and
participate effectively in trials.
Both these matters are considered in detail
below. As noted above, all these reforms work together and therefore should be
implemented
Recommendation
6. The test for assessing fitness to stand trial in
Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
should be reformed so that its focus is
on the accused’s decision-making capacity as means of determining whether
can effectively participate in the trial rather than on his or her
cognitive capacity. This recommendation is to be understood in
conjunction with
two other factors:
(1) an identification of the key matters about which a person must be able
to make decisions in the trial in order for them to be
able to meaningfully
participate (see Recommendation 8); and
(2) the need for the court to take into account any accommodations and
supports that would assist a person to be able to exercise
decision-making capacity in the trial process (see Recommendations 9 and
Rationality
5.4.28 A further issue the Institute considered was whether the recommended
decision-making test should be narrowed by including a
requirement for the
decision-making to be
. Although there is some suggestion that
the law already requires a court to take account of whether the applicable
criteria are able
to be exercised rationally, this is not expressly
For this reason, an
approach taken to address the deficiencies of the current test in some
into it a requirement for rationality.
This approach has been implemented in South Australia, where the test explicitly
rationality (as noted at [
]). The NSWLRC also incorporated a
requirement for rational decision-making into its recommendations for reform of
the statutory fitness
In Victoria, the Law Reform Committee recommended that rationality be
incorporated into components of the recommended test so that
consideration is
given to defendants’ ability to understand, or respond rationally to the
charges or their ability to exercise
or give rational instructions about the
exercise of procedural
5.4.29 This approach can be justified on the basis that it addresses concerns
understand the trial process
but whose capacity to make decisions is impaired by delusional
5.4.30 The VLRC also examined whether the test should consider the
accused’s ability to make rational decisions. Arguments in
favour of this
approach include that it would provide more clarity in situations where an
accused has a delusional disorder that
affects his or her understanding and that
the current test sets the threshold too
However, a number of
concerns have been identified with this model:
• the current criteria already implicitly include rationality;
• that rationality is difficult to define, assess clinically and apply
in practice;
• that it would introduce too much subjectivity into the test; and
• that it would inappropriately widen the number of people who could be
found unfit to stand trial.
There is also concern that incorporating rationality may ‘unjustifiably
limit accuseds’ autonomy and their choice to make
decisions, including
On balance,
the VLRC’s view was that there is a risk that introducing a requirement of
‘rationality’ would add
to the complexity of the test and increase
its subjectivity.
5.4.31 In addition, the introduction of a
requirement for rationality is difficult to reconcile with the
recognises the right of people with disabilities to make choices for themselves
even if they are not in their ‘best
interests’.
expressed concerns about a requirement for rationality which ‘may lead to
a person’s decision-making ability
being assessed on its likely
This would be
inconsistent with the National Decision-Making Principles (recommended by the
ALRC), as well as the
, which focus on the ‘rights, will and
preferences’ of the person instead of an approach based on the ‘best
5.4.32 In light of reforms proposed in other jurisdictions, the Institute
sought feedback on whether the test of unfitness to stand
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) should include a
requirement that the accused person is able to exercise his or her
decision-making capacity rationally.
Should the test of unfitness to stand trial contained in the
Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
include a requirement that
the accused person is able to exercise his or her decision-making capacity
rationally?
5.4.33 There was limited support in submissions for the inclusion of a
rationality requirement in any decision-making test adopted
in Tasmania, with
two submissions rejecting its inclusion and only one submission suggesting a
limited role for rationality as a
criterion for determining fitness to stand
5.4.34 Walvisch suggested that
‘[r]ationality is important but it is also essential to respect a
person’s autonomy and
their choice to make unwise decisions, and so it is
necessary to take great care in developing the bounds of any rationality
Walvisch stressed that ‘it is essential that people not be
considered unfit simply because the content of their decisions differs
decisions that would be made by expert witnesses, the judge or the jury’.
For these reasons, Walvisch submitted that
‘the notion of rationality
should be incorporated into the test by requiring the accused to be able to make
decisions that
are “reasons-responsive”’. This was explained
as follows:
this is not simply about being unable to recognise a sufficient reason for
action on one particular occasion. It is about failing
to exhibit a pattern of
reason-recognition that is understandable to those who are judging the
agent’s responsibility, and
that is grounded in reality. According to this
view, a person will not be fit to stand trial if he or she is unable to
how reasons fit together, to see why one reason is stronger than
another, or to understand how the acceptance of one reason as sufficient
that a stronger reason must also be sufficient. However, he or she will not be
unfit simply because poor or seemingly irrational
decisions have been made.
This would allow a finding of unfitness to be made where a person’s
delusional beliefs may mean that they do not have the capacity
to make decisions
their trial.
5.4.35 In contrast, the DPP and ForensiClinic
opposed the inclusion of a requirement of rationality. The DPP wrote that
is implicit in the existing criteria. Any irrational behaviour that
impacted upon a person’s fitness to stand trial would be
identified by an
expert psychiatrist in a report addressing the
ForensiClinic’s view was that the inclusion of rationality may lower the
threshold for a finding of unfitness
and would be problematic from a clinical
point of view:
In relation to the concept of rationality, this is contentious in mental
health practice and its application in legal proceedings.
It is often a
subjective judgement made by clinicians and there is a lack of methodological
standardisation in determining whether
a thought process is rational or not.
Rational thinking can be affected by clinical and non-clinical factors.
Non-clinical factors
may include personality (e.g., antagonism, oppositional),
motivation, and naivety. Non-clinical factors would not form a reasonable
for unfitness. Clinical factors may include psychosis and dementia.
Additionally, a rational decision from one cultural background
considered irrational from another cultural background. Rationality is
temporally unstable. A person’s degree of rationality
or irrationality can
change very quickly due to environmental and personal circumstances (e.g.,
5.4.36 In Tasmania, an approach that incorporates
an assessment of an accused’s capacity to make rational decisions would
approach in the
Guardianship and Administration
(Tas), which allows the Guardianship and Administration Board to
appoint a guardian or administrator where a person with a disability
by reason of that disability to make
judgements in respect of
all or any matters relating to his or her person or circumstances and is in need
of a guardian.
However, it is
important to note that, the requirements of the
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
(Tas), including the basis on which assessments are
made of a person’s decision-making capacity, have been reviewed recently
by the TLRI which has recommended that assessments should not focus on
people’s rationality but rather on their ability to
make a decisions with
support, if necessary.
recommendation accords closely with the approach ultimately recommended in this
Report and supports the conclusions reached
here. Accordingly, the maintenance
of consistency with the
test in the
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
(Tas) does not provide a sound basis for
incorporating a requirement of rationality into the fitness test. A requirement
for rationality
is also contrary to the approach in the
National Decision-Making
Principles.
5.4.37 Consequently, the Institute does not
recommend the inclusion of any requirement of rationality or rational
decision-making
into the test for determining whether a person should be
required to stand trial in the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
Recommendation
7. Rationality or rational decision-making should not be included in the test
for determining whether a person should be required
to stand trial contained in
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
Criteria to be applied in assessing defendants’ decision-making
5.4.38 Decision-making capacity will necessarily fall to be assessed
according to prescribed criteria in order to ensure that those
assessments are
consistently carried out. Prescription of applicable criteria will also give
content to the decision-making test
and reduce potential subjectivity in its
application by providing guidance in this regard. This begs the question, what
these criteria
should be. At the core of the recent reviews of the test of
fitness to stand trial is a desire to ensure that the criteria governing
assessment of decision-making capacity reflect a need for an accused to be
‘able to make “true choices” concerning
the crucial decisions
in the trial that are not substantially prejudiced by their mental
condition’.
Commission of England and Wales identified the need to ensure that there is
meaningful participation in the trial process
stating that it would be ‘an
abuse of the process of the law to subject someone to a trial when he or she is
unable to play
any real part in that
Similarly, the
VLRC’s view is that fairness requires that accused only be subject to the
trial process where they are able
to make crucial decisions relevant to their
Accordingly, the VLRC
considered that the most appropriate way to ensure that the test takes this into
account is to:
• evaluate the current criteria for unfitness to stand trial against
the crucial decisions an accused should be expected to
• supplement the criteria with a requirement that the accused be able
to make these specific decisions, where the current criteria
do not cover
Other jurisdictions have also examined the criteria used to assess fitness to
stand trial and considered whether they are appropriate
in the modern trial
5.4.39 Appendix 4 contains a comparison of the
criteria that are used in other jurisdictions, as well as new criteria that have
recommended by law reform bodies.
5.4.40 Criteria that have been identified as essential that are not
explicitly contained in the Tasmanian legislation are:
• The accused’s ability to understand the significance of
entering a plea.
• The accused’s ability to communicate
instructions to his or her legal practitioner.
• The accused’s ability to decide whether to give evidence to
support his/her case, and if he or she wishes to give evidence,
his/her ability
5.4.41 In recommending reform of the basis of the fitness test, the Law
Commission of England and Wales also reviewed the guideline
criteria to be
applied in its application. This is also the approach adopted in Scotland. The
Law Commission of England and Wales
specified a number of abilities as relevant
to the assessment of the defendant’s decision-making capacity and
therefore capacity
for effective participation in the trial. These included the
ability to:
• understand the charges (what the charges mean, their nature and the
evidence on which the prosecution rely to establish the
• understand the trial process and the consequences of being convicted;
• give instructions to a legal representative;
• follow proceedings in courts;
• give evidence;
• make a decision about whether to plead guilty or not guilty;
• make a decision about whether to give evidence;
• make a decision about whether to elect Crown Court trial; and
• make any other decision that might need to be made by the defendant
in connection with the trial.
This approach was also endorsed by the Northern Ireland Law
Commission.
5.4.42 The requirements for effective participation are set out in
legislation in Scotland. Following recommendations of the Scottish
Commission,
Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995
was amended to provide that
‘a person is unfit for trial if it is established ... that the person is
incapable, by reason of
a mental or physical condition, of participating
effectively in a
In making the
determination of fitness, the court is to have regard to the following factors:
(a) the ability of the person to — understand the nature of the charge;
understand the requirement to tender a plea to the charge
and the effect of such
a plea; understand the purpose of, and follow the course of, the trial;
understand the evidence that may be
given against the person; instruct and
otherwise communicate with the person’s legal representative; and
(b) any other factor which the court considers
5.4.43 Based on these different approaches, the Institute sought feedback on
the current criteria contained in the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment)
(Tas) and the need for their reform particularly in the context of
reform of the basis of the fitness test. Two questions were asked
Are changes required to the criteria contained in the
Criminal Justice
(Mental Impairment) Act 1999
to allow for an accused to
participate meaningfully in the trial process?
What changes to the criteria contained in the
Criminal Justice (Mental
Impairment) Act 1999
can be made, if any, to enhance the ability
of experts to assess an accused person’s fitness to stand trial?
5.4.44 Respondents who supported the replacement of the current cognitive
capacity test with a decision-making test also proposed
the legislative
prescription of new criteria to reflect the key decisions to be made in
participating in trials. Walvisch and the
ALA made broadly similar
recommendations in this regard. Walvisch suggested that the legislative criteria
should include all the
current factors, as well as the following additional
• the accused’s ability to understand the actual significance of
entering a plea
• the accused’s ability to communicate
instructions to his or her legal practitioner
• the accused’s ability to decide whether to give evidence to
support his/her case and his/her ability to give evidence
• that the accused be able to understand the meaning of conviction and
punishment.
5.4.45 The ALA proposed the following criteria relating to the abilities of
the accused, as matters that should be included in the
Criminal Justice
(Mental Impairment) Act 1999
These criteria were the
• to understand the charges (what the charges mean, their nature and
the evidence on which the prosecution relies to establish
• to understand the trial process and the consequences of being
• to give instructions to a legal representative
• to follow proceedings in courts
• to give evidence
• to make a decision about whether to plead guilty or not guilty
• to make a decision about whether to give evidence
• to make a decision about whether to elect a trial in the Criminal
Court and, if so, by jury or by judge
or any other decision
that might need to be made by the defendant in connection with the trial.
5.4.46 Because the Institute acknowledges that there are concerns about the
broad and potentially imprecise nature of a decision-making
capacity test, and
considers that this could be addressed by identifying the matters about which a
person will need to make decisions,
it recommends that these matters be
legislatively specified as criteria to guide the application of the test. This
was the approach
recommended by the Law Commission of England and Wales, the
Northern Ireland Law Commission and that has been legislated in
It is also the
approach suggested by Walvisch and the ALA.
5.4.47 After reviewing the submissions received and approaches in other
legislatively prescribed to guide assessments of defendants’
decision-making capacity. They should consist of critical
understandings and
abilities that defendants must have in order to make key decisions during
trials. These criteria should include:
• an understanding of the actual significance and effect of entering a
• the ability to communicate
instructions to his or
her legal practitioner
• the ability to decide whether to give evidence to support his/her
case and his/her ability to give evidence (that is, the
ability to give a
coherent account in his/her defence and to answer questions put to him/her)
• an understanding of the meaning and consequences of a finding of
guilt including that he/she may be punished and in jeopardy
of imprisonment, if
so advised that they are at risk of such a penalty
• an understanding of the nature of the offence(s) with which he/she is
• the ability to understand the nature of the proceedings as a process
to determine whether it has been proved that he/she has
committed the offence(s)
• the ability to understand and follow the substance of the evidence
that may be given at trial
• the ability to understand the course of the proceedings and what is
going on in a general sense at each stage of the trial
5.4.48 While these matters contain features that are similar to the current
factors courts use to determine fitness under the
approach, they
are used for a different purpose. Their purpose is to throw light on
defendants’ ability to participate in their
trials by making decisions, by
being able to account for their actions and communicate their decisions. The
inclusion of these criteria
should be understood as providing guidance in the
application of the decision-making test, as giving it content and inhibiting
subjectivity
in its application. In other words, these criteria provide a basis
for the assessment of decision-making capacity.
5.4.49 There may be concern about the possible increase in the number of
people found to be unfit under the new test given that it
requires more than a
capacity for passive involvement through understanding of key features of the
trial and also requires an ability
to participate actively in the trial process
by making decisions. However, it is important to recognise that this revised
not sit alone but is part of three interrelated changes and the
proposed revised test is to be understood alongside a recommendation
implement a legislative requirement to take into account how a person can be
supported to be able to exercise their decision-making
capacity. This involves
the need to assess available accommodations and supports that may create
conditions that optimise an accused’s
decision-making capacity. Combined,
this approach reflects the justification for the requirement that an individual
is fit to stand
trial and reflects the need to ensure that a person is able to
have a fair trial and is able to make the link between their conduct
allegedly is a crime) and the court process and punishment.
Recommendation
8. Criteria should be legislatively prescribed to guide assessments of
defendants’ decision-making capacity. These criteria
should consist of
critical understandings and abilities that defendants must have in order to make
key decisions during trials including:
• an understanding of the actual significance and effect of entering
• the ability to communicate
instructions to his or
her legal practitioner
• the ability to decide whether to give evidence to support his/her
case and his/her ability to give evidence (that is, the
ability to give a
coherent account in his/her defence and to answer questions put to
• an understanding of the meaning and consequences of a finding of
guilt including that he/she may be punished and in jeopardy
of imprisonment, if
so advised that they are at risk of such a penalty
• an understanding of the nature of the offence(s) with which he/she
• the ability to understand the nature of the proceedings as a
process to determine whether it has been proved that he/she has
committed the
offence(s) charged
• the ability to understand and follow the substance of the evidence
that may be given at trial
• the ability to understand the course of the proceedings and what is
going on in a general sense at each stage of the trial
Supports and accommodations
5.4.50 As indicated, the availability of supports and accommodations has been
identified by the Institute as a key aspect of its reform
proposals. Although
case law recognises the relevance of accommodations and supports, it has been
contended that ‘the application
of such accommodations is arguably ad
hoc’ and that a ‘more formalised, systematic application of
procedural accommodations
... could be achieved through the training of judicial
officers and greater statutory protections for support persons to assist accused
persons at risk of being deemed unfit to
Accordingly,
Gooding et al criticise the current test for failing to ‘incorporate a
requirement to consider whether support
or assistance could help the accused to
optimise fitness to stand
5.4.51 The need for greater emphasis on the supports and accommodations that
could be made available to an accused to facilitate fitness
for trial has also
been recognised by various law reform bodies. For example, the Victorian Law
Reform Committee has stated that
the test ‘sets a low threshold for
determining the fitness of an accused with an intellectual disability or
cognitive impairment’.
It indicated that it had received evidence to suggest that ‘the provision
of court support services could provide a mechanism
for overcoming barriers that
[such] a person ... may experience when interacting with the courts and may
therefore minimise the potential
for findings of unfitness to be made against
recommended that there be a reformulation of the test ‘to focus on
whether, and to what extent, a person can be supported
to play their role in the
justice system, rather than on whether they have capacity to play such a role at
Similarly, the
VLRC indicated that ‘the importance of support measures in the unfitness
to stand trial process was one of the
strongest themes to come out of the
Commission’s
In England and
Wales, the Law Commission expressed the view that the test should take
‘into account assistance available to
the defendant’ and that
‘a finding of lack of capacity should only be made as a last
It also noted
that this reflected the current law as applied by the courts but considered that
support should be explicitly recognised
The NSWLRC also
recommended that in determining whether a person is unfit for trial, the court
must consider where modifications
to the trial process can be made or assistance
provided to facilitate the person’s understanding and effective
participation.
The Western
Australian review conducted by the Department of the Attorney General
recommended that the concept of ‘fitness
with support’ should be
specifically included as a factor in the determination of an accused’s
fitness to stand trial.
‘Fitness with support’ refers to ‘modifications to court
processes that are made to assist an individual to participate
processes’.
appears to be a wide consensus in favour of requiring courts to consider the
availability of supports and accommodations
to maximise defendants’
opportunity to participate in the criminal justice process. Explicitly
incorporating this requirement
into the test also reduces the likelihood for
inconsistency in its application.
5.4.52 Despite widespread support for this approach, concerns have been
expressed that to use special measures to allow an accused
to become fit for
trial is not necessarily in his/her best interests. In the view of the Northern
Ireland Law Reform Commission,
it may be inherently unfair for special measures
to be used to ‘make’ an accused fit for
This is because:
The individual has not changed and might be better served by the disposals
which are available following a determination of unfitness
rather than following
a criminal trial, where the focus is on sentencing and rehabilitation rather
than medical treatment and
Accordingly, its view was that special measures should only be considered
once the issue of unfitness to plead has been considered
and a finding of
fitness determined.
5.4.53 In Tasmania, as indicated, the issue of supports and accommodations
for people with communication needs involved in the criminal
justice system was
the subject of recent review by the TLRI. The TLRI examined the feasibility of
instituting a communication assistant/intermediary
scheme in Tasmania, and its
principal recommendation was that such a scheme should be established in
Tasmania with a view to enabling
‘people with communication needs to
participate to the best of their ability in the criminal justice
The proposed
scheme would involve expertly trained intermediaries/communication assistants
who have a range of functions including
advisory and interpretive roles as well
as the power to intervene in inappropriate questioning and to suggest how such
questioning
should be altered. The intermediaries/communication assistants would
be able to provide advice to courts, legal practitioners and
the police and
communication assistance to people with communication needs who are involved in
the criminal justice process. This
will facilitate communication with the police
and legal practitioners and will support individuals with communication needs
court hearings and
Accordingly, the
creation of such a scheme is likely to reduce the need to hold fitness hearings,
and/or reduce the number of people
found unfit to stand trial and enhance the
human rights of people with communication needs in their interactions with the
justice system. The TLRI has also made recommendations in relation to
the importance of appropriate decision-making supports as a
means to facilitate
decision-making to maximise a person’s autotomy and promote a will,
preference and rights approach to decision-making
for people requiring
5.4.54 In addition to the benefits offered by an intermediary scheme in
facilitating participation in the criminal process, other
means available to
increase the level of support for people with intellectual disabilities and/or
cognitive impairments have been
identified as
• the provision of a formal education program that may facilitate
fitness such as the provision of education about the nature
of the trial
process, the nature of the criminal charge and the role of court staff;
• court familiarisation processes;
• the modification of court procedures to suit people with intellectual
disabilities or cognitive impairments, such as shorter
sessions, additional
breaks, reduced formalities, allowing the giving of evidence via videolink;
• improved communications methods, such as use of visual aids and clear
These measures may also allow individuals with intellectual disabilities
and/or cognitive impairments to participate more effectively
in an ordinary
trial and support their fitness to stand trial. The provision of procedural
accommodations to facilitate a person’s
access to justice accords with the
requirements of the
according to Gooding and O’Mahoney, ‘circumvent the need for any
assessment of fitness for trial in the first
5.4.55 On this basis, in the Issues Paper, the
Institute suggested that it may be desirable to incorporate the relevance of
and accommodations specifically into the statutory test, including the
use of expert intermediaries/communication assistants. Further,
judicial officers to make an assessment about fitness taking into account
necessary supports and accommodations, they should
be empowered to obtain expert
advice about the requisite accommodations and supports that are available and
that should be used.
5.4.56 Accordingly, feedback was sought from stakeholders and members of the
Tasmanian community on the need to include the availability
of accommodations
and support measures, including the potential use of an
intermediary/communication assistant in
Criminal Justice (Mental
Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) as a factor to be taken into account when
determining fitness to stand trial. The Issues Paper asked the following
in this regard:
Should the availability of accommodations and support measures, including the
potential use of an intermediary/communication assistant
(if the scheme is
adopted) be specified in the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act
(Tas) as a factor that needs to be taken into account when determining
unfitness to stand trial?
5.4.57 There was clear support in the submissions
for the legislative recognition of supports and accommodations. While not
supporting reform of the current fitness criteria, the DPP was not
opposed to legislative amendment that requires consideration of
any special
measures that might be implemented to support an accused to meet fitness to
stand trial criteria. The DPP explained that
such a requirement would, in any
event, simply reflect current practice. However, the DPP stated that:
Any such amendment would need to be considered in light of what special
measures are reasonably and practically available. This would
require extensive
consultation with the court and other stakeholders. Intermediaries or
communication assistance, as proposed by
the TLRI in Final Report 23, may enable
a person to be supported to such an extent that they are fit to stand trial.
5.4.58 ForensiClinic also agreed that ‘the potential use of an
intermediary/communication assistant is a helpful concept, particularly
those on the borderline threshold of fitness, or with specific communication
impediments’. Support for legislative recognition
of the importance of
intermediaries/communication assistants in facilitating fitness to stand trial
was found in several other submissions
received. O’Connell wrote that:
I am of the view that an intermediary could assist defendants with mental
illness or mental impairment. There often exists a tension
between the law and
psychiatry and a communication expert could assist all parties in maximising the
defendants participation in
the court process. There are a number of defendants
that are charged with matters, deemed fit to stand trial but the lawyer is
dissatisfied
with the quality of instructions provided. An intermediary would
assist in these matters.
5.4.59 Walvisch recognised the value of using intermediary/communication
assistants to facilitate participation given that ‘[i]t
community’s interests that people who are accused of committing crimes be
called to account for those crimes’.
He agreed with Gooding’s
argument that ‘the measure of a person’s decision-making capability,
or their legal capacity,
[should] no longer [be] their inherent abilities, but
rather the range and quality of supports and accommodations around
Walvisch placed some caveats on this proposition:
(1) ‘in implementing such measures, great care should be taken to
ensure that the accused person’s impairment is
properly taken
into account in the sentencing process’;
(2) ‘it is essential that the decision-maker be certain that such
measures will actually be available to the accused throughout
the trial, and
that there is evidence to support the fact that they will assist the accused to
reach the requisite standards’;
(3) that there is ‘provision to revise the fitness assessment if the
support becomes unavailable, or it becomes apparent that
it is not assisting the
accused to meet the requisite standards’.
5.4.60 EOT stressed the role that supports and accommodations, including
communication assistance could play in reducing the number
of people found unfit
to stand trial. This reflects EOT’s view that the rights of people with
disability are not always upheld
in practice. EOT has undertaken significant
work with stakeholders to develop the
Disability Justice Plan for Tasmania
. In this regard EOT noted that:
A key action identified in the DJPT [was] the need to ‘improve the
justice system’s capacity to recognise an individual’s
disability at
the earliest opportunity and make available appropriate supports and adjustments
to enable them to participate in those
services on an equitable basis with
EOT stated that ‘[c]apacity can be removed in circumstances where it is
not clear that a rigorous assessment has been made or
where the capacity for
decision making ... with the assistance of aids and supports has not been
5.4.61 Accordingly, in light of its research and the submissions received,
the Institute recommends that there should be legislative
recognition of the
need to take into account support measures and accommodations that are available
to defendants with a view to
optimising their fitness to stand trial, in
circumstances where they may otherwise be unfit.
Greater use of
special measures to support an accused’s fitness to stand trial is
recommended on the basis that the optimum
approach is for defendants to proceed
through the normal trial process, wherever this can be fairly
This is both
beneficial to defendants and in the public
Accordingly, the
law should aim to reduce the number of people who take part in special hearings
so that a finding of fitness is
only a last resort where a person cannot be
supported to participate in the ordinary trial process. This approach is
consistent with
the obligations that arise under the
Further, as
recognised by the ALRC, explicitly incorporating the concept of supports and
accommodation into the test for fitness
‘reflects the National
Decision-Making Principles in that any assessment of decision-making ability
should be considered in
the context of available
5.4.62 These recommendations are also aligned to the previous recommendations
of the Institute contained in its Final Report,
Facilitating Equal Access to
Justice: An Intermediary/Communication Assistant Scheme for
5.4.63 In the Institute’s view, a focus on supports and accommodations
combined with a decision-making approach aligns strongly
with the purpose of the
test and identifies the factors that will allow defendants to participate in a
meaningful way in their own
trial. A decision-making model for assessing fitness
to stand trial also aligns closely with human rights considerations. As Walvisch
observes, ‘[t]he key issue in this regard is
whether the
accused suffered from a particular type of mental or physical disability (which
would clearly be discriminatory), but
whether the accused is able to account for
his or her actions if provided with the appropriate supports’.
5.4.64 This approach to assessing fitness to stand trial for an accused is
also consistent with the approach contained in the
Evidence Act 2001
, which deals with the competence of witnesses to give evidence.
There is a presumption of competence, set out in
, ‘unless the
contrary is proved’.
further provides:
(1) A person is not competent to give evidence about a fact if, for any
reason (including a mental, intellectual or physical
disability)
(a) the person does not have the capacity to understand a question about the
(b) the person does not have the capacity to give an answer that can be
understood to a question about the fact –
and that incapacity cannot be overcome
(8) For the purpose of determining a question arising under this section, the
court may inform itself as it thinks fit, including
by obtaining information
from a person who has relevant specialised knowledge based on the person’s
training, study or experience.
Clearly, under
, a witness will only be incompetent if a lack of capacity
cannot be overcome. The Institute recommends that this approach be adopted
relation to fitness to plead and an accused’s capacity to participate in
trials. In common with the recommendation of the
Law Commission of England and
Wales, the Institute recommends findings of lack of capacity, and therefore
unfitness to stand trial,
should only be made as a last resort.
5.4.65 The Institute recognises that the court’s assessment of the
supports and accommodations that may assist an accused to
be fit for trial must
be based on the supports/accommodations that are actually available and that
will be effective to assist the
accused. This should be the subject of expert
reports provided to the court in relation to its consideration of the fitness to
trial test. Again, this is consistent with the
Evidence Act 2001
Recommendations
9. There should be legislative recognition in the
Criminal Justice (Mental
Impairment) Act 1999
of the need for courts to take into account
support measures and accommodations that are available to an individual with a
optimising an accused’s fitness to stand trial in circumstances
where they may otherwise be unfit. Further, the legislation
should specify that
a finding of lack of capacity is only to be made as a last resort, that is, in
the event that support measures
have been exhausted.
10. The court’s assessment of the supports and accommodations that may
assist an accused to be fit for trial must be based on
supports/accommodations that are actually available and would be effective to
assist the accused. This should be the subject
of expert reports in relation to
the court’s determination of the fitness to stand trial test.
Pleas of guilty
5.4.66 A related issue is whether the test for determining fitness should be
adapted in cases where an accused wishes to plead guilty.
This question has been
considered in several reviews of the law on the basis that a person may be able
to understand the nature of
the charge and may be able to enter a plea to the
charge but may not be able to understand more complex aspects of the trial
Under the current
law, such a person is unfit to stand trial and is not able to enter a plea of
guilty but instead is subject to
the special hearing
procedures.
anecdotal evidence is that such people do plead guilty rather than rely on the
fitness to stand trial provisions, if their
legal representative is satisfied of
their capacity to plead and participate in the sentencing hearing, in order to
avoid the onerous
consequences of a finding of
5.4.67 There have been differing views expressed in relation to the
appropriateness of adapting the test if an accused wishes to plead
Arguments in favour of a separate test
5.4.68 The following arguments have been advanced in favour of a separate
• The minimum standards to enter a plea are less onerous than those
required to stand trial.
• It would enable defendants who are able to enter a plea to
participate in the usual criminal
• Where an accused is able to make a particular decision, this should
be given effect as far as
This accords with
human rights
considerations.
• It allows an accused to ‘get on with treatment’ without
concerns in relation to fitness procedures and the prospect
of proceedings being
resumed on recovery.
• If an accused can plead guilty, this is better for victims and
• The law requires flexibility to take account of differing levels of
Arguments against a separate test
5.4.69 The following arguments have been advanced against a separate test:
• The concerns about capacity are the same for both fitness to plead
and fitness to stand trial, and so the test should be the
• A separate test would be an unnecessary complication and would be
• Expert assessment can already take into account the differing demands
depending on the nature of the
proceedings.
• Concerns that an accused may not truly understand the nature of the
guilty plea and that difficulties with understanding the
trial process may mean
that they see no option other than to plead
• Concerns that such a test may undermine the legitimacy of the
criminal justice system if it allows ‘individuals who
are otherwise unable
to participate effectively in proceedings to plead guilty, especially to serious
5.4.70 The NSWLRC made no recommendation on this issue in view of the
strength of opposition from key
stakeholders.
The VLRC and
the Law Commission of England and Wales supported varying the test for pleas of
The VLRC expressed
the view that adequate safeguards should be built into the model so that the
revised test for guilty pleas would
only apply if a defendant was legally
represented.
The criteria
that were identified as relevant for fitness to enter a plea were that the
• Understands the nature of the charge.
• Understands the nature of the hearing if they pleaded not guilty.
• Understands the significance of entering a plea of guilty and its
consequences.
• Meaningfully communicates to his or her legal practitioner his/her
decision to plead guilty.
• Follows the course of the plea and sentencing hearing that will
follow a plea of guilty.
It is noted that the test for capacity recommended by the ALRC does not make
a distinction between the test to enter a guilty plea
and the test to stand
trial but does allow the differing decisions that a defendant will need to make
to be taken into account in
the assessment of
5.4.71 In the Issues Paper, the Institute sought feedback on whether there
should be a separate test in the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act
(Tas) to determine whether a person is fit to enter a plea and if so,
the requirements of that test.
Should there be a separate test in the
Criminal Justice (Mental
Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) to determine whether a person is fit to enter a
If so, what should be the requirements of the test?
5.4.72 The Institute received two submissions that addressed these questions.
The DPP clearly supported a separate test based on the
test proposed by the
VLRC. The DPP wrote that:
I would support the inclusion of a separate test in the
Criminal Justice
(Mental Impairment) Act
to determine whether a person is fit to enter a
plea. There is a difference between being fit to stand trial and being fit to
guilty. The nature and course of the proceedings is simpler in uncontested
matters, and a person may be able to understand and follow
the nature and course
of proceedings on a plea of guilty but not a trial. It is in the interests of
justice for victims, witnesses
and accused that matters are dealt with as
quickly as possible.
In circumstances where a person has impaired mental functioning, this can be
readily and appropriately managed in the sentencing process.
The test proposed by the VLRC, as set out in 4.4.35 of the [issues] paper
seems appropriate.
5.4.73 While Walvisch recognised the difference between being fit to stand
trial and being fit to enter a guilty plea, he did not
consider that it was
essential to have two separate tests if there was one test with sufficient
flexibility to accommodate both situations.
In Walvisch’s view, the
essential matter is the ‘law should be able to differentiate between
fitness to enter a plea
and fitness to stand trial’ and ‘is clearly
able to differentiate between these two situations’. In Walvisch’s
view, it was necessary to take care:
to ensure that the requisite capacities are not too strictly circumscribed in
any test that applies to fitness to plead, and that
the accused properly
understands the nature of the guilty plea. In such cases, the accused must still
be able to:
• Understand the nature of the charge;
• Understand that he or she has a right to contest that charge, and
what that would generally involve (e.g., a trial involving
witnesses giving
evidence, determined by a jury/magistrate);
• Understand the nature and strength of the evidence that may be given
in support of the prosecution, and the nature and strength
of any legal defences
open to him or her;
• Understand the meaning of conviction and punishment, and the nature
of the sanctions which may be imposed;
• Enter a plea to the charge;
• Make reasons-responsive decisions about the relevant issues; and
• Give meaningful instructions to his or her legal practitioner.
Each of these matters should be clearly spelt out in any separate test.
5.4.74 The focus of the Institute’s recommendations are to maximise an
individual’s participation in regular criminal
justice process wherever
possible and a separate test that would allow for a person’s fitness to
enter a guilty plea to be
assessed would facilitate this. Further, as noted by
the VLRC and NSWLRC, there is anecdotal evidence that individuals who may be
unfit to stand trial may enter guilty pleas to avoid the onerous consequences of
a finding of unfitness in circumstances where their
legal representative was
satisfied of their capacity to
While it is unclear
the extent to which this occurs in Tasmania, it is reasonable to assume that it
does happen on occasion. A legislative
provision that outlines the nature of the
matters to be addressed and also the need to consider supports and
accommodations that
may facilitate fitness to plead would formalise this process
and make the relevant factors more transparent. Accordingly, the Institute
recommends that a specific test be included in the
Criminal Justice (Mental
Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) to set out the circumstances in which a person is
unfit to enter a plea. This test should largely reflect the test for fitness
stand trial (and so, focus on the accused’s decision-making ability) but
it should also incorporate changes that reflect
the differences between a guilty
plea and a trial.
5.4.75 The Institute’s view is that the following factors are relevant
to a person’s fitness to enter a guilty plea:
• The accused’s understanding of the nature of the offence with
which he or she is charged.
• The accused’s understanding that he or she has a right to
contest that charge.
• The accused’s understanding of the nature of the hearing if he
or she entered a plea of not guilty as a process to determine
whether it has
been proved that the person committed the offence charged.
• The accused’s understanding of the consequences of entering a
plea of guilty, including what is being admitted when
a plea of guilty is
entered, the effect of a plea of guilty, that the court may impose punishment
and a general understanding of
the punishment that the person is in jeopardy of
• The accused’s understanding of the course of the sentencing
hearing and a general understanding of what is occurring
at each stage and the
right to challenge the facts stated by the prosecution.
These factors relate to the key decisions that an accused will need to make
in deciding whether to enter a guilty plea. In addition,
the accused must be
able to communicate to his or her legal practitioner his/her decision to plead
guilty and his/her version of
facts relevant to the sentencing hearing.
Recommendations
11. There should be a separate test in the
Criminal Justice (Mental
Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) to determine whether a person is fit to enter a
plea of guilty.
12. The test for fitness to enter a plea of guilty should reflect the
decision-making and communication approach contained in the
proposed test for
determining fitness to stand trial (see Recommendation 6) with necessary
alterations to reflect the difference
between entering a plea of guilty and
participating in a defended trial.
13. The following trial processes are relevant to a person’s
decision-making capacity to be fit to enter a guilty plea (see
Recommendation
• the nature of the offence with which he or she is charged.
• the right to contest that charge.
• the nature of the hearing if he or she entered a plea of not guilty
as a process to determine whether it has been proved that
the person committed
the offence charged.
• the consequences of entering a plea of guilty, including what is
being admitted when a plea of guilty is entered, the effect
of a plea of guilty,
that the court may impose punishment and a general understanding of the
punishment that the person is in jeopardy
of receiving.
• the accused’s understanding of the course of the sentencing
hearing and a general understanding of what is occurring
at each stage and the
right to challenge the facts stated by the prosecution.
to Stand Trial: Procedure to Determine Unfitness to Stand Trial
Introduction
6.1.1 This Part sets out the current Tasmanian procedure to determine
unfitness to stand trial, the position in other jurisdictions
and options that
are available to reform the current procedure. Concerns that arise in this area
• the role of experts and experts’ reports in the process of
determining unfitness to stand trial,
• the appropriate decision-maker (judge or jury) in making fitness
determinations in the Supreme Court, and
• the appropriateness of the current procedure for determining fitness
in the Magistrates Court.
6.1.2 In order to address these problems,
makes recommendations for
reform that relate to the need for best practice guidelines to be developed in
relation to the preparation
of expert reports to be used by the court to make a
determination of fitness to stand trial or to enter a guilty plea. Related to
Recommendation 10, the recommendations here highlight the need for experts to
provide information to the court in relation to supports
and accommodations that
may support the accused’s decision-making capacity and assist him/her to
participate in the criminal
justice process. Other significant recommendations
for reforms set out in
are that determinations of fitness to stand trial
in the Supreme Court should be determined by a judge rather than a jury
(Recommendation
16) and the introduction of a simplified alternative pathway for
appropriate cases in the Magistrates Court (Recommendations 17–18).
Tasmanian position
6.2.1 In Tasmania, subject to the potential referral of an accused to the
Diversion List,
procedure applies in relation to fitness to stand trial and insanity regardless
of whether the matter is an indictable offence
heard in the Supreme Court or a
summary offence dealt with in the Magistrates Court. The only difference is that
the magistrate makes
decisions in relation to fitness and the relevant findings
at a special hearing rather than a jury.
6.2.2 Figure 5.1 shows the stages of the unfitness to stand trial process
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
Figure 5.1: Unfitness to stand trial in the Supreme Court and Magistrates
6.2.3 The question whether a person is unfit to stand trial is a question of
It is determined in the
Supreme Court by a jury and by a magistrate in the Magistrates
However, there is no
need to conduct an investigation (by a jury or a magistrate) if the prosecutor
and defendant agree, in which
case the court may record a finding that the
defendant is unfit to stand
On an investigation, a
court must hear any relevant and probative evidence and representations put to
the court by the prosecutor
or the defendant, it may call evidence on its own
initiative and may require the defendant to undergo an examination by a
psychiatrist
or other appropriate expert and require the results to be reported
to the court.
6.2.4 If, on an investigation, a defendant is found unfit to stand trial, the
court must determine whether or not the defendant is
likely to become fit to
stand trial during the next 12
If a jury determines
that a defendant is unfit to stand trial, then it determines whether or not the
defendant is likely to become
fit to stand trial during the next 12
If the defendant and
the prosecution agree, and a finding that an individual is unfit is recorded
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
matter is dealt with in the Magistrates Court, then the judicial officer (judge
or magistrate) makes the determination about
the likelihood of a person becoming
fit to stand trial.
determined that the defendant is likely to become fit to stand trial during the
next 12 months, the court must adjourn the
proceedings for a period not
exceeding 12 months. If, after the adjournment, the court is of the opinion that
the grounds on which
the investigation was thought to be necessary no longer
exist, the court may decide not to proceed with the
investigation.
However, if
the defendant does not become fit to stand trial within 12 months, then the
court must proceed to hold a special
The position in
other jurisdictions
6.3.1 As with Tasmania, in higher courts in the Northern Territory and
Victoria, the jury determines whether or not an accused is
fit to stand
In the Northern
Territory and South Australia (as with Tasmania), there is power to dispense
with the investigation if the prosecution
and defence
In South Australia a
defendant can also elect to have the investigation into fitness to stand trial
determined by a judge instead
6.3.2 In contrast, in New South Wales, Western Australia, the Australian
Capital Territory and for federal offences, the judge makes
the determination of
whether an accused is fit to stand
This is also the
position in England and
6.3.3 In Queensland, there is a dual track system, with decisions being made
by the jury under the
Criminal Code
(Qld) s 613 or the Mental Health
Court under the
Mental Health Act 2016
The Magistrates
6.3.4 In relation to magistrates’ courts, there are different
approaches taken in relation to fitness to stand trial.
6.3.5 As with Tasmania, in the Australian Capital Territory, South Australia
and Western Australia, magistrates have the power to
determine the issue of
unfitness to stand trial.
the ACT, greater flexibility exists in relation to the powers that a magistrate
may exercise for summary offences where fitness
to stand trial is raised as a
genuine issue. Instead of carrying out an investigation into fitness to plead
and the special hearing
process (following a finding of unfitness), the
magistrate has a power to dismiss the charge, if:
(a) the court is satisfied that there is a real and substantial question
(b) the court considers that because of the trivial nature of the charge or
the nature of the defendant’s mental impairment,
it would be inappropriate
to inflict any punishment on the defendant in relation to the
6.3.6 In Victoria, the Magistrates’ Court does not have the power to
determine unfitness to stand trial. Similarly, in the Northern
Territory, the
Local Court does not have an express power to determine unfitness to stand
If the issue of
unfitness is raised in relation to a summary offence, the matter is
discontinued.
6.3.7 The VLRC has considered the process that should apply when questions of
unfitness to stand trial are raised in relation to summary
offences in the
Magistrates’ Court. It recommended that the Magistrates’ Court
should have the power to determine whether
a person is unfit to stand trial and
to conduct special hearings after a finding of
The VLRC also
recommended that there be flexibility for a magistrate to discharge an accused
with or without conditions for a summary
offence if there was a ‘real and
substantial question as to the unfitness of the accused’ where the
magistrate considers
that the accused does not pose an unacceptable risk of
causing physical or psychological harm to another person, or other people
generally, as a result of the discharge and the accused is receiving treatment,
support or services in the
This reflects the
it was important to retain flexibility by having the option of not proceeding
with charges in particular circumstances. This was seen
as important so that
accused were not picked up by the CMIA pathway and made subject to compulsory
treatment or services where it
was considered unnecessary or inappropriate
having regard to the risk posed to the community and the person’s need for
or services. This may be appropriate where the offending behaviour is
such that the risk posed to the community is low, where the
condition has stabilised and there are appropriate supports in place for the
person in the community, and there is
no need for supervision of the accused
under the CMIA.
6.3.8 In Queensland, until recent amendments introduced by the
Health Act 2016
(Qld), the Magistrates Court did not have power to determine
issues of unfitness to stand
magistrate has the power to dismiss a complaint for a simple offence if
‘reasonably satisfied, on the balance of probabilities,
that the person
charged with the offence was or appears to have been, of unsound mind when the
offence was allegedly committed; or
is unfit for
Magistrates can
also dismiss the charge and refer the defendant to an appropriate body for care
and/or treatment if certain conditions
They can also
dismiss the matter following the receipt of a Mental Health Assessment, which is
a report prepared by a Senior Mental
Health Clinician with the support of a
Consultant Psychiatrist and includes: (i) mental health assessment court liaison
service feedback;
or (ii) mental health and fitness for trial assessment court
liaison service feedback; or (iii) mental health, fitness and soundness
assessment court liaison service
6.3.9 In New South Wales, there is no legislative provision in relation to
fitness to stand trial in the Local Court and so the common
law applies.
However, the Local Court generally deals with accused people with a mental
impairment using its diversionary powers
Health (Forensic Provisions) Act 1990
As set out in
Table 5.1, this procedure differs from the ACT, Queensland and the proposed
Victorian approach as the magistrate’s
power to dismiss the charges
conditionally or unconditionally does not rely on a finding in relation to a
person’s unfitness
for trial or criminal responsibility. Instead, the
procedure relies on a magistrate’s assessment that the person has the
condition, and in relation to s 32, that on an outline of the facts
alleged in the proceedings, or such other evidence as the magistrate
consider, it is more appropriate to deal with the defendant in accordance with
the provisions in s
6.3.10 As shown in Table 5.1, the legislation in each jurisdiction sets out a
different threshold that allows the magistrate to exercise
a discretion to
dismiss the charge (and impose assessment and treatment conditions). These range
from the lowest standard that ‘it
appears to the magistrate’ (NSW),
to the requirement that ‘there is a real and substantial question’
the highest standard that the magistrate is satisfied on the balance
of probabilities (Queensland). The ‘real and substantial
test was also recommended in Victoria.
Table 5.1: Magistrates Court powers, ACT, New South Wales and
Legislation
Statutory criteria for exercise
Order available
New South Wales
Mental Health (Forensic Provisions) Act 1990
• It appears to the magistrate that the defendant was cognitively
impaired, suffering from mental illness or suffering from
a mental condition for
which treatment is available in a mental health facility (but is not mentally
• On an outline of the facts alleged in the proceedings or such other
evidence as the magistrate may consider, it is more appropriate
to deal with the
defendant in accordance with the
provisions.
• Adjourn the proceedings
• Remand the defendant on bail
• Dismiss the charge and discharge the defendant into the care of a
responsible person, either unconditionally or subject to
• Dismiss the charge and discharge the defendant
unconditionally
• In relation to defendants who are mentally ill, there is power for
the magistrate to grant bail.
Mental Health (Forensic Provisions) Act 1990
• If it appears that a defendant is mentally ill.
• Order that the person be detained in mental health facility for
• Discharge the defendant into the care of a responsible person,
either unconditionally or subject to conditions
• Order a community treatment order.
Australian Capital Territory
Crimes Act 1900
• Court is satisfied that there is real and substantial question
court considers
because of the trial, nature of the charge or the nature of the
defendant’s mental impairment, it would be
inappropriate to inflict any
punishment on the defendant in relation to the offence the court may decide not
to carry out or continue
an investigation into fitness to plead.
• Dismiss the charge.
Mental Health Act 2016
• Reasonably satisfied on the balance of probabilities that the
person charged with the offence was of unsound mind when the
offence was
committed or was unfit for trial.
• Dismiss the complaint
• Make an examination order.
consideration
Assessment reports
6.4.1 Reports provided by experts provide the evidentiary foundation for
findings of unfitness and so are fundamental to the determination
of fitness to
stand trial.
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas), in addition to
requiring the court to hear evidence and representations by defendants or
prosecutors as to fitness, there is
also provision for the court to call
evidence on its own initiative and order an assessment of a defendant by a
psychiatrist or other
appropriate
6.4.2 In its consideration of the procedure in relation to determining
unfitness to stand trial, the VLRC observed that ‘[p]otential
arise in relation to the qualifications of experts, the quality and utility of
expert reports and the number of experts
relied on in assessments of unfitness
to stand trial’.
result, the VLRC sought feedback in relation to these issues, as well as other
issues that may exist in relation to the process
for determining unfitness to
stand trial.
6.4.3 In response, it was noted that, despite the general recognition of
expertise and objectivity of experts on issues of unfitness
acknowledgment of the difficult task faced by experts, some problems did arise
in this area. These included:
• discrepancies in experts’ training and expertise;
• reports sometimes lacking a forensic direction or familiarity with
CMIA legal concepts;
• assessments conducted inappropriately (for example, questions not
communicated effectively to people with an intellectual
disability or in a
culturally appropriate manner);
• a small pool of experts, which could compromise
objectivity.
6.4.4 Suggestions made by the VLRC to improve expert assessment in relation
to unfitness to stand trial included:
• Unfitness assessments should be conducted by a multi-disciplinary
specialised team of psychologists, psychiatrists and speech
pathologists.
• There should be careful regulation of experts who assess unfitness in
terms of qualifications and expertise through registration
or accreditation of
their competency to conduct these assessments. ...
• There should be clearer guidance to experts about the test for
unfitness. This could be achieved through the development of
best practice
guidelines on what should be included in a report, or through training.
• A component of every assessment should be standardised. For example,
there should be standard information that should be included
as part of every
report. ...
• Assessments should be conducted using appropriate communication
techniques.
6.4.5 The VLRC concluded that it is necessary to make changes to
‘address unnecessary variability and to ensure the fairness
and accuracy
of expert assessments of unfitness to stand
However, it
considered that ‘experts themselves are the best people to determine the
changes’ that would be necessary
to address these
6.4.6 Anecdotally, the TLRI understands that there is a lack of
standardisation in assessments provided by experts in Tasmania, and
consequently
there is considerable diversity in the assessment reports. This is a concern
given the importance of the expert advice
in the court process. Accordingly, in
the Issues Paper, the TLRI sought feedback on whether there are any issues that
arise in relation
to the role of experts and expert reports in the process of
determining unfitness to stand trial. Further, the TLRI sought feedback
relation to how any difficulties might be resolved, for example whether there
should be a specified minimum number of expert reports
that should be required,
whether there is a need for greater control in relation to the expertise or
accreditation of the person
conducting the assessment and writing the report for
the court, and/or the information that should be contained in the report.
Are there any issues that arise in relation to the role of experts and expert
reports in the process of determining unfitness to stand
If so, how do you think these problems might be resolved?
6.4.7 Five submissions
addressed the questions in relation to the role of experts and expert reports
and some of the potential problems
that may arise. A common theme in several
submissions related to need to bridge the gap between the legal context in which
the information
would be used and the assessment made by medical experts.
Accordingly, solutions proposed tended to focus on the use of guidelines
other strategies to facilitate better communication and consistency in approach.
O’Connell’s submission focused on
the expense of seeking expert
evidence for a defendant who is not funded by Legal
The submission of EOT
expressed the view that there is a need for a multi-disciplinary approach in
making assessments of fitness
involving experts in speech pathology and
communications.
that ‘[r]reports should include an assessment of whether the provision of
supports would assist the defendant to
participate in the trial and the nature
of the supports that should be provided to enable this to be so’.
6.4.8 The DPP indicated that ‘[o]n occasion, issues arise in relation
to the role of experts and expert reports in the process
of determining
unfitness to stand trial. This is often due to an expert not being given
sufficient material to enable an assessment
of the Crown and defence
case’. In response, the DPP indicated that there is ‘merit in the
development of best practice
guidelines that include a list of materials that
must be provided to an expert who is preparing a report assessing a
fitness to stand trial’.
6.4.9 Walvisch saw problems arising ‘due to the lack of a neat fit
between legal and clinical concepts of “mental disorder”’.
response was to have ‘clear guidance ... provided to experts working in
the field about both the
of the test and its precise
. This could be done through the development of a handbook for use
by practitioners, as well as through the implementation of training
courses for
people working in the field’. Walvisch also observed that the development
of a Practice Note by the court with
the assistance of relevant experts may be
useful for this purpose. In this regard, he noted that the Practice Note dealing
with expert
reports on mental functioning of offenders for sentencing hearings
was a possible model that could be adapted for use in fitness
This was developed
by the Forensic Evidence Working Group for use in the Supreme and County Courts
in Victoria. Its purpose is to
enhance the quality and reliability of expert
evidence, as well as the utility of the evidence.
6.4.10 ForensiClinic also saw issues arising from a lack of knowledge and
standardisation in the approach taken by experts to make
an assessment in
relation to fitness:
When issues arise regarding the interpretation of the legal test by assessing
practitioners, these tend to come from a lack of education
stand trial, a lack of education about the legal process, and a lack of
standardisation of methods used to evaluate
fitness. Methodological diversity is
influenced by qualifications (e.g., psychiatry, forensic psychology,
neuropsychology) and the
defendant’s diagnosis. Methodological diversity
and a lack of understanding about fitness causes heterogeneous interpretation
the fitness criteria. A united understanding of precedent and expectation would
resolve this issue.
Accordingly, ForensiClinic’s approach to the improvement of the role of
experts and expert reports included:
• Providing ‘[e]ducational opportunities for collaboration
between legal and forensic mental health practitioners’
• Standardising assessment methodology
• Having feedback provided from the courts and legal practitioners to
medical experts about the strengths and weaknesses of
the report.
6.4.11 In light of the submissions received, the Institute’s view is
that there is scope to improve the use of experts to inform
the court about a
person’s fitness to stand trial. There is a need for clearer guidance to
experts about the test of fitness
through the development of best practice
guidelines. This could be developed through an expert working group (as occurred
in Victoria)
involving judges, forensic psychiatrist and psychologists and legal
practitioners. This expert group should also include appropriate
expertise in
language and communications. In developing the guidelines, the expert group
should consider how to address challenges
arising in the assessment of fitness
to stand trial by experts posed by cultural and ethnic factors, as well as other
communication
difficulties. This may include taking into account the efficacy of
psychometric instruments, where relevant, that were developed
through studies of
Western, English-speaking populations. In addition to developing guidelines,
this collaboration would allow for
educational opportunities for legal and
medical practitioners. Further, the scope of the best practice guidelines would
need to accommodate
proposed changes to the fitness test, particularly in
relation to supports and accommodations reports that may assist defendants
participate in the criminal justice process.
Recommendations
14. Best practice guidelines should be developed for the preparation of
expert reports to be used by the court to make a determination
of fitness to
stand trial or enter a guilty plea. These should be developed by an expert
working group, which should consider how
to address challenges arising in the
assessment of fitness to stand trial by experts posed by cultural and ethnic
factors, as well
as other communication difficulties. This may include taking
into account the efficacy of psychometric instruments, where relevant,
developed through studies of Western, English-speaking populations.
15. The scope of the best practice guidelines should accommodate the proposed
changes to the fitness test and should provide information
to the court in
relation to the supports and accommodations that may support the person’s
decision-making capacity and assist
an individual to participate in the criminal
justice process.
Determination of the issue of fitness by a
judge rather than jury in the Supreme Court
6.4.12 In Victoria, consideration has been given to removing the requirement
for investigations into fitness to be determined by a
jury. The Victorian Law
Reform Committee recommended a judge-alone procedure for investigations of
fitness to stand trial on the
grounds that:
• fitness investigations primarily involve technical matters and
therefore it is more suitable for a hearing to be conducted
• a fitness hearing is not designed to be adversarial and no decisions
are made about the person’s criminal responsibility;
• a judge hearing evidence alone may be quicker, less formal and less
confusing or stressful for the accused with an intellectual
disability or
cognitive impairment, particularly if experts from both sides agree that the
accused is clearly unfit to be
6.4.13 The VLRC, similarly, recommended that unfitness to stand trial should
be determined by a judge or a magistrate on the basis
that this was a pre-trial
issue that need not be determined by a
The VLRC observed the
narrowing of the role of the jury in relation to pre-trial matters more
It also noted that
changing the criteria for a determination of fitness to stand trial meant that a
judge (rather than a jury) was
more appropriately able to undertake the nuanced
nature of pre-trial
decision-making.
6.4.14 In Tasmania, as noted, there is provision for the investigation into
fitness to be determined by a trial judge where the defence
and prosecution
agree. However, consideration could be given to removing the jury’s role
in relation to the determination of
the issue of fitness to stand trial in all
cases. Accordingly, the Institute sought feedback on this issue in the Issues
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
amended to provide that unfitness to stand trial is to be determined by a judge
in the Supreme Court instead of a jury in
6.4.15 Five submissions addressed whether the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) should be amended to
provide that unfitness to stand trial should be determined by a judge in the
Supreme Court instead of
a jury in all cases. This option for reform was clearly
supported in four of the submissions on the basis that the decision to be
aligns more closely with the judicial role in a trial than with the jury, that
it involves a test that is more readily applied
by judicial officers given their
understanding of the trial process and would be likely to lead to a more timely
and less stressful
6.4.16 The DPP supported such an amendment on the basis that it was
consistent with the procedure in other jurisdictions, including
New South Wales,
Western Australia, the Australian Capital Territory and also with other
provisions in the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
The DPP also considered that it would streamline the process, create
efficiencies and reduce stress and confusion for the
accused. In addition, the
DPP argued that ‘determining the issue of fitness should not be
unnecessarily adversarial. The issues
that require determination are technical;
they are not determinations about a person’s criminal
responsibility’.
6.4.17 Walvisch also observed that the judge should always have the power to
determine the issue of unfitness to stand trial. In support
of this view, he
noted the views of the VLRC (as set out at [5.4.7] of the
Issues Paper
as well as the following:
• The decision that is being made in this context is a procedural one,
rather than a substantive one. Consequently, it fits
more neatly within the
general role of the judge to practically manage the course of the trial, than
with the role of the jury to
determine the facts surrounding the offence;
• The decision relates to the accused’s ability to meaningfully
participate in the trial process. The judge, with his
or her specialised
knowledge of trial procedure and processes, is far better placed to make a
determination in this regard;
• Contested matters will require the application of highly specialised
expert evidence to complex legal issues. Judges with
experience in these matters
are more likely to be able to adequately perform this task than lay jurors.
6.4.18 CLC Tas reported that ‘[a]necdotally, lawyers who appear as
counsel in these applications observe that the jury is reliant
on expert reports
provided by psychiatrists and other medical expertise’. On this basis, CLC
Tas considered that ‘it
should be sufficient for a judge alone, after
analysing expert medical opinion, to determine the question of fitness to stand
This would be likely to result in fewer delays and finalisation of
the issue in a timelier manner.
6.4.19 ForensiClinic supported reform to provide that fitness to stand trial
should be determined by a judge and not a jury. This
was supported on the basis
that it provides greater transparency of decision-making in the event of an
6.4.20 The Department of Police, Fire and Emergency Management
(‘DPFEM’) did not express clear agreement with the amendment
proposal but gave to support to the idea by expressing the view that
‘consideration could be given to removing the jury’s
determining the issue of fitness to stand trial in all cases’. This was
because of the complicated nature of the assessment
required (and the potential
for conflicting expert evidence) and that it is an extension of the provision in
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) that allows the
judge to determine fitness in cases where the defence and prosecution agree.
6.4.21 Based on the support for reform in the submissions received by the
Institute, the relevant literature and the approach taken
Criminal Justice
(Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) should be amended to provide that the
investigation into fitness to stand trial must be determined by a judge (rather
the jury). The Institute’s view is that the determination of fitness
to stand trial is a pre-trial matter that the judge is
best placed to assess.
The recommendation of the Institute in relation to reforms to the test for
determining fitness strengthen
arguments for this position because it is
appropriate that a judge makes the decisions (based on information provided to
by relevant experts) about the supports and accommodations that may
facilitate fitness for trial as part of the decision making process.
Recommendation
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) should be
amended to provide that the investigation into fitness to stand trial is to be
determined by a judge (rather than
Procedure in the Magistrates
6.4.22 In Tasmania, if an issue of fitness to stand trial arises, the
procedure for determining fitness and the conduct of special
hearings applies in
both the Supreme Court and in the Magistrates Court (as set out at [
]). This is a complex process (and a
potentially costly and time consuming one) and unlike the ACT and Queensland,
and as recommended
in Victoria, there is no provision in Tasmania for a
magistrate to dismiss the charge without conducting a special hearing. In New
South Wales, there is also power for a magistrate to dismiss the charge.
Accordingly, it may be argued that it is appropriate to
have a simpler and more
flexible approach available in the Magistrates Court. An option for reform would
be to amend the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
provide for greater flexibility to allow the magistrate to dispose of a matter
in a timelier manner in circumstances where
it appears that a defendant is unfit
for trial and this is appropriate in the context of the
This reform
would mean that the magistrate could make an assessment of whether it appears
that an accused is unfit to stand trial
(and/or has a defence of insanity) and
then discharge the person and divert them from the
Criminal Justice (Mental
Impairment) Act
pathway, if this is appropriate.
6.4.23 Possible models for reform are found in other jurisdictions. The power
to discharge could be made following a determination
that the court is satisfied
that it appears that the accused is cognitively impaired, suffering a mental
illness or suffering from
a mental condition for which treatment is available in
a mental health facility, or that the accused is mentally ill (the New South
Wales position) or that there is a real and substantial question about the
defendant’s fitness to stand trial (the ACT position
and that proposed in
Victoria) or following a finding that on the balance of probabilities the
accused is unfit to stand trial or
unsound (Queensland approach and current
Tasmanian test for unfitness to stand trial). In addition, in the ACT, the power
of discharge
can be exercised where the matter is trivial or, taking into
account the nature of the defendant’s mental impairment, it would
inappropriate to inflict any punishment on the defendant. In Victoria, it was
recommended that the magistrate’s power of
discharge would depend on an
assessment of the risk posed to the community and the treatment, support or
services received in the
community by the accused.
6.4.24 There is also scope to improve the effectiveness of the process, for
example, by adopting the Queensland approach of allowing
Court Liaison Officers
to provide advice to magistrates on a person’s state of mind at the time
of the offence or fitness for
Similarly, in
Victoria, the VLRC’s view was that the operation of the Mental Health
Liaison Service (with appropriate funding)
could be expanded to allow the
service to provide information to magistrates to ‘assist them in
determination whether there
is a real and substantial question as to the
unfitness of the
6.4.25 In the Issues Paper, feedback was sought
in the Magistrates Court.
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
amended to allow a magistrate to discharge an individual without making a
determination of their fitness to stand trial
or criminal responsibility?
What (if any) limitations should be set out in relation to the exercise of
the power of discharge?
6.4.26 Seven responses addressed these questions, and all agreed that
amendment to the current procedure that applies in the Magistrates
appropriate so that the magistrate has power to discharge an individual under
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas). However,
differences of opinion were expressed about the test that should be applied in
relation to the exercise of the power
of discharge.
6.4.27 CLC Tas expressed its strong belief that ‘there should be an
emphasis on diverting persons with cognitive and mental
health impairments away
from the criminal justice system and into treatment.’ For matters in the
Magistrates Court, CLC Tas
highlighted the financial constraints that may pose a
barrier to justice for some individuals. The cost of obtaining a report from
psychiatrist or other appropriate expert (in the absence of legal aid funding)
may result in some people not being able to prove
their incapacity to stand
trial. This was also noted by Marita O’Connell who wrote that
‘[s]eeking expert evidence is
also a very expensive endeavour and places
the onus on the defendant to provide such evidence. If the defendant does not
have a grant
of Legal Aid, this can be a complex and expensive route to
take’. O’Connell also supported the introduction of diversionary
provisions. The cost and complexity of the legal process in raising fitness to
stand trial and/or insanity and the value of diversion
was also a focus in the
submission from TasCOSS.
6.4.28 CLC Tas also pointed to the lack of ‘provision in the
Magistrates Court for a magistrate to dismiss a charge without
conducting a
special hearing, a process that is both complex and time-consuming’. To
address this, CLC Tas supported a simpler
and more flexible approach (as found
in other jurisdictions) but did not have a view of which threshold test was the
most appropriate.
It did, however, strongly believe that magistrates must be
provided with the discretion, available in all three jurisdictions mentioned
above, to dismiss the offence and/or divert the person to treatment, a reform
that would reduce the court backlog, improve access
to services and support
recovery. O’Connell, in her submission, also highlighted the value of
providing diversionary provisions
for defendants with mental illness or mental
impairment appearing in the magistrates court from the point of view of the
and the court system. In O’Connell’s view, a diversionary
process would ‘provide a mechanism for more timely
treatment/support’
as well as cutting ‘down on lengthy and expensive
hearing times and the need for expensive expert evidence for summary
6.4.29 In terms of approach, O’Connell pointed to the recent measures
introduced in Queensland:
that allow magistrates to make pre-plea determinations once satisfied that a
defendant is complying with appropriate treatment and
support to reduce the risk
of reoffending. This involves a boosting of the Court Liaison staff (Forensic
Mental Health Services,
FMHS) whose assessments inform the magistrates. These
assessments are all overseen by a FMHS psychiatrist.
6.4.30 The DPP indicated that ‘in some circumstances it may be
appropriate to allow a magistrate to discharge an individual
without making a
determination of their fitness to stand trial or their criminal
responsibility’ and that ‘an amendment
to facilitate this would be
consistent with some other jurisdictions’. However, the DPP stated that
the power to discharge
would need to be limited:
[f]or example, a magistrate should be required to be satisfied, on the
balance of probabilities, that a person was unfit to stand
trial. Further,
consideration would need to be given to the strength of the case, the
seriousness of the alleged offence, the need
to protect the community and any
treatment that may be available to the accused.
6.4.31 Walvisch also considered that reform is appropriate. However, he
considered that the test should be whether there is a ‘real
substantial question’ about the accused’s fitness to plead or stand
trial’. This is the same trigger that was
suggested by the
However, in terms of
the nature of the test to be applied in determining whether discharge is
appropriate, Walvisch suggested a more
flexible test than that proposed in
Victoria. As indicated, the test proposed by the VLRC involves consideration of
whether the accused
poses an unacceptable risk of causing physical or
psychological harm to another person or other people generally as a result of
discharge and whether the accused is receiving treatment, support or
services in the community.
contrast, Walvisch’s view was that:
The test should provide magistrates with the power to discharge if
appropriate in light of (i) the nature of the offence; (ii) the
nature of the
impairment; (iii) the risk to the community; and (iv) the treatment, support or
services available to the accused.
6.4.32 EOT also considered that the threshold for the test should be whether
the magistrate is satisfied that there is a real and
substantial question about
the defendant’s fitness to stand trial. This threshold was suggested
because it provides sufficient
protection for the defendant:
We are concerned to ensure, however, that any presumption made about an
accused’s fitness to trial is done on the basis of transparent
and isn’t used as a mechanism to undermine the rights of the charged
person. Of particular concern, given the capacity
to restrict the rights of the
accused, would be any authority provided to a Magistrate to place the accused on
any restriction or
supervision orders in the absence of a proper testing of the
issues surrounding the case.
6.4.33 The DPFEM also supported a change to the process that operates in the
Magistrates Court. In its submission, it indicated that:
the merit of the proposed amendment is that it would provide for greater
flexibility to allow the magistrate to dispose of a matter
in a timelier manner
in circumstances where it appears that a defendant is unfit for trial and this
is appropriate in the context
of the particular case or exercised where the
matter is trivial.
The DPFEM considered that this power should only be exercised where the
prosecution and defence agree that the individual has a mental
or cognitive
impairment that meets the required threshold. Otherwise, the concern was
expressed that ‘some magistrates could
dismiss matters at a very low
threshold for this test’ and that without consensus, there would be scope
for a greater number
of appeals.
6.4.34 In its Issues Paper, the Institute did not directly seek feedback on
how to implement any recommendation for a power to discharge.
However, a view
expressed in three of the submissions was that the Tasmanian Magistrates Court
Diversion List may provide the appropriate
framework to exercise the power to
For example, the
DPP wrote that:
The Tasmanian Magistrates Court Diversion List (the list) may provide an
appropriate framework to facilitate magistrates to discharge
accused persons in
the above circumstances. The list has a therapeutic jurisprudence approach;
court liaison officers (employed by
the Department of Health and Human Services)
act as a conduit between defendants and health care providers to assist in the
of better and more timely treatment. Offences that are deferred to the
list may, in the main, be suitable for the disposition of
matters in this way.
For example, in 2009 the most common charges dealt with in the list were
offences against justice procedures,
government and government operations and
theft-related offences (Mental Health Diversion List Evaluation, Final Report,
Participation in this list is voluntary and thus would not adversely
affect the rights of an accused.
The list aims to address the mental health issues of participants and to
reduce offending behaviour. In this sense, it is to the benefit
community, accused persons, victims and witnesses.
The Institute can certainly see the logical connections that exist between
the operation of the Diversion List and a flexible procedure
for magistrates to
discharge a person where there is a real and substantial question about their
fitness to stand trial. However,
as with the approach adopted in Victoria, the
Institute’s view is that ‘it is best to leave it to the courts to
how to operationalise the [Institute’s]
recommendations’.
6.4.35 Based on the support for reform in the submissions received by the
Institute and the approach taken in other jurisdictions,
the Institute’s
view is that the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
should be amended to allow a magistrate to discharge an individual without
making a determination of their fitness to stand
trial or criminal
responsibility. It is the Institute’s view that the power to discharge
should operate as follows:
(1) It should apply to summary offences and indictable offences dealt with
summarily. This will provide consistency of approach for
all matters involving
adult offenders dealt with in the jurisdiction of the Magistrates Court.
However, the discharge power should
not apply to matters that are referred to
the Magistrates Court for trial from the Supreme Court by virtue of the
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 308, as it is the Institute’s view that
matters of fitness are more appropriately resolved in the Supreme Court prior
the judge taking a view that the matter should be tried summarily.
(2) The threshold test for the operation of the discretion to discharge
should be that there is a real and substantial question in
relation to the
defendant’s fitness to stand trial and not the lesser standard of
‘it appears’ (as exists in New
South Wales) or the higher standard
of balance of probabilities (as exists in Queensland). In the view of the
Institute, the ‘real
and substantial’ test should be adopted because
it is the same test as contained in the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment)
that limits the power of a court to conduct an
investigation into a defendant’s fitness to stand trial. It is not
appropriate
that the test be on the balance of probabilities as this is the same
test that applies for actual determination of fitness and so
this approach is
unlikely to provide for a more efficient or streamlined process in appropriate
(3) Expert advice in relation to the issue of fitness for the purpose of
exercising the discretion should be able to be provided to
the magistrate by the
Court Liaison Officers. This will require that appropriate resources are made
available to the Court Liaison
(4) While it is acknowledged that it is likely that there will generally be
agreement between the defence and prosecution that a discharge
is an appropriate
course for the magistrate to take, the power should operate as a genuine
discretion vested in the magistrate and
should not require the consent of the
prosecution and defence.
(5) There should be legislative guidance on factors that are relevant to the
exercise of the discretion to discharge. Such an approach
may be appropriate,
for example, when the risk posed to the community is low, where the
defendant’s condition has stabilised
or the defendant has accessed
appropriate services or treatment in the community and a more interventionist
response from the court
Accordingly,
legislative guidance should include a non-exhaustive list of matters that are
relevant to the decision to dismiss the
charge, including the following matters:
(1) the nature of the offence, (2) the nature of the impairment, (3) the risk to
the community,
(4) the treatment, support or services available to the
Institute’s view is that such an approach protects the rights of the
individual as well as the safety of the community
consistent with the least
restrictive alternative.
(6) Although the power to discharge a person conditionally exists in some
in Victoria) or to
require a person to undergo examination (for example, in Queensland), the
Institute’s view is that it is
not appropriate to allow the court to
impose conditions on the discharge of the defendant under the flexible pathway
proposed for
the Magistrates Court. The person has not had their fitness
determined by an investigation and the prosecution case has not been
having their responsibility determined by a special hearing. However, the
treatment needs and the willingness and ability
of the person to access
treatment and/or other services appropriate to their needs are factors that are
relevant to the power to
Recommendations
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) should
be amended to allow a magistrate to discharge people without making
determinations of their fitness to stand trial or
their criminal responsibility.
18. The power to discharge should operate as follows:
(a) It should apply to summary offences and indictable offences dealt with
summarily. The discharge power should not apply to matters
that are referred to
the Magistrates Court for trial from the Supreme Court by virtue of the
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 308.
(b) The threshold test for the operation of the discretion to discharge
should be that there is a real and substantial question about
defendant’s fitness to stand trial.
(c) Advice in relation to the issue of fitness for the purpose of
exercising the discretion should be provided to the magistrate by
Liaison Officers. Appropriate resources should be made available to the Court
Liaison Service for this
(d) The power should operate as a genuine discretion vested in the
magistrate and should not require the consent of the prosecution
and defence.
(e) Legislative guidance as to the factors that are relevant to the
exercise of the discretion to discharge the charges should be
provided and
include: (1) the nature of the offence, (2) the nature of the impairment, (3)
the risk to the community, (4) the treatment,
support or services available to
the accused.
(f) The power to discharge should only provide for an unconditional
discharge and not a conditional discharge or the power to order
therapeutic intervention by the magistrate.
to Stand Trial: Procedure Following a Determination of Unfitness to Stand
Introduction
7.1.1 This Part sets out the procedure following a determination of unfitness
to stand trial in Tasmania and in other comparable jurisdictions.
examines options for reform of this procedure. Aligned with the approach of the
Institute to facilitate supported decision-making
(as set out in Part 4), the
Institute makes recommendations to use intermediaries and communication
assistants in special hearings.
Recommendations are also made to allow for a
special hearing to be heard by a judge alone where the prosecution and the
defence agree
in relation to the defence of insanity (or, as recommended in the
Report, the defence of mental or cognitive impairment).
The Tasmanian
7.2.1 As shown in Figure 5.1, following a finding that a defendant is unfit
to stand trial, the court makes a determination of whether
or not the he or she
is likely to become fit to stand trial during the next 12
If the court
determines that the person is likely to become fit to stand trial during the
next 12 months, the court adjourns the
proceedings. However, if the court
determines that the defendant is unlikely to become fit to stand trial within 12
months or the
defendant does not become fit to stand trial within 12 months,
then the court holds a special
7.2.2 As noted at [
], prior to
the introduction of the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas), if a person was found to be unfit to stand trial, then they would be
detained under a restriction order, notwithstanding that
the prosecution case
had not been
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas), a process
is set out for a special hearing to determine ‘whether, despite the
unfitness of the defendant to stand trial,
on the limited evidence available the
defendant is not guilty of an
In the Supreme
Court this question is determined by
Magistrates Court it is determined by the magistrate.
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) provides
that the special hearing ‘is to be conducted so that the onus of proof and
standard of proof are the same as
in a trial of criminal proceedings and in
other respects as nearly as possible as if it were a trial of criminal
proceedings’.
special hearing:
(a) the defendant is taken to have pleaded not guilty to the offence; and
(b) the defendant’s legal representatives may exercise the
defendant’s rights to challenge jurors or the jury; and
(c) the defendant may raise any defence that could properly be raised if the
special hearing were an ordinary trial of criminal proceedings;
(d) the defendant is entitled to give
explained that the hearing ‘is an opportunity for the State and the
accused to call evidence, in the usual way,
relevant to the question whether the
accused is guilty of the offence or offences
accused is unable to give instructions to his or her legal representative, the
legal representative may act, in the exercise
of an independent discretion, in
what he or she genuinely believes to be the defendant’s best
In addition, the
court has a discretion to permit an accused to be absent from a special
7.2.4 Although the original intention was for ‘the special hearing ...
to determine the external facts of the case — excluding
the question of
intent — to ascertain whether the basic prosecution case can be proved
beyond reasonable
it appears that
an accused’s intention is relevant to the jury’s assessment in
special hearings. In
the defendant faced a
special hearing in relation to one count of committing an unlawful act intended
to cause bodily harm and, in
the alternative, causing grievous bodily harm. The
defendant was found not guilty of the first count, but the jury was not able to
find that he was not guilty of the alternative crime of causing grievous bodily
harm. In making orders under the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act
(Tas), Wood J stated that:
Clearly, the jury was not satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the
defendant had held the necessary intention required for the charge
of committing
an unlawful act intended to cause bodily harm. The jury was not satisfied beyond
reasonable doubt that ... W had intended
to cause Mr S grievous bodily harm. The
jury must have been satisfied that he realised that striking Mr S and causing
him grievous
bodily harm was a likely consequence of driving at him, and that he
went ahead disregarding that
Accordingly, in order for a jury to be unable to find that an accused is not
guilty, the prosecution must prove the external facts
and mental element for the
offence, as well as disprove any relevant defence (such as self-defence) beyond
reasonable doubt. If the
defence of insanity is raised, this must be proved by
the accused on the balance of
probabilities.
7.2.5 At a special hearing, there are three findings available to the
The court may:
(a) find the defendant not guilty of the offence. This has the same effect as
a finding of not guilty following a trial of criminal
proceedings;
(b) find the defendant not guilty on the ground of insanity; or
(c) indicate that a finding cannot be made that the defendant is not guilty
of the offence charged. This finding is made if the jury
‘concluded beyond
reasonable doubt, on the evidence before it, that the accused appeared to be
7.2.6 It is not possible for the prosecution and
defence to dispense with the need for a special hearing by agreeing that the
should be found not guilty on the grounds of insanity. Similarly, it is
not possible for the defendant who is found unfit to stand
trial to enter a plea
However, it is
noted that the Institute has made recommendations that would create a new test
to determine fitness to stand trial
(see Recommendations 4–9) and has also
recommended that the prosecution and defence be able to agree to a finding of
on the basis of mental or cognitive impairment with judicial
oversight (see Recommendation 21).
7.3.1 In Australia, while there is broad similarity in the criteria used to
assess fitness to stand trial, different procedures are
followed if an accused
is found to be unfit to stand trial.
7.3.2 In Western Australia and Queensland (as set out in Appendix 5), there
is no provision for a special hearing to be
This means that the
prosecution case is not tested and a determination is not made as to whether the
accused is entitled to an
In contrast, in
other jurisdictions, there are provisions for special hearings following a
finding that the accused is unfit to stand
trial. However, there are differences
in regard to the conduct of the hearing. For example, in several jurisdictions
the prosecution
is only required to prove the physical elements of the offence
(South Australia, ACT, England and Wales, New
while in others the
standard of proof differs from a regular trial (Commonwealth and New
consideration
7.4.1 There are issues that arise in relation to the procedure following a
determination of unfitness to stand trial. They are:
• whether the special hearing process complies with the human rights
obligations under the
• whether there should be provision for a judge-alone process for
special hearings.
obligations
7.4.2 Special hearing provisions in Australia (and
comparable jurisdictions) have been criticised by those concerned with the human
rights obligations arising under the
. These criticisms have focused
on the removal of the accused from the mainstream criminal justice system and
the extent to which
the modified process of the special hearing differs from a
criminal trial.
Gooding et al
have suggested that, in order to meet
obligations, the minimum
requirements that should apply to any alternative procedure are:
• The same standard of proof and probative value of prosecution
evidence as in typical trial;
• The same presumption of innocence, with the associated requirement
for proof of all elements;
• The availability to the accused of all defences; and
• That proceedings against the accused must be based on his or her
‘rights, wishes and preferences’ (and not his
or her ‘best
interests’).
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
appear to comply substantially with the minimum requirements under the
as identified by Gooding et al. The provisions require that the same
standard of proof apply and that the special hearing is to be
‘as nearly as possible’ to normal criminal trials. The prosecution
must prove the external and fault elements
of the offence beyond reasonable
doubt and the defendant can rely on any defences that would have been available
in a mainstream
criminal trial.
7.4.4 Nevertheless, specific criticism has been directed at the Tasmanian
provision on the ground that it allows the jury to determine
finding cannot be made that the defendant is not guilty of the offence charged
or any offence available as an
alternative’.
et al, write that:
A literal reading of this provision suggests that in order for the accused to
secure an unconditional acquittal, the special hearing
jury must make a positive
finding that the accused is not guilty. The Tasmanian Supreme Court has
suggested that a qualified finding
is accordingly available “if the jury
concluded beyond reasonable doubt, on the evidence before it, that the accused
to be guilty”. It is not clear what it means for an accused to
‘appear to be guilty’, but this ruling raises concern
integrity of the presumption of innocence.
7.4.5 However, a contrary view is that Gooding et al’s interpretation
of the legislation does not accord with the interpretation
of the provision or
the approach adopted by the court at a special hearing. In the Tasmanian
context, it is clear that the special
hearing does not result in a reversal of
the onus of proof as the jury is directed that an accused is deemed to be
innocent unless
and until the jury is satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the
accused committed the particular offence and the Crown has the burden
7.4.6 Further, as the Law Commission of England
and Wales has argued, the purpose of the special hearing is to provide an
with an equal opportunity for an
This means that at
a special hearing the jury makes a determination (as with the usual criminal
trial process) as to whether the
prosecution has established the case beyond
reasonable doubt. If the prosecution has not established its case, then the
a special hearing (like an accused in the mainstream criminal
process) is entitled to an acquittal. In a mainstream trial, if the
satisfied that the prosecution has established its case beyond reasonable doubt,
then it will find the accused guilty. However,
at a special hearing, given the
limitations of the accused’s capacity to participate in a trial, it is not
considered appropriate
to find the accused guilty of the offence (and hence the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
that a finding cannot be made that the defendant is not guilty of the offence
charged or any offence available as an alternative).
7.4.7 Further concerns have been raised that the special hearing process
removes the benefits of entering an early guilty plea in
sentence mitigation as
it assumes that the person has pleaded not
However, it should be
remembered that a person dealt with under the
Criminal Justice (Mental
Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) is not ‘sentenced’ and the usual
sentencing principles (including a discount for a guilty plea) do not apply to
the determination of the appropriate court order. Instead, the court applies the
principles under the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
that focus on the nature of the defendant’s mental impairment and the
likely danger that he or she poses to other people,
and the need to ensure that
restrictions on the defendant’s freedom and personal autonomy are kept to
a minimum consistent
with the safety of the
comparison of the potential sentences (taking into account a plea of guilty and
the person’s mental or cognitive
impairment as mitigating factors) and a
finding of unfitness and the dispositions that may follow a special hearing may
inappropriately
influence an accused’s decision to proceed with a guilty
7.4.8 An additional criticism that could be made is in relation to the
requirement for the accused’s legal representative to
exercise his or her
independent decision-making discretion in the best interests of the accused.
This is in conflict with the
requirement that proceedings against an
accused should be based on his or her ‘rights, wishes and
preferences’ rather
than their best interests. It is also inconsistent
with the National Decision-Making
Principles.
7.4.9 Accordingly, in the Issues Paper, the Institute sought feedback on the
nature of the special hearing to explore concerns about
the differences between
a special hearing and an ordinary trial, concerns about the presumption of
innocence and the role of legal
practitioners in special hearings. The Issues
Paper asked the following questions:
Do you consider that the conduct of a special hearing differs from an
ordinary trial in terms of the evidence adduced or the conduct
of the hearing?
If so, in what ways?
Do you consider that the conduct of the special hearing is consistent with
the presumption of innocence?
Do issues arise in relation to the conduct of legal practitioners in acting
in the ‘best interests’ of a person rather
than based that
person’s ‘rights, wishes and preferences’?
7.4.10 Four
submissions to the Institute addressed these questions.
7.4.11 The DPP and O’Connell identified the streamlining of the
evidence as a key difference between a special hearing and an
ordinary trial.
The DPP observed that in special hearings ‘it is common for the parties to
more readily agree matters that
are not in dispute’ but considered that
that the ‘conduct of the special hearing is consistent with the
presumption of
innocence’. The DPP noted that the onus and standard of
proof were the same for a special hearing as in a criminal trial. Accordingly,
the ‘jury still has to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt of an
accused’s guilt for the offence charged; if they are
not so satisfied an
outright acquittal is returned’. This point was also made by
In contrast,
O’Connell submitted that:
there are a number of cases where the elements of the special hearing are
generally agreed and so the special hearing differs from
an ordinary hearing in
that all facts and evidence are agreed to by both parties. This can make the
process something of a ‘rubber
stamp’ exercise.
7.4.12 EOT highlighted the human rights implications of the special hearing
process noting in particular the inconsistency between
principles and the procedures in several jurisdictions. EOT stressed that
‘of particular concern are limitations placed on the
participate in a meaningful way in proceedings which risks diminishing the
ability of the court to test the case against
the accused’ and ‘that
the holding of special hearings may compromise the common law principle that a
trial not be held
when the defendant’s abilities are so limited that the
trial would be unfair or unjust’. EOT cited the concerns about
the special
process hearing expressed by Arstein et al:
Even though many jurisdictions explicitly strive to emulate the trial process
as closely as possible, a special hearing is fundamentally
not a trial. The
procedures are different. The available verdicts are different. Ultimate
dispositions – potentially including
indefinite detention – are
radically different. Therefore, a special hearing may not adequately uphold the
CRPD obligations
for persons with disabilities to have an equal right to a fair
However, in circumstances where an accused cannot participate in a trial
under the ordinary criminal procedures, EOT recommended adoption
following criteria (as identified by Gooding et al) as the standards to be met
to ensure minimum compliance with the
• The same standard of proof and probative value of prosecution
• The same presumption of innocence and the need for the prosecution to
prove all elements of offences
• The availability of all defences
• Proceedings based on ‘rights, wishes and preference’ and
not ‘best interests’.
7.4.13 As noted, in the Tasmanian context, most of these criteria currently
apply. There is the same standard and onus of proof for
a special hearing as
applies in ordinary criminal procedures, there is the same presumption of
innocence and the same availability
of all defences to an accused. Further, as
noted in the submissions received by the Institute and in the Issues Paper,
concerns about the role of the legal practitioners, particularly where
accused are unable to give instructions. According to O’Connell,
‘the presumption of innocence is compromised for matters that proceed to
special hearing. In the absence of sound instructions,
it is difficult to refute
the charges.’ Similarly, O’Connell noted that:
issues do arise in relation to the conduct of legal practitioners in acting
in the ‘best interests’ of a person rather
than based on that
person’s ‘rights, wishes and preferences’, particularly when a
defendant may be opposed to any
kind of mandated treatment or oversight, which
is the likely outcome of any special hearing procedures.
7.4.14 Walvisch also commented on the inconsistency of the current
legislative approach with the
National Decision-Making Principles. In his view
reform should be enacted:
to provide that legal practitioners should act in accordance with the
accused’s rights, wishes and preferences where these can
be ascertained.
However, it may be necessary to have a fall-back position (such as a ‘best
interests’ test) for use in
cases where no rights, wishes or preferences
can be determined.
7.4.15 The DPP also noted the ethical difficulties created for a legal
practitioner in determining what is in the ‘best interests’
accused person. The DPP stated that this:
requires the legal practitioner to consider the person’s rights, wishes
and preferences. However, as the procedure follows a
finding that the person is
unfit to stand trial, the very purpose of the procedure is that the person may
not be capable of acting
in their own best interests and exercising their
rights. This requires the legal practitioner acting on behalf of such a person
determine what is in the best interests of their client. This in and of
itself may create ethical issues.
Likewise, the NSWLRC has noted the ‘legal and ethical “grey
area”’ faced by legal practitioners when clients
are unable to give
proper instructions
that problems arise when an unfit defendant is ‘unable accurately and
coherently to give evidence’ and in determining
the scope of a legal
practitioner’s discretion in cases where a person is unable to give
instructions’.
7.4.16 Based on its detailed consideration in the Issues Paper and the
submissions received, the Institute’s view is that compliance
requires that the special hearing should reflect the conduct of an
ordinary trial as far as is possible. Further, following a finding
of unfitness,
it is absolutely necessary to have some mechanism to provide an individual with
an opportunity for an acquittal. Given
the finding of unfitness this cannot be
an ordinary trial. It is the Institute’s assessment that the special
hearing provisions
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) allow for this to happen in a way that is compliant with the
with one exception — the role of the legal practitioner in
circumstances where the accused is unable to give instructions.
7.4.17 As noted at [
the criteria for a finding of unfitness relates to the ability to give
instructions to a legal practitioner. This has clear
implications for cases
where a special hearing is held, and an individual is not able to communicate
his or her instructions effectively
to his or her legal representative. The
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
for a legal representative to exercise an independent discretion in such cases
and to act in what he or she genuinely believes
to be the defendant’s best
interests on any question relating to an investigation or special hearing. A key
component of the
Institute’s approach to this reference is to maximise the
participation of defendants with mental health or cognitive impairments.
is scope for the use of intermediaries and other supports to assist defendants
in providing instructions to legal practitioners.
Where an individual’s
rights, wishes and preferences can be ascertained, then a legal practitioner
should act in accordance
with them. In this regard, the Institute notes the
potential role of intermediaries and communication assistants and the vital role
that education and training of legal professionals will play as outlined in the
Institute’s
Facilitating Equal Access to Justice: An
Intermediary/Communication Assistant Scheme for Tasmania?
Report. However, there may be cases where these mechanisms are not available
or are ineffective. This will necessarily raise questions
practitioners are to proceed in the absence of instructions.
7.4.18 The Institute’s view is that this issue requires further
attention given that the intermediary/communication assistant
scheme has not yet
been implemented and the approach taken to the use of intermediaries and
communication assistants in special hearings
should reflect the approach of that
scheme. This will require legislative amendment to the
Criminal Justice
(Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) to make provision in this regard.
Further, there should be legislative recognition that in the conduct of an
investigation and
a special hearing the defendant’s rights, wishes and
preferences should be given effect where he or she is capable of giving
instructions. Nevertheless, a decision needs to be made about the obligations of
legal practitioners in circumstances where defendants’
rights, wishes and
preferences cannot be ascertained even with assistance. The Institute’s
view is that, in these circumstances,
legal practitioners must act to promote
and uphold defendants’ personal and social wellbeing and in a way that is
least restrictive
of their human
Recommendations
19. The approach taken to the use of intermediaries and communication
assistants in special hearings should reflect the approach recommended
Institute’s Final Report on the establishment of an
Intermediary/Communication Assistant scheme in Tasmania. This will
legislative amendment of the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act
20. There should be legislative recognition that, in the conduct of an
investigation into fitness to enter a guilty plea/to stand
trial and in special
hearings, a person’s rights, wishes and preferences should be given effect
where a person is capable of
giving instructions. However, in circumstances
where defendants are not capable of giving instructions even with support, legal
practitioners
must act to promote and uphold the person’s personal and
social wellbeing in a way least restrictive of their human rights.
Judge only proceedings
7.4.19 Law reform enquiries in England and Wales and Victoria have considered
whether or not there should be a judge-only alternative
procedure — either
in all cases (England and Wales) or in cases where the prosecution and defence
agree that the evidence establishes
the defence of mental impairment/insanity
(Victoria). It is also noted that in South Australia, the defendant may elect to
matter dealt with by a judge sitting alone rather than having the
investigation conducted by a
Recent reforms in the
Northern Territory allow for the special hearing to be dispensed with if the
parties to the prosecution of
the offence agree that the evidence establishes
the defence of mental
impairment.
7.4.20 In Victoria, there is provision for a ‘consent mental
impairment’ hearing if the prosecution and defence agree
that the evidence
establishes the defence of mental
impairment.
However, this
option is not available for a person who has been found unfit to stand trial and
the determination of mental impairment
needs to be made by a
Accordingly, the VLRC
gave consideration to whether a judge-alone procedure should be available in
place of a special hearing where
the prosecution and defence agree that the
evidence establishes the defence of mental impairment.
7.4.21 In submissions to the VLRC, the following reasons were advanced in
support of such a consent process:
• There is little utility or benefit in court and jury resources being
allocated to a special hearing in these circumstances.
A judge-alone procedure
would avoid the delay, inconvenience and expense of a special hearing.
• The court is able to determine the accused’s criminal
responsibility in a robust manner.
• A judge-alone process would avoid putting the parties through the
stress of a special hearing.
The Law Commission of England and Wales also outlined the following matters
in support of a judge-only process:
• [It would] be less formal, less time-consuming and may lead to fewer
delays in concluding the proceedings.
• A judge may be better positioned than a jury to analyse the expert
evidence adduced.
• Empirical research suggests that in the majority of cases the
[special] hearing is not
• Judges have to give reasons for their decisions which in this context
would be valuable.
• The objection based upon the apparent loss of a trial by jury is
properly met by the fact that this is not a decision which
attributes criminal
7.4.22 Opponents of a judge-alone process observed that a person who is unfit
to stand trial will not be able to instruct their lawyer
to agree to the
This concern was
also shared by the VLRC.
addition, the VLRC expressed the view that the jury (as community
representative) should be involved in determining the issues
at a special
hearing in the interests of the community and the victims and as a means to
protect the rights of the
It observed
the determination of criminal responsibility by a jury provides a greater
level of acknowledgement to victims and their families of
the harm they have
experienced. The importance of acknowledgment of victims and their family
members is not diminished in cases where
an accused has been found under law not
to be criminally responsible due to a finding of not guilty because of mental
impairment.
The Commission recognises the importance of victims and their
families witnessing the process of the hearing, and listening to the
psychiatric
or psychological evidence and the reasons for dealing with accused within the
forensic mental health or disability system
rather than the prison system. In
the Commission’s view, this will promote the acceptance and understanding
of the finding
of not guilty because of mental impairment and its underlying
causes, such as a mental illness, intellectual disability or other
impairment.
Opposition to a judge-alone process reported by the Law Commission of England
and Wales also focused on the erosion of the jury trial
and the role of the jury
as the fact-finder as a vital component of the criminal justice system. It was
thought that to remove the
jury may reduce public willingness to accept the
findings following special hearings and may undermine the legitimacy of the
justice system.
addition, a judge-alone process would be in conflict with the requirements for
equality under the
given that this process would differ from
fact-finding in the usual trial
7.4.23 Responses received by the VLRC and the Law Commission of England and
Wales were divided on this issue. Similarly, the approaches
taken by the law
reform bodies were different. Ultimately, the VLRC recommended against allowing
a judge-alone process and the Law
Commission of England and Wales considered
that a judge-alone process should be available at the election of the
7.4.24 The Issues Paper sought feedback on whether there should be a
judge-alone process for special hearings:
Should any changes be made to the procedure for a special hearing?
Should there be a judge-alone process available instead of a special hearing?
If so, should this be available in circumstances where
the prosecution and
defence agree that the evidence establishes the defence of insanity at a special
hearing? Or should there be
a judge-alone process available instead of a special
hearing in all cases?
7.4.25 Three submissions to the Institute addressed these questions, and, as
with other inquiries into the issue, differing views
were expressed. Walvisch,
for the reasons outlined at [6.4.22], did not support the introduction of a
judge-alone process for a special
hearing. In contrast, the DPP’s view was
that the ‘need for a special hearing should be able to be dispensed with
circumstances where two or more experts agree that the accused should be
found not guilty on the grounds of insanity and the prosecution
and defence
agree’. The DPP noted that ‘[i]t is not uncommon for experts to
agree on their findings. In such circumstances,
it is difficult to see how a
properly instructed jury could reach a verdict that was inconsistent with expert
evidence given at trial’.
The DPP also noted that there may be scope to
limit the use of special hearings in some other circumstances:
There is a distinction between the physical elements and the mental elements
of an offence. It is possible that two or more experts
will agree that an
accused person should be found not guilty on the grounds of insanity and for
prosecution and defence to agree
on that issue. However, prosecution and defence
may disagree as to the physical elements of the crime. In such circumstances, a
hearing to consider simply the physical elements of the offence, to be
determined by a jury, may be beneficial. I would support consideration
given to legislative reform that would divide the trial into objective physical
elements and the mental elements, as is the
approach in South Australia.
O’Connell stated that ‘in the most serious of matters, I do
support a judge-alone model or even a model of a panel of
Justices and a
psychiatrist to consider matters in an inquisitorial manner as is the case for
the mental health court in Queensland.’
7.4.26 After considering these submissions, the approaches to the issue in
other jurisdictions and the relevant literature, the Institute
recommends that
provision should be made for a ‘consent verdict’ of not guilty by
reason of mental or cognitive impairment
to be available at a special hearing
where the prosecution and defence agree that the defence would be available on
the evidence.
This reflects the Institute’s recommendation that there
should be provision for ‘insanity by consent’ in cases
person is fit for trial.
However, as with the process in cases where the person is fit for trial, the
Institute’s view is that this process requires
judicial oversight to
provide appropriate
safeguards.
Accordingly, the
Institute’s view is that the court should have the power to review the
evidence and hear from the experts
in order to be satisfied that the evidence
establishes the defence of mental or cognitive impairment in a case where the
prosecution
and defence agree that the proposed evidence establishes the
7.4.27 Further, it is the Institute’s view that in all other cases the
special hearing should heard by heard by a jury in the
Supreme Court. This
reflects the principle that special hearings should be, as far as possible,
consistent with ordinary trials.
At a special hearing, a jury is not able to
make a finding that a person is guilty but they have the responsibility for
determining
whether a person is acquitted or whether the evidence is such that a
finding cannot be made that the defendant is not guilty of the
Recommendation
21. There should be provision in the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment)
(Tas) for a special hearing by a judge alone where the prosecution
and defence agree that the defence of mental or cognitive impairment
established on the evidence. However, safeguards are required and the court
should have the power to review the evidence
(including hearing from expert
witnesses) in order to be satisfied that the evidence establishes the defence of
mental or cognitive
impairment in a case where the prosecution and defence agree
that the proposed evidence establishes the defence.
Introduction
8.1.1 The Terms of Reference request that the TLRI consider the operation of
the law of insanity in Tasmania with particular reference
(a) the operation of s 16(3) of the
Criminal Code
(b) whether evidence of insane delusions arising from mental illness should
form the basis of self-defence;
(c) if insane delusions arising from mental illness form the basis of
self-defence, whether defendants relying on insane delusions
should be liable to
supervision under the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(d) if insane delusions arising from mental illness form the basis of
self-defence, whether the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
requires amendment in relation to treatment options for such defendants.
Aspects of this reference have already been considered by the TLRI in its
review of the law of self-defence, where the TLRI’s
view was that the
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 16(3) should be repealed and that a provision be
included in s 46 of the
Criminal Code
(Tas) to the effect that evidence
of delusions arising from a mental illness cannot be relied on for the purposes
of self-defence.
In this review, the Institute also stated that a review of the
insanity defence was warranted given that the law of insanity ‘pre-dates
the inception of modern psychiatry and psychology as professional
disciplines.’
Particular concerns identified were the scope of the legal concept of mental
disease (compared to the medical understanding of mental
illness) and the focus
on an accused’s incapacity rather than his or her actual awareness or
understanding.
8.1.2 This Part provides an overview of the law of insanity in Tasmania,
identifies concerns in relation to the existing law and outlines
recommendations
for reform. The key reforms recommended are to retain and reform the defence of
insanity in the
Criminal Code
(Tas) s16 by:
• Changing the name of the defence of the mental or cognitive
impairment.
• Changing the scope of the qualifying condition by replacing the term
‘mental disease’ with a detailed definition
of mental and cognitive
impairment.
• Changing the terminology in s 16(1)(a)(i) from ‘understanding
the physical character’ to ‘understanding
the nature and
quality’ of such act or omission.
• Repealing s16(3).
• Making legislative provision for the prosecution to raise the defence
of mental or cognitive impairment against the wishes
of the defendant with the
leave of the court.
• Providing the court with the power to dispense with a trial if the
prosecution and defence agree that the evidence in a case
raises the defence of
mental or cognitive impairment. This should operate with judicial oversight.
Overview of the
law of insanity in Tasmania
8.2.1 The law of insanity in Tasmania has its origins in the rules laid down
in 1843 by the House of Lords’ decision in
this case, medical evidence was presented that the accused held a delusional
belief that he was being persecuted by the police,
on instruction from the Tory
party. At his trial, evidence was presented that the accused, acting under that
delusion, killed a man
believing him to be the Home Secretary, Sir Robert
M’Naghten was
acquitted on the grounds of insanity and, as a result of the considerable public
uproar that followed, the Queen
asked the House of Lords to review the matter.
In response, the House of Lords set out the rules of insanity. These rules first
a presumption of sanity by stating that ‘in all cases that every
man [or woman] is presumed to be sane, and to possess a sufficient
reason to be responsible for his [or her] crimes, unless the contrary be
rules then define the circumstances in which
a person may rely on the defence of insanity. The substance of the defence of
is contained in the statement by the House of Lords that:
To establish a defence on the ground of insanity, it must be clearly proved
that, at the time of the committing of the act, the party
accused was labouring
under such defect of reason, from disease of mind, as not to know the nature and
quality of the act he was
doing; or, if he did know it, that he did not know
what he was doing was wrong.
The House of Lords also considered the situation where a person was acting
under a delusion:
Making the assumption ... that he labours under such partial delusion only,
and is not in other respects insane, we think he must
be considered in the same
situation as to responsibility as if the facts with respect to which the
delusion exists were real. For
example, if under the influence of his delusion
he supposes another man to be in the act of attempting to take away his life,
he kills that man, as he supposes, in self-defence, he would be exempt from
punishment. If his delusion was that the deceased had
inflicted a serious injury
to his character and fortune, and he killed him in revenge for such supposed
injury, he would be liable
to punishment.
These aspects of the
rules find expression in ss 15
and 16 of the
Criminal Code
, which are set out at [
8.2.3 The theoretical basis of the defence of insanity rests on a fundamental
principle of modern criminal law — the idea of
individual responsibility:
‘the idea of the subject as a rational agent with capacities of both
cognition and self-control,
and hence the idea of criminal liability is rooted
in individual
Individual responsibility is seen to be dependent on ‘the principle of
capacity and a fair opportunity to act
otherwise’.
It is for this reason that the criminal law has long recognised ‘the
notion that ... the insane lack the ability to reason’
and this is
reflected in ‘laws excusing them from responsibility for criminal
As noted by
Lacey, Wells and Quick:
A plea of exemption such as insanity goes to the defendant’s capacity
to be addressed as a normal subject of criminal law: if
a defendant’s
mental capacity is such that fundamental questions can be raised about her
cognitive or, perhaps, volitional
capacities, it might be argued that they are
not even the kind of subject whom criminal law aspires to
Fairall and Yeo recognise that ‘the law would be unduly harsh to punish
people who are unable to choose or control their
point to the lack of utility in punishing people who are mentally impaired given
that they ‘would not have been deterred
by a threat of
punishment’.
Accordingly, the function of the law of insanity has been said to ‘define
the point at which mental disorder dissolves [criminal]
responsibility’.
8.2.4 In its consideration of the foundations of criminal responsibility, the
Law Commission of England and Wales stated that:
Criminal law is generally thought to be founded on the principle that a
person must have been responsible for his or her actions in
order to be held
culpable and to be punished.
It would be unfair for those whose serious disorders caused them to lack
criminal responsibility at the time of an alleged offence
to be at risk of the
same outcome (criminal conviction) as people without that serious condition
Accordingly, the Law Commission addressed ‘the concept of
responsibility as part of the essential inquiry: when does the fact
person has a particular condition make it unfair to hold him or her responsible
for his or her otherwise criminal
Commission concluded that, ‘people should not be held criminally
responsible for their conduct if they lack the capacity
to conform their
behaviour to meet the demands imposed by the criminal law regulating that
8.2.5 In his submission, Walvisch also considered the nature of criminal
responsibility:
a person should only be called to account for their wrongdoing if they are
responsible for that wrongdoing. At the very minimum, this
means they must be a
‘responsible agent’ — a person who can be expected to
recognise and discharge the responsibilities
laid down by the criminal law. This
requires them to be reasons-responsive: ‘a responsible agent is one who is
capable of recognising
and responding to the reasons that bear on his
situation’.
In order to be reasons-responsive, it is not just ‘a matter of acting
in conformity with appropriate reasons’, and so
failing to be a
‘responsible agent’ is described as ‘failing to exhibit a
pattern of reason-recognition that is
understandable to those who are judging
the agent’s responsibility, and that is grounded in reality’.
Walvisch wrote
in his submission that a person is not a responsible agent and so
should be exempted from criminal responsibility if at the time
of the offence,
‘the beliefs, attitudes and emotions that informed the accused’s
deliberations and actions were “so
disordered, so detached from reason,
that he was not operating within that realm at
circumstances, it is not appropriate to attribute criminal responsibility to
someone if they were incapable of understanding
the nature and scope of their
duty to avoid those actions and so are unable to be properly guided by them.
8.2.6 In addition to fairness to the individual, the protection of the public
is a (competing) rationale for the defence of insanity
with the law of insanity
being concerned to ‘protect society against recurrence of dangerous
within the insanity defence in the
Criminal Code
s 16 that operates to
separate sane from insane automatism and the forward focused nature of the
assessment made in relation to the
dispositions available under the
Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
The development of the law of insanity has been said to reflect a need to
identify ‘those defendants who seem more likely to
pose a danger to others
in the future’ and so those who ‘should be subject to supervision
and restraint rather than released
unconditionally’.
The current law
of insanity in Tasmania
8.3.1 In Tasmania, the presumption of sanity is
set down in s 15 of the
Criminal Code,
which provides, ‘[e]very
person is presumed to be of sound mind, and to have been of sound mind at any
time which comes in question,
until the contrary is proved’. This means
that the prosecution does not need to prove in every trial that the defendant is
sane. It can rely on the presumption of sanity until it is displaced by evidence
to the contrary.
8.3.2 The defence of insanity is set out in s 16 of the
Criminal Code
(Tas), which provides:
(1) A person is not criminally responsible for an act done or an omission
made by him —
(a) when afflicted with mental disease to such an extent as to render him
incapable of —
(i) understanding the physical character of such act or omission; or
(ii) knowing that such act or omission was one which he ought not to do or
(b) when such act or omission was done or made under an impulse which, by
reason of mental disease, he was in substance deprived of
any power to
(2) The fact that a person was, at the time at which he is alleged to have
done an act or made an omission, incapable of controlling
his conduct generally,
is relevant to the question whether he did such act or made such omission under
an impulse which by reason
of mental disease he was in substance deprived of any
power to resist.
(3) A person whose mind at the time of his doing an act or making an omission
is affected by a delusion on some specific matter, but
who is not otherwise
exempted from criminal responsibility under the foregoing provisions of this
section, is criminally responsible
for the act or omission to the same extent as
if the fact which he was induced by such delusion to believe to exist really
(4) For the purpose of this section the term mental disease includes natural
imbecility.
Key components of the defence
Mental disease
8.3.3 Central to the operation of the insanity defence is the scope of the
concept of ‘mental disease’. In order to rely
on the defence of
insanity under ss 16(1) and (2), it must be established on the balance of
probabilities that the defendant was
suffering a mental disease. Significantly,
the definition of a mental disease is a legal rather than a medical
It is a legal
question rather than a medical question as to whether any particular condition
is a ‘mental disease’ for
the purposes of the insanity defence.
Further, it is for the jury to determine whether the accused was suffering from
a condition
that answers the description of a ‘mental
In other words, the jury must determine whether a condition is a mental disease
according to the legal definition of the term and
whether the accused actually
has that condition. However, expert medical evidence is clearly likely to be
crucial to the jury’s
determination of these issues.
8.3.4 Mental disease is not defined in the
Criminal Code
(Tas) other than to specify that it includes natural
imbecility,
meaning is found in the common law term ‘disease of the
of the mind’ is ‘a state of disease or disorder or mental
disturbance arising from infirmity, temporary
longstanding’
not include transient conditions caused by external factors unconnected with
An accepted
definition is found in the judgment of King CJ in
R v Radford
, where his
Honour stated that:
The expression ‘disease of the mind’ is synonymous, in my view,
with ‘mental illness’ ... The essential notion
appears to be that in
order to constitute insanity in the eyes of the law, the malfunction of mental
faculties called ‘defence
of reason’ in the M’Naghten rules,
must result from an underlying pathological infirmity of mind, be it of long or
duration and be it permanent or temporary, which can be properly termed
mental illness, as distinct from the reaction of a healthy
mind to extraordinary
external stimuli.
This statement focuses on the distinction to be drawn between the reaction of
a sound mind to external stimulus and the reactions
of an unsound mind
(sound/unsound mind distinction) as a basis for determining whether a condition
was a ‘disease of the mind’.
The key is whether the mental state is
caused by an external influence compared to an internal condition of the
defendant. This approach
reflects the explicit policy of the law, which is
concerned ‘that certain persons likely to be involved in repeated episodes
of dangerous behaviour should be subject to restraint rather than be given an
unqualified acquittal on the basis of automatism or
lack of mens
8.3.5 The legal tests to determine whether or not a condition comes within
the definition of a ‘disease of the mind’ have
largely been
developed to distinguish ‘sane’ and ‘insane’ automatism.
Sane automatism results in a complete
acquittal on the basis that the
prosecution has not proved beyond reasonable doubt that the act was voluntary
and intentional as
required by the
Criminal Code
s 13(1). In contrast,
‘insane’ automatism results in a qualified acquittal (not guilty by
reason of insanity) according
to the insanity defence by virtue of the
Criminal Code
The law provides that an accused cannot rely on automatism if the involuntary
conduct is attributable to a condition falling within
the legal definition of a
mental disease/disease of the mind — in this case, the defendant can only
rely on insanity.
8.3.6 The scope of the concept of a ‘mental disease’/disease of
the mind is also relevant to the distinction made between
the defences of
intoxication contained in s 17 of the
Criminal Code
(Tas), insanity and
automatism. The issue in this context is whether an accused’s involuntary
state at the time of the offence
was attributable to intoxication or a
‘mental disease’. There are limits on the relevance of intoxication
as a denial
of criminal responsibility as evidence of intoxication is not
relevant in determining whether an act is voluntary and intentional.
necessary to determine whether the accused’s state of mind was
attributable to intoxication (a temporary and external
factor) or whether it was
attributable to a ‘mental disease’. Evidence of intoxication is not
relevant to the defence
of insanity unless the person is suffering from disease
of the mind caused by intoxication, such as delirium
8.3.7 At common law, conditions that have been
accepted within the definition of mental disease include:
schizophrenia,
depression,
psychomotor
hyperglycaemia,
arteriosclerosis
post-traumatic stress
As explained, the
common thread in the application of the concept of ‘mental disease’
in these cases is that the conditions
have been held to arise from an internal
rather than an external
This approach
highlights the unusual results that can be created by the current legal test
given that ‘mental disease’
has been held to extend to conditions
that are not normally associated with mental illness, such as
arteriosclerosis (hardening of arteries causing reduced flow of blood to the
There are differing
views about whether somnambulism (sleepwalking) is a ‘disease of the
mind’ depending on the evidence,
with a Canadian court in
finding that sleepwalking was not a mental
and the English Court
of Appeal finding that it was a disease of the
In Australia, it
appears that sleepwalking has generally been regarded as involving non-insane
automatism.
8.3.8 There is uncertainty in relation to the
status of personality disorders for the purpose of the
Criminal Code
16, and their status as a mental disease appears to depend on the evidence
adduced in a particular case.
In some cases, the trial judge has refused to leave insanity on the basis of a
personality disorder,
in other cases, insanity (although not successful) has been left for the jury on
Limbs of the defence
8.3.9 Further, evidence of a mental disease alone will not provide the
defendant with a defence. Under ss 16(1) and (2), it must also
be established
that the effect of the mental disease was either that:
• the defendant did not have the capacity to
understand the physical
character of the act
• the defendant did not have the capacity to know that the
omission was one which he or she ought not do or make
• the defendant acted under an
uncontrollable impulse
Physical character of act
. This reflects the first limb of
M’Naghten’s
case that D be ‘labouring under such defect
of reason, from a disease of the mind as not to know the nature and quality of
the act he was doing.’ In
, Dixon J explained that a
person would not know the physical nature of what they were doing if he or
had so little capacity for understanding the nature of life and the
destruction of life, that to him [or her] it is no more than breaking
destroying an inanimate object. He [or she] would not know the implications and
what it really amounted to.
Illustrations of when a person does not understand the physical character of
the act include placing a baby on a fire thinking it
is a log of wood or
smashing a baby’s head believing it to be a
8.3.11 However, it is unclear whether s
16(1)(a)(i) is limited only to the physical character of the act (eg strangling
another under
the impression of squeezing a lemon) or whether it extends also to
the significance of the
It has been pointed
out in academic critique of the insanity defence that different results may
occur if a narrow (physical act only)
or a broad interpretation (physical act
and its consequence) is applied. For example, in a case where an accused hits
another person
repeatedly with a golf club to try to stop the person from
teasing him or her but does not know that the act of striking will kill,
this person rely on the defence of insanity? Applying a narrow interpretation,
the accused would not be able to rely on insanity
as they understand the
physical character of the act (hitting with the club). However, applying a
broader interpretation they would
be able to rely on insanity, as they did not
appreciate that their conduct could kill
Another example
given in textbooks of the application of a broader interpretation of the
incapacity to understand the physical character
of the act would be where a
person decapitates someone just to see what that person looks like without a
The precise scope of being
‘incapable of understanding the physical character’ of the act is
not settled in Tasmania.
There is support for the narrow view in
accused stabbed and killed the victim. Medical evidence was given at trial which
‘amounted ... to an opinion that
the appellant at the time he did this act
... was probably totally unaware that he was so acting or even unaware that he
basis for the insanity defence was that the accused’s act was not
voluntary and intentional because he had a ‘gross
personality
disorder’. In outlining the scope of the first limb of the insanity
defence, Neasey J relied on the approach taken
it has become the practice to regard a person as ‘incapable of
understanding the nature and quality’ of his act when in
truth he was not
conscious of having acted at all; and so to treat the formula as applicable to
cases of automatism.
Accordingly, Neasey J stated that if the individual ‘was totally
unaware of what he was doing, he was at that time incapable
of understanding the
physical character of his act, because he was at that time incapable of
considering the physical character of
it, or anything else about it, at
This approach
would seem to limit the scope of this limb of the insanity defence
significantly.
8.3.13 In contrast, a broader approach is evident
in the judgment of Crawford J in
Hawkins (No
where his Honour
cited the interpretation of the common law rule ‘as not to know the nature
and quality of the act’ found
interpretation encompassed the act and its consequences: ‘whether the
accused “was in such a condition that he could
not appreciate what death
amounted to or that he was bringing it about or that he was destroying life and
all that is involved in
the destruction of
8.3.14 However, it is difficult to determine the approach that the court is
likely to adopt given that this provision is rarely used
Other than the case
Williams v The Queen
(where insanity was rejected by the jury), the
TLRI is not aware of any case decided in the Supreme Court where this ground for
establishing
insanity has been successfully relied on by the defendant.
Act or omission which ought not do or
. This reflects the second limb of
M’Naghten’s
that the defendant did not know what he was doing was wrong. In
, Dixon J stated that:
The question is whether he was able to appreciate the wrongness of the
particular act he was doing at the particular time. Could this
man be said to
know in this sense whether his act was wrong if through a disease or defect or
disorder of the mind he could not think
rationally of the reasons which to
ordinary people make that act right or wrong? If through the disordered
condition of the mind
he could not reason about the matter with a moderate
degree of sense and composure it may be said that he could not know that what
was doing was wrong. What is meant by ‘wrong’? What is meant by
wrong is wrong having regard to the everyday standards
of reasonable
Accordingly, a key feature of the test is that the defendant could not think
rationally about whether the matter was right or wrong.
Further, the
defendant’s understanding of ‘wrong’ is concerned with the
defendant’s failure to understand
that the act was morally wrong rather
than the defendant’s failure to understand that the act was legally
8.3.16 It has been observed that this is the most
common basis on which insanity is
established.
In Tasmania, this was the ground of insanity used in all of the cases where
insanity was successfully argued in Supreme Court cases
identified by the TLRI
Typically, the
defence was based on the accused’s impaired judgement arising from
delusions resulting from a pre-existing mental
health impairment. For example,
in making orders under the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) in the case of
Porter J observed that
‘the mental condition and the delusions from which he suffered were of
such intensity in nature that
it impaired and reduced his ability to judge the
situation in an ordinary manner. The disorder deprived him of the capacity to
the acts were ones which he ought not to do’. In another case, the
medical evidence was that the defendant was mentally ill
and experiencing
auditory hallucinations and the crimes were committed in response to the voice
he heard and a belief that his family
would be at risk if he did not commit the
defendant’s condition caused him to experience ‘acute psychotic
symptoms including auditory and visual hallucinations
and persecutory and
referential
delusions’.
8.3.17 A further illustration of the operation of this limb of the insanity
defence (in the Western Australian context) is the case
McHenry v Western
Australia (No 2)
case, the accused killed his brother under the deluded belief that his brother
was a threat to him personally and to the
world. He believed that his brother
was an alien linked to spiders and Satan and that they were planning to blow up
the planet. By
killing his brother, he thought he would destroy the spider and
save many from Satan. He also believed he would protect his brother
from Satan.
Expert evidence was given that the accused suffered from paranoid schizophrenia
evidenced by auditory hallucinations
(hearing voices) and delusional beliefs
(religious and in extra-terrestrial aliens), and that this deprived him of the
capacity to
know that he ought not to do the act of killing. The accused was
acquitted on account of his unsoundness of mind.
Uncontrollable impulse.
This is described as the
‘volitional’ limb of the insanity defence and this basis to
establish the defence of insanity
was not contained in
M’Naghten’s
rules (and so does not exist at common
Section 16(1)(b) of the
Criminal Code
(Tas) states that a person is not criminally responsible
for an act or omission ‘when such act or omission was done or made
an impulse which, by reason of mental disease, he [or she] was in substance
deprived of any power to resist’. Section
16(2) provides that:
the fact that a person was, at the time at which he is alleged to have done
an act or made an omission, incapable of controlling his
conduct generally, is
relevant to the question whether he [or she] did such act or made such omission
under an impulse which by reason
of mental disease he [or she] was in substance
deprived of any power to resist.
8.3.19 The operation of this limb of the insanity defence was considered in
the case of
, where the Court of Criminal Appeal expressed the
view that the issue for the jury was:
whether the appellant did the acts complained of under an impulse which by
reason of mental disease he was in substance deprived of
any power to resist. It
was for the appellant to satisfy the jury upon the balance of probabilities:
• that the acts were in fact done under an impulse;
• that it was an impulse which by reason of mental disease he was in
substance deprived of any power to
The degree of impairment of violation was addressed by the High Court in
O’Neill v The Queen
, where the court held that to succeed, it must
be established on the balance of probabilities that ‘the accused had lost
power to resist: that mental disease had left him with no power of
resistance to the impulses to do the fatal
8.3.20 There are some illustrations of circumstances in which this provision
has been used in practice.
However, it appears to be difficult to establish based on the pre-existing case
law. There have been three decisions of the Court
of Criminal Appeal that have
considered the operation of s 16(1)(b), all involving cases where the accused
was appealing a conviction
cases, the difficulties in relying on this limb of the insanity defence were
apparent, as it was noted that the medical evidence
was not sufficient to
establish that the person
resist the impulse (rather than
resist the impulse). The TLRI has identified one further case
where this ground was unsuccessfully relied on in the Supreme Court
ground that the mental illness ‘greatly diminished’ but did not
result in a total loss of
An exception arose in
a recent arson case where the accused relied on both s 16(1)(a) (did not know
the act was wrong) and the uncontrollable
impulse limb of the insanity defence
and insanity was accepted by the
Section 16(3) of the
Criminal Code
substantially reproduces the statement in
M’Naghten’s
that a defendant’s responsibility is judged by reference to the facts as
he or she supposes them to be and not by the
It specifically refers
to the effects of delusions on a defendant’s criminal responsibility. This
provision was considered
by the Court of Criminal Appeal in
a case in which
the accused was charged with murder after he shot and killed an acquaintance at
close range. At trial, the defence
did not seek to rely on insanity. Instead,
the accused sought to rely on self-defence on the basis of a hallucinatory
belief that
at ‘the time of the discharge of the weapon the accused
believed that he was in Korea defending himself from an enemy
The accused
had been a soldier in the Korean War where he had been severely wounded by a
mortar explosion. Subsequently, he had on-going
health problems that required
hospital admission and on some occasions shock treatment. The defence sought to
adduce the accused’s
medical files that ‘showed a history consistent
with a longstanding mental disorder caused by war
experience.’
defence also sought to lead expert evidence from a psychiatrist that the accused
was suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder
and, as a manifestation of
that disorder, might have believed that he was on active service in
8.3.22 The trial judge, Slicer J, ruled that the accused’s delusions
could be relied upon under s 16(3) for the purpose of self-defence
Criminal Code
(Tas). However, his Honour held that self-defence would
only be available in this way once the jury rejected the defence of insanity
under ss 16(1) and 16(2). This could occur where the jury was not satisfied on
the balance of probabilities that the accused’s
disorder amounted to a
‘mental disease’ for the purposes of the insanity defence or that
the mental disease affected
him in one of the ways set out in ss 16(1) and (2).
In these circumstances, Slicer J ruled that the jury could consider the
delusion, pursuant to s 16(3), for the purposes of self-defence.
8.3.23 The jury convicted Walsh of murder. The Court of Criminal Appeal
rejected his appeal stating that the trial judge’s direction
accused’s deluded beliefs could be considered for the purposes of
self-defence after the defence of insanity had been
properly considered was
unduly favourable to the accused. Further, the Court considered that the
accused’s action in shooting
his acquaintance could not be regarded as a
reasonable response, if he was sane. However, the Court accepted the expert
in relation to the accused’s mental disease and quashed the
accused’s conviction for murder and substituted a verdict
of not guilty on
the grounds of insanity.
8.3.24 The Court of Criminal Appeal’s view was that the accused’s
insane delusions were not relevant to self-defence and
would only be relevant to
the defence of insanity. Only the accused’s sane beliefs could provide a
basis for the accused’s
subjective belief in the need for self-defence.
The Court considered that, if accepted by the jury, the evidence of the
deluded belief brought him within s 16(1)(a)(ii) of the
Criminal Code
, and so that limb of the insanity defence governed the
accused’s criminal responsibility. In the words of Crawford J:
On the evidence, if the appellant believed that he was being attacked or
approached by an enemy soldier or by some assailant from
Sydney the cause of
that belief was his mental disease, that is to say the post traumatic stress
disorder. If he acted in defence
of himself under the influence of such a belief
he was insane within the second limb of the M’Naghten rules because he was
affected with mental disease to such an extent as to render him incapable of
knowing that his act was one which he ought not to do
16(1)(a)(ii)).
The effect of the Court of Criminal Appeal’s decision in
is to restrict the relevance of insane delusions to the defence of insanity.
Accordingly, if the jury reject the defence of insanity,
they must judge the
reasonableness of the accused’s conduct on the basis that he is
Section 16(3) cannot be
applied to extend the relevance of an insane delusion to the defence of
self-defence. However, as discussed
], there remains some uncertainty
in relation to the scope of s 16(3).
8.3.25 The TLRI has not identified any other Tasmanian cases where s 16(3) of
Criminal Code
(Tas) has been relied on.
Procedural matters
Onus of proof
8.3.26 As indicated at [
], s 15 of the
Criminal Code
(Tas) contains a presumption of sanity. Thus, the onus is on the defendant
to prove that he or she was insane within s 16 on the balance
of probabilities.
This is reinforced by s 381(3) of the
Criminal Code
(Tas), which provides
that ‘the onus of proving the insanity of any such person shall be upon
the defence, but the same may
be established upon the evidence of the
prosecution’.
8.3.27 The language used in ss 381(3), 399 and 401 of the
Criminal Code
(Tas) assumes that insanity can be raised by someone other than the
Section 381(3)
provides that ‘the onus of proving the insanity of any such person shall
be upon the defence, but the same may
be established upon the evidence of the
prosecution’. Section 401 of the
provides that a person
convicted may appeal. ‘Person convicted’ includes, according to s
399, ‘an accused person
who, not having set up insanity as a defence, has
been acquitted on the ground of insanity.’ Case authority establishes that
the prosecution can allege and call evidence to prove insanity if the defendant
puts his or her state of mind in issue by alleging
non-insane automatism or the
absence of intent.
the prosecution cannot introduce evidence probative of insanity until the matter
is put in issue by the
Role of judge and jury
8.3.28 As indicated, the definition of mental illness is a matter of law, but
whether the defendant suffered from a mental disease
is a question of fact. This
was set out in
where Green CJ stated
the jury have the sole responsibility for making all necessary findings of
fact and for determining the verdict. The functions of
the judge and jury are no
different in cases in which a defence of insanity has been raised. In such cases
it is for the judge to
inter alia direct the jury as to the meaning of the
expression ‘mental disease’ in s 16 but it is for the jury to decide
whether the evidence satisfies them that the accused was at the relevant time
suffering from a mental
Accordingly, it is a matter for the jury whether the defendant was affected
by a mental disease, and also whether the mental disease
deprived the defendant
of one of capacities in s 16 of the
Criminal Code
(Tas). There is no
provision for the prosecution and the defence to agree on a verdict of not
guilty by reason of insanity.
Law in other jurisdictions
8.4.1 Although not identical, all Australian jurisdictions have comparable
laws in relation to insanity based on the
summary of the defence of insanity (Western Australia and Queensland), mental
illness (New South Wales), mental impairment
(Victoria, the Northern Territory,
the Australian Capital Territory, and in Commonwealth legislation) and mental
incompetence (South
Australia) are set out in Table 7.1.
Table 7.1 Elements of the defence of mental impairment in Australian
Name of defence
Components of mental state
Nature and quality of conduct
Knowledge that conduct is wrong
Inability to control conduct
Criminal Code
Mental Impairment
Mental impairment includes senility, intellectual disability, mental
illness, brain damage and severe personality disorder.
Mental illness is a reference to an underlying pathological infirmity of
mind, whether of long or short duration and whether permanent
or temporary, but
does not include a condition that results from the reaction of a healthy mind to
extraordinary external stimuli.
However, such a condition may be evidence of a
mental illness if it involves some abnormality and is prone to recur.
Did not know the nature or quality of the conduct.
Did not know that the conduct was wrong (that is, the person could not
reason with a moderate degree of sense and composure about
whether the conduct,
as perceived by reasonable people, was wrong).
Unable to control conduct.
If carried out conduct as a result of a delusion caused by a mental
impairment, the delusion cannot otherwise be relied on as a defence.
ss 7.3(8), (9)
s 7.3(1)(a)
s 7.3(1)(b)
s 7.3(1)(c)
Criminal Code
Mental Impairment
Mental impairment includes senility, intellectual disability, mental
illness, brain damage and severe personality disorder.
Mental illness is a reference to an underlying pathological infirmity of
mind, whether of long or short duration and whether permanent
or temporary, but
does not include a condition (a reactive condition) that results from the
reaction of a healthy mind to extraordinary
external stimuli. However, a
reactive condition may be evidence of a mental illness if it involves some
abnormality and is prone
Did not know the nature or quality of the conduct.
Did not know that the conduct was wrong (that is, the person could not
reason with a moderate degree of sense and composure about
whether the conduct,
as perceived by reasonable people, was wrong).
Unable to control conduct.
If carried out conduct as a result of a delusion caused by a mental
impairment, but the person may rely on the mental impairment to
deny criminal
responsibility.
ss 27(1), (2), (3)
ss 28(1)(b), (2)
M’Naghten rules
Mental Health (Forensic Provisions) Act
Mental Illness
Defect of reason caused by a disease of the mind.
This is contrasted with ‘mere excitability of the normal man,
passion, even stupidity, obtuseness, lack of self-control and
impulsiveness.
Any mental disorder which ‘manifests itself in violence and is prone
to recur’ may be a
disease of the
Mental malfunctioning of a transitory nature caused by some external factor
such as violence, drugs, alcohol has been held not be
A ‘gross psychopath’, that is, one who has a gross lack of
self-control and emotional feeling is not
Irresistible impulse does not by itself raise a defence of mental
Did not know the nature and quality of the act he or she was doing
Did not know that what he or she was doing was wrong.
‘Wrong’ means ‘wrong’ according to ‘ordinary
standards adopted by reasonable
If labours under a partial delusion only, and is not in other respects
insane, must be considered in the same situation as to responsibility
facts with respect to which the delusion exists were real.
Criminal Code
Mental impairment
Mental impairment includes senility, intellectual disability, mental
illness, brain damage and involuntary intoxication.
Mental illness is a reference to an underlying pathological infirmity of
mind, whether of long or short duration and whether permanent
or temporary, but
does not include a condition that results from the reaction of a healthy mind to
extraordinary external stimuli
(although such a condition may be evidence of a
mental illness if it involves some abnormality and is prone to recur).
Did not know the nature and quality of the conduct.
Did not know that the conduct was wrong (that is, the person could not
reason with a moderate degree of sense and composure about
whether the conduct,
as perceived by reasonable people, was wrong).
Unable to control conduct.
s 43C(1)(a)
s 43C(1)(b)
s 43C(1)(c)
Criminal Code
Mental disease or natural mental infirmity
Capacity to understand what the person is doing.
Capacity to know that the person ought not to do the act or make the
Capacity to control the person’s action.
Affected by delusions on some specific matter or matters, but who is not
otherwise entitled to the benefit of sub-s (1), is criminally
responsible to the
same extent as if the real state if things had been such as the person as
induced by the delusions to believe
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
Mental incompetence
Mental impairment includes mental illness, intellectual disability or a
disability or impairment of mind resulting from senility.
Mental illness means a pathological infirmity of the mind (including a
temporary one of short duration).
Does not know nature and quality of conduct.
Does not know that the conduct is wrong, that is the person could not
reason about whether the conduct, as perceived by reasonable
people, was
Totally unable to control conduct.
[intoxication provision]
s 269C(1)(a)
s 269C(1)(b)
s 269C(1)(c)
Criminal Code
Mental disease includes ‘natural imbecility’.
Incapable of understand the physical character of the act or
Incapable of knowing that the act or omission was one that he or she ought
not to do or make.
Under an impulse which he or she was in substance deprived of any power to
Affected by a delusion on some specific matter, but who is not otherwise
exempted from criminal responsibility under the foregoing
provisions of this
section, is criminally responsible for the act or omission to the same extent as
if the fact which he was induced
by such delusion to believe to exist really
s 16(1), (4)
s 16(1)(a)(i)
s 16(1)(a)(ii)
Crimes (Mental Impairment and Fitness to be Tried) Act 1997
Mental impairment
No definition
Did not know the nature and quality of the conduct.
Did not know that the conduct was wrong (that is, the person could not
reason with a moderate degree of sense and composure about
whether the conduct,
as perceived by reasonable people, was wrong).
Criminal Code
Unsoundness of mind; mental impairment means intellectual disability,
mental illness, brain damage or senility.
Mental illness means an underlying pathological infirmity of mind, whether
of long or short duration and whether permanent or temporary,
but does not
include a condition that results from the reaction of a healthy mind to
extraordinary stimuli.
Capacity to understand what the person is doing.
Capacity to know that the person ought not to do the act or make the
Capacity to control the person’s action.
Affected by delusions on some specific matter or matters, but who is not
otherwise entitled to the benefit of sub-s (1), is criminally
responsible to the
same extent as if the real state if things had been such as the person as
induced by the delusions to believe
ss 1, 27(1),
Issues for consideration
8.7.1 The law of insanity has been controversial,
and as Norval Morris observed in 1970 (quoted in Blackwood and Warner):
of ink, mountains of printer’s lead, and forests of paper
have been expended’ on the issue of the defence of
Since that time, there have been further reviews of the law of insanity in many
criticism, the law of
insanity has remained essentially unchanged since the mid-nineteenth
Key difficulties are
in relation to the terminology used and the disconnect between the legal concept
of insanity and contemporary
psychological understanding.
8.7.2 In the discussion that follows, four options for reform are considered
with a view to ensuring that ‘the law has the right
test to distinguish
between those who should be held criminally responsible for what they have done,
and those who should not because
condition’:
(1) Make no change to the current defence of insanity
(2) Abolish the defence of insanity
(3) Abolish the current defence of insanity and introduce a replacement
(4) Reform the current defence of insanity
(5) Make no change to the current defence of insanity.
Make no change to the current defence of
8.7.3 An option would be to make no change to the current defence of
insanity. As noted, despite the extensive review undertaken of
the defence of
insanity, it has ‘weathered [this] constant
and, despite its flaws, has not changed significantly. The New Zealand Law
Commission (‘NZLC’) suggested that this intractability
may reflect
the core decision that needed to be made by a jury: ‘regardless of what
the rules may say, in the end, the question
jurors will put to themselves when
they retire is simply: “Is this man mad or
Accordingly, despite recognising the ‘not insignificant’ problems
with the defence and the outdated language, the NZLC
did not recommend reform to
the defence.
8.7.4 None of the submissions received by the Institute (which made comment
on the defence of insanity) indicated that the defence
should not be changed.
Further, based on the Institute’s analysis of the defence and its
consideration of other law reform
reports and expert commentary, the Institute
considers that reform is necessary. Accordingly, the Institute does not
recommend making
no changes to the defence of insanity.
Recommendation
22. The Institute recommends making changes to the current defence of
insanity contained in the
Criminal Code
Abolish the defence of insanity
8.7.5 An option for reform at the other extreme would be for Tasmania to
abolish the defence of insanity all together. In some states
in the United
States, the insanity defence has been
In 1989, the Law
Reform Commissioner of Tasmania recommended that the defence of insanity be
abolished and that evidence of mental
or psychological disorder be admissible as
relevant to deny the mental element for the offence in all
The abolition of the insanity defence has also been advocated by some legal
and disability
The Scottish Law Commission, the Law Commission of England and Wales, the New
Zealand Law Reform Commission, the New South Wales
Law Reform Commission and the
Law Reform Commission of Victoria have also considered the abolition of the
defence of insanity.
Commission of England and Wales was the only review to propose a provisional
abolition of the insanity defence. Nevertheless,
the Commission considered that
there is a need for a special defence of non-responsibility and rejected the
adequacy of general principles
of criminal law to address cases where an
accused’s mental disorder resulted in a total loss of capacity. This is
further at [
8.7.6 Abolition of the insanity defence (without a
comparable replacement) would mean that the criminal liability of a person with
a mental illness or intellectual disability would be determined according to the
general principles of criminal law. This would allow
evidence of mental illness
or intellectual disability to be used to deny the elements of the offence (the
voluntary and intentional
act, intention, knowledge, subjective recklessness
etc) or to establish a defence of general application (such as
self-defence).
According to
this approach, concerns about the protection of the public following an
acquittal could be resolved through civil rather
than criminal
procedures.
Reasons advanced for the abolition of the defence
8.7.7 The following reasons have been advanced in
support of the abolition of the defence:
It is inherently discriminatory based on disability and contrary to
right to equality before the law, including the right to
recognition of legal capacity
. The United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights has stated that:
In the area of criminal law, recognition of the legal capacity of persons
with disabilities requires abolishing a defence based on
the negation of
criminal responsibility because of the existence of a mental or intellectual
disability. Instead disability-neutral
doctrines on the subjective elements of
crime should be applied, which take into consideration the situation of the
individual defendant.
Further, it is argued that ‘[g]ranting people with mental disability a
special defence stigmatises and marginalises them. The
category of
“criminal insanity” perpetuates the extremely damaging myth that
people with mental disability are especially
dangerous or especially
uncontrollable’.
It is fundamentally flawed to argue that a person who is mentally ill
is less guilty than someone who is not mentally ill but is driven
into criminal
behaviour by circumstances beyond their control (such as social
deprivation)
argument is that there is no reason for distinguishing between different causes
of non-responsibility.
It is wrong in principle
. This argument is based on the concern
that the criminal law is being used inappropriately to detain people who have
been acquitted
on the ground that they ‘were perceived to pose a risk of
Burden of proof and consistency with general principles of criminal
It is argued that it is contrary to ‘notions of justice and fair
play’ to require ‘the accused to prove not only
that he [or she] did
but that he [or she] suffered from a total incapacity
to understand the physical nature of the
This represents a
shifting of the burden of proof to the accused and also the imposition of a more
onerous burden.
It is argued
that the abolition of the insanity defence ‘is more consistent with
general principles of criminal law’
on the basis that ‘if the
prosecution can prove the elements constituting the offence, the charge is made
out, and if it cannot,
then the accused must be
acquitted’.
8.7.8 The following reasons have been advanced to
support the retention of the defence:
The insanity verdict reflects the true ground for the
reflects the foundations of the defence as a ‘denial of criminal
responsibility due to a person’s lack of
observed that:
It is not, in fact, true to say, as the abolitionists do, that the insanity
defence is ill-founded because criminal liability in general
turns on the
presence or absence of criminal intent. The criminal law, and society more
generally, across all like-minded jurisdictions,
does recognise other
circumstances in which factual guilt, and criminal actions with intent, are
justified or excused, resulting
in acquittal, because the offender was placed in
a position in which he or she did not have a “real” choice.
Self-defence,
and duress or necessity, are
Further, there may be some individuals who were proved to have the relevant
intent at the time of the offence but where the intent
was affected by a
delusion. It is argued that it would be unfair to convict such a person where
they were ‘grossly out of touch
with reality at the time of the
It also does
not account for strict liability offences, where the prosecution does not need
to prove any intention beyond a voluntary
and intentional act.
The requirement for legal capacity under the CRPD (which refers to
one’s power to act within the legal
undermined by the insanity defence
. After considering the views expressed by
those who would advocate for the abolition of the insanity defence on human
rights grounds,
Wondemaghen argues that:
Adherence to Article 12 demands that persons with mental and psychosocial
disabilities are recognised as free agents with legal capacity
who may or may
not choose to employ the defence of insanity to negate reasoning, not as a
perpetual and continuous state, but solely
at the time of the commission of a
criminal act.
This can be contrasted with the position of children where lack of criminal
responsibility is an on-going state for children under
the age of 10 and a
rebuttable presumption for children aged between 10 and 14
For individuals who
seek to raise insanity, there is a presumption of sanity and it must be
established on the balance of probabilities
that the person had a mental
disease, which gave rise to one of the relevant incapacities at the time of the
offence. Accordingly,
it is not a permanent or on-going lack of legal capacity
based on disability. Indeed, a person may be found guilty of some offences
not guilty by reason of insanity in relation to other offences for offending
that occurs in a relatively close time
The underlying rationale for the insanity defence is still valid
This was the view expressed by the NSWLRC:
Is there still a need to provide a legal mechanism for excusing from criminal
responsibility those offenders whose mental capacity
is significantly impaired,
for protecting them from themselves or the community where their impaired mental
capacity makes them susceptible
to dangerous behaviour, and for providing them
with the opportunity for treatment, rather than
punishment?
The Commission’s view was that ‘the answer to that question is
uncontroversial, and the underlying rationale for the defence
of mental illness
remains as valid today as it did when it first
Public protection requires the courts to have special powers beyond
civil powers of
Commission stated that:
A person with mental disorder who has done what would amount to a criminal
offence is not, it seems to us, in the same position as
a person who has been
acquitted without any reliance on a mental disorder defence. It is justifiable,
on the grounds of public protection,
to detain a person who has been found to
have committed what would have been a criminal offence but for his or her
medical condition
(whether physical or
8.7.9 In the Issues Paper, the Institute sought feedback about whether the
defence of insanity should be abolished:
Should the defence of insanity in s 16 of the
Criminal Code
If you consider that the insanity defence should be abolished, do you think
that a new defence should be created, or should general
principles of criminal
responsibility apply?
If the defence of insanity is abolished, do you consider that the powers
Mental Health Act 2013
(Tas) are sufficient to address
community protection concerns following the acquittal of an individual with
mental health impairments?
If not, what changes would be necessary?
8.7.10 Five submissions addressed the question of whether the defence of
insanity in s 16 of the
Criminal Code
(Tas) should be abolished. No
submissions called for the abolition of the defence of insanity without
replacement. In other words,
there was no support for amending the law so that
individuals who were affected by a mental health or cognitive impairment at the
time of the offence (to such an extent that the defence of insanity would apply)
would be dealt with according to the general rules
of criminal responsibility,
and the powers of civil detention under the
Mental Health Act 2013
However, the issue on which there was a greater divergence of views was whether
the current defence should be abolished and
replaced with a new defence.
8.7.11 The DPP and ForensiClinic supported the retention of s 16 of the
Criminal Code
(Tas). The DPP wrote that ‘the provision works well
in practice. Established and well understood principles would be eroded
defence were to be abolished. I would strongly oppose any proposal to remove
this defence from the Code’. ForensiClinic
also expressed the view that
‘the insanity defence is extremely important’ but proposed reform to
the terminology used
in s 16. The need to change the terminology used in the
defence was raised in many of the submissions received by the Institute.
discussed further at [
8.7.12 On the other hand, there was support in three submissions for the
replacement of the insanity defence with a new defence —
either based on
the England and Wales Law Commission’s provisional
recommendations
introduction of a new defence based in ‘lack of
reasons-responsiveness’.
8.7.13 The introduction of a new defence based on
the England and Wales proposal was supported by EOT and the ALA. Broadly
this defence is grounded in the defence of insanity but has an
expanded operation in that it applies to physical and mental conditions
(recognised medical conditions). In addition, it employs different incapacity
The ALA’s view
was that this new defence should be introduced to replace the insanity defence.
EOT’s submission indicated
that it was ‘attracted’ to the Law
Commission proposal, but it also proposed other reforms to the current defence
the alternative. The ALA supported the reform because it would overcome
‘the disconnection between the legal definition of
“disease of the
mind” and medical understanding of mental illness, and conditions
affecting mental functioning such as
hypoglycaemia’. Similarly, the appeal
of the approach proposed by the Law Commission for EOT was that it would
clearly reflect the broad range of conditions that have previously
been captured by the umbrella of “insanity”, including
impairment and conditions such as sleep apnoea syndrome or narcolepsy’.
EOT considered that the concept of ‘recognised
medical condition’
‘would also help to raise awareness of the diversity of various disability
difference between cognitive impairment (which may
include intellectual disability, learning difficulties, acquired brain injury
and so on) and psychiatric impairments which are linked to mental
illness’. Its view is that this may enable utilisation of
a broader range
of orders than those available under the forensic mental health system.
8.7.14 Walvisch, instead, proposed a new defence
based in a lack of reasons-responsiveness. He argued that a specific legal
is required as it is inappropriate to hold individuals responsible for
their wrongdoing if they:
• Were not capable of recognising and responding to the reasons that
bore on their situation (i.e. they were not reasons-responsive);
• They were not responsible for their lack of reasons-responsiveness.
Walvisch considered that the scope of the defence should reflect its purpose
which is ‘to exculpate people who should not be
held criminally
responsible for blameless conduct’. Accordingly, his view is that the
defence should have two main requirements:
1. That the accused lacked reasons-responsiveness at the time of the offence;
2. That the accused should not be held responsible for that lack of
reasons-responsiveness.
In his view, this approach avoids many of the problems with the current law
because it avoids definitional questions and focuses solely
on the nature of the
accused’s impairment (that is, whether the person was ‘operating
outside the realm of reason at
the relevant time’) rather than its cause.
Further details of this proposal are set out from [
8.7.15 As noted above, there are competing arguments for the retention and
abolition of the defence of insanity. While a case can
be made for the abolition
of the defence, the Institute’s view is that there remains a need for a
special defence so that the
criminal justice system can respond in cases where
it is not appropriate to attribute criminal responsibility given the
individual’s
state of mind at the time of the offence (as outlined at [
]). The absence of criminal
responsibility is clear in the finding that the person is not guilty on the
basis of insanity or mental
impairment. The Institute’s view is that
abolition of the defence would give rise to unfairness because the inevitable
consequence
would be that individuals with mental or cognitive impairments would
be found guilty of offences in circumstances where their mental
state rendered
them unable or unaware of the fact that they should act otherwise. However,
having agreed that there is the need for
the defence, the Institute acknowledges
that the current law is problematic (as outlined below) and that there is a need
for reform.
The Institute’s approach is to retain and reform the
Recommendations
23. The Institute does not recommend abolition of the defence of insanity
simpliciter.
24. The Institute recommends retaining and reforming the current defence of
Abolish the defence of insanity and
introduce a replacement defence (a ‘radical’ change)
8.7.16 As indicated above, an alternative to the
complete abolition of the defence of insanity would be to replace it with an
alternative
means of deciding the circumstances in which people ought not be
criminally responsible for their conduct.
8.7.17 In England and Wales, the Law Commission
provisionally proposed a ‘radical’ change to the
Its view was that
the defence in its current form should be abolished and that a special defence
based on the accused’s lack
of capacity at the time of the offence should
be created that would apply to physical as well as mental conditions that led to
relevant loss of capacity.
It proposed a new defence of ‘not criminally responsible by reason of a
recognised medical condition’. This defence applies
where the defendant,
as a result of a qualifying ‘recognised medical condition’, wholly
lacked the capacity to:
(a) Rationally form a judgment about the relevant conduct or circumstances
(ie ‘could not have reasoned rationally about what
he or she was
(b) Understand the wrongfulness of what he or she is charged with; or
(c) Control his or her physical acts in relation to the relevant
Accordingly, the Law Commission proposed changing the current requirement
that the defendant ‘did not know the nature and quality
of the act’
(the equivalent of s 16(1)(a)(i) of the
Criminal Code
(Tas)) to a test
based on the capacity to rationally form a judgment about conduct or
circumstances. In the Law Commission’s
view, the ability to rationally
form a judgment required at least three types of ‘cognitive
competency’: (1) an ability
to form accurate beliefs; (2) an ability to
draw on their existing wants and beliefs; and (3) ‘an accurate reasoning
that allows them to draw warranted conclusions about the probable
relationships among various wants, acts and
consequences’.
Law Commission’s view, the new test encapsulates these ideas about
rational judgment and better reflects the underlying
rationale for the
8.7.18 Another significant change contained in the
provisional proposal is the shift from ‘mental disease’ to
‘recognised
medical condition’. The Commission’s view was that
the boundary between ‘sane’ and ‘insane’ automatism
should be re-defined, so that a special verdict would be available if a mental
or a physical disorder deprived the defendant of a
relevant loss of capacity. It
outlined the following reasons for this approach:
(a) It removes the artificial division between physical and mental disorders
and focuses on the essential point, which is ‘whether
the accused had the
relevant criminal
There is no
principled reason to treat mental disorders differently from physical disorders
when they gave rise to a loss of
(b) It would reduce the stigma attached to mental illness arising from the
use of terminology of the nineteenth century by introducing
a verdict of
‘not criminally responsible by reason of a recognised medical
condition’.
‘crafted in modern terms with flexibility to accommodate developing
medical knowledge’.
(c) It would result in more appropriate
The Law Commission
provides the example of a person who is charged with causing death by dangerous
driving in circumstances where
they fell into a hypoglycaemic coma. They would
be acquitted outright but the Law Commission argued that this ‘situation
appropriately fits within a defence of not criminally responsible by reason
of a medical
condition’.
also be more appropriate than labelling as ‘insane’ people with
diabetes (hyperglycaemia) and epilepsy.
(d) It would result in more appropriate outcomes by providing the court with
powers over cases where there is a risk of reoccurrence
arising from a physical
disorder (hypoglycaemia),
such as, for example, where someone operates machinery and suffers from sleep
apnoea. If such a person harmed someone, they may have
a defence of automatism
with an acquittal and no power for preventive measures to be imposed by the
court. Under the new defence,
if the person was found ‘not criminally
responsible by reason of recognised medical condition’, ‘the court
require him or her to obtain the necessary medical treatment or
supervision’.
(e) It would address problems that arise from narrow construction of the
incapacities, particularly the fact that insanity is unavailable
where a person
has knowledge of the physical aspect of the act even if they do not understand
the moral dimension.
8.7.19 A further reason that could be advanced for supporting such an
approach is that it more readily reflects the requirement for
equality under the
by creating a defence that applies to recognised medical conditions
(both physical and mental) that give rise to a relevant incapacity.
respect, it is disability neutral in form and substance as it will not only
apply to individuals with mental health or cognitive
impairments.
8.7.20 Although the Law Commission proposed the introduction of a broad test
for the qualifying condition (recognised medical condition),
some limits were
recommended for policy reasons. The Law Commission’s provisional proposals
were that there be two non-qualifying
conditions — acute intoxication/drug
induced psychosis and anti-social personality
conditions that currently fall outside the qualifying condition of a
‘disease of the mind’ but would be included
within the scope of a
‘recognised medical condition’. In relation to acute intoxication,
the Commission’s view
was that the existing approach of the law in
relation to intoxication based on prior fault should continue to
However, this does not
exclude the possibility that alcohol dependency syndrome (as distinct from
drunkenness) may be a qualifying
In addition, the
Commission proposed, on policy grounds, that antisocial personality disorder
should not be a condition that qualifies
as a ‘recognised medical
condition’.
8.7.21 The Law Commission’s proposed reform to the insanity defence has
generally been well received in the academic
literature.
For example, Rumbold and Wasik write that ‘[t]he changes proposed in the
discussion document provide a logical and consistent
framework for mental
condition defences that will reflect modern medical
In contrast,
Duff argued that there are problems with the proposals. He suggested that the
three incapacities set out in the Law
Commission’s proposal should be
reduced to one overarching incapacity — the person must ‘wholly lack
the capacity
to guide his conduct for the legally relevant
Further, Duff
argued that there is no need for there to be a qualifying condition from which
the incapacity resulted and to include
such a requirement is either unnecessary
He maintained that
if someone has proven a total incapacity to conform to the relevant law then
this should be enough.
this reason, Duff proposed an alternative defence — a defence of
‘lack of rational capacity’. This would be
‘available to
anyone whose commission of the offence could be attributed to their lack of
rational capacity to conform their
conduct to the relevant law, or to guide
their conduct by the reasons that, according to the law, bear on their
8.7.22 Despite the largely positive commentary, a drawback of adopting the
Law Commission approach in Tasmania is that it is not known
how it would operate
in practice. It has not been implemented in England or Wales and so, it is not
possible to determine whether
it would be a better option for defendants than
the current insanity defence.
Ashworth has observed that increased reliance on this defence compared with the
current defence is not guaranteed because ‘[a]s
now, some defendants may
prefer to take their chances with ordinary sentencing powers’, and
further, the new defence is narrowly
drawn by requiring a total lack of
8.7.23 In addition, it can be asked whether it is appropriate that medical
conditions which would currently result in an unqualified
acquittal on the basis
of ‘sane automatism’ (that is, that the act was not voluntary and
intentional) should be included
in a new defence that results in a qualified
acquittal. Consider, for example, the situations where a driver suffers a sudden
condition that results in a loss of consciousness causing a crash and
resulting in the serious injury or death of another; or where
a person faints
and falls onto another person causing injury; or where a person commits an
offence as a result of concussion.
8.7.24 An additional disadvantage arising from adopting a new approach to
insanity and automatism is that the long-settled law in
this area would be
As the NSWLRC has
observed, despite concerns in relation to the operation of
rules, there are advantages to their retention:
• Consistency with other Australian jurisdictions and comparable
• The rules have stood the test of time, and despite numerous reviews,
‘most cognate jurisdictions have not taken a fundamentally
different route
in dealing with this legal
In the Issues Paper, the Institute sought feedback on the introduction of a
new defence to replace the insanity defence in s 16 of
Criminal Code
Should a new defence be introduced to replace the insanity defence that
provides for a verdict of not guilty on the grounds of a recognised
condition (as proposed in England and Wales)?
If so, should there be any non-qualifying conditions?
8.7.25 As indicated at [
], the Institute received two
submissions (from the ALA and EOT) that were supportive of the introduction of a
new defence that provides
for a verdict of not guilty on the grounds of a
recognised medical condition (as proposed in England and Wales)
submission, the ALA also addressed the issue of non-qualifying conditions and,
contrary to the views of the Law Commission,
did not think that policy
considerations justified the exclusion of temporary drug-induced disorders or
anti-social personality disorder
‘given that the ultimate test would be
the defendant’s ability to form capacity’.
8.7.26 In contrast, the DPP was strongly opposed to the replacement of s 16
on the ground that long-settled law would be lost. This
concern has been a key
factor in the lack of legislative reform in other jurisdictions. As noted at [
], despite the well-recognised
concerns about the law of insanity, there has generally been little political
appetite to move away
from its long-established legal principles that are well
understood and generally do not give rise to difficulties in practice. For
reason, as noted, the defence proposed by the Law Commission was recognised by
its proponents to be a ‘radical proposal’.
Similarly, the Institute
acknowledges that a recommendation based on the Law Commission’s proposals
would be a bold initiative,
and one that would require very careful
consideration. Further, as noted, the Law Commission proposals were set out in a
Paper rather than a Consultation Paper which means that feedback was
The reforms have
not been implemented and so it is not possible to assess their practical
operation and any difficulties or problems
that may have arisen with their
application.
8.7.27 There are two key changes that would be
made to the law in Tasmania if the Law Commission’s proposals were
(1) The requirement that the person was
afflicted with a mental
would be replaced with the requirement that the person had a
recognised medical condition
(2) Instead of being
incapable of understanding the physical character
of their act or omission, the test would be whether the accused was
of rationally forming a judgment
circumstance.
Another change would be the explicit exclusion of certain personality
disorders (anti-social personality disorder) from the definition
‘recognised medical condition’. Currently in Tasmania, personality
disorders are neither expressly included nor excluded
from the scope of a
‘mental disease’ (see [
8.7.28 Other features of the defence would remain essentially the same:
(1) a test based on understanding of the wrongfulness of the conduct (knowing
the act or omission was one which he or she ought not
to do or make)
(2) a test based on incapacity to control conduct
(3) the exclusion from the defence of temporary drug induced psychosis.
8.7.29 Another model for reform (as indicated at
]) was suggested by Walvisch
— the defence of ‘lack of reasons-responsiveness’. In terms of
assessing a person’s
lack of reasons-responsiveness, Walvisch says the
‘key issue is whether,
at the time of the offence
accused’s psychological condition was such that the accused was not
functioning as a responsible agent
in relation to the offending
’. Expressed differently, this means that:
we need to ask whether, at the time of the relevant conduct, the beliefs,
attitudes and emotions that informed the accused’s
deliberations and
actions were ‘within the realm of reason; or were they so disordered, so
detached from reason, that he was
not operating within that realm at
8.7.30 This proposal is different from the current approach in s 16 of the
Criminal Code
(Tas) in several ways:
(1) There is no qualifying condition — ‘the defence should be
available to
who non-culpably lacked reasons-responsiveness,
regardless of cause’. This would include personality disorders, substance
or physical illness. However, the defence would not be available in cases of
‘self-induced reasons responsiveness’ —
where the lack of
reasons responsiveness at the time of the offence can be traced back to an
earlier time when the individual made
a decision while they were
reasons-responsive. This may arise in cases where the accused’s lack of
reasons-responsiveness is
attributable to their own behaviour such as a failure
to take prescribed medication or the decision to take illicit drugs. However,
this prior ‘reasons-responsiveness’ would not preclude the defendant
from relying in the defence in all cases but would
require a balancing of the
circumstances in each
(2) The tests of incapacity would be changed to a focus on the person’s
lack of reasons-responsiveness (capable of recognising
and responding to the
reasons that bear on his/her situation). In Walvisch’s words:
a person will generally not be responsible if he or she is unable to
recognise how reasons fit together, to see why one reason is
stronger than
another, or to understand how the acceptance of one reason as sufficient implies
that a stronger reason must also be
sufficient.
While this proposed defence is expressed very differently from the current
tests of incapacity in s 16 of the
Criminal Code
(Tas), Walvisch’s
view is that ‘many (if not all) of the individuals captured by the current
defence would continue to
be captured by this revised defence’. This is
because ‘that understanding the physical and moral nature of one’s
conduct, and being able to act in accordance with one’s deliberations,
constitute essential elements of reasons-responsiveness’.
In addition, it
would appear under the model that individuals whose lack of
reasons-responsiveness can be attributed to prior fault
(such as drug taking or
drinking) would be excluded from the defence.
8.7.31 As outlined above, the Institute
acknowledges that there are benefits in adopting the English or Walvisch’s
However, as the DPP has indicated, the law of insanity reflects
well-established legal principles and to move to a completely new
and untested
approach may create new and unforeseen difficulties in practice, where no
difficulties currently exist. While the Institute
accepts that there are
problematic aspects in the current defence, it is preferable to try to resolve
those difficulties rather than
introduce a new defence. The Institute’s
view is that the legislative statement of the scope of the defence serves an
function of community education, and so the qualifying condition
should not be too broad. Accordingly, after considering the alternative
proposed by the Law Commission of England and Wales and Walvisch, the
Institute’s view is that the preferred approach
is to retain the current
defence of insanity but make reforms to address its defects.
Recommendation
25. The insanity defence in s 16 of the
Criminal Code
(Tas) should not
be wholly replaced by a new defence.
Retain but amend the insanity defence in s
16 of the Criminal Code
8.7.32 As indicated, the view of the Institute is to retain but amend the
insanity defence in s 16 of the
Criminal Code.
Extensive academic
literature has outlined deficiencies with the current law of insanity. An
overview of these concerns is set out
below as well as the feedback received on
whether these problems create difficulties in practice and how and what
reform(s) might
ameliorate them. The amendments considered are:
• To change the name of the defence of insanity
• To change the scope of the qualifying conditions for the defence
including the terminology used
• To clarify the interrelationship between insanity and
self-defence.
Inadequacy of the current insanity defence
Inappropriate and outdated
terminology
. Problems with the current defence are said to be created by the
mismatch between the ‘outmoded
(legal insanity)
and contemporary psychiatric knowledge about mental illness (medical
As Ormerod writes, ‘[i]t is surprising that in the twenty-first century
the law is based not on any medical understanding of
mental illness but on a
distinct legal criterion of
responsibility’.
8.7.34 A specific criticism directed at the insanity defence is the use of
inappropriate and outdated terminology such as ‘insanity’,
‘mental disease’ and ‘natural imbecility’, as well as
the concept of a ‘disease of the mind’.
These terms are considered
to be stigmatising, and, as recognised by the Law Commission of England and
Wales, not medical terms but
rather outdated legal
8.7.35 In many other jurisdictions, the name of the insanity defence has been
changed to reflect the inappropriateness of using such
terminology. In the
Northern Territory, the Australian Capital Territory, Victoria, and at the
Commonwealth level, the defence is
now called the defence of mental impairment,
and in South Australia it is called ‘mental
incompetence’.
Western Australia, while the defence is still called insanity and refers to
‘unsoundness of mind’, the substance of
the defence uses the term
‘mental impairment’, which means ‘intellectual disability,
mental illness, brain damage
Reform Commission of Western Australia (LRCWA) has recommended that the defence
be renamed ‘defence of mental impairment’
and similarly, the
Scottish Law Commission has recommended a name change. In New South Wales, the
defence is called ‘mental
illness’ and the NSWLRC has recommended
that the defence be renamed ‘defence of mental health impairment or
impairment’. Proposed reforms in NSW will rename the legal terms
for the defence to, ‘Act proven but not criminally responsible
of cognitive or mental health
impairment’.
contrast, the NZLC, despite acknowledging that the terminology is outdated,
recommended that the terminology not be changed simply
to fulfil semantic
purposes: ‘the rationale for reforming it really boils down to no more
than desire to make the defence “look
and feel” more modern, without
adding anything of substance or changing
8.7.36 In the Issues Paper, the Institute sought feedback on changing the
name of the defence of insanity:
Do you consider that the name of the defence of insanity in s 16 of the
Criminal Code
(Tas) should be changed? If so, what should the defence be
8.7.37 Seven submissions addressed this issue, and there was general
agreement that the language of the defence is outdated and
inappropriate.
highlighted the changing understandings of the conditions that affect
responsibility for criminal action and the inability of
‘insanity’ to reflect this. Similarly, the ALA commented on the
failure of the language of ‘insanity’
to reflect modern psychiatry.
The DPFM wrote that ‘it is an outdated title for mental impairment and
reflects thinking from
100 years ago’.
8.7.38 In addition to the failure of the label ‘insanity’ to
reflect the scope of the defence, other submissions stressed
its discriminatory
and stigmatising connotations. The MHCT wrote that the term
‘insanity’ is equated with ‘a historical
institutionalisation, community fear and misunderstanding of mental
ill-health’. It suggested that the stigmatising
nature of the language
perpetuated fear and discrimination when associated with people with mental
Reforming the language within the defence of insanity will achieve
significantly more than just modernising the ‘look and feel’
law. An updated use of language will provide a legal basis for the systemic
reduction of stigma within our communities and
support upholding the dignity and
self-respect of people with a mental illness through the use of appropriate and
respectful language.
The MHCT suggested that the name be changed to the ‘defence of mental
health and cognitive impairment’. It wrote that
‘[f]rom the
perspective of upholding the dignity of the individual, [this term] provides a
respectful description of the condition
or conditions’. The DPFM also
recommended use of this terminology.
8.7.39 Similarly, TasCoss submitted: ‘[t]he language of
Criminal Code
needs to be modernised. The current
Criminal Code
at section 16 uses inappropriate and outdated terminology
(insanity) which is stigmatising and reinforces damaging and incorrect
perceptions
that people with mental illness are dangerous’. TasCoss
supported the MHCT, in advocating for the name to be changed to the
‘defence of mental health and cognitive impairment’, to achieve
three things: (1) a better reflection of contemporary
understandings of mental
illness; (2) a reduction in stigma; and (3) upholding the dignity of people with
disability through the
use of appropriate and respectful language. Walvisch also
submitted that ‘the term “insanity” is inappropriately
stigmatising and should be
8.7.40 The DPP indicated that he was ‘not
opposed to modernising the language of the Code so it is not inconsistent with
medical terms’ but expressed caution: ‘any amendment would
need to be carefully considered to ensure that the existing
case law was not
8.7.41 In the Issues Paper, the Institute noted
previous concerns about the label of ‘insanity’. These concerns were
reflected in the submissions received. The Institute does not consider
that name change would achieve nothing more than a sematic
change to make the
defence feel more modern (a view expressed by the NZLC). Rather, in the
Institute’s view a name change is
essential to remove stigmatising and
offensive terminology from the
Criminal Code
(Tas). Accordingly, the
Institute recommends that the name of the defence in s 16 of the
(Tas) be changed. Based on the approach taken by the Institute to the
reform of the defence more broadly, the name should be changed
to the defence of
mental or cognitive impairment. This broadly aligns with the recommendations of
the NSWLRC and the views of mental
health and disability experts.
Recommendations
26. The name of the insanity defence in s 16 of the
Criminal Code
(Tas) should be changed.
27. The name of the defence in s 16 of the
Criminal Code
(Tas) should
be changed to the defence of mental or cognitive impairment.
The qualifying mental state: mental disease
. In addition to the
name of the defence, concepts of mental disease and disease of the mind are
regarded as ‘limited, outdated
offensive’.
to this concern, other jurisdictions have defined the required mental state
according to contemporary medical
terminology.
different formulations have been adopted. For example, in South Australia, the
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
(SA) uses the term, ‘mental
impairment’, which is defined to include ‘mental illness,
intellectual disability or
a disability or impairment of mind resulting from
Commonwealth, the Australian Capital Territory, the Northern Territory and
Western Australia, define mental impairment to mean,
‘intellectual
disability, mental illness, brain damage or
The ACT and
the Commonwealth legislation, unlike other jurisdictions, include ‘severe
personality disorder’ in the definition
of mental impairment). The
Northern Territory includes involuntary intoxication in the definition of mental
impairment.
8.7.43 Reviews conducted in other Australian jurisdictions that do not
currently have a definition of mental impairment have all recommended
legislative change to provide for such a definition. Again, however, there are
variations in terminology recommended. The VLRC has
recommended that mental
impairment should be defined to include, but not be limited to, ‘mental
illness, intellectual disability
and cognitive
impairment’.
Reform Committee (Victoria) recommends that the definition of mental impairment
should encompass mental illness, intellectual
disability, acquired brain injury
and severe personality
recommends that the terms, ‘mental health impairment’ and
‘cognitive impairment’ be used and that
detailed definitions be
provided for these terms (this is discussed
It also recommends
that personality disorders be excluded from the definition. The Scottish Law
Commission has recommended that a
brief definition be introduced to define
mental disorder to mean: (a) mental illness, (b) personality disorder or (c)
learning disability.
However, it should exclude psychopathic personality
In contrast, the
NZLC’s view is that there is no need to change the terminology
8.7.44 An additional criticism is that the legal
interpretation of ‘disease of the mind’ has created arbitrary and
unsatisfactory
outcomes. As discussed at [
], the common law tests for
determining if a condition is a disease of the mind focus on the division
between internal and external
causes and the boundary between a sound and
unsound mind. This approach has been adopted in Tasmania in determining whether
has a ‘mental disease’, and in New South Wales and Victoria
(where there is no legislative definition). It is also generally
(set out in Table 7.2).
Table 7.2: Australian legislative definitions of mental illness contained
in the defence of mental impairment
Mental illness is a reference to an underlying pathological infirmity of
mind, whether of long or short duration and whether permanent
or temporary, but
does not include a condition that results from the reaction of a healthy mind to
extraordinary external stimuli.
However, such a condition may be evidence of a
mental illness if it involves some abnormality and is prone to recur.
South Australia
Mental illness means a pathological infirmity of the mind (including a
temporary one of short duration).
There is a note to the definition that provides that ‘a condition
that results from the reaction of a healthy mind to extraordinary
stimuli is not a mental disease, although, such a condition may be evidence of a
mental illness if it involves some abnormality
and is prone to recur (see
(1990) 171 CLR 30).
Western Australia
Mental illness is a reference to an underlying pathological infirmity of
mind, whether of long or short duration and whether permanent
or temporary, but
does not include a condition that results from the reaction of a healthy mind to
extraordinary stimuli.
Proposed in NSW
Mental health impairment means a temporary or continuing disturbance of
thought, mood, volition, perception, or memory that impairs
emotional wellbeing,
judgment or behaviour, so as to affect functioning in daily life to a material
8.7.45 As noted at [
concept of ‘disease of the mind’ and the legal tests that have
developed to distinguish sane and insane automatism
have reflected a need to
strike ‘the right balance ... between fairness to mentally disordered
accused persons and societal
protection against their
misconduct&#
The conflict
between the two rationales has created confusion and a ‘mix up [of] the
defendant-focused question of criminal
responsibility with a second and
different question: who needs to be detained for the protection of the
focused on internal factors that are prone to recur as providing the basis for
the classification of a ‘disease of
the mind’ and has resulted in
unusual and inappropriate results. As observed by Child and Sullivan, ‘the
first thing
to strike anyone studying the current defence is that it labels as
insane persons who are manifestly not insane within any natural
Individuals with
such conditions as diabetes, epilepsy and sleepwalking have been labelled
insane. The test for insanity has also
created illogical results following the
internal/external cause test so that a person with diabetes may be insane
(hyperglycemia)
or not insane (hypoglycaemia). As Ashworth has observed:
There can be no sense in classifying hypoglycaemic states as automatism and
hyperglycaemic states as insanity, when both states are
so closely associated
with such a common condition as
However, as noted at [
Tasmania a review of cases decided in the Supreme Court since 2010 revealed that
insanity has most commonly been relied on in
cases where the accused had a
condition that would be regarded as a mental illness (such as bipolar disorder
and schizophrenia).
8.7.46 Possible models for an alternative approach that may resolve the
unsatisfactory and arbitrary division between internal and
external causes are
found in other jurisdictions. The solution provisionally proposed by the Law
Commission of England and Wales
to the problems created by the definition of
‘disease of the mind’ and the arbitrary distinction between medical
that arise from an internal or external cause is a defence that would
apply to ‘recognised medical conditions’. As noted,
this would apply
to medical conditions arising from a physical or mental condition and from an
internal and external cause (subject
to an accused also meeting the relevant
incapacities).
Applying this
approach would mean that issues of automatism arising from any medical condition
(concussion, sleep apnoea, diabetes,
mental illness, epilepsy for example) would
all fall within the scope of the special defence giving rise to a qualified
This proposal formed part of larger proposed changes that would
replace insanity with a new defence of ‘recognised medical
condition’. This is discussed from [
8.7.47 In contrast, the VLRC proposed a ‘broad and inclusive definition
of mental impairment’ that would ‘provide
flexibility to include any
mental condition (subject to specific
exclusions)’.
discussed at [7.5.91], these specific exclusions relate to self-induced
conditions that result from the temporary effects of ingesting
substances. The
meaning recommended was that mental impairment should be defined for the
purposes of the defence as a condition that
‘includes, but is not limited
to, mental illness, intellectual disability and cognitive
impairment’.
definition was said to include but not be ‘limited to the common law
notion of a “disease of the mind.”’
In the VLRC’s view,
the broad scope of this definition would not ‘open the floodgates for
people claiming the defence
of mental impairment’ due to the limits on its
operation imposed by the ‘high standard required in meeting the
operational
elements of the
8.7.48 A different approach is found in the Western Australian
specifies that mental illness ‘does not include a
condition that results from the reaction of a healthy mind to extraordinary
stimuli’. Unlike the position in other jurisdictions, this provision does
not specify that the ‘extraordinary stimuli’
, and so it has been argued that there is greater flexibility to
deal with conditions resulting from a healthy mind’s reaction
stimuli within the automatism defence. It has been argued that
this means that cases of involuntariness arising from hyperglycaemia,
and arteriosclerosis would be treated as automatism rather than giving rise to a
mental illness for the purposes of the
However, this
approach still adopts the sound/unsound mind division, which has been criticised
because it is not helpful as ‘it
is not obvious what “unsound
mind” means; it is not defined in the case law; nor is it consistent with
[the] policy aim
of avoiding language that is out of step with modern
psychiatric
8.7.49 Another approach to addressing the deficiencies in using outdated
concepts of ‘disease of the mind’, ‘defect
and ‘mental disease’ is found in the review of the law conducted by
the NSWLRC. It recommended the introduction
of a detailed definition of
‘mental health impairment’ and ‘cognitive impairment’.
It was recommended that
mental health impairment be defined as follows:
(a) Mental health impairment means a temporary or continuing disturbance of
thought, mood, volition, perception, or memory that impairs
emotional wellbeing,
judgment or behaviour, so as to affect functioning in daily life to a material
(b) Such mental health impairment may arise from but is not limited to the
(i) anxiety disorders
(ii) affective disorders
(iii) psychoses
(iv) substance induced mental disorders.
“Substance induced mental disorders” include ongoing mental
health impairments such as drug-induced psychoses, but do
not include substance
abuse disorders (addiction to substances) or the temporary effects of ingesting
substances.
For the purposes of this section “mental health impairment” does
not include a personality disorder.
8.7.50 The NSWLRC further recommended that
cognitive impairment be defined as:
(a) an ongoing impairment in comprehension, reason, adaptive functioning,
judgement, learning or memory that is the result of any
damage to, dysfunction,
developmental delay, or deterioration of the brain or mind.
(b) Such cognitive impairment may arise from, but is not limited to, the
(i) intellectual disability
(ii) borderline intellectual functioning
(iii) dementias
(iv) acquired brain injury
(v) drug or alcohol related brain damage
(vi) autism spectrum disorders.
The NSWLRC argued that the definitions are appropriate for the defence of
mental illness because they: (1) capture the appropriate
people; (2) are
consistent with the definitions recommended for diversion and bail; (3) reflect
contemporary psychological and psychiatric
understandings; (4) are respectful of
people with such impairments; and (5) are tighter and more precise than the
current outdated
terminology.
The NSWLRC considered that the fit between cognitive impairments and
‘disease of the mind’ is not a good one, and that
it should be made
clear that the defence applies to people with cognitive
impairments.
8.7.51 The NSWLRC addressed concerns that such a broad test is inappropriate
as the basis for an exculpatory defence. It argued that
the broad test is
appropriate as it is only the preliminary ‘gate’ that the defendant
must pass to succeed in the defence,
and that ‘defendants must also pass
through a second, and much narrower, “gate” by demonstrating the
required nexus
between their impairment and the
8.7.52 In the Issues Paper, the Institute sought feedback on a number of
issues connected with the language and the scope of the qualifying
conditions:
Does the definition of ‘mental disease’ cause problems in
Should the terminology in s 16 of the
Criminal Code
(Tas) be changed
to replace the terms ‘mental disease’ and ‘natural
imbecility’? If so, what terminology
should be used? Should s 16
refer to mental health and cognitive impairments (as recommended in NSW)? Or
mental impairment (as used
in a majority of other jurisdictions)? Or what other
terminology would you recommend be used?
Should there be a statutory definition of the terms used?
If so, should this be a definition that defines mental impairment to include
all or any of the following: mental illness, intellectual
disability, cognitive
impairment, senility, dementia?
Should there be a definition, such as is recommended in New South Wales, that
separates mental health impairment and cognitive impairment?
If so, should the
New South Wales definition be adopted?
Should mental illness be defined, and if so, how?
Should cognitive impairment be defined, and if so, how?
8.7.53 There was a range of viewpoints expressed in the submissions, but a
common view was that the terminology is outdated and inappropriate.
caused by the inappropriate use of language relate to stigma, and also to the
failure of the defence to reflect contemporary
understanding of mental
impairment or cognitive impairment.
8.7.54 The stigma caused by the use of language was identified by the
Outdated and offensive terms such as ‘mental disease’ and
‘natural imbecility’ significantly contribute to
the systemic
stigmatisation of people with mental illness and intellectual disability in our
communities. These outdated terms do
not communicate dignity and self-respect
for individuals experiencing mental ill health or cognitive impairment.
The term ‘mental disease’, as explained by MHCT ‘is not a
term commonly used within the community-managed mental
health sector, or across
the system in a contemporary setting’. Similarly, O’Connell wrote
that, ‘all terms associated
with a s16 defence do need review including
insanity and imbecility due to the stigma they attract.’
8.7.55 The submissions also identified issues arising from the language used
beyond its stigmatising effect. EOT wrote that:
As outlined in the Issues Paper the use of terms such as ‘mental
disease’ and ‘natural imbecility’ has led
to a body of case
law that is both arbitrary and inaccurate. It has the capacity to, for example,
capture actions arising from the
side-effects of diabetes such as hyperglycaemia
or epilepsy as ‘mental diseases’. Not only is the use of the term
disease’ inaccurate, in the context of making out an
insanity defence it has the capacity to be highly stigmatising
ForensiClinic, noted that:
the term ‘mental disease’ does cause a problem in practice, as
many mental health/cognitive impairments are not the result
of disease, and a
medical expert is not necessarily best placed to assess the implications of an
impairment on criminal behaviour
and associated defence. For example, a medical
expert may not be an expert in the assessment of intellectual disability.
O’Connell wrote that:
The term mental disease does cause some difficulty in practice and there
exists a tension between medical concepts and the law. This
is especially true
with the rise in cases of serious psychosis (in the absence of an underlying
mental illness) as a result of methamphetamine
8.7.56 As noted at [
DPP was not opposed to modernising the language to reflect modern medical terms
but expressed the need for careful consideration
to ensure that the existing
case law is retained.
8.7.57 Submissions to the Institute proposed a number of solutions and
reforms to eliminate these problems. EOT suggested that ‘clearer
stigmatising terminology such as ‘mental health impairment’ or
‘cognitive impairment’ should be
considered’. This approach
was also supported by the MHCT on the basis that it ‘is respectful to the
individual and family
and additionally is more reflective of current medical
terminology. The MHCT also suggested that the Tasmanian Communications Charter
be used ‘as a reference point for contemporary use of language within the
defence of insanity law
The Charter
uses the term ‘mental ill health’ which includes both mental illness
and mental health problems, and defines
mental illness as a ‘disorder
diagnosed by a medical professional that significantly interferes with a
person’s cognitive,
emotional or social
abilities’.
8.7.58 A different source of description was proposed by O’Connell, who
suggested that ‘consideration could be given to
utilising terms consistent
Mental Health Act
and as with the
Mental Health Act
inclusion of specific personality disorders should be avoided’. The
Mental Health Act 2013
(Tas) defines mental illness as follows:
(1) For the purposes of this Act –
(a) a person is taken to have a mental illness if he or she experiences,
temporarily, repeatedly or continually –
(i) a serious impairment of thought (which may include delusions); or
(ii) a serious impairment of mood, volition, perception or cognition; and
(b) nothing prevents the serious or permanent physiological, biochemical or
psychological effects of alcohol use or drug-taking from
being regarded as an
indication that a person has a mental illness.
8.7.59 The DPP indicated his support for ‘consideration being given to
using the terminology “mental impairment”
as it is most consistent
with other jurisdictions’. His view was that ‘it seems appropriate
to [define this to] include
mental illness, intellectual disability and
senility, but not cognitive impairment or dementia (so as to be consistent with
8.7.60 Walvisch approached the issue from the perspective of the underlying
purpose of the defence, which is primarily ‘to identify
individuals who
lacked reasons-responsiveness at the time of the offence, and so should not be
held responsible (in the absence of
prior fault)’. Walvisch argued that
the focus of lack of reasons-responsiveness meant that it is not necessary to
address the
cause of an accused’s impairment but rather its nature. In
Walvisch’s view, this approach overcomes many of the problems
current law (and many alternative suggestions) and would appear to be compliant
as it is disability neutral. Walvisch argued that
‘[w]hile in most cases an individual’s lack of
reasons-responsiveness
will result from a mental illness or cognitive
impairment, this need not be the case: the defence should be available to anyone
non-culpably lacked reasons-responsiveness, regardless of the cause’.
Accordingly, it isn’t necessary to consider if
the disorder was internally
or externally caused, whether the accused ‘suffered from a mental illness
or a personality disorder,
or whether the accused’s use of drugs caused
his or her disorder or triggered an underlying pathology. Instead, the focus
be squarely on the key question: did the accused lack
reasons-responsiveness’.
8.7.61 There was cautious support for the inclusion of more detailed
definitions in some of the submissions. The DPP considered that
‘mental illness’ and ‘intellectual disability’
‘may ... benefit from non-exhaustive definitions.
I would recommend
consultation with appropriate medical experts in considering appropriate
definitions’.
8.7.62 EOT wrote that:
We are supportive of the inclusion of statutory definitions covering these
concepts [mental health and cognitive impairment]. Definitions
flexible enough, however, to capture evolving understanding of medical
conditions. For example, as cognitive impairment
associated with dementia
evolves a more detailed understanding is developing regarding how it can impact
on behaviour.
8.7.63 The MHCT expressed its agreement with the NSWLRC’s
recommendation of separating the definitions of mental health and
impairment and supported the definitions of those conditions provided by the
NSWLRC. Its view was that:
The descriptions are aligned with contemporary understandings and provide a
more updated and respectful use of terminology. Utilising
such terminology
within court proceedings would support more respectful language within court
documents, media reporting and subsequently
within the community.
8.7.64 Walvisch argued that:
If the relevant conditions are to be defined, this should be done by
reference to relevant legal (rather than medical) considerations.
diagnoses, such as those contained in the DSM, have been developed for treatment
and research purposes. They are not targeted
at the normative concerns of the
insanity defence, which address issues of criminal responsibility. This is a
issue not a
one – so it is appropriate to have
test in place.
8.7.65 After considering the literature and the submissions received, the
Institute agrees that the language in the
Criminal Code
(Tas) should be
reformed. The more difficult question is how it should be amended. In this
regard there is little uniformity in the
approaches adopted in other law reform
proposals and the submissions to the Institute. However, it is possible to
identify a number
of approaches to reform:
Minimal reform
. This would involve changing the language in
Criminal Code
(Tas) but largely preserving the existing approach to
the scope of qualifying mental states. Precedents for this approach are found
South Australia, the Commonwealth, the Australian Capital Territory, the
Northern Territory and Western Australia, where the defence
has been changed to
mental impairment, which is defined to include mental illness, intellectual
disability or a senility (or words
to a similar effect). In these jurisdictions,
the definition of mental illness generally reflects the pre-existing test of
of mind’ from
This approach
has the advantage of retaining the pre-existing case law on the scope of the
qualifying conditions. However, it does
not resolve the difficulties and
anomalies created by the internal/external cause test. These criticisms also
apply to the approach
of the VLRC, which defined mental impairment to include
mental illness (which was to incorporate the common law notion of ‘disease
of the mind’). However, it could be argued that the current anomalies (for
example, hypo/hyperglycaemia) are well-understood
and that any new definition
will give rise to new ‘anomalies and that its novelty would cause more
uncertainty than presently
However, other
concerns with this approach are that it does not appear to address the problems
of disparity between legal and medical
understandings of mental illness or
claims that such a defence is discriminatory and contrary to the
Remove the requirement for extraordinary stimuli to be
. This approach would involve a minimal change to language (as set
out above) by adopting the Western Australian definition of mental
illness that
does not specify that the extraordinary stimuli must be external. Instead, as
], the test of mental
illness specifies that it ‘does not include a condition that results from
the reaction of a healthy mind
to extraordinary stimuli’. The LRCWA
observed that some commentators have suggested that ‘conditions resulting
healthy mind’s reaction to
extraordinary stimuli
(such as ... [hyperglycaemia, epilepsy and arthrosclerosis]) are excluded from
the defence&#
reason the LRCWA argued that no reform is necessary because ‘the
definition of mental illness under the Code enables
“holistic” approach when considering whether a particular condition
should be classified as a mental illness.
On this basis, it is arguable that the
exclusion of the word ‘external’ from the test would mean
involuntariness arising
from such conditions would be dealt with as automatism
rather than as a mental illness for the purposes of the mental impairment
defence. This seems appropriate and preferable to option (1). However, it is
uncertain whether conditions such as diabetes and epilepsy
would actually be
considered extraordinary stimuli. Further, this approach does not address
broader concerns about the existence
of a defence based on disability and the
legal/medical divide.
Redefinition of qualifying
conditions within mental health and cognitive impairment framework
approach would change the
test by providing a detailed definition
of mental and cognitive impairment as proposed by the NSWLRC. This is set out in
and, as shown, has similarities with the definition contained in the
Mental Health Act 2013
Table 7.3: Comparison of definition of mental illness
NSWLRC recommendation
Mental Health Act 2013
(a) Mental health impairment means a temporary or continuing disturbance of
thought, mood, volition, perception, or memory that impairs
emotional wellbeing,
judgment or behaviour, so as to affect functioning in daily life to a material
(b) Such mental health impairment may arise from but is not limited to the
(i) anxiety disorders
(ii) affective disorders
(iii) psychoses
(iv) substance induced mental disorders.
‘Substance induced mental disorders’ include ongoing mental
health impairments such as drug-induced psychoses, but do
not include substance
abuse disorders (addiction to substances) or the temporary effects of ingesting
substances.
For the purposes of this section ‘mental health impairment’
does not include a personality disorder.
(1) For the purposes of this Act –
(a) a person is taken to have a mental illness if he or she experiences,
temporarily, repeatedly or continually –
(i) a serious impairment of thought (which may include delusions); or
(ii) a serious impairment of mood, volition, perception or cognition;
(b) nothing prevents the serious or permanent physiological, biochemical or
psychological effects of alcohol use or drug-taking from
being regarded as an
indication that a person has a mental illness.
8.7.69 The NSWLRC preferred this approach as it reflects contemporary
psychiatric and psychological understanding and is more precise
than the current
outdated terminology. It also considered that it is more respectful and more
consistent with behavioural science
to provide separate definitions for
cognitive impairment and mental health
impairment.
As set out at [
], the definition of cognitive
impairment is as follows:
(a) an ongoing impairment in comprehension, reason, adaptive functioning,
judgement, learning or memory that is the result of any
damage to, dysfunction,
developmental delay, or deterioration of the brain or mind.
(b) Such cognitive impairment may arise from, but is not limited to, the
(i) intellectual disability
(ii) borderline intellectual functioning
(iii) dementias
(iv) acquired brain injury
(v) drug or alcohol related brain damage
(vi) autism spectrum disorders.
8.7.70 The definitions set out by the NSWLRC were developed as a result of
consultation with a broad range of stakeholders including
legal and medical
experts and an Expert Advisory Panel (consisting of Professor Eileen Baldry, Dr
Jonathan Phillips, Mr Jim Simpson
and Professor Ian
Further, this
approach would move away from the outdated
definition of mental
illness (internal/external) and more appropriately reflect medical
understanding. It reduces stigma and is more
respectful in the separation of
mental health impairment from cognitive impairment.
Redefinition of the qualifying condition outside the
mental health impairment and cognitive impairment framework.
This was the
approach of the Law Commission of England and Wales (recognised medical
condition) and Walvisch (defence of lack of reasons-responsiveness).
Commission argued that the ‘recognised medical condition’ defence is
preferable to amending a special defence
based on mental disorder because there
is no reason to treat mental disorder differently from physical disorders and it
would reduce
Walvisch’s proposal does not require an inquiry into the cause of the
defendant’s lack of reasons-responsiveness and
instead focuses on its
effect. Walvisch’s defence would not have qualifying conditions. Both
these models have moved away from
tying the defence to a mental or cognitive
impairment framework and, on this basis, can be argued to reflect a disability
approach. As noted at [
the defence of insanity or mental impairment has been criticised as being
inherently discriminatory to those with disabilities
and contrary to the
right to equality before the law. However, as noted, other commentators have
argued that the defence does not offend against the provisions
8.7.72 The approaches of the Law Commission of England and Wales and Walvisch
would also have the advantage of removing the internal/external
division of the
current test of mental disease. As noted by the Law Commission, an approach
based on a ‘recognised medical
condition’ means that the
‘illogical and hair-splitting’ distinctions arising from the
internal cause (insanity)
and external factor (automatism) can be
Instead, the effect
of the impairment is the focus of the legal test. However, this could also be
achieved by a less fundamental
reform such as that as set out in Option (2). It
may also be questioned whether a special defence is appropriate in cases
conditions like diabetes and that issues of voluntariness arising from
this condition should be dealt with according to the general
rules of criminal
responsibility. Another category of cases that would be brought within the scope
of the ‘recognised medical
condition’ would be involuntariness
attributed to concussion or drivers who fall asleep as a result of sleep apnoea.
cases have previously been decided according to the general principles of
criminal responsibility.
8.7.73 In developing its recommendations about the most appropriate reform
path to be adopted in Tasmania, the Institute stresses
that the scope of the
defence is a legal issue and not a medical issue. Nevertheless, it is critical
that the reform of the defence
is informed by and reflects contemporary medical
understanding and does not perpetuate stigma and stereotypes. It is also
(as recognised by the NSWLRC) that the qualifying condition (and
associated definitions) must be appropriate for their purpose, and
context of a defence of mental impairment, ‘the function of the definition
of the person’s mental state in the
defence is to provide a preliminary
“gate” through which a defendant must
8.7.74 After considering these approaches to reform and the submissions
received, the Institute’s view is that the most appropriate
reform is to
amend the defence by changing the qualifying conditions from a ‘mental
disease’ to definitions that reflects
a mental and cognitive impairment
model as set out by the NSWLRC with one exception in relation to personality
disorders (see from
[7.5.75]). The Institute’s view is that the NSWLRC
definitions provide well-considered definitions to be included in the renamed
‘defence of mental or cognitive impairment’ given the consultation
process undertaken in the development of those definitions.
The NSW government
has announced that it is in process of reforming the
Mental Health (Forensic
Provisions) Act 1990
(NSW) and it is proposed to include an updated
definition of mental health
impairment.
These reforms
have been the subject of further consultation and broadly reflect the NSWLRC
recommendations.
publicly released, this draft legislation could further assist in the
development of the definitions to be used in the Tasmanian
legislation.
8.7.75 Further issues that require consideration in relation to the
definition of mental impairment are the approach that should be
adopted for
personality disorders and for substance use.
Personality disorders.
As set out at
], the NSWLRC made
recommendations to exclude personality disorders from the definition of mental
health impairment. The Scottish
Law Commission similarly recommended that the
condition of psychopathic personality disorder be excluded from the scope of the
The Law Commission
of England and Wales likewise expressed the view that an antisocial personality
disorder should not be a condition
which qualifies for a special
Most statutory
definitions of mental illness or mental impairment do not include personality
disorders (exceptions to this are found
in Commonwealth and ACT legislation).
However, there is no express exclusion in Western Australia, South Australia and
the Northern
is also uncertainty in relation to the status of personality disorders within
the scope of the insanity defence that rely on
8.7.77 The NSWLRC summarised the arguments in favour of excluding personality
disorders from the insanity defence:
• The inclusion of personality disorders would open the floodgates as
many people who commit crimes have personality disorders.
Its view was that to
include personality disorders is to throw ‘the net too wide. In
particular, ... [it is not] appropriate
for those with anti-social personality
disorder or psychopathy to be exculpated substantially because of their criminal
behaviour.’
• It is against the weight of community opinion, the approach in the
majority of Australian jurisdictions and academic expert
• The evidence base for policy development needs to be developed as
‘the psychiatric understandings of personality disorders,
precision with which they are defined, is not sufficient to allow their
inclusion with any degree of confidence at this present
8.7.78 The NSWLRC also set out reasons in favour of the inclusion of
personality disorders as follows:
• The gate can be narrowed by the requirement that the personality
disorder is severe, and further that the ‘person must
pass through the
second, and narrower, gate and show that the personality disorder had the effect
that he or she did not know what
they were doing, or know that it was wrong, or
that he or she was unable to control their
• There is no evidence of over-reliance on the defence in jurisdictions
that allow personality disorders to be
Other reasons identified in favour of including (or at the least not
excluding) personality disorders include the view that particular
should not be singled out in legislation for exclusion, and that there should be
flexibility to consider whether a particular
condition, including a personality
disorder, qualifies for the
The Law Commission
of England and Wales also noted that it can be difficult to distinguish
personality disorders from other mental
8.7.79 As indicated, another approach is neither to expressly exclude nor
include personality disorders for the purposes of the insanity
defence. This is
the approach in New Zealand, where the NZLC recommended no change be made to
this position.
Similarly, in
South Australia, Victoria and the Western Australia, reviews of the relevant
legislation recommended no change to the
approach in those jurisdictions in
relation to personality
However, these
mind’ and this provides an additional
safeguard to allow for courts to
exclude personality disorders where appropriate.
8.7.80 In the Issues Paper, the Institute sought feedback on the approach
that should be taken to personality disorders:
Should the definition of mental impairment include some or all personality
disorders or expressly exclude some or all personality
disorders, or should the
definition not specifically refer to personality disorders? If the definition of
mental impairment is to
distinguish between personality disorders, which should
be included or excluded from the scope of s 16?
8.7.81 There were different views about the approach that should be taken to
personality disorders in the submissions received.
8.7.82 The DPP did not support the express inclusion of any personality
This is consistent with the majority of other jurisdictions which do not
include personality disorders in the statutory definition
of mental impairment.
There are a range of personality disorders and there is a divergence of opinion
whether or not they amount
to a psychiatric illness. For example, the Victorian
Supreme Court of Appeal found that the Verdins principles were inapplicable
personality disorders in
DPP v O’Neill
[2015] VSCA 325.
inclusion of personality disorders may open the floodgates. The NSWLRC, as
summarised in 7.5.29 of the paper, stated the “evidence
base for policy
development needs to be developed as the psychiatric understandings of
personality disorders, and the precision with
which they are defined, is not
sufficient to allow their inclusion with any degree of confidence at the present
time.” However,
if a person with personality disorder otherwise fits the
criteria for the defence as provided in s 16 of the Code, the defence should
available to them.
O’Connell also did not support the inclusion of specific personality
8.7.83 On the other hand, EOT and the MHCT did not recommend the express
exclusion of personality disorders. EOT wrote that:
Exclusion of personality disorders risks scoping out some major conditions
that might ordinarily be associated with mental health
impairment, including
paranoia, schizophrenia and/or borderline personality disorder. Accordingly EOT
does not support excluding
these conditions.
Similarly, MHCT did not support express exclusion. MCHT highlighted the high
prevalence of co-morbidity of personality disorders with
other mental health
conditions as well as the ‘complexity of personality disorders and that
the condition is a diagnosed mental
illness’. MHCT also noted that meeting
the criteria for a mental health impairment does not mean that the defence would
successfully made out, as the defence has a second component (in terms of the
relevant incapacities) and that narrows the gate.
8.7.84 The ALA addressed the issue of personality disorders in the context of
a new defence applying to ‘recognised medical
conditions’. As noted
], its view was that policy
considerations do not justify excluding anti-social personality disorders.
8.7.85 Similarly, Walvisch’s approach would not exclude personality
disorders, as the focus should be on the nature of the accused’s
impairment rather than its cause. In his proposal, the additional threshold for
the operation of the defence of lack of reasons-responsiveness
would provide a
difficult threshold to meet — namely that the accused ‘must have
been operating outside the realm of
reason at the relevant time’. Further,
under this approach, the defendant would be precluded from relying on the
defence due
to prior fault (for example, in some cases where the person had
failed to take medication or otherwise manage their mental health).
8.7.86 After considering the submissions received and the different
approaches and views on the issue, the Institute’s view
is that the
legislative definition of mental impairment and cognitive impairment should
neither expressly include or exclude personality
disorders from the defence.
This provides flexibility in relation to whether a particular disorder qualifies
for the defence in the
circumstances of the case and reflects the current
approach in Tasmania.
Substance use
. Currently, s 17(1) of the
Criminal Code
(Tas) recognises that intoxication may bring an accused within the insanity
rules contained in the
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 16 if the accused’s
intoxication has caused a disease of the mind. This is relatively
uncontroversial. It is also uncontroversial
that a person who is temporarily
intoxicated as a result of substance use should rely on the intoxication defence
(and not the defence
of insanity), However, as the TLRI’s report on
self-defence noted, there are complexities that arise from the interaction of
the defences of intoxication, insanity and self-defence in cases where a person
experiences substance related
8.7.88 In Carroll et al’s analysis of drug-associated psychosis and
criminal responsibility, the authors have identified at
least four ways in which
drug-associated psychosis may arise:
(1) a person may experience a drug induced psychotic episode that is part of
an intoxication syndrome that resolves rapidly with
the excretion of the drug
from the body;
(2) a person may experience relatively short-lived psychotic symptomatology
due to the direct psychological effects of an ingested
substance and the
symptoms may persist for a short period (days or weeks) after the excretion of
the substance;
(3) a person’s use of drugs may be associated with the development of a
psychotic illness that then has an independent long-term
(4) a person with an established psychotic illness may engage in substance
abuse, which appears to precipitate psychotic
Currently, in Tasmania, defendants can rely on the insanity defence if they
suffer from a disease of the mind caused by intoxication
and this would
encompass (3) and (4) where a person has an independent psychotic
However, issues
remain as to the appropriateness of excluding an accused from the insanity
defence where his or her psychosis is
attributable to the intoxicating effects
of the substance or short-term symptoms associated with drug use, (the states of
(1) and (2)) which may give rise to ‘temporary
insanity’).
8.7.89 The weight of commentary by academics and law reform bodies has taken
the view that there should be a distinction between self-induced
independent
conditions resulting from substance use (which should be included in the
definition of mental disorder) and the temporary
effects of ingesting drugs
(which should be excluded from the definition of mental
For example, in
its review the NSWLRC recommended that ‘substance induced mental
disorders’ be included within the definition
of mental health impairment
but that this should not include substance abuse disorders (addiction to
substances) or the temporary
effects of ingesting substances. It drew a
distinction between casual intoxication, substance use disorder or addiction,
and ongoing
cognitive and mental impairments induced by the use of such
substances.
intoxication refers to the temporary effects of the use of alcohol, drugs and
other substances and its relationship to criminal
responsibility is contained in
the law of intoxication as set out the
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 17.
Substance use disorder refers ‘to the abuse of, and dependence on, drugs,
alcohol and/or other substances “to
the extent that the person’s
functioning is
affected.”’
Accordingly, the NSWLRC indicated that substance use disorder is:
distinguished from casual substance use or temporary intoxication. It is also
to be distinguished from a substance-induced mental
disorder, an impairment that
is caused by a person’s “substance use, abuse, intoxication or
withdrawal”. Such disorders
can be the product of long-term abuse of drugs
and alcohol or, in some instances, can be triggered after a single
It indicated that this approach would include within the definition of mental
health impairment ongoing mental health impairments
such a long-term drug
induced psychiatric disorders like Korsakoff’s Syndrome and drug induced
8.7.90 The NSWLRC stated that the approach it had taken is consistent with
the common law and the exclusion of the ‘reaction
of a healthy mind to
extraordinary external stimuli, including psychoactive substances’ from
the definition of ‘disease
This approach
would appear to encompass (as with Tasmania) the states set out in (3) and (4)
above within the definition of mental
health impairment. However, it appears
that a temporary drug induced psychosis (being the temporary effect of ingesting
substances)
would be excluded. This reflects the common law approach that
‘a drug induced psychosis (unaccompanied by a separate psychiatric
illness) does not constitute a disease of the mind as understood at common
8.7.91 In its consideration of the issue, the VLRC
also expressed the view that ‘self-induced conditions that result from the
temporary effects of ingesting substances’ should be excluded from the
definition of mental impairment. However, it considered
that self-induced
independent conditions that result from ingesting substances that persist after
the drugs have left the person’s
system should be included in the
definition.
acknowledged that this distinction would create considerable practical
difficulties for mental health experts in cases where
it is difficult to
determine whether the person was suffering from the temporary effects of
substance use or a permanent
For example, as
Bourget has written, ‘it is not often possible to distinguish
substance-induced psychosis from a first-episode
psychosis in the context of a
primary mental disorder due to the very high level of
comorbidity.’
Nevertheless, her view was that the distinction is supported on sound public
policy grounds.
8.7.92 The definition of ‘mental impairment’ in the
Law Consolidation Act 1935
(SA) also excludes intoxication, which is defined
as ‘a temporary disorder, abnormality or impairment of the mind that
from the consumption or administration of intoxicants and will pass on
metabolism or elimination of intoxicants from the
This approach is
similar to the approach recommended in New South Wales and
Additionally, the
review by the Sentencing Advisory Council, South Australia (‘SASAC’)
concluded that the provisions
of the legislation that set out the relationship
between intoxication and mental impairment should be retained without
8.7.93 In the Issues Paper, the Institute sought feedback on the relationship
between drug induced psychosis and the insanity defence:
How should drug induced psychosis be treated within the insanity defence?
Should a distinction be made between psychosis arising from
the temporary
effects of drug use and mental health impairments resulting from drug use (as
recommended in NSW and Victoria)?
8.7.94 The interaction of drug-induced psychosis and a defence of mental
impairment was addressed by the DPP, who wrote that:
Section 17(1) of the Code allows the provisions of
to apply to a person
suffering from disease of the mind caused by intoxication. In my view, there
should be a distinction between
ongoing mental health impairments such as
drug-induced psychoses and the temporary effects of ingesting drugs. The latter
not be captured within the insanity defence.
8.7.95 The ALA addressed the issue of drug-induced psychosis in the context
of a new defence applying to ‘recognised medical
conditions’. As
], its view was that
policy considerations did not justify excluding temporary drug-induced
8.7.96 Walvisch also considered that there is no need to exclude drug-induced
psychosis given that the focus should be on the nature
of the accused’s
impairment rather than its cause (and whether the individual was
reasons-responsive).
8.7.97 The Institute agrees with the position of the DPP and considers that
it is appropriate to make a distinction between drug-induced
psychosis that
arises from the temporary effects of drug use and ongoing mental impairments
arising from drug use. This reflects
the current position in Tasmanian law and
the recommendations of the Institute in relation to the qualifying condition and
definitions are not meant to result in a change to this approach.
This is important from a policy point of view and prevents reliance
on a defence
of mental or cognitive impairment where the reason for the person’s
psychosis is substance use (unaccompanied
by a separate psychiatric illness).
Accordingly, as with the VLRC and the NSWLRC, the Institute’s view is that
self-induced
conditions that result from the temporary effects of ingesting
substance should be excluded from the defence.
8.7.98 Based on this discussion, the Institute’s view is the defence of
mental and cognitive impairment should apply to ongoing
mental impairments
arising from substance use. In the words of the NSWLRC, this would include
‘a person who has a psychiatric
disorder at the time of the offence,
albeit one brought on by abusing
substances’.
it should not include any temporary conditions resulting from the effects of
ingesting substances. It should also not include
substance use disorders
(addiction to substances).
Recommendations
28. The qualifying condition contained in the
Criminal Code
16 should be changed from a ‘mental disease’ to mental or cognitive
impairment with detailed definition of these
terms included in the
29. The definition of mental and cognitive impairment should be based on
the definitions set out by the NSWLRC as follows:
Mental impairment means a temporary or continuing disturbance of thought,
mood, volition, perception, or memory that impairs emotional
wellbeing, judgment
or behaviour, so as to affect functioning in daily life to a material extent.
Such mental impairment may arise from but is not limited to the following:
(i) anxiety disorders
(ii) affective disorders
(iii) psychoses
(iv) substance induced mental disorders.
‘Substance induced mental disorders’ include ongoing mental
impairments, but do not include substance abuse disorders
(addiction to
substances) or the temporary effects of ingesting substances.
Cognitive impairment means an ongoing impairment in comprehension, reason,
adaptive functioning, judgement, learning or memory that
is the result of any
damage to, dysfunction, developmental delay, or deterioration of the brain or
Such cognitive impairment may arise from, but is not limited to, the
(i) intellectual disability
(ii) dementias
(iii) acquired brain injury
(iv) drug or alcohol related brain damage
(v) autism spectrum disorders.
30. Section 16(4) of the
Criminal Code
(Tas) should be
31. The legislative definition of mental impairment and cognitive
impairment should not expressly include or exclude personality disorders
the defence.
Narrow scope of incapacities
. It has been argued that some
‘persons with medical conditions whom we would regard as insane are
outside the scope of the
because of the very narrow interpretation of the relevant incapacities set out
in the insanity defence. As noted at [7.3.14],
the first limb of the insanity
defence (that the person does understand the physical character of their act) is
rarely used because
of its narrow interpretation. The Law Commission of England
and Wales has observed that it is very rare for a person not to know
and quality of his or her actions in a physical sense (as distinct from the
moral aspects of their conduct) and that,
further, its ‘exclusive focus on
cognitive questions excludes other sorts of problems in the functioning of minds
and brains,
such as mood disorders or emotional
The limited
utility of this limb of the insanity defence has also been noted by other legal
commentators.
8.7.100 In addition, in Tasmania the tests are focussed on people’s
‘capacity’ to know or understand rather than
their actual knowledge
or understanding. This is also the position in Queensland and Western
The NSWLRC has
observed that capacity tests may create problems ‘because a person with a
mental illness may have capacity at
one time but not at another, or may have
capacity to understand some things but not
In contrast,
in other jurisdictions, the test is whether the accused knew the nature or
quality of the conduct or that the conduct
Yeo has written
The element of incapacity is narrower than lack of knowledge because it is
possible for a person to generally possess the cognitive
capacity to know the
nature of his or her act or that it was wrong, but not to have known of it at
the time when the crime was
Yeo suggests that courts have taken a pragmatic approach to the issue and
avoided applying an overly restrictive approach to ‘incapacity’,
has expressed the view that:
Ideally, however, the word “incapacity” should be avoided so as
to enable the defence to succeed so long as the accused
was dispossessed of the
relevant mental faculty at the time of the offence, even if he or she might have
possessed such a faculty
on other occasions.
However, the precise difference between ‘capacity’ and
‘knowledge’ is unclear. For example, the VLRC has written
‘there is some contention over whether a “knowledge” or
“capacity” approach is more
restrictive’.
8.7.101 As indicated, there is also uncertainty about whether an
understanding of the physical character of the act relates just to
character of the act or whether it extends to ‘the capacity to know and
understand the significance of the act’
or the ‘consequences of the
Allnutt, Samuels and O’Driscoll have suggested that the broader view (for
example, that would require an understanding that
a stabbing could result in
death) is reflected in the Queensland and WA criminal codes, which refer to the
‘capacity to understand
what the accused is
8.7.102 In relation to the requirement that the person not have the capacity
to know that the act was one which he or she ought not
do or make contained in s
16(1)(a)(i), the Tasmanian approach has been to adopt the common law
interpretation.
interpretation has been widely accepted and adopted in legislation in other
As indicated,
this is the limb of the insanity defence most commonly relied upon in Tasmania
(and other jurisdictions). In the Issues
Paper, the Institute sought feedback in
relation to whether this requirement causes any difficulties in practice.
Does the narrow interpretation of the ‘incapacity’ and/or the
physical character of the act contained in the
Criminal Code
16(1)(a)(i) cause any problems in practice?
Does the requirement to establish that the person was incapable of knowing
that the act was one which he or she ought not do or make
contained in the
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 16(1)(a)(ii) cause any problems in practice?
Do you consider that there should be any change made to the qualifying
conditions for the defence of insanity contained in the
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 16(1)(a)?
8.7.103 These questions were addressed in two submissions. The DPP’s
response was that he was not aware of any problems from
the operation of s
16(1)(a)(i) and s 16(1)(a)(ii). Walvisch’s response addressed how the
requirement contained in the
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 16 would be captured
in his proposed defence of ‘reasons-responsiveness’:
As noted above, in my view the test should be changed to focus on the
accused’s lack of reasons-responsiveness, rather than
on the requirements
currently set out in Criminal Code (Tas) s 16. I note, however, that many (if
not all) of the individuals captured
by the current defence would continue to be
captured by this revised defence. This is due to the fact that understanding the
and moral nature of one’s conduct, and being able to act in
accordance with one’s deliberations, constitute essential
elements of
reasons-responsiveness.
8.7.104 While the Institute notes that the scope of the limbs in s 16(1)(a)
do not give rise to difficulties in practice, there is
uncertainty in the
interpretation of the first limb of the insanity defence (that is, the
understanding of the physical character
of the act) as a result of the different
interpretations in case law.
One interpretation is that s 16(1)(a)(i) is limited only to the physical
character of the act and on this narrow view, the defence
is only available if
the person was totally unaware of what he or she was doing. The broader view
(and one reflecting the common
law) is that the defence is available if the
defendant is incapable of understanding the nature and quality of the act. This
interpretation
extends to understanding the act and its consequences. It is the
Institute’s view that it is not desirable for the law to be
uncertain and
that there should be reform to make the interpretation clear. Further, the
Institute considers that s 16(1)(a)(i) should
be amended to refer to an
incapacity to understand the nature and quality of the act. This is consistent
with the law in most other
8.7.105 The Institute’s view is that it is not necessary to make any
other changes to the qualifying conditions for the defence
of insanity contained
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 16(1)(a).
Recommendation
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 16(1)(a)(i) should be amended to refer
to ‘understanding the nature and quality of such act or
Irresistible impulse
. Concerns have also been raised in
relation to the ‘irresistible impulse’ limb of the insanity defence
in s 16(1)(b)
Criminal Code
(Tas). This has been described as the
‘most controversial’ aspect of the insanity defence because:
it is difficult to determine objectively whether or not the action is the
consequence of ‘an irresistible impulse or an impulse
not resisted’,
that is, whether or not the person was genuinely incapable of controlling the
behaviour or whether or not he
or she chose not to inhibit the
In addition to the difficulty of determining whether an accused was unable or
unwilling to resist the impulse, Bronitt and McSherry
criticise the
‘volitional’ limb as being contradictory to modern psychology as it
requires the separation of cognition
and action: it ‘assume[s] that a
person can know what he or she is doing is wrong, yet be unable to control his
or her actions’.
is more forcefully stated by Kenny, who asserts that ‘the notion of
irresistible impulse is an incoherent piece of
8.7.107 The majority of Australian jurisdictions have a volitional element in
the insanity defence.
However, it does not exist in Victoria and New South Wales. This issue has also
been subject to review, and as noted by the SASAC,
‘of the six reviews
which have recently addressed this issue, three recommended incorporating a
volitional element ... (NSW,
WA and England) and three opposed its adoption
(Victoria, New Zealand and
Scotland)’.
8.7.108 Reasons for the inclusion of a volitional element are that:
(a) It exists in most other jurisdictions.
(b) Even if it may be difficult to differentiate, there are people who are
genuinely unable to control behaviour and as a matter of
principle, such people
should be exculpated.
8.7.109 Reasons for rejecting a volitional element are that:
(a) It is difficult to differentiate between irresistible impulses and
non-resisted impulses.
(b) The other limbs of the insanity defence are sufficient to accommodate
cases where a defendant was unable to control his or her
conduct, and so a
volitional element is
unnecessary.
8.7.110 In the Issues Paper, the Institute sought feedback on whether the
volitional test in the
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 16(1)(b) should be retained
or amended.
Do you consider that the volitional test for insanity contained in the
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 16(1)(b) should be retained?
Do you consider that any amendment should be made to the
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 16(1)(b)?
8.7.111 The volitional limb of the insanity defence relates to uncontrollable
impulses — the requirement for a person to have
done the acts under an
impulse and the impulse was by reason of a mental disease one which he or she
was in substance deprived of
any power to resist.
8.7.112 There were two responses that addressed these questions.
8.7.113 The DPP supported retaining the current provision in the
(Tas) s 16(1)(b) without amendment. The DPP wrote that:
This provision is consistent with the majority of other jurisdictions. I note
the commentary in par 7.5.41 of the paper to the effect
that this limb is
contrary to modern psychology. However, this is a legal concept and it is almost
inevitable that there will be
some divergence between legal and medical
terminology. Without more detailed submissions from suitably qualified medical
I consider it would be unwise to remove this limb.
8.7.114 The other response addressing the volitional component of the defence
was provided by Walvisch. He noted the similarities
between the scope of the
current provision and his proposed defence of reasons-responsiveness:
As noted above, in my view the test should be changed to focus on the
accused’s lack of reasons-responsiveness, rather than
on the requirements
currently set out in Criminal Code (Tas) s 16. I note, however, that many (if
not all) of the individuals captured
by the current defence would continue to be
captured by this revised defence. This is due to the fact that understanding the
and moral nature of one’s conduct, and being able to act in
accordance with one’s deliberations, constitute essential
elements of
reasons-responsiveness
8.7.115 The Institute’s view is that the
Criminal Code
16(1)(b) should be retained without amendment. Although not frequently used, it
has been relied upon, and reflects the law
in most other Australian
Recommendation
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 16(1)(b) should be retained without
Further consideration of the practical difficulties with the use
of the insanity defence
. Despite well-established theoretical concerns, it
is less clear to what extent these matters give rise to difficulties in
Accordingly, the TLRI sought stakeholder feedback about such
difficulties.
8.7.117 In England and Wales, consultations with stakeholders reported that
the ‘insanity and automatism defences are so outmoded,
inappropriate and
complicated that they are seen as irrelevant. Practitioners work round
Consequently,
despite the ‘significant problems with the law when examined from a
theoretical perspective’, there were
few practical problems actually
reported with the defence given the approach taken by legal and medical
practitioners.
Further, as in
Tasmania, insanity is rarely pleaded, and research in other jurisdictions
suggests that this is because:
practitioners take a pragmatic approach, and achieve the
‘correct’ outcome, in the view of the practitioner and/or the
accused, without having to consider the insanity defence: defendants often
prefer the certainty of a prison term to the uncertainty
of a release date from
Similarly, in New South Wales, stakeholders reported that ‘broadly
speaking, the defence of mental illness works in practice
without any
significant difficulty and that the right results are
8.7.118 The TLRI has undertaken a review of insanity cases decided in the
Supreme Court. This has allowed the TLRI to consider the
insanity has been successful. It does not provide a picture of how the defence
is operating in the Magistrates
Court or how often the insanity defence is
considered (and rejected) by practitioners representing clients and how often it
is unsuccessfully
relied upon at
As discussed in Part
3, the available information suggests that only a small number of individuals
with mental health impairments
or cognitive impairments are able to rely on the
insanity defence. In the Issues Paper, the Institute welcomed feedback on
stakeholders’
views on why this is the case, and, in particular, whether
it is attributable to problems with the law:
Do you have an explanation as to why successful reliance on the defence of
insanity is so low?
Do you consider that there are practical difficulties with the current
operation of the insanity defence contained in the
Criminal Code
Does the current test work well in practice or does it wrongly include or
exclude defendants from the scope of the defence?
Do medical practitioners experience cases where a person’s mental state
at the time of the offence was such that their opinion
was that he or she ought
not to have been held criminally responsible, but the mental condition did not
meet the tests contained
in s 16 of the
Criminal Code
Does the insanity test contained in s 16 of the
Criminal Code
create difficulties for experts in writing reports and/or in giving evidence at
8.7.119 The Institute received two submissions that addressed these
8.7.120 As noted, the DPP’s view is that the substance of the insanity
defence should not be changed as the law is well understood
and does not give
rise to difficulties in practice. This reflects the experience reported in other
The DPP wrote
In my view, this provision does not require amendment. One reason why
successful reliance on s 16(1)(b) may be so low is because although
a person may
have a delusion the delusion is generally in relation to the situation as
opposed to the act. For example, a person
may know they have a gun which they
can and do shoot; but the reason they do so is due to a delusional belief as to
the circumstances
that exist at the time of the relevant act.
8.7.121 O’Connell suggested that there may be difficulties reliably
capturing reliance on insanity in statistical data and that
reliance is low
‘because it is a long and expensive process’.
Section 16(3): The interrelationship between
insanity and self-defence
8.7.122 Another area of concern in relation to the
law of insanity in Tasmania is the role of s 16(3) of the
Criminal Code
(Tas) and the interrelationship of the insanity and self-defence. The law of
self-defence in s 46 of the
Criminal Code
(Tas) provides that a person is
justified in using such force in defence of him or herself or another person as
is reasonable in the
circumstances as the defendant believes them to be. The
test for self-defence requires that: (1) the defendant believes that he or
was acting in self-defence; and (2) the force used by the defendant was
reasonable in the circumstances that the defendant believed
to exist. In cases
where the accused’s perception of the need to use defensive force
corresponds with the actual need to do
so, the application of the law of
self-defence is unproblematic. However, difficulties arise when there is a
difference between the
actual circumstances and the circumstances as the accused
mistakenly believed them to be. And, in the context of this review, key
are: (1) whether an accused can rely on a mistaken belief arising from a
delusion caused by a mental illness for the purposes
of self-defence; and (2)
the role of s 16(3) of the
Criminal Code
8.7.123 These issues are a focus of the Terms of Reference for this Report
and, as discussed at [
], were the
subject of a previous TLRI law reform report. Accordingly, in this section, the
TLRI sets out its previous views and stakeholder
necessary to revisit these recommendations.
8.7.124 In its report
Review of the Law
Relating to Self-defence
, the TLRI observed that considerable uncertainty
remains in relation to the meaning and consequences of s
In particular, the
TLRI observed that it is unclear:
Whether there are any circumstances where the jury might have regard
to evidence of a mental disease and its effects when considering
s 46 of the
Criminal Code
in circumstances where the defence of insanity has been
, the Court of Criminal Appeal left unresolved the
question whether ‘evidence concerning a mental disease and its effects may
ever be taken into account by a jury when considering s 46 in circumstances
where the defence of insanity has been
To what extent does the High Court decision in
Hawkins v the
undermine the
authority of the Court of Criminal Appeal decision in
uncertainty arises because the High Court in
Hawkins v the Queen
a different approach to that of the Tasmanian Court of Criminal Appeal in
h in relation to the relevance of expert opinion evidence of mental
illness in circumstances where the jury has rejected the defence
of insanity. In
, the defence wished to use evidence about
the accused’s mental impairment caused by a mental illness to deny the
unlawfulness
of the accused’s conduct. However, different grounds were
advanced for denying the unlawfulness of the accused’s conduct
, the defence sought to deny that the act was unlawful on
the basis that the accused was acting in self-defence. In
defence sought to deny the specific intention for the offence. In both cases,
the issue for the court to decide was whether
the expert opinion evidence of
mental impairment could be used for a dual purpose — first, in relation to
the insanity defence,
and then, if insanity was rejected, as the basis for a
claim of self-defence (
) or to deny the specific intent of the
, the Court of Criminal Appeal ruled
that, in the circumstances of that case, the evidence could not be used for a
dual purpose. In
contrast, in
, in the context of a denial of
specific intent, the High Court said that the expert evidence could be used for
the dual purpose sought.
is still binding authority in
Tasmania in relation to the interaction of insanity and self-defence, it remains
to be seen how, in
light of the approach of the High Court in
the issue might be approached if the Court of Criminal Appeal reconsidered the
Is s 16(3) limited to insane delusions or does it apply to delusions
more generally?
On the basis that s 16(3) does not refer to insane
delusions, some commentators have suggested that ‘specific delusions may
be exempt from criminal responsibility even though they are not caused by mental
Read in this
way, s 16(3) could apply to a delusion arising from drug-induced psychosis
rather than from an underlying mental disease.
However, the opposing view is
that s 16(3) should be read as applying only to delusions that are produced by a
mental disease. This
interpretation is supported by the location of s 16(3)
within the provision that sets out the insanity defence. This issue is
unresolved.
If an accused is able to rely on a sane delusion under s 16(3) as a
basis for raising self-defence, is the accused entitled to a complete
qualified acquittal?
In Tasmania, reliance on s 16(3) has more commonly been
understood to provide the accused with a basis for raising self-defence under
46, and if the prosecution cannot prove beyond reasonable doubt that the
accused’s use of force was excessive, the accused
would receive a complete
position is that s 46 works within s 16 to provide the accused with an
additional way of proving insanity and obtaining
a qualified acquittal; that is,
not guilty by reason of
8.7.125 Accordingly, the TLRI expressed the view that there is a need to
clarify the interaction of the law of self-defence and
8.7.126 The Terms of Reference for this current review ask the TLRI to
provide advice as to whether evidence of insane delusions arising
from mental
illness should form the basis for self-defence. This has previously been
addressed by the TLRI, and it was recommended
Criminal Code
(Tas) be amended to provide that if a person does an
act or makes an omission as a result of a delusion caused by a mental disease,
the delusion can only be used as a defence under s 16 of the
Criminal Code
(Tas) and cannot be relied on to support a defence of self-defence under s
Criminal Code
8.7.127 This recommendation reflects the TLRI’s view that to allow all
evidence of mental illness to be relevant to self-defence
is contrary to
community expectations and does not reflect the respective purposes of the
insanity defence and the defence of self-defence.
While, as a matter of policy,
it may be accepted that an accused should be able to rely on sane though
unreasonable mistakes for
the purposes of self-defence, it does not follow that
an accused should similarly be entitled to rely on insane delusions. As
by Baker, a belief arising from a delusion is not a
Further, in the case of a (sane) mistake the jury can apply their common sense
and may refuse to accept a patently absurd and unreasonable
mistake as one that
is not genuinely held. This ‘reality testing’ is unlikely to be
possible for an insane delusion.
This means that the prosecution will only be
able to establish beyond reasonable doubt that the accused was not acting in
self-defence
by proving either that the delusion was not one of
immediate/imminent harm
that the force used was excessive in the circumstances as the accused believed
them to be. But exactly how would the prosecution
be able to do this? It would
require them to engage with the insane delusion as though it had some basis in
reality. This gives rise
to the possibility of trials in which the
‘facts’ to be established would consist entirely of the content of
Similarly, asking jurors to assess the reasonableness of an accused’s
response to an insane delusion obliges them to engage
in fantastical reasoning.
This begs the question, just how can a jury realistically or rationally assess
the reasonableness of a
response generated by an insane
Additionally, to
permit complete acquittals in cases of insane delusions does not enable
appropriate treatment to be provided to
deluded defendants or take into account
the need for community
protection.
8.7.128 Illustrative cases where a defendant relied on insanity but where the
nature of the delusion meant that the defendant believed
that he was acting in
self-defence include:
(a) A case where the accused suffered from severe schizophrenia and was
described by a forensic psychologist as ‘seriously unwell’.
accused’s condition caused acute psychotic symptoms including auditory and
visual hallucinations and persecutory and referential
delusions. The accused
believed that the police officers were trying to kill them.
(b) A case where the accused suffered from schizophrenia, with the most
prominent symptoms being a belief that family members were
being impersonated,
delusions and other abnormal beliefs. The accused repeatedly hit and injured
their family member, believing that
the person was impersonating their family
member (rather than actually being the family member). The accused believed the
‘impersonator’
was dangerous as the accused believed the
‘impersonator’ had killed the family member.
(c) A case where the accused threatened police officers because, due to a
psychotic illness, the accused believed that the police
were a source of
profound danger.
8.7.129 In addition, in its previous report, the TLRI considered the repeal
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 16(3) and recommended that it should be
8.7.130 This is the approach adopted in the
Criminal Code
7.3(7) and the
Criminal Code
(ACT) s 29(2). The
Criminal Code
(ACT) s 29 provides:
(2) If the trier of fact is satisfied that a person carried out conduct
because of a delusion caused by a mental impairment, the delusion
itself cannot
be relied on as a defence, but the person may rely on the mental impairment to
deny criminal responsibility.
Criminal Code
(Cth) s 7.3(7) provides that:
If the tribunal of fact is satisfied that a person carried out conduct as a
result of a delusion caused by a mental impairment, the
delusion cannot
otherwise be relied on as a defence.
These provisions reflect the view of the Model Criminal Code Officers
Committee (‘MCCOC’) that ‘delusions are symptoms
of underlying
pathology and that such defendants should be confined to the mental impairment
approach precludes reliance on a delusion for self-defence, it does not prevent
a person who suffers from an insane delusion
from relying on self-defence in
circumstances where the person is actually under threat (rather than relying
solely on an imagined
threat that is a product of
psychosis).
This approach was
also supported by the DPP, who expressed the view that:
An accused should not be allowed to rely on evidence of a delusion caused by
mental impairment as a basis for self-defence. Evidence
of delusions caused by
mental impairment should be dealt with by a consideration of insanity under s 16
Criminal Code.
It is contrary to community expectations that an
accused person could be acquitted based on a deluded belief or view of the
The community would expect that such a person would be caught by the
insanity provisions and in that way the community would be protected
risk that they might behave in a similar way in the future due to ongoing
8.7.131 Further, this model accords with the approach of the Court of
Criminal Appeal in
, where it was held that expert evidence of an
insane delusion is not generally admissible in relation to the defence of
self-defence
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 46. In these circumstances,
evidence of the accused’s delusions is confined to the insanity defence
contained in s 16
Criminal Code
8.7.132 This model also prevents people who are suffering psychotic illnesses
from relying on their deluded beliefs to obtain a complete
acquittal. This
approach is supported on policy grounds that the public requires protection from
potential future harms.
can also be said to accord with community sentiments that a person who inflicts
violence as a result of a deluded belief of danger
‘should be confined to
a place of safety but not be
dispositional options available following a finding of not guilty by reason of
insanity means that the court can appropriately
respond to treatment needs of
the individual and the need for community protection.
8.7.133 In addition, the TLRI’s view was that repealing s 16(3) of the
Criminal Code
(Tas) had the advantage of promoting clarity and the
modernisation of the law through the removal of a redundant provision. The scope
and operation of this provision has remained obscure with some commentators,
courts and law reform bodies expressing the view that
it is redundant and out of
step with modern
psychiatry.
In Canada, these concerns led to the repeal in 1991 of the equivalent provision
in the Canadian
The utility of s
16(3) is particularly questionable in circumstances where a person has a deluded
belief in the need for self-defence
arising from a mental illness. It is
difficult to envisage a scenario where such a case would not fall within s
16(1)(ii) of the
Criminal Code
(Tas). This section has been interpreted
to mean that the defendant did not know that what they were doing was wrong
according to
the ‘everyday standards of reasonable
8.7.134 The possibility that the jury might reject the defence of insanity
yet consider it possible that the accused acted in self-defence
when under the
influence of an insane delusion is problematic. As noted in the Canadian
decision of
An accused will be able to bring his claim within the scope of the second
branch of the test set out in s 16(2) [the equivalent of
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 16(1)(ii)] if he proves that he was incapable of knowing that his
conduct was morally wrong in the particular circumstances,
for example, if he
believes that the act was necessary to protect his life. If he is not able to
establish this fact, it must be
concluded that he either knew or was capable of
knowing that the act was wrong in the circumstances. He cannot then possibly
in claiming that the act would have been justified or excused had the
perceived facts been
A similar view was expressed by Simester et al, who observed that the rule on
delusions in
M’Naghten’s
does not appear to add anything to the substance of the Rules; the
illustrations provided by the judges who formulated the Rules indicate
effect of the delusion must be to prevent D knowing the nature and quality of
his actions or from knowing that his actions
were wrong. The superfluity of this
aspect of the
Rules is borne out by the lack of case law
arising thereunder.
If the jury accepts the expert opinion evidence concerning the
accused’s delusional belief in the need to use self-defence,
qualified acquittal on the grounds of insanity is available on the basis that
the accused did not know that the act was wrong.
On the other hand, if the jury
rejects the defence of insanity, it seems difficult (if not impossible) to argue
that the accused
can rely on evidence of his or her delusion for the purposes of
self-defence on the basis that he or she is ‘criminally responsible
the act or omission to the same extent as if the fact which ... [he or she was]
induced by such delusion to believe to exist
There is no
evidentiary foundation to support the contention that the accused had a genuine
belief in the need to act in self-defence.
8.7.135 However, the TLRI observed that contrary views had been expressed in
relation to the repeal of s 16(3). Some commentators
have suggested that
arguments that s 16(3) is an anachronism fail to take account of the difference
between the medical and legal
definitions of insanity and the role of the jury
in applying the insanity
Further, the TLRI
noted that retaining s 16(3) of the
Criminal Code
(Tas) acknowledges the
possibility that there may be cases where juries are able to take evidence
concerning a mental disease and
its effects into account when applying s 46 of
Criminal Code
(Tas) in circumstances where the other limbs of the
defence of insanity have been rejected. The Court of Criminal Appeal in
unanswered the question whether there are any circumstances where this may be
possible. Accordingly, an alternative model considered
by the TLRI is to retain
s 16(3) of the
Criminal Code
(Tas) but to specify that delusions would
result in a qualified acquittal (and not a complete acquittal via s 46). This is
the approach
recommended by the LRCWA.
8.7.136 This model is advocated on the basis that it permits evidence of
delusions to be relied on for the purposes of self-defence,
but provides that,
in these circumstances, only a qualified acquittal is possible (that is, not
guilty on the grounds of insanity).
This would mean that a person who held a
deluded belief in the need for self-defence but did not meet the test for
insanity contained
Criminal Code
(Tas) ss 16(1) and (2) could rely
on s 16(3) if his or her response was reasonable in the circumstances as they
believed them to be.
The onus of proof would be on the defendant (as with the
other provisions of the insanity defence) to establish this on the balance
probabilities. However, if the defendant discharged the onus of proof in this
regard, the result would be a qualified acquittal
8.7.137 This approach reflects both the original
on delusions and arguably the intended operation of the
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 16(3).
reflects the approach of the LRCWA which recommended that the equivalent Western
Australian provision be retained and that
it be made clear that successful
reliance on the provision would result in a special verdict of not guilty by
reason of mental impairment
rather than a complete
recommended this approach because it is in the public interest and it allows for
the appropriate treatment of a deluded
It ensures that a
person with a deluded belief in the need for self-defence receives a qualified
acquittal. It can be argued that
this reflects community expectations.
8.7.138 Accordingly, this model would retain s 16(3). This model and the
model previously recommended by the TLRI, which would repeal
s 16(3), are
similar in that they achieve the same end — limiting the use of evidence
of delusions arising from a mental illness
to the insanity defence. However, the
difference rests on the desirability of retaining s 16(3) of the
8.7.139 An alternative model (and one previously
rejected by the TLRI) would be to allow evidence of delusions arising from
illness to form the basis for self-defence with the result that a
successful argument of self-defence results in a complete acquittal.
would make no distinction between mistakes and delusional beliefs arising from
mental illness. This approach may satisfy
concerns arising about the unequal
treatment and discrimination for individuals with disabilities under the
However, given
that a person acquitted by reason of self-defence is free to leave and there is
no provision for any disposition to
be imposed under the provisions of the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas), it does raise
questions about whether community safety is adequately protected. This depends
on the options available under
the civil process contained in the
Health Act 2013
(Tas). This issue was also addressed at [
] and [8.3.52]–[8.3.53].
8.7.140 In the Issues Paper, the Institute sought further feedback on the
operation of 16(3) and the relationship between insanity
and self-defence in s
Criminal Code
Can you outline any circumstances where an accused would not be able to rely
on insanity within s 16(1) but would be able to rely
on insanity within
Do you agree with the view of the TLRI that s 16(3) of the
should be repealed and a provision inserted in the
provide that if a person does an act or makes an omission as a result of a
delusion caused by a mental disease, the delusion can
only be used as a defence
under s 16 of the
Criminal Code
(Tas) and cannot be relied on to support
a defence of self-defence under s 46 of the
Criminal Code
possible model would be the legislation in the ACT or the Commonwealth Act).
Alternatively, do you consider that s 16(3) of the
Criminal Code
should be retained, and an amendment made to the
to provide that
successful reliance on s 16(3) would result in a special verdict of not guilty
by reason of insanity rather than
a complete acquittal? (A possible model for
the legislation would be the amendment proposed by the Western Australian Law
Commission).
Alternatively, do you consider that evidence of delusions arising from mental
illness should be able to be relied on for the purposes
of the self-defence in s
Criminal Code
(Tas) with the result being that a successful
argument of self-defence receives a complete acquittal? If so, what (if any)
protections
need to be put in place in the case of an accused who is acquitted
on the basis of self-defence arising from a deluded belief attributable
mental illness?
8.7.141 Two submissions addressed these questions. In response to the first
question, the DPP indicated that he could not ‘readily
outline any
circumstances where an accused would not be able to rely on insanity within s
16(1) but would be able to rely on insanity
within s 16(3)’. Accordingly,
his view was that he would not be opposed to the repeal of this provision.
Walvisch also supported
the repeal of s 16(3). This conforms to the previous
recommendation of the Institute, and the Institute’s view remains
Accordingly, it reiterates its previous recommendation that the
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 16(3) be repealed.
Recommendation
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 16(3) should be repealed.
8.7.142 With regard to the relationship between self-defence contained in s
and delusional beliefs, as noted, the Institute has
previously stated that a delusional belief should not form the basis for
self-defence
and that a provision should be inserted in the
provide that if a person does an act or makes an omission as a result of a
delusion caused by a mental disease, the delusion can
only be used as a defence
under s 16 of the
Criminal Code
(Tas) and cannot be relied on to support
a defence of self-defence under s 46 of the
Criminal Code
(Tas). Both the
DPP and Walvisch agreed with this recommendation.
8.7.143 The DPP wrote:
I repeat the comments I made in response to Issues Paper 20 on self-defence
An accused should not be allowed to rely on evidence of a delusion caused by
mental impairment as a basis for self-defence. Evidence
of delusions caused by
mental impairment should be dealt with by a consideration of insanity under s 16
Criminal Code
. It is contrary to community expectations that an
accused person could be acquitted based on a deluded belief or view of the
The community would expect that such a person would be caught by the
insanity provisions and in that way the community would be protected
risk that they might behave in a similar way in the future due to ongoing
delusions. ...
such an amendment would allow a jury to take into account evidence of
psychiatric conditions falling short of establishing s 1 insanity
determining the circumstances as the accused reasonably believed them to be.
Therefore when an accused was in fact under attack
a jury could take into
account their mental state when determining if their reasonable belief was that
they needed to use force to
defend themselves, but when there was in fact no
attack, evidence as to an accused’s delusions would be dealt with under s
16. This amendment would clarify the law but still be consistent with the
approach taken by the Court of Criminal Appeal in
Walsh v The Queen
8.7.144 Walvisch also stressed the need to distinguish between self-defence
and beliefs attributable to mental illness:
In addressing this issue, it is useful to consider the differing purposes of
the defences of traditional (non-mistaken) self-defence
and mistaken
self-defence. Traditional self-defence is a defence of justification: the
accused is acquitted because he or she acted
correctly in the circumstances, all
things considered. By contrast, an accused who acts on the basis of mistaken
self-defence has
not acted in a justified fashion: when all things are
considered, he or she acted wrongfully (due to the mistake). However, as the
accused has acted in response to what reasonably appeared to be good reasons,
his or her actions are considered warranted in the
circumstances, relieving him
or her of criminal liability.
It can be seen from this description that self-defence arising from a deluded
belief does not properly fall within either of these
categories: it is neither
justified (as it was not the correct thing to do in the circumstances) nor
warranted (as it was not committed
in response to what reasonably appeared to be
good reasons). Consequently, if the accused is to be relieved of liability it
be on a different basis: namely due to his or her lack of
reasons-responsiveness (or whatever other form of the ‘insanity’
defence is enacted).
Consequently, I agree with the view of the TLRI that s 16(3) of the Criminal
Code should be repealed and a provision inserted in the
Code to provide that if
a person does an act or makes an omission as a result of a delusion caused by a
mental disease, the delusion
can only be used as a defence under s 16 of the
Criminal Code
(Tas) and cannot be relied on to support a defence of
self-defence under s 46 of the
Criminal Code
8.7.145 Accordingly, the Institute reaffirms its earlier recommendation that
a delusional belief should not form the basis for self-defence
provision should be inserted in the
to provide that if a person does
an act or makes an omission as a result of a delusion caused by a mental
disease, the delusion can
only be used as a defence under s 16 of the
Criminal Code
(Tas) and cannot be relied on to support a defence of
self-defence under s 46 of the
Criminal Code
(Tas). However, this prior
recommendation needs be changed to refer to mental or cognitive impairment in
light of the Institute’s
recommendations in relation to terminology used
in s 16 in this Report.
Recommendation
35. A delusional belief should not form the basis for self-defence and a
provision should be inserted in the
to provide that if a person does
an act or makes an omission as a result of a delusion caused by a mental or
cognitive impairment,
the delusion can only be used as a defence under s 16 of
Criminal Code
(Tas) and cannot be relied on to support a defence of
self-defence under s 46 of the
Criminal Code
Procedural aspects of the
Burden of proof
8.7.146 As indicated at [
the burden of proof is on the defendant to prove that he or she was insane
within the meaning of the
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 16. Concerns have been
expressed about the burden of proof that is cast on the defendant to prove the
insanity defence on
the balance of probabilities. This is contrary to the
general rule of criminal law that the legal burden of proof is on the
prosecution.
It is also different from other defences where an accused raises
the defence of mistake or self-defence or seeks to rely on evidence
automatism or intoxication to deny criminal responsibility. In relation to these
matters, the accused has an evidentiary onus
8.7.147 Arguments in favour of placing the burden of proof on the defendant
are based on the view that if the burden were placed on
the prosecution,
‘it would be impossible for the prosecution to disprove an assertion of
insanity, resulting in unmeritorious
acquittals’.
Bronitt and McSherry write that the ‘modern rationale ... lies in the fear
that if an accused only has to bear an
evidentiary burden in relation to mental
impairment, more individuals would be found not criminally responsible than
should be the
However, they observe that this argument is difficult to support in relation to
insanity when it does not apply for other defences,
given that ‘[t]here
appears little support for the proposition that it may be easier to fake a claim
of mental impairment’
than these other
8.7.148 Other law reform reviews, including those conducted by the Scottish
Law Commission, the NZLC and the LRCWA, did not recommend
a change to the
current burden of proof that is placed on the
In contrast, in
relation to its new defence of ‘not criminally responsible by reason of a
recognised medical condition’,
the Law Commission of England and Wales
recommended that there should be an evidential burden only on the defendant
(discharged by
the provision of supporting expert evidence) but that the
prosecution should bear the burden of disproving the defence once it has
8.7.149 In the Issues Paper, the Institute sought feedback on the burden of
proof for the insanity defence:
Criminal Code
(Tas) be amended to provide that the burden
of proof for the insanity defence rests on the prosecution and that the
defendant bears
an evidential burden only in relation to this defence?
8.7.150 There were two submissions that addressed this question with opposing
views expressed.
8.7.151 The DPP opposed a change to the burden of proof to place it on the
prosecution with the defendant bearing only an evidential
burden. The DPP
considered that this ‘would be illogical ... [as] the defence have more
information in respect of this issue
than the prosecution. Further, it only
becomes an issue once guilt has been established’.
8.7.152 On the other hand, Walvisch supported this amendment on the ground
that ‘there seems little reason in principle to differentiate
the insanity
defence from other defences in this regard’. Further, Walvisch expressed
the view that ‘it is arguable that
requiring people to prove their
impairment to a greater extent than they are required to prove other defences
(such as self-defence
or duress) constitutes discrimination on the grounds of
disability’.
8.7.153 The Institute recognises that there are arguments that would support
placing the burden of proof on the prosecution in cases
where it is raised by
the defence given that other defences (such as self-defence (s 46) and mistake
(s 14, 14A, 14B)) contain elements
that relate to the defendant’s state of
mind at the time of the offence, and the prosecution still bears the onus of
in these cases. However, the Institute considers that this is a
controversial reform and should only be made if there is very strong
justification for it. The Institute did not receive any submissions indicating
that the current position is causing difficulties
for defendants. Further, if
the burden of proof changed, the standard of proof would necessarily change from
on the balance of probabilities
to beyond reasonable doubt, and this may create
difficulties in respect of expert evidence. Accordingly, the Institute’s
is that the burden of proof should remain with the defence. This is
consistent with the approach in other jurisdictions and the recommendations
by a clear majority of other law reform bodies.
Recommendation
36. The burden of proof in relation to the defence of mental or cognitive
impairment should remain with the defence in cases where
it is raised by the
Raising the defence of insanity
8.7.154 As indicated at [7.3.27], the prosecution cannot raise the defence of
insanity unless the defendant has put his or her state
of mind in issue. In
contrast, in other Australian jurisdictions, mental impairment may be raised by
the prosecution, the defence
Under the Commonwealth
Criminal Code
and legislation in the Australian
Capital Territory, the Northern Territory, South Australia and Victoria, the
prosecution may raise
Similarly, the
NSWLRC recommended that the defence of mental illness should be able to be
raised by the court or the prosecution
(with the permission of the court) if it
is in the interests of
It is also noted
Mental Health (Forensic Provisions) Act 1990
‘requires an explanation as to the availability of the defence to be put
to the jury if the question of mental illness
“is raised”,
regardless of whether it is embraced as a defence by the accused at
8.7.155 The ability for the prosecution to raise the defence of insanity
(absent the accused putting the state of mind in issue) is
supported on the
basis that the public interests of both fairness and community safety are better
served when a person who has committed
a serious offence by reason of a
cognitive or mental health impairment is detained as a forensic patient to allow
the person to receive
recognised in
by Deane and Dawson JJ, who observed that
‘nowadays it is often in the interests of the prosecution (or, at all
events, the
community) to raise the question of insanity, rather than in the
interests of the
considered that there are very few cases where the absence of a prosecution
power to raise the defence of mental impairment
posed a difficulty in
However, it
considered that the prosecution should have such a power to ensure that the
public interest is served in the appropriate
8.7.156 The contrary view is that to allow the prosecution to raise the
insanity defence is contrary to fundamental rights of the
defendant given the
indeterminate consequences that follow from a finding of not guilty by reason of
inconsistent with ‘the interests of the defendant in retaining control of
his or her defence’.
addition, the NZLC commented on the significant stigma that attaches to the
insanity defence.
reasons, the NZLC recommended that the Crown should only be able to adduce
evidence of insanity (with the leave of the
court) where the defence has put his
or her mental capacity for criminal intent in issue without raising the insanity
8.7.157 Accordingly, a fundamental issue in Tasmania is whether the Crown
should be able to raise the defence of insanity contrary
to the wishes of the
defence. Feedback on this issue was sought in the Issues Paper:
Should the prosecution have the power to raise the defence of insanity
against the wishes of the defendant?
Should the leave of the court be required for the prosecution to do this?
8.7.158 Three submissions to the Institute addressed these questions.
8.7.159 Both ForensiClinic and the DPP supported legislative imprimatur for
the prosecution to raise the defence of insanity. ForensiClinic
stated that this
‘may result in a more appropriate therapeutic outcome and associated risk
reduction’. Similarly, the
DPP focused on the protection of the community
and fairness to the accused to allow insanity to be raised by the
prosecution:
The prosecution would need to be able to establish an evidentiary basis on
the facts of the case to raise the issue of insanity. It
would be appropriate
for the leave of the court to be required for the prosecution to do this.
If the prosecution has evidence that an accused may have a defence of
insanity it is appropriate that it be raised. It may be that
defence counsel,
acting in the best interests of their client as permitted by
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act
, may choose not to explore or
rely on the defence given the orders that may follow. The fact that an accused
person does not wish
to raise insanity, perhaps perceiving it is not in his best
interests to do so, does not mean it should not be raised. It is in the
interest that the defence be raised; it is a matter of fairness to an accused
and protection of the community.
As noted by the DPP, this is the position in the Australian Capital
Territory, Northern Territory, Victoria and South Australia. It
supported by the NSWLRC.
8.7.160 On the other hand, Walvisch outlined the arguments both in favour and
against allowing the prosecution to raise the defence
against the wishes of the
accused, and strongly argued that there are powerful reasons not to provide the
prosecution with this power.
8.7.161 In Walvisch’s submission, there were two main policy grounds
that would support the view that the prosecution should
be given such a
First, it can help to ensure that people who are not criminally responsible
for their actions are not improperly punished. This is
important both from the
perspective of the individual (who only deserves to be punished if he or she has
committed a blameworthy
act) and society (which has an interest in ensuring that
‘insane’ people are not incorrectly labelled as criminals).
Secondly, it aims to protect the public, by ensuring that people who have
committed ‘criminal’ acts and who meet the requirements
insanity defence are subjected to the supervisory dispositions available in
relation to mentally impaired offenders. In this
regard, it is at least arguable
that such people are potentially ‘dangerous’ to others, and should
be monitored rather
than set free.
Walvisch also set out a number of arguments that can be advanced against
allowing the prosecution to raise the defence of insanity:
Foremost amongst these is the contention that, in a system which claims to
respect the autonomy and dignity of its participants, an
accused person should
have the right to control his or her own
This is an issue that affects all people who are charged with offences, and
who, by virtue of the
principle, are denied the ability to conduct
their own defence. However, it is a particular problem for offenders who suffer
mental illnesses, due to the discrimination and stereotyping often faced by
such people:
In denying the mentally disabled personal autonomy in decision-making, it
reinforces the stereotype that they are incapable of rational
thought and the
ability to look after their own interests [
[1991] 1 SCR
In addition, the whole trial process may be distorted if the insanity defence
is raised against the wishes of the accused. In particular:
• The accused may be placed in a position where inconsistent defences
must be advanced;
• The accused’s credibility may be undermined, potentially
prejudicing the other defences he or she wishes to raise; and
• The jury may be left with the impression that, because of the mental
illness, the accused is the ‘type of person’
who would have
committed the offence. [reference omitted]
These last two matters are a particular problem due to the stigma that is
attached to mental illness in our society. This factor was
highlighted by the
Canadian Supreme Court in
, with Chief Justice Lamer suggesting that
the ‘irrational fear of the mentally ill in our society’ could
result in an
accused’s credibility being irreversibly damaged where the
issue of insanity is raised [39].
In fact, it is arguable that this ‘irrational fear’ underlies the
public protection aim of the current law. This aim is
premised on the view that
offenders who meet the requirements of the mental impairment defence are
potentially dangerous, and need
to be contained in the interests of public
safety. Yet there is no empirical evidence that firmly establishes that
offenders with
mental illnesses are any more likely to reoffend, or to reoffend
in a more serious way, than offenders without mental illnesses.
people with mental illnesses to a different legal outcome on account of an
unproven and stereotyped view that they are
‘dangerous’ therefore
appears discriminatory.
This is a particular problem given that, under the current scheme, an
individual can be deprived of his or her liberty on a standard
of proof which is
less than the ordinary criminal standard. This is because it appears that the
prosecution may only need to prove
that the accused committed the physical act
alleged beyond reasonable doubt, rather than all of the elements of the charged
If they can then prove, on the balance of probabilities, that the
requirements of the insanity defence have been met, the result
may be lengthy
detention in a secure facility.
This concern is compounded by the possibility that the jury will return a
compromise verdict of not guilty by reason of insanity where
they are not
convinced of the accused’s guilt beyond reasonable doubt, but are
satisfied that the accused ‘is mentally
ill and perhaps dangerous’.
Furthermore, it is important to note that the consequences of a qualified
acquittal may be more
harmful to the accused than a conviction. He or she may
ultimately be detained or subjected to supervision for a longer period than
he or she been found guilty of the offence. In addition, he or she must
‘live with the stigma of being held to be both
a criminal and insane, and
may face conditions worse than those obtaining in prison’.
8.7.162 Accordingly, in Walvisch’s view, these arguments seem ‘to
far outweigh the policy goals which the suggested amendment
seeks to achieve.
Rather than being protected, the accused is denied the right to autonomy and
dignity, and placed at risk of greater
state intervention’. Further, it
was argued that ‘[t] he aim of “public protection” seems to be
a discriminatory view of the dangers posed by individuals with mental
illnesses. Moreover, where there is a genuine need to protect
the community from
a truly dangerous person, civil commitment laws can be relied upon’. In
this case, Walvisch argued that:
That simply leaves the problem of potentially convicting some people who are
truly not blameworthy. This could largely be overcome
by the use of
prosecutorial discretion — the prosecution could decide not to proceed
with charges against an individual who
is believed to be have a valid defence.
Alternatively, the judge could direct an acquittal in such circumstances,
perhaps accompanied
by a recommendation that an investigation be undertaken into
the possible need for civil commitment. While a few individuals may
slip between
the cracks of these approaches, and may be convicted despite the fact that they
were not criminally responsible for
their actions, the numbers are likely to be
extremely limited. In light of this fact, there does not seem to be sufficient
justification
for allowing the insanity defence to be raised against the
accused’s wishes.
Instead, a competent accused should be allowed to waive his or her right to
raise the defence, just as he or she can waive other rights.
This is the
approach that has been taken in a number of cases in the United States, such as
Because the defendant must bear the ultimate consequences of any decision, we
conclude that if a defendant has acted intelligently
and voluntarily, a trial
court must defer to his or her decision to waive the insanity defense
, 378 (DC App Ct, 1979)].
8.7.163 Walvisch also gave consideration to the limits that should be placed
on the power of the prosecution to raise the defence
(if such a power were
recognised in Tasmania). His view was that ‘the ability to do so should be
heavily circumscribed’.
Accordingly:
the trial judge should not be required to give leave insanity whenever there
is sufficient evidence to raise the defence. Instead,
the judge should be given
a broad discretion to focus on whether the interests of justice require the
prosecution to raise the matter,
taking into account factors such as:
• The amount of evidence addressing the accused’s impairment;
• The extent to which that evidence raises a question about the
accused’s criminal responsibility for his or her actions;
• The likelihood that the accused committed the criminal act in
• The nature and seriousness of the offence;
• The extent to which the accused poses a threat to society; and
• The prejudice that will be caused to the accused by raising the
Such an approach has the benefit of ensuring that the defence will only be
raised against the accused’s will where it is seen
to be absolutely
necessary, rather than potentially being addressed in every case where there is
some evidence of mental illness.
8.7.164 As noted above, the power of the
prosecution to raise the defence of insanity/mental impairment exists in statute
Tasmania, the prosecution can raise the defence of insanity if
the defendant
puts their mental state in
As explained, this
includes cases where the defendant raises non-insane automatism or absence of
intent. This would seem to reduce
the need to make specific provision for the
Crown to have the power to raise insanity. As the NSWLRC observed, there may
a ‘few cases where the absence of a prosecution power to raise
[the defence] arises as a practical problem’ given a defendant’s
mental state will frequently be in
However, it observed
that ‘they may be some cases where the defence wishes to avoid raising the
issue of the defendant’s
mental state ... but where the prosecution
believes it to be in the public interest to raise the
The issue is
whether it is appropriate that the prosecution be given the power to raise the
defence in these circumstances, and,
as noted by Walvisch, there are competing
arguments that involve balancing the interests of the defendant in maintaining
of their defence, particularly given the indefinite nature of forensic
orders, and the public interest in community protection by
allowing the
defendant to be detained and receive
8.7.165 After considering these complex issues, the Institute’s view is
that the prosecution should have power to raise the
defence of insanity with the
leave of the court. As recognised by the NSWLRC, there may be cases where the
court determines that
it is in the public interest for the prosecution to raise
the defence when the defendant wishes to avoid raising his or her mental
As indicted, this
reflects the approach under the Model Criminal Code, in Victoria, South
Australia, Northern Territory and the Australian
Capital Territory. In such
cases, the onus of proof should rest with the
prosecution.
A model for
reform in this regard can be found in Victoria, where the
Crimes (Mental
Impairment and Unfitness to be tried) Act 1997
(Vic) provides that:
21(1) A person is presumed not to have been suffering from a mental
impairment having the effect referred to in section 20(1) until
the contrary is
(3) If the defence of mental impairment is raised by the prosecution or the
defence, the party raising it bears the onus of rebutting
the presumption.
22(1) The question of mental impairment may be raised at any time during a
trial by the defence or, with the leave of the trial judge,
prosecution.
Recommendation
37. The prosecution should have the power to raise the defence of mental or
cognitive impairment against the wishes of the defendant
with the leave of the
court. In this case, the onus of proof should be on the prosecution and the
standard of proof should be the
balance of probabilities.
A ‘consent defence’
8.7.166 Unlike the criminal law generally, where the prosecution can accept a
plea by a defendant, currently in Tasmania it is not
possible for the defendant
to enter a plea of not guilty by reason of insanity. In the Supreme Court a
verdict of not guilty by reason
of insanity must be delivered by a jury, and in
the Magistrates Court it must be given by a magistrate. In the letter to the
setting out the Terms of Reference, the then Attorney-General indicated
that the DPP had requested that consideration be given to
reforming the law in
relation to the criminal procedure relating to the defence of insanity and to
legislating to remove the necessity
for a jury to determine the question of
insanity in certain circumstances. Similarly, the NSWLRC recommended that if the
prosecution
and defence agree that evidence in a case establishes the defence of
mental health or cognitive impairment, then the court must enter
a verdict of
not criminally responsible by reason of mental health or cognitive impairment if
satisfied that the defence is established
This has been
described as a defence of mental illness by
Similarly, the Scottish Law Commission and the Law Commission of England and
Wales recommended that there should be provision for
the verdict of insanity by
The absence of a
‘consent defence’ in Tasmania contrasts with the position in
Victoria, Western Australia, South Australia,
the Australian Capital Territory
and the Northern Territory, as well as in New
8.7.167 Reasons for allowing a consent defence are that:
(a) It ‘avoid[s] farcical trials where insanity is not in
It avoids the
jury process becoming ‘artificial’ or a
‘formality’.
may result in a loss of faith in the jury system as the jury is essentially
confirming the view of the defence and
prosecution.
(b) It saves court time and consequently
(c) It reduces stress on the defendant (who may still be ill at the time of
the trial) and witnesses including victims and family
members’ in cases
where this is the obvious
(d) In the case of an accused who is unfit to stand trial in Tasmania, it is
possible to determine this issue by consent but it is
not possible to resolve
the question of criminal responsibility by consent.
8.7.168 The VLRC noted that where the prosecution and defence agree that the
evidence establishes the defence of mental impairment,
‘it is unlikely
that the jury will arrive at a different
conclusion.’
8.7.169 The importance of the role of the jury in representing the community
in determining criminal responsibility has been identified
as the predominant
reason provided for not allowing a consent defence of
On this basis, the
VLRC changed its view from prior recommendations it had made and recommended
that the law be changed to require
a jury to determine criminal responsibility
in all criminal trials in higher courts under the
The VLRC observed that
the jury protects the interests of the community by ensuring the sound
administration of justice, and that
this is particularly important in these
that has profound
and lasting consequences for the accused, victims and the
community’.
for public examination of the issues ‘in a way that is comprehensible to
the accused, victims and the community’.
This has an educative function
for the public.
protects the accused by requiring their criminal responsibility to be determined
by independent members of the community.
In addition, ‘the determination
of criminal responsibility by a jury provides a greater level of acknowledgement
and their families of the harm that they have
experienced’.
8.7.170 Other reasons in favour of retaining the jury are that the trial
process operates as a check and a safeguard not just by the
involvement of the
community but also in that the scrutiny inherent in the trial process may
promote caution in the formulation of
opinion by expert witnesses. Further,
expert opinion is only as good as the information that is provided to the expert
as the basis
for the opinions expressed, and the factual matrix that may emerge
at trial may differ from the facts that appear in the Crown papers.
that experts may refine their opinions contained in the pre-trial reports to
reflect the change in facts that emerge at
trial. This caution and refinement
may be lost if the trial process is replaced by a ‘defence consent’
8.7.171 On the other hand, it is noted that the DPP routinely makes decisions
the DPP is to make
decisions about whether or not to institute proceedings and this involves
decisions in relation to the charges
laid (for example, whether an accused is
charged with attempted murder or causing grievous bodily harm), the acceptance
of guilty to particular charges and/or in relation to decisions not to
proceed with a matter (such as where the prosecution accepts
that a defence of
self-defence is made out on the
In making these
decisions, fairness is the overarching principle and it may be questioned as to
why decisions in relation to acceptance
of the insanity defence should be
treated any differently.
8.7.172 In the Issues Paper, the Institute sought feedback on whether a
consent defence should be permitted:
Should there be legislative change to allow the prosecution and defence to
agree that a defendant is not guilty by reason of insanity?
If so, are there any protections in the interests of the defendant that need
to be put in place?
8.7.173 There were three submissions that addressed this issue and all
supported allowing the prosecution and defence to agree that
a defendant is not
guilty by reason of insanity.
8.7.174 The DPP provided detailed consideration of
the issue, highlighting the problems that potentially arise when a trial is
in circumstances where both parties agree that the defendant satisfies
the requirements for a finding of not guilty on the grounds
of insanity:
In recent years this Office has conducted a significant number of trials
where both the prosecution and defence have agreed that the
accused was insane.
Our Office only reaches such a position after having had the accused
independently assessed and receiving independent
psychiatric evidence that the
accused is insane.
These trials have been considerably traumatic for the accused (who is
generally mentally very unwell), the victim(s), their families
and witnesses.
Juries find it difficult to understand why they are there because, as a matter
of practicality, there is only one
possible result with Crown counsel, the
defence counsel and the judge telling the jury although it is a matter for them
only one appropriate verdict. It turns the trial into a farce. Further,
the cost involved in these unnecessary hearings is a relevant,
albeit minor,
consideration.
In circumstances where the independent evidence suggests the accused is not
insane, the Crown strongly disputes any assertion to the
If the Crown, having received independent advice, was able to accept a plea
of not guilty on the grounds of insanity, the above problem
would be removed
where it is not accepted the trial would take place in the usual manner.
The argument that these matters should be determined by a jury, as
representatives of the community, is erroneous:
• In circumstances where experts give unchallenged evidence that the
defendant is not guilty by reason of insanity but the jury
makes an alternative
finding, the matter would inevitably be successfully appealed on the grounds the
verdict was unsafe and unsatisfactory,
(1993) 22 Tas R 368.
Pennicott v State of Tasmania
CCA 1183 of 2013, the Court of Criminal
Appeal quashed the appellant’s convictions and substituted verdicts of not
insanity, the court published reasons to the parties only.
• At a plea hearing the prosecution must state the facts. The facts
will inevitably include information as to the medical evidence
relied upon to
support the plea. The prosecution will be accountable in open court for the
• The Director of Public Prosecutions makes decisions which affect the
criminal liability and responsibility of accused persons
routinely, for example,
when determining whether to charge with manslaughter or murder, or whether to
accept a plea to a lesser charge.
Thus the law routinely entrusts an independent, statutorily appointed person,
to make such decisions. There is no reason to depart
from this in circumstances
where prosecution and defence agree that a defendant is not guilty by reason of
8.7.175 DPFEM also agreed that a consent verdict should be available. Its
view was that this would result in a saving of court time
and money in avoiding
trials if both the prosecution and defence agree. DPFEM also indicated that
removing the need for a trial may
protect a person with mental health
impairments from the trauma of the trial process. DPFEM considered that a
defence of mental impairment
by consent is an extension of the power of the
Prosecution Services and the Office of the DPP to discontinue matters according
the balance of public interest and chance of success determinations.
8.7.176 Although the Institute recognises the importance of the role of the
jury in representing the community, the Institute agrees
with the DPP,
ForensiClinic and DPFEM that the prosecution and the defence should be able to
agree that the evidence establishing
the defence of mental impairment. Contrary
to the current position in Tasmania, this is possible in Victoria, Western
South Australia, the Australian Capital Territory, the Northern
Territory and in New Zealand. It avoids unnecessary trials that cause
victims and families, and to individuals who are mentally unwell, and reflects
the responsibility placed in the Office
of the DPP and Prosecution Services to
represent the public interest. It also consistent the power of the court
contained in the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
to dispense with an investigation into the defendant’s fitness to stand
trial if the prosecution and defendant agree.
8.7.177 However, the Institute’s view is that safeguards are required
in this process and that the ‘consent defence’
should operate with
judicial oversight. Accordingly, as with the view expressed by the NSWLRC, the
Institute’s view is that
the court should have the power to review the
evidence in order to be satisfied that it establishes the defence of mental or
impairment in a case where the prosecution and defence agree that the
proposed evidence establishes the defence. If the court is
satisfied that the
evidence establishes the defence, then the judge will enter a verdict of not
guilty by reason of mental or cognitive
impairment. If the trial judge is not
satisfied, then the case must proceed to a jury
The court should have
access to the expert reports as well as the power to require oral evidence to be
given by the expert.
Recommendation
38. The court should have the power to dispense with a trial if the
prosecution and defence agree that evidence establishes the defence
of mental or
cognitive impairment. However, safeguards are required and the court should have
the power to review the evidence (including
hearing from expert witnesses) in
order to be satisfied that the evidence establishes the defence of mental or
cognitive impairment
in a case where the prosecution and defence agree that the
proposed evidence establishes the defence.
The operation of
in the Magistrates
8.7.178 There are two matters that require attention in relation to the
operation of the proposed defence of mental or cognitive impairment
Magistrates Court:
(1) The introduction of a simplified procedure (such as recommended in this
Report for fitness to stand trial).
(2) The application of the new defence of mental or cognitive impairment to
summary offences.
Simplified procedure
. A further issue that should be
considered is the operation of the recommended power to discharge in the
Magistrates Court for the
new defence of mental or cognitive impairment (or the
defence of insanity if this is retained). In
, the Institute recommended
that magistrates be provided with a power to discharge people without making a
determination of their
fitness to stand trial or their criminal responsibility
in some circumstances (Recommendations 17 and 18). This was not raised in
Issues Paper in relation to the defence of insanity. However, similar issues
arise in relation to the complexity and expense
of raising the defence of
insanity for relatively minor matters in the Magistrates Court. It is noted that
in Queensland the discharge
powers of the court operate in relation to both
fitness and insanity. Accordingly, the Institute suggests that consideration be
to allowing magistrates to discharge for the defence as well as for
fitness matters and that discussions with stakeholders take place
implementation of Recommendations 17 and 18.
Summary offences
. The current position in the Magistrates
Court is that the
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 16 applies to summary offences
where there is a parallel
This includes
assault, assaulting a police officer, indecent assault and unlawfully injuring
However, common law
principles of criminal responsibility (including the defence of insanity) apply
to other summary offences.
While this may not have created any particular difficulty when the common law
provision in relation to insanity were very similar, it is
the Institute’s view that the new defence of mental or cognitive
impairment should apply to all offences in Tasmania — indictable and
summary offences. Accordingly, the Institute recommends
that the new defence of
mental or cognitive impairment should apply to indictable and summary offences.
8.7.181 The Institute notes that this problem extends further than the
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 16 and exists in relation to all principles of
criminal responsibility (including defences) that operate in Tasmania.
Previously,
the Institute has highlighted the complexity and inconsistency
created by the operation of fundamentally different rules in its consideration
of evidence of intoxication used to deny criminal
responsibility.
Institute’s view that this requires further examination for all principles
of criminal responsibility for summary
offences without
parallels in
Tasmania and suggests that this matter could be pursued as a separate
Recommendation
39. The new defence of mental or cognitive impairment introduced to amend the
current defence of insanity contained in the
Criminal Code
should apply to indictable and summary offences.
Disposition:
Forensic and Treatment Orders
Introduction
10.1.1 This Part examines the orders that can be made under the
Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) following a finding that an
individual is not guilty by reason of insanity (either at a trial or a special
hearing) or if a
finding cannot be made that the defendant is not guilty of an
offence (at a special hearing).
10.1.2 The Terms of Reference ask the TLRI to address the following matters
relevant to disposition:
(a) if insane delusions arising from mental illness form the basis of
self-defence, whether defendants relying on insane delusions
should be liable to
supervision under the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(b) if insane delusions arising from mental illness form the basis of
self-defence, whether the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) requires amendment in relation to treatment options for such
defendants.
Based on the Institute’s recommendation that insane delusions arising
from mental illness should only be used in relation to
a defence under s 16 of
Criminal Code
(Tas) and not for the basis of self-defence, there is
no need to address these matters further. Individuals who consider that they
need to use force against another person based on a delusion will be able to
rely on the defence of mental or cognitive impairment,
and if found not guilty
on that basis, the court will be able to impose any of the orders under the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
10.1.3 The Terms of Reference also require the TLRI to consider the just and
effective operation of the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas), in particular the operation of Part 4 of the Act, including in relation
to the discharge and review of forensic and treatment
orders and whether there
is a need for ‘step-down’ options. In light of these consideration,
this Part also sets out
recommendations for reform that will abolish the current
indefinite detention scheme for forensic orders and replace it with a new
with the following features:
(1) a limiting term set by the court following a finding of not guilty by
reason of mental or cognitive impairment or where a finding
of cannot be made
that the defendant is not guilty.
(2) The limiting term should be set on the basis of the hypothetical sentence
model. This means that the court must nominate a limiting
term, which would be
the court’s best estimate of the length of the sentence that would have
been imposed had the person been
found guilty at a normal trial.
(3) A limiting term should not operate as an absolute limit of the duration
of an order. The DPP can make an application to the Supreme
Court prior to the
expiration of the limiting term for an extension of a restriction order or a
supervision order. The DPP can also
apply for a restriction order to be replaced
with a supervision order instead of an extension of the restriction order.
(4) A forensic patient should be able to apply to the Supreme Court for a
discharge of a restriction order or the variation or revocation
of a supervision
order prior to the expiry of the limiting term.
(5) The test for making, varying or removing orders under the
Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
should be changed from
‘likely to endanger’ to refer to whether the defendant does, or
would if released, pose an unacceptable
risk of causing physical or
psychological harm to a person or persons generally.
(6) The test for making, varying or removing orders under the
Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
should be amended to
require the Mental Health Tribunal and the court to have regard to the
person’s recovery or progress in
terms of treatment progression and
personal improvement in making a decision to discharge a restriction order, or
vary or revoke
a supervision order.
Consequences of findings under the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
Orders available under the
Criminal Justice
(Mental Impairment) Act 1999
10.2.1 Under the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
there are five orders that a court can make if a defendant is found not guilty
of the offence on the ground of insanity or
if a finding cannot be made that the
defendant is not guilty. These are to impose:
(a) a restriction order;
(b) release the defendant and make a supervision order;
(c) a treatment order;
(d) a conditional release order; or
(e) an unconditional release
10.2.2 As noted at [
Sentencing Act 1997
, a court may also impose a
restriction, supervision or treatment order on a person found guilty, if the
court is satisfied that the
person appears to be suffering from a mental illness
that requires trea
10.2.3 In any case, only the Supreme Court is able to make a restriction
order or a supervision order, and so, if a magistrate considers
that either of
these orders are appropriate, the matter must be referred to the Supreme
Restriction and
supervision orders are classified as forensic
Table 8.1: Explanation of orders available under
Criminal Justice
(Mental Impairment) Act 1999
Details of orders
Time limit for order
Consequences of breach
Restriction order
This is an order requiring the person to be admitted to and detained in a
secure mental health unit until the order is discharged
by the Supreme
The Wilfred Lopes
Centre is designated secure mental health facility in Tasmania. It is a 35 bed
facility that is situated near Risdon
Prison. It is a health owned facility
managed by the Department of Health and Human
No limit required but subject to annual review by Mental Health Tribunal
and the option to apply to Supreme Court for discharge of
the order after 2
Supervision order
This is an order releasing the person under the supervision of the Chief
Forensic Psychiatrist and any such conditions as the court
appropriate.
Conditions may
include requiring the person to:
• Take medication
• Submit to specified mental treatment
• Comply with direction given by the Chief Forensic Psychiatrist
around supervision and
No limit required but subject to annual review by the Mental Health
Tribunal and the option to apply to the Supreme Court for variation
revocation of the supervision
May be apprehended if, a prescribed person believes on reasonable grounds
if there is a breach or a likely breach of the supervision
order or a serious
deterioration of the person’s mental health; and as a result, there is
risk that person will harm themselves
Person must be taken to a secure mental health unit or an approved
The person can be detained for:
(a) A period not exceeding 24 hours; and
(b) If the Chief Forensic Psychiatrist authorises it, for one further
period not exceeding 72 hours; and
(c) If the Mental Health Tribunal authorises it, for one or more further
periods each of a length to be determined by that
A person detained can also be detained on authorisation of a member of the
MHT until the determination of an application to the MHT
for further detention
((c) above).
A person can also be detained until the Supreme Court has made a
determination if an application has been made to vary or revoke the
supervision
Treatment order
A treatment order has the same meaning as a treatment order made under the
Mental Health Act 2013
This allows a person to be given treatment without the person’s
informed consent.
It may require a person to be given specified treatment, require a person
to be treated at a particular place, require a person to
be admitted to and
detained an approved
Up to six months or until the order is discharged but can be renewed by the
Mental Health Tribunal.
May be involuntarily admitted to, and detained in, an approved facility if
reasonable steps have been taken to obtain the person’s
compliance and if
the person’s treating medical practitioner is satisfied that the person
has failed to comply despite the
reasonable steps that have been taken to obtain
the person’s compliance; and the failure to comply has seriously harmed,
is likely to seriously harm, the person’s health or safety or the
safety of others, and the person’s admission and detention
is necessary to
address the harm to the person’s health or safety or the safety of
The treating medical practitioner can make an application to the MHT to
vary the treatment
There are also powers to admit a person to prevent possible harm (even if
the person has complied) if the treatment order provides
for a combination of
treatment setting and for the admission and re-admission of the patient to those
If a person is admitted due to failure to comply, the person can be
detained either under the original treatment order until the order
is varied so
as to provide for a different treatment setting or if person’s treatment
order authorises admission to and if
necessary, detention in an approved
hospital, until the order ceases to have
Conditional release
Release on such conditions that the court considers appropriate.
There is no limit to the time period allowed for the conditions other than
those set out in the court
If a person breaches a condition of release, an application may be made to
the court. The court may confirm the conditions as originally
imposed; impose
new conditions or may revoke the order and deal with the person for the offence
in respect of which the order was
This does not involve the MHT.
Unconditional release
Release without conditions
10.2.4 As shown in Table 8.1, other than a restriction order, which
authorises detention in a secure mental health facility, there
are several means
by which a court is able to direct a person to take part in treatment in the
community. This may include seeing
medical practitioners, the requirement to
take medications, to attend treatment centres and to comply with residential
directions.
However, there are key differences in the orders:
(a) A supervision order remains in force until discharged by the Supreme
Court and the person is under the supervision and direction
of the Chief
Forensic Psychiatrist. This person is a forensic patient. On breach of the
order, the person can be detained in a SMHU.
While the decision in
suggests that
this detention is only intended to be for a relatively short time, the
legislation allows the MHT to authorise extended
periods of detention in a SMHU
for people on a supervision order. Application can also be made to the Supreme
Court to vary or discharge
the order. The court can then discharge the
supervision order and impose a restriction order or can vary or confirm the
supervision
(b) The term of a treatment order is set by legislation and it remains in
force for six months. However, it can be renewed by the
MHT. A treatment order
is not a forensic order. If a person does not comply with the order, there are
provisions for the person to
be detained in an approved hospital under the
provisions of the
Mental Health Act 2013
(Tas). A treatment order made
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
administered under the
Mental Health Act 2013
(Tas). This process does
not involve the Supreme Court. However, there is power for a treatment order to
be renewed if this is required.
(c) A conditional release order remains in force for the period specified in
the order. If a person does not comply with the order,
there is power for the
Supreme Court to confirm the order, impose new orders or revoke the order and
impose another order on the
This process does not
involve the MHT and the conditional release order does not make a person subject
Mental Health Act 2013
Use of orders under the
Criminal Justice
(Mental Impairment) Act 1999
10.2.5 Table 8.2 sets out the use of these orders for individuals found not
guilty by reason of insanity and/or unfit to stand trial
and where a finding
cannot be made that the defendant is not guilty in the Supreme Court during the
period 2005–June 2018.
Table 8.2: Dispositions made in the Supreme Court 2005–June 2018
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) for individuals
found not guilty by reason of insanity and/or unfit to stand trial and where a
finding cannot be made that the
defendant is not guilty
No of cases
Restriction
Supervision
Conditional release
Unconditional release
10.2.6 Table 8.3 sets out the number of individuals who have been supervised
by the Mental Health Tribunal in relation to a forensic
order during the period
2005–June 2018. This includes people who were found not guilty by reason
of insanity and/or not guilty
following a special hearing, as well as those who
had a restriction or supervision order imposed following a finding of guilt, in
addition to a sentence of imprisonment.
Table 8.3: Individuals supervised by the Mental Health Tribunal in
relation to forensic orders during the period 2005–June 2018
No of cases
Restriction
Supervision
10.2.7 In the Magistrates Court, 12 people were identified who were found
unfit to stand trial and where a finding could not be made
that the defendant
was not guilty. Order information was recorded for nine of those cases. In those
cases, the following orders were
imposed under
Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(a) six were released on conditions;
(b) three were released unconditionally.
The conditions imposed often referred to attendance at medical appointments
and compliance with medical advice, for example, ‘attend
appointments with
your [general practitioner/ Forensic Mental Health Services/Community Mental
Health Services/Forensic Disability
Service]’, ‘comply with your
[Mental Health Plan/National Disability Insurance Scheme approved support
‘take medications as prescribed’, and to abstain from
using drugs and alcohol.
10.2.8 Of the nine defendants found not guilty by reason of insanity, order
information was recorded for eight matters with the following
orders imposed
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(a) one treatment order;
(b) six conditional release orders;
(c) one referral to the Supreme Court.
Again, the conditions imposed were similar to those imposed for defendants
where a finding cannot be made that the defendant was not
guilty following a
special hearing (following a finding of unfitness).
Process for making orders
10.2.9 In making orders under the
Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(1), the court
is directed by
to apply, where appropriate, the principle that restrictions
on the defendant’s freedom and personal autonomy should be kept
minimum consistent with the safety of the
In exercising its
powers under
, the court is also directed by
to have regard to the
(a) the nature of the defendant’s mental impairment or other condition
or disability;
(b) whether the defendant is, or would, if released, be likely to endanger
another person or other persons generally;
(c) whether there are adequate resources available for the treatment and
support of the defendant in the community;
(d) whether the defendant is likely to comply with the conditions of a
supervision order; and
(e) other matters that the court thinks
For the purposes of assisting a court to determine proceedings under
provides that the Attorney-General must provide the court with a report
stating, so far as reasonably ascertainable, the views of
the next of kin of the
defendant and the victims, if any, of the defendant’s
The court must not
release a defendant under the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(1) unless it has considered an expert report on the
condition of the defendant and the possible effects of the proposed action on
the behaviour of the defendant. The court also must have considered the report
of the attitudes of victims, if any, and next of kin,
and be satisfied that the
defendant’s next of kin and victims have been given reasonable notice of
the proceedings.
10.2.10 A review of cases indicates that factors such as the nature of the
mental illness or intellectual disability, including its
amenability to
treatment, an individual’s compliance with treatment and insight into
their condition, the person’s previous
history of offending and/or
violence are relevant to the exercise of the court’s discretion. In cases
where restriction orders
were imposed, individuals typically had chronic mental
illnesses that were difficult to treat and had a lack of insight into their
condition and a history of non-compliance with treatment. In contrast,
supervision orders, treatment orders and conditional release
orders were
typically imposed where the person had an awareness of their condition and no
history of offending or
Similar conditions
were imposed in most cases where supervision, treatment or conditional release
orders were made and these involved
submission to treatment, taking medication
and residential restrictions. Factors that seemed to influence the making of a
supervision
order as opposed to a treatment order or a conditional release order
were the need to ensure long-term compliance with treatment
and the more limited
powers that existed in the event of non-compliance with the conditions of the
order in the case of treatment
and supervision orders.
10.2.11 In the Supreme Court cases where the person was found not guilty, or
not guilty by reason of insanity, and details of the
mental illness or
intellectual disability were known (n = 23), there were 15 cases involving
mental illness (predominately schizophrenia),
seven cases involving intellectual
disability and one case involving cognitive impairment. In relation to the seven
cases where the
defendant was classified as having an intellectual disability,
in two cases the person received a conditional release order and in
five cases a
supervision order. In relation to defendants with a mental illness, five
defendants received a restriction order, six
defendants received a supervision
order, two defendants received a treatment order and two defendants were
conditionally released.
Review of orders
10.2.12 During the term of restriction and
supervision orders, there are provisions for regular review of the order by the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
forensic orders are to be reviewed by the MHT within 12 months after the order
was made and at least once in each period of
afterwards.
At a review, the
MHT can issue a certificate if it determines that a forensic order is no longer
warranted or that the conditions
of the order are not
appropriate.
The factors set
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
in relation to making of orders are also relevant the review process
conducted by the MHT.
However, the legislation does not direct the MHT to take into account the view
of next of kin or victims.
The MHT must also have regard to the mental health service delivery principles
set out in the
Mental Health Act 2013
(Tas). These principles are set out
in sch 1 of the
Mental Health Act 2013
(Tas) and include respecting,
observing and promoting the inherent rights, liberty, dignity, autonomy and
self-respect of a person
with mental illness, to interfere with and restrict the
rights of persons with mental illness in the least restrictive way and to
least extent consistent with the protection of those persons, the protection of
the public and the proper delivery of the relevant
10.2.13 If a certificate is issued, the defendant may apply immediately to
the Supreme Court for a discharge, revocation or variation
of the forensic
The MHT can recommend
that a restriction order be discharged and replaced with a supervision or
treatment order or that the defendant
be released conditionally or
unconditionally.
recommend that a supervision order be revoked and may recommend that a treatment
order be made or that the defendant be released
conditionally or
unconditionally.
recommendation can also be made to vary the supervision order. The MHT can also
recommend that a supervision order be revoked and
that a restriction order be
made in respect of the
Although the MHT
can make recommendations, it does not have the power to discharge a restriction
order or vary or revoke a supervision
order. This power must be exercised by the
Supreme Court.
Review of orders by the Mental Health
Tribunal and the Supreme Court
10.2.14 Tables 8.4 and 8.5 set out the number of review hearings for
restriction orders and supervision orders conducted in each year
Table 8.4: Forensic statistics, Restriction Order Hearings, Mental Health
Restriction order hearings
Restriction order hearings adjourned
Restriction order certificates issued
Table 8.5: Forensic statistics, Supervision Order Hearings, Mental Health
Supervision order hearings
Supervision order hearings adjourned
Supervision order certificates issued
Source: MHT Annual Report
10.2.15 As shown in Tables 8.6 and 8.7, as at June 2018, there were nine
people under the jurisdiction of the MHT who were subject
to restriction orders
and 26 who were subject to supervision orders. There are no people still subject
to restriction orders who
have a certificate issued. In one case, it is noted
that there has not been a review hearing as the restriction order was made in
2018. In the period 2005–June 2018, there were six people in respect of
whom the restriction order was discharged, and a supervision
order was imposed
and one person where the restriction order was discharged. In cases where a
supervision order was imposed following
the discharge of the restriction order,
none of these individuals have had the supervision order revoked.
10.2.16 In relation to supervision orders, MHT data (set out in Table 8.7)
show that of the 26 people currently subject to supervision
orders, 18 do not
and eight do have a certificate
Of the eight people
who have a certificate issued, one commenced an application to revoke with Legal
Aid but withdrew the application,
one sought advice but did not make an
application through Legal Aid, four have applications in process and two people
have not made
any contact with Legal
Table 8.6: People on restriction orders from 2005 to 30 June 2018, MHT
data (both sentenced offenders and individuals found not guilty
by reason of
insanity or where a finding could not be made that the person was not
Min time on order
Max time on order
Median on order
People currently subject to order
134 days and continuing
(4 months and 13 days)
5580 days and continuing
(15 years 3 months and 11 days)
2409 days and continuing
(6 years 7 months and 5 days)
Current certificate issued
People who have had order discharged and supervision order imposed
(2 years 6 months and 17 days)
(16 years 5 months and 7 days)
(7 years 8 months and 19 days)
People who have had restriction order discharged
(4 years 11 months and 3 days)
Table 8.7: People on supervision orders from 2005 to 30 June 2018 (both
sentenced offenders and individuals found not guilty by reason
of insanity or
where a finding could not be made that the person was not guilty)
Min time on order
Max time on order
Median on order
People currently subject to order
253 days and continuing
(8 months and 9 days)
6543 days and continuing
(17 years 10 months and 29 days)
2795 days and continuing
(7 years 7 months and 26 days)
Current certificate issued
People who have had order revoked
(1 year 8 months and 27 days)
(12 years 3 months and 5 days)
(6 years 11 months and 26 days)
Process to discharge or vary forensic
10.2.17 As noted in Table 8.1, restriction and
supervision orders are indefinite orders, subject to the discharge/revocation of
orders by the Supreme Court. The
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act
(Tas) sets out the requirements for making an application, including
the time at which an application can be made:
(1) If the person has received a certificate from the MHT, a person may apply
to the Supreme Court for the discharge, variation or
revocation immediately on
the issue of the certificate.
(2) In other cases, an application for discharge of a restriction order can
be made after two years and then a subsequent application
can be made every two
years. There are no time constraints placed on the ability to initially apply
for variation or revocation of
a supervision order. However, if the Supreme
Court has refused an application of a defendant for a variation or revocation of
a supervision
order, another application cannot be made for six months or such
other period as the Supreme Court may
Discharge of orders in Tasmania
10.2.18 The MHT Annual Report 2015–2016, indicated that in this period,
two certificates were issued and both forensic patients
made an application to
the Supreme Court to have the restriction orders revoked. In both cases, the
Supreme Court revoked the restriction
order and imposed a supervision
In the same period,
the MHT issued 11 certificates for supervision orders. As noted above, there are
eight people who are being supervised
under a supervision order who have a
current certificate and four who have an application under way with the Legal
Aid Commission
to discharge the order. The MHT reported that in 2017–2018,
10 certificates were issued to patients on supervision orders and
two patients
made an application to the Supreme Court — both applications were
successful.
In the same period, there were no certificates issued to forensic patients on
restriction orders.
10.2.19 In a review of forensic orders conducted by Smith, it was reported
that in 2010 there had been 64 reviews undertaken since
February 2006. From
these reviews, a total of 25 certificates had been issued. Those 25 certificates
related to 15 people, four in
relation to restriction orders and 11 in relation
to supervision orders.
also reported that only four people had applied successfully for a discharge
from a forensic order since 2003 and these were
all supervision
However, data
provided by the Legal Aid Commission of Tasmania indicate that from 2010 to 2018
(see Table 8.8), there have been five
applications made to discharge restriction
orders and all of these were successful (with the restrictions being replaced by
supervision
10.2.20 Data provided by the Legal Aid Commission of Tasmania also show that
since 2010, 13 applications were made to revoke supervision
orders. In relation
to these applications, there were three that resulted in the orders being
revoked and four that resulted in revoked
supervision orders being replaced by
conditional orders. In relation to the unsuccessful applications, one had the
conditions of
the supervision order varied, three have a new application on
foot, one person withdrew the application, one has a new application
on foot and
one is ongoing.
Table 8.8: Applications undertaken by Legal Aid to revoke or discharge
supervision and restriction orders, 2010–June 2018
Application to Revoke/Discharge
Not granted
Supervision Orders
Conditional orders made, 12–24 mths
New application on foot
Client withdrew
Restriction Orders
Supervision order made in substitution
10.2.21 MHT data indicate that from 2005 to 2018, seven people had their
restriction orders discharged. In six of these cases, a supervision
imposed, and all these people remain subject to the supervision order. Current
certificates have been issued for two of
these six people. As noted, no one is
subject to restriction orders who has a current certificate issued from the MHT.
MHT data indicate
that there were 16 supervision orders that were revoked in
this period. As noted, there are eight people still subject to supervision
orders who have a current certificate from the MHT and 18 who do not. Of those
with certificates, there are four people who currently
have an application to
revoke the supervision order ongoing with the Legal Aid Commission of Tasmania.
The fact that a number of
people on restriction orders have had their orders
discharged (unlike Smith’s earlier findings where no restriction orders
were discharged despite having certificates issued) and that there have been a
number of supervision orders revoked, suggests that
for those with current
certificates, there has been more success in having orders discharged/revoked by
the Supreme Court. However,
this does not mean that there are no remaining
difficulties in the process for some people or that the statutory test for
does not require reform.
Factors relevant to the discharge or
revocation of orders
10.2.22 The factors set out at [
] in relation to making of orders
are also relevant to the discharge of a restriction order and the variation or
revocation of a supervision
order by the Supreme
In making a decision
to impose an order, or vary or discharge an order, the relevant legislative
sections involve the exercise of
judicial discretion as they require a value
judgment to be
Court of Criminal Appeal considered the interaction of the principle that
‘where appropriate, restrictions on the defendant’s
freedom and
personal autonomy should be kept to a minimum consistent with the safety of the
community’ contained in
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
with the matters set out in 35(1). The Court stated that,
if a court, by reference to the matters set out in
considers it is
not appropriate to apply that principle, for example it concludes by reference
factors that a less restrictive order is not consistent with the
safety of the community, then it is entitled to make an order disregarding
first part of the principle.
This weighs the balance in favour of community safety at the expense of the
minimal restriction on the defendant’s freedom and
autonomy. Similarly, in
Secretary of the Department of Health and Human Services v
the Court of
Criminal Appeal stated that ‘the issue of the respondent’s freedom
and personal autonomy is not one which
should override all else. It is an issue
to be considered “where appropriate” and in the context of community
It is also to be considered in the context of the factors identified in
10.2.23 A key factor identified in
need to assess the risk that the defendant poses to other people. In making an
assessment of the likelihood of the person being
a danger to others (as required
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
s 35(1)(b))
the view was expressed that the court is required to do more than simply
approach the issue on the basis that ‘the greater
the degree of likelihood
of danger found, the less likely a court would be to order
revocation’.
the Court has to make a finding, on the balance of probabilities, whether or not
a state of affairs is
Court noted that different interpretations of ‘likely’ include that
there is a ‘real or substantial chance
possibility’
something is ‘more likely than
However, the
precise meaning of ‘likely’ was not resolved with the Court of
Criminal Appeal indicating that in that case,
the primary judge ‘was
entitled to be satisfied that there was, at least, a real chance or possibility
of the appellant again
becoming a danger to members of the
community’.
10.2.24 The Court also considered the meaning of ‘freedom and personal
autonomy’ and examined whether this encompasses
restrictions arising from
the way in which the order could be revoked or varied (for example if the order
had to be revoked by the
Supreme Court or lapsed through the passing of
It was held that it
does not extend to the difficulties, ‘in practical terms, for the person
to make an attempt to be relieved
of some or all of the consequences of the
This means that
the indefinite nature of the supervision order compared to the finite nature of
a treatment order is not considered
relevant to an assessment of the
restrictions that either order may place on a defendant’s freedom and
personal autonomy. Instead,
‘freedom and personal autonomy’ mean the
‘ability to move freely and function within the community, and to be
self-regulatory
and self-sufficient as far as possible, in all
10.2.25 In making decisions in relation to the revocation of orders, the
Supreme Court has been particularly concerned about the powers
that exist under
orders in the event that the person is non-compliant with their treatment
regime. In cases where the Supreme Court
refused to revoke a supervision order
and replace it with a treatment order, the applicants had long-standing mental
illnesses requiring
ongoing medication to manage the illnesses. The concern was
expressed that, while they did not present a risk to the community when
appropriately treated, there was a risk of harm to others if the medication
regimes were not complied with. Accordingly, the court
considered that
supervision orders were required (rather than treatment orders) to ensure
compliance with medication treatment and
mental health
management.
This allowed for
oversight by the Supreme Court and the power to detain the person in a SMHU, if
necessary. It also meant that orders
would not lapse (unlike treatment orders
that require administrative action if they are to be renewed).
10.2.26 Subsequent to the decisions in
of the Department of Health and Human Services v
the Victorian Court of Appeal considered in detail the interaction
between the Victorian equivalents to
Criminal Justice
(Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas), in particular the meaning of
case, the primary judge refused to revoke a supervision order on the basis that
he had concluded that the risk of danger
to the public was significant if the
individual was non-compliant with treatment (a risk assessed as low). This
approach was rejected
by the Court of Appeal:
His Honour, in our respectful opinion, wrongly focused upon the gravity of
the potential harm to others involved with such a risk
in assessing the likely
danger to others as ‘significant’. In assessing the likely danger
... the low likelihood of such
a risk materialising should have been the
critical consideration, rather than the gravity of the harm in the event that
eventuated.
Endangerment is about the risk of harm. The gravity of the harm may be
relevant to assessing the nature of the risk, but the probability
of any risk,
be it high or low, is the critical concept of endangerment. ... The ordinary
meaning of endangerment entails the concept
of chance or risk. The terms of [the
provision] require a court to assess whether a person is ‘
endanger themselves or others’. This serves to emphasise that the focus is
upon the extent of the chance, risk or peril of
some harm materialising. If the
harm or injury which is likely to result is substantial but the
‘chance’, ‘risk’
or ‘peril’ of it
eventuating is minimal, then a person subject to a supervision order is not
necessarily ‘likely
to endanger’ ...
It is an assessment of the likelihood of the risk materialising and whether
or not that risk is more than merely possible that is
the critical
consideration, not the gravity of the harm that may
This interpretation reflects the approach evident in the decisions of the
Court of Criminal Appeal in Tasmania, where the focus is
on the risk of danger
rather than the magnitude of the danger.
10.2.27 An additional issue considered in
relevance of any change in the practical restrictions on the defendant arising
from the removal of the supervision order in
considering the balance between the
safety of the community and the person’s freedom and autonomy. The primary
judge had expressed
the view that the continuation of the order would not impose
any significant practical restrictions on the defendant as his treatment
remain the same with or without the order. However, the Court of Appeal accepted
that ‘the finding that the nature and
degree of the restrictions on the
appellant’s freedom and autonomy would have no “significant
practical effect”
does not provide a basis for refusing to revoke the
supervision order’.
Court’s view was that supervision ‘is a restriction on liberty and
autonomy and it can be justified only where it
is found to be necessary’
and ‘if it was not necessary to impose any restriction on the appellant to
ensure the safety
of the community, the statutory regime, informed by the
principle of parsimony, did not allow for the consideration of the degree
inconvenience to the appellant to justify non-revocation of the
This differs
from the approach of the Court of Criminal Appeal in
Leave provisions
10.2.28 Under the
Mental Health Act 2013
(Tas), the MHT may grant a
forensic patient who is subject to a restriction order leave of absence from a
secure mental health unit.
The Chief Forensic Psychologist (‘CFP’) may grant leave to a
forensic patient who is not subject to a restriction
Leave may be granted
for clinical or personal reasons, for a particular purpose, or a particular
period, or both and may be granted
unconditionally or subject to
conditions.
The criteria set
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) do not
apply to leave provisions, with the MHT or the CFP being required to exercise
responsibility subject to the service delivery
principles set out in sch 1 of
Mental Health Act 2013
This takes into
account the need to respect, observe and promote the inherent rights, liberty,
dignity, autonomy and self-respect
of persons with mental illness and the need
to ensure that the interference with or restriction of the rights of persons
with mental
illness is done in the least restrictive way and to the least extent
consistent with the protection of the individual and the
Table 8.9 sets out
the number of leave applications determined by the MHT in the period
2014–2015 to 2016–2017.
Table 8.9: Leave application requested and granted by the MHT,
2014–15 to 2017–18
Leave applications requested
Leave applications granted
Source: MHT Annual Report
Issues for consideration
10.3.1 There are a number of issues in relation to the imposition and
discharge/revocation of forensic orders under the
Criminal Justice (Mental
Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas). Broadly speaking, they include:
(1) Whether it is necessary to make a change to the indefinite nature of
forensic orders imposed under the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act
(Tas)? And if so, how?
(2) Whether there is a need to make a change to the statutory test contained
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
making, varying, discharging and revoking an order?
(3) Whether there should be change to the judicial model of decision-making
to allow the MHT to exercise powers of variation, discharge
or revocation of
forensic orders under the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(4) Whether there is a need for a change the leave provisions and/or to make
other changes to provide an appropriate pathway for gradual
reintegration of a
person subject to a forensic order into the community?
(5) Whether the orders are appropriate for people with intellectual
disabilities and cognitive impairments rather than mental illness?
10.3.2 Another issue is whether the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment)
(Tas) should be amended to provide for a limiting term for
conditional release orders to replace the current position where it is
for the court to make an indefinite order. This order is not a forensic order
and does not involve the CFP or the MHT. Instead,
it is an order made and
supervised by the court.
Indefinite nature of forensic
10.3.3 In Tasmania, restriction orders and supervision orders are indefinite,
subject to review by the MHT and revocation or discharge
by the Supreme Court.
This aspect of the insanity and fitness to stand trial regime has been the
subject of significant criticism
(as discussed below). Although the move away
from the traditional ‘Governor’s Pleasure’ regime (in Tasmania
elsewhere) was intended to remove the arbitrary and political nature of
indefinite detention, criticism has been directed at the
Tasmanian system on the
basis that the Governor’s Pleasure model is retained ‘in substance,
if not in form’.
be argued that the current system is unfair to individuals and does not reflect
the principles underlying the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) which seek to provide an appropriate balance between individual
freedom and autonomy and community safety.
Position in other jurisdictions
10.3.4 As shown in Appendix 3 Table A3.3, several other Australian
subject to mechanisms for review and ending the orders. This is the position in
New South Wales (for those found not guilty
by reason of insanity), Victoria,
Western Australia, Queensland and the Northern Territory. In Victoria and the
Northern Territory,
a period is set for a major review of the order, referred to
as a nominal term, either by reference to a specified statutory period
(Victoria) or by the court (Northern Territory). At the major review, there is a
presumption that the level of supervision will be
In Queensland,
Western Australia and New South Wales (as with Tasmania), there is provision for
periodic reviews, which may result
in the orders being varied or revoked. In
Queensland, orders may be revoked or varied by the Mental Health Tribunal,
subject to any
non-revocation period that may have been set for prescribed
offences. In Western Australia, an order may be revoked by the Governor
advice from the Minister following a recommendation from the Mental Impairment
Accused Review Board. In New South Wales, the court
or the Mental Health Review
Tribunal (‘MHRT’) may make an order for releasing a
10.3.5 Other jurisdictions provide for finite terms through the use of
limiting terms.
In New South
Wales (for those found unfit and not acquitted following a special hearing),
South Australia, the Australian Capital
Territory and the Commonwealth, the
court is required to set a limiting term when imposing a detention or
supervision order. The
limiting term sets the longest period of detention and
there is a possibility that the person may be released before the expiry of
limiting term. However, evidence in New South Wales suggests release before the
expiration of the limiting term is rare. The
MHRT indicated that it did not know
of any patients being unconditionally released prior to the expiry of their
limiting terms and
that conditional release was also
In New South Wales, the
Australian Capital Territory and the Commonwealth, the limiting term is set by
the court making a best estimate
of the sentence that would have been considered
appropriate in a normal trial. In South Australia, the limiting term is the
to the period of imprisonment that would have been appropriate if the
defendant had been convicted of the offence of which the objective
elements have
been established, without taking into account the defendant’s mental
impairment.
Approach to reform
10.3.6 In Tasmania, there are several options for reform:
Make no change to the current position
Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas). This would mean that forensic
orders would remain indefinite, with provision for certificates to be issued by
the MHT, and
orders to be varied, discharged or revoked by the Supreme Court.
The test contained in the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
would continue to refer to ‘likely to endanger’
]). This approach is not
recommended by the Institute.
Make no change to the current position
Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) in relation to indefinite
detention but amend the discharge procedure
to create a presumption in
favour of a reduced level of supervision in circumstances where the MHT has
issued a certificate and the
person makes an application to the Supreme Court.
This approach is also not recommended by the Institute.
Change the indefinite nature of forensic orders to require the court
to set a limiting term
. This is the approach recommended by the Institute
and so it is necessary to decide:
(a) the approach to setting the term (see [
(b) whether a preventative detention scheme should be introduced that would
allow for an extension of the person’s forensic
patient status beyond the
limiting term (see [
(c) any presumptions that should exist in the legislation in favour of or
against reduced supervision or release (see [
, it is necessary to decide whether:
(a) the current test in the Act of ‘likely to endanger’ should be
changed to a test of ‘significant risk of serious
harm’, or an
‘unacceptable risk of causing physical or psychological harm’ (see
]). The Institute recommends that
the current test be changed to a test of unacceptable risk of causing physical
or psychological
(b) to change the judicial model of decision-making to allow the MHT to
exercise powers of variation, discharge or revocation of forensic
orders under
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) (see [
]). The Institute does not support
this reform.
Replacement of indefinite terms with a limiting term
. The first
decision that needs to be made is whether to retain the indefinite nature of
forensic orders contained in the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act
(Tas) or whether to introduce a limiting term. As noted, limiting terms
exist in New South Wales (for those found unfit and not acquitted
following a
special hearing), the Australian Capital Territory, South Australia and the
Commonwealth. In contrast, as with Tasmania,
indefinite detention of forensic
patients exists in New South Wales (for those found not guilty by reason of
insanity), Victoria,
Western Australia, Queensland and the Northern
10.3.9 Several law reform bodies have examined the period of supervision or
detention that is appropriate for forensic patients following
a finding of not
guilty by reason of insanity or unfit to stand trial (and not acquitted at the
special hearing). The NSWLRC recommended
that a limiting term apply for both
defendants found not guilty by reason of insanity and following a finding that
the person was
unfit to stand trial (and not acquitted at the special
The view of the
NSWLRC view was that there should be a time limit because it provides an
important protection for forensic patients.
10.3.10 The SASAC’s view was also that limiting terms should be
Similarly, a key
recommendation of the ALRC was that there should be limits placed on the
detention that can be
This approach was
also recommended by the Senate Committee examining indefinite detention of
people with cognitive and psychiatric
impairment in
The LRCWA also
recommended introducing the use of limiting
10.3.11 In contrast, the VLRC and the Western Australian review conducted by
the Department of the Attorney-General preferred to retain
indefinite terms with
regular reviews. The VLRC considered this was the preferred approach in
combination with reforms to ensure
that ‘the decision-making framework in
place once an order is made is rigorous and ensures that the period a person is
closely reflects the minimum period necessary to address the
person’s risk to the
community’.
Arguments in favour of making provision for a limiting
The following arguments can be identified in relation to making
provisions for a limiting term.
(1) An indefinite term creates uncertainty and this is potentially an
incentive for innocent people to plead guilty rather than rely
on unfitness to
stand trial/and or insanity.
The NSWLRC observed that ‘anecdotally it appears that the indeterminate
orders may deter people with mental impairment from
relying on the defence of
mental illness’.
Further, it stated that ‘[i]f this is correct, then it may lead to
outcomes which fail to meet the interests of justice, public
safety, or the
person’s treatment
Conversely, the
benefits of a limiting term are that it facilitates fairness so that
‘forensic patients are not detained or
managed within the forensic system
for longer than they would have been following
conviction.’
encourage people to raise unfitness to stand trial or the defence of insanity.
In addition, it ensures that people who require
treatment are able to access it
given that these people should be managed in the forensic system rather than the
correctional system.
(2) People who are detained indefinitely may spend longer under supervision
than if they had been sentenced following the usual
implications for decisions about whether to rely on unfitness to stand trial/and
or insanity. As observed by the Office
of Public Prosecution Victoria, ‘a
person who is able to understand the process involved in a plea of guilty will
better off being dealt with by a criminal sanction, rather than being
placed on an indefinite supervision
It also raises
questions of fairness.
The relationship between the time spent in detention/under supervision
compared to the sentence a person would have received had they
been sentenced
following a finding of guilty has been examined in Tasmania. Research suggests
that ‘the consequences of an
insanity plea or unfitness to plead [are]
likely to restrict the liberty of the subject to a greater degree than an actual
in all cases except murder and
This is confirmed by recent research undertaken by the TLRI with the assistance
of the MHT, which shows that the period of restriction
of liberty is
considerably longer for individuals subject to forensic orders following a
finding of not guilty by reason of insanity
or where a finding could not be made
that the defendant is not guilty at a special hearing than for offenders
sentenced following
a finding of
In addition, it has
been suggested that for persons subject to a supervision or restriction order
‘it is highly unlikely, for
practical reasons, that any person could be
discharged from an order in under in 2
This was on the
basis that the MHT will not review the order until the person is at or near the
completion of the first twelve months
under the order and, if a certificate is
issued, the experience has been that it takes 12 months after the certificate is
for an application for discharge to be filed with and considered by the
This appears contrary
to the principle of least restriction consistent with community safety and
fairness to the accused person that
underpin the
Criminal Justice (Mental
Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas). Accordingly, it could be argued that changes are
necessary to ensure that the Act operates justly and consistently with the
principles that underlie it.
(3) Indefinite detention may affect a forensic patient’s self-esteem
and response to treatment.
has been suggested that indefinite terms cause ‘supervised people to feel
trapped or lack the motivation to get
(4) Indefinite terms reinforce negative perceptions about a forensic
patient’s criminality.
(5) A limiting term may encourage the provision of resources and greater
planning towards a person’s release from supervision
in comparison to
(6) Indefinite terms are contrary to international obligations arising under
Art 5 (prohibition of disability-based discrimination)
and Art 14 (rights to
liberty and security of the person) of the
Gooding et al
have argued that indefinite terms ‘clearly deviate from the
establishing separate processes with lesser safeguards to deprive the liberty of
accused persons with disabilities deemed unfit
Arstein-Kerslake et al have suggested that compliance with international
obligations would require that procedures following a finding
of unfitness to
stand trial ‘must never result in a longer or more severe sentence than
would have resulted if a standard trial
proceeded’.
commentators argue, that all mental health detentions are contrary to the
Art 14(b) which provides that ‘the existence of a disability
shall in no case justify a deprivation of
the basis of views expressed by the UNCRPD that laws enabling involuntary
detention should be abolished in cases where
disability is a criterion, even if
other criteria are used in making the assessment (such as dangerousness or
Arguments against a limiting term
The following
arguments have been made in relation to not introducing a limiting term and
retaining indefinite detention:
(1) A limiting term may result in some people reaching the end of the time
limit and being unconditionally released, in circumstances
where he or she is at
risk of causing harm to the
In addition, the
length of the time limit is set at the time of disposition, when the progress of
the defendant’s treatment
and rehabilitation is hard to
However, this
concern is true in relation to sentenced offenders, ‘who are ordinarily
entitled to be released at the expiry
of the sentence, even if they still pose a
risk to others’.
addition, concerns about community safety at the end of the limiting term could
be managed within the civil mental health
Further, a system of
continued restriction or supervision could be introduced to address any concern
where a person poses a serious risk of
harm to other people at the end of the limiting
(2) The forensic system has quite different objectives to
sentencing.
It is concerned
with a person’s treatment and safety, and on this basis indefinite terms
are ‘a way of recognising that
[the] orders were based on a therapeutic
framework, rather than one that is corrections-based (where orders have a
definite term).’
VLRC considered that:
Indefinite term orders ... are consistent with the therapeutic focus of the
CMIA. Such orders are also consistent with the principle
of community protection
underlying the CMIA that recognises that the recovery of a supervised person
should proceed on a gradual
basis so that their risk can be managed to a point
where they can ultimately be reintegrated into the community.
The supervision of people under the CMIA is justified on these principles and
not on the basis of proportionality or deterrence which
would form the basis of
a criminal sentence. In the Commission’s view, the duration of orders
should therefore be based on
the time a supervised person needs to recover or
progress through the system of gradual reintegration before they can safely
to the community. The length of time it takes for this to happen varies
from person to person and is difficult to predict at the
time of the making of a
supervision order.
Similar concerns were expressed in submissions to the SASAC that ‘the
amount of time the defendant spends in custody should
be determined by the
defendant’s treatment needs and the protection of the community, rather
than the nature of the offence
committed’.
accords with the view of Boyd-Caine and Chappell, that indefinite detention is
‘able to respond to the individual needs
of each patient on a forensic
order.’ In contrast, ‘definite orders would not necessarily be
capable of responding to
the complexities of diagnoses, responsiveness to
treatment, and access to leave privileges that are critical to the care,
and rehabilitation of forensic
There may also be advantages for an unwell person in accessing services within
the forensic mental health system given that the level
of support and treatment
may be more difficult to access in the civil mental health system.
(3) A related concern is that the use of a time limit set by reference to a
hypothetical sentence may create the impression that the
time limit is a
sentence (see further at [
A person who has been found not guilty by reason of insanity or where a finding
cannot be made that the person is not guilty at a
special hearing (following a
finding of unfitness) is not found guilty of any offence and is not sentenced.
However, in requiring
the court to specify a limiting term, the court is engaged
in an exercise ‘akin to sentencing’, which may create an impression
that ‘the person is being punished, despite not having been tried and
convicted of any
10.3.14 Other commentators have supported indefinite detention provided there
are sufficient protections and supports to ensure that
forensic patients are
able to progress through the system and ultimately be released. The former
President and the former Forensic
Team Leader of the MHRT in New South Wales
have highlighted the risk that indefinite detention is ‘susceptible to
facilitating
preventive detention’ as the forensic system is
‘susceptible to a privileging of preventative aims over therapeutic or
rehabilitative aims’.
Ultimately, however, their view was that indefinite detention is appropriate as
it is able to respond to individual needs whereas
a definite order ‘would
not necessarily be capable of responding to the complexities of diagnoses,
responsiveness to treatment,
and access to leave privileges that are critical to
the care, treatment and rehabilitation of forensic
Consumer Advisory Group (in its submission to the NSWLRC) argued that:
step up and step down processes need to be enhanced to provide forensic
patients with transparent avenues to progress though the system,
which would
also assist in developing goals and support a recovery focused system. That is,
forensic patients need guidance and resources
to access and understand pathways
to unconditional release.
Similarly, it may be that concerns in relation to indefinite detention can be
addressed by reforms to the review process and the management
of forensic
patients in Tasmania. This is considered further below.
10.3.15 Previous analysis of the Tasmanian forensic mental health system has
raised concerns about the difficulty that patients experience
in having a
forensic order discharged. As noted at [8.3.12], there are concerns that under
restriction orders, forensic patients
are detained for ‘substantially more
than what [they] would have been if they had been found guilty of the
offence’ (other
than in cases of
Similar observations
have been made in relation to supervision orders, where concerns have been
expressed about the length of time
that a forensic patient is subject to
supervision.
Anti-Discrimination Commissioner has illustrated the problems in having an order
discharged with a case study.
Case Example
A man was subject to a restriction order for 16 years. Despite reports from
the Tasmanian Forensic Review Tribunal suggesting that
the restriction order be
lifted and replaced by a supervision order allowing him to reside in the
community subject to the supervision
of the Chief Forensic Psychiatrist, the
courts were reluctant to revoke the restriction order on the basis that they had
no evidence
of how the person would operate in the community.
This was described as presenting a ‘catch 22’ situation given
that it would be ‘almost impossible to gather evidence
to present to the
court to demonstrate how they would operate in a different
10.3.16 There also appears to be a traditional
reluctance on the part of the Supreme Court to allow an individual to transition
an indefinite supervision order to a limited term treatment order in cases
where a person has a mental illness that requires long-term
(potentially
life-long) treatment, such as schizophrenia. This is illustrated in the cases of
CJS v Tasmania
Secretary of the Department of Health and Human
Services v Horacek
, where in both cases the person committed an offence
while unmedicated and, on the evidence, was not a danger to the community while
medicated. However, the concern expressed by the court was that the person may
become non-compliant with a medication regime once
the supervision order was
revoked, and so the potential for danger to the community would re-emerge. While
under both a supervision
order and a treatment order there is power to impose a
compulsory medication regime, the court was concerned about the need to renew
treatment order (in contrast to the indefinite nature of the supervision order)
and the lack of any judicial oversight. In these
circumstances, it was
considered that the long-term management regime provided by a supervision order
was necessary. Again, this
appears to be a ‘catch 22’ situation
given that there is little ability for a forensic patient to demonstrate an
to comply with treatment without a supervision order, until provided
with this opportunity. Further, Smith has argued that these
cases show that
‘too little weight is attached to the fact that the commission of the
offences occurred when a person was undiagnosed
and untreated’ while the
‘single most important aspect [from the court’s point of view] with
respect to schizophrenia
is that it requires lifelong treatment and, in their
view, mandatory
treatment’.
approach is evident in other decisions of the Supreme Court where applications
to revoke supervision orders were rejected because
the person had a chronic
mental health condition and there was a concern about the ability of a treatment
order to ensure compliance
with medication requirements.
10.3.17 However, more recently, people with schizophrenia or a
schizoaffective disorder have had supervision orders revoked. Data
from the MHT
show that since November 2010, there have been six people with schizophrenia or
a schizoaffective disorder who have
had their supervision orders revoked. Other
orders revoked since 2010 include those for four people with a primary diagnosis
of intellectual
disability and two with acquired brain injury. In this period,
there have also been three people with schizophrenia or a schizoaffective
disorder and two with intellectual disability who have had restriction orders
discharged and supervision orders made.
10.3.18 There has also been disquiet about the
inconsistency in outcomes between decisions of the MHT in issuing certificates
the Supreme Court in refusing to discharge orders once applications have
been made. Smith, then President of the Guardianship and
Administration Board
and ex officio member of the Forensic Tribunal, noted the ‘marked
difference between the approaches of
the Forensic Tribunal in issuing the
certificate and the Supreme Court in considering
discharge’.
difference was attributed to the different legislative considerations governing
determinations of each body (see [
]) and to their different
experiences:
the members of the Tribunal, unlike the Court, regularly see a range of
people with more severe or more acute levels of disability
than the person who
is the subject of forensic orders. Such people also require lifelong treatment
and Tribunal members are familiar
with the non-punitive facilities which exist
to ensure that they have it.
However, it may be that there has been a narrowing of the division between
the approach of the MHT and the Supreme Court given that
there are no people on
restriction orders who have a current certificate and eight people with current
certificates on supervision
orders four of whom are currently making
applications for the revocation of those supervision orders.
10.3.19 Similar concerns exist in other
undue “conservatism”
in the approach of people involved in the
system, from psychiatrists to the Forensic Leave Panel [Victoria] and the
In Victoria, it has been observed that one of the main obstacles in the
progression of a forensic patient towards release is the
desire to avoid
complete revocation of the non-custodial supervision
Freckelton notes that
‘the [Victorian] Supreme Court has been more liberal in varying orders
from a custodial supervision order
to non-custodial supervision order than in
revoking supervisory status
completely’.
This is because under a non-custodial supervision order, the court retains a
‘continued capacity ... to order acquittees to
if they breach the terms of a non-custodial supervision order’. In
contrast, ‘if the court
revokes an acquittee’s supervisory status,
he or she reverts to being simply another patient in the community with a
of a mental
10.3.20 The Tasmanian Supreme Court has also
commented on the differing approach of the MHT and the Court to the revocation
of supervision
orders and has been critical of the MHT for its ‘lenient
approach to the issue of
certificates’.
case, Evans J noted that ‘this is the fourth occasion since March 2008 on
which I have formed a different view to the
Forensic Tribunal on whether a
supervision order should be removed’. His Honour stated that:
Where the primary purpose for a supervision order or a community treatment
order is to impose an indefinite requirement on the subject
of the order to take
medication, those involved in the supervision and annual review of the order may
well deem those tasks to be
an unwarranted burden. My experience is that
notwithstanding that the person subject to a supervision order is content with
its continuance,
that person may be encouraged to apply for its discharge: by
those involved in its supervision or review; and on the basis of a
misunderstanding
of the effects of the order or the likely effects of a
community treatment order which might replace it.
The observation appears to rest on the notion that from a patient’s
perspective there is little practical difference between
a compulsory treatment
regime imposed by a supervision order and a treatment order. Accordingly,
community safety warrants retaining
the indefinite order rather than imposing an
order that will expire. However, this approach overlooks the prospect of the
progressing to a treatment regime outside of the forensic context.
10.3.21 More recently, however, decisions of the Supreme Court have accepted
that the revocation of a supervision order may be appropriate
even if the person
has an enduring mental impairment and will require life-long medication. There
has been acceptance that Community
Mental Health Services are able to manage
these conditions through life-long treatment and assertive case management and
as required, and that the ongoing supervision of the court is not
required. The court has noted the importance of comprehensive information
future care and treatment being provided to satisfy the requirement that the
revocation of the order is consistent with community
10.3.22 An additional problem Smith identified was the lack of statistical
information about the operation of forensic mental health
It is difficult to
access information that allows for an assessment to be made of periods of
restriction or supervision for forensic
patients. While the MHT reports on the
number of certificates issued, it is not known publicly how many certificates
result in a
discharge or revocation of order by the Supreme Court (other than if
the MHT reports on this). Although some applications for discharge
are publicly
available (either on the Inglis Clark sentencing database or in appeal
decisions), it appears that many are not publicly
While this is
understandable given the sensitive nature of the cases, it makes it difficult
for legal practitioners to provide advice
to their clients about the likely long
term consequence of relying on insanity or fitness to stand trial, beyond
needing to ‘be
mindful of how difficult it can be to discharge a forensic
10.3.23 Based on these concerns, in the Issues Paper, the TLRI sought
Tasmania for
supervision and restriction orders. The Issues Paper asked whether, in the
alternative, any concerns about the indefinite
nature of these orders and the
balancing of the interests of the individual and the community could be more
appropriately dealt with
through a system of indefinite detention with periodic
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
amended to provide for a limiting term for restriction and supervision orders to
replace the current indefinite nature of
these orders?
10.3.24 The Institute received five submissions addressing the issue of
limiting terms for restriction and supervision orders to replace
the current
indefinite nature of these orders. Differing views were expressed in relation to
10.3.25 EOT argued that the indefinite nature of restriction orders risks
leading to human right breaches. EOT argued that ‘while
[Act] requires that restrictions on a defendant’s freedom should be kept
to the minimum consistent with the safety of
the community’, there are no
time limits on the period a person may be detained after a restriction order has
been made. Accordingly,
EOT observed that this has the effect that
‘persons on restriction orders may be detained for periods of time well in
of those applied to persons committing similar offences whose cases had
proceeded through the court’.
10.3.26 QAI also commented on the unfairness of indefinite detention when
compared to the sentence that a person receives following
a finding of guilt for
the same offence, and the fact that individuals with intellectual impairment or
mental impairments are treated
differently to those without such conditions. QAI
argued that contrary to the perception that a finding of unfitness is a
out of jail free card’, it may instead ‘have devastating
consequences for the accused, who may languish in forensic detention
than they would have had they been found fit and steered through the usual
criminal court process’:
It is likely that the longer people are detained the more their capacities
will diminish, particularly given the sterile environment
and limited
opportunities to use those capacities. While the courts have a duty to the
public to manage risk, the cost to the defendant
is high. The indefinite
detention of those with intellectual impairments on the basis of a risk of harm
to others is discriminatory.
Those without mental or intellectual impairments
are not, as a general rule, indefinitely detained on this basis.
10.3.27 In addition to the comparison in outcomes between a sentence and an
order made following a finding of unfitness, QAI described
some of the damaging
consequences for individuals subject to indefinite detention:
The purpose of the order may be in part therapeutic, but here in Queensland
the detainee has no idea when, or if, they will be released.
The substantive
long-term effects are de-habilitation and institutionalisation, because in
Queensland all but a few of the accused
are placed into purpose-built facilities
that in appearance and structure are little different to prisons. With lack of
use, communication
and other skills erode, and the transitioning detainee, many
years down the track, must attempt to relearn them.
QAI described the limitations of the detention process as follows:
According to anecdotal evidence, the staff at Queensland forensic facilities
lack the skills to promote [re]habilitation and reintegration,
and while there
is clinical expertise to develop behaviour support plans, there is a disconnect
between the plans and their implementation.
The plans are often extremely
detailed and complex, but their implementation is left to unskilled support
workers who do not read
them anyway.
In addition, the artificial, hierarchical, structured living arrangements
atrophies detainees’ capacities and living skills.
The longer a person
stays in detention the less likely it is that they will ever emerge from it. It
is almost impossible to prove
a reduction in risk when the person’s risk
environment is so sterile and artificial. Extraneous factors play on risk too.
matter how accurately the Court/Tribunal predicts risk the calculation still
depends upon the availability of accommodation and support
outside forensic
10.3.28 In the Tasmanian context, O’Connell’s submission
commented upon the practical delivery of rehabilitation for individuals
the SMHU. O’Connell supported a time limit restriction for restriction
orders and stated that this should be ‘perhaps
with a proviso that it can
be extended under extenuating circumstances’. In her view, this reform
would improve the delivery
of services to individuals detained under a
restriction order by providing a better framework to give effect to the
principles of
rehabilitation and least restriction:
The current legislation essentially allows for rehabilitation but in
practice, there is no onus on services to provide it. It is common
people’s leave is frequently delayed or cancelled due to staffing
pressures. The availability of suitable accommodation
is lacking and both of
these issues undoubtedly lengthen a person’s detention under a RO. Whilst
the legislation states that
principles of least restriction must apply, the
culture of the Secure Mental Health Unit is one of risk adverse practice with
increasingly
poor rehabilitative outcomes. The legislation needs amendment to
allow not only for the provision of gradual rehabilitation into
the community
but [also for] a mandated pathway for it.
O’Connell also advocated the introduction of time limits for
supervision orders:
In my experience, the downgrading of SOs is slow and difficult and there is
no onus on the court to lift the order when certain provisions
are met. This
means that all the evidence can be supporting the downgrading of the order but
the Judge takes an opposing view to
maintain the status quo.
10.3.29 In contrast, Walvisch and the DPP supported the retention of
indefinite orders. The DPP did not consider that any change is
In my view the current system in which orders are reviewed annually by the
Mental Health Tribunal is appropriate. The system enables
regular review and
management of an order. The removal of orders should not be considered unless
and until the Tribunal considers
that an order is no longer warranted or the
conditions are inappropriate.
Whilst other jurisdictions have limiting or nominal terms for orders, I would
not recommend adopting such an approach. These orders
focus on community
protection and therapeutic care determined by a person’s treatment needs.
In reality it is the Tribunal
who is best placed to make the initial assessment
as to the appropriateness of the orders. If the Tribunal issues a certificate
an application is made to the court the factors contained in ss 34 and 35 of
the Act will be considered.
10.3.30 Walvisch also supported retaining indefinite orders for restriction
and supervision orders under the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act
(Tas). However, he proposed changes to the current system to facilitate
the discharge of orders. Walvisch stressed that in considering
this issue:
it is essential to keep in mind the purpose which restriction and supervision
orders serve. Given that people subject to such orders
have not been convicted
of an offence, it is clear that they do not serve a penal purpose — their
aim is not to punish. Instead,
they serve a protective function, aiming to
prevent people who have committed acts that are ordinarily classified as
from harming other people. Consequently, as far as
possible their reach should be limited to the supervision of people who continue
to pose a risk to others.
Bearing this in mind, I am supportive of the introduction of measures that
seek to provide a safeguard against the arbitrary and indefinite
detention of
people who no longer pose a risk to the community. In an era of increasing
punitivism and risk aversion, it is essential
that there be specific measures
that ensure that people are not detained for longer than their condition
10.3.31 However, Walvisch opposed the setting limiting of nominal terms based
on a method akin to imposing sentence given that the
person has not been found
guilty, and so is not blameworthy and is not being sentenced for what they have
done. He wrote that:
maintaining a link between the required term of supervision and the maximum
penalty/hypothetical sentence implicitly suggests that
the individual bears some
responsibility for the offence, thereby undermining the purpose of the qualified
acquittal. For example,
requiring a person who is found not guilty of murder
because of insanity to serve a longer period of supervision than a person found
not guilty of rape because of insanity suggests that the former person is more
culpable than the latter. Whilst this may be the popular
perception of the issue
(with the public perhaps thinking that a person receiving a qualified acquittal
for murder should serve a
longer time under supervision), it is not the purpose
of the order. The length of supervision should solely be related to the question
of whether or not the person continues to pose a risk to the community
10.3.32 Instead, Walvisch proposed reforms
(discussed further below) to ensure that any restriction imposed is for the
shortest time
necessary to reflect the risk posed to the community. The
necessary reforms include:
• maintaining a system of regular review by the MHT where the timing of
the reviews is not referrable to the alleged offence
but should be held
• specifying that the purpose of the review is to determine whether the
individual continues to pose a sufficient risk to the
community to justify
continuing the current restrictions on his or her liberty, and thus whether or
not the supervision or restriction
order should be maintained or varied;
• incorporating a presumption in favour of reducing the level of
supervision, unless there is evidence that members of the public
seriously endangered as a result of reducing the supervision status of the
• giving the MHT an appealable power to vary, discharge or revoke
orders made under the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) 1999
Walvisch argued that while this approach maintains a system of indefinite
detention (with its drawbacks), the impact of the ‘drawbacks
limited by a strong presumption that the level of supervision should be reduced,
and the capacity of the MHT to vary, discharge
or revoke orders’. In his
view, under such a system, ‘it is anticipated that the term of supervision
for many offenders
would be significantly reduced’.
10.3.33 The Institute recognises that this is complex issue. As noted, the
reason for having the doctrine of fitness of stand trial
and a defence of mental
impairment and cognitive impairment rest on notions of fairness to the
individual — that it is not
fair to require someone to participate in a
trial if they are unable to do so and that it is not fair to attribute criminal
responsibility
to those who are not able to act otherwise. It then seems
counterintuitive to detain such people indefinitely under restriction orders
to subject them to indefinite supervision under supervision orders when this
would not happen if they were found guilty and given
finite sentences.
Accordingly, there are strong arguments in favour of introducing limiting terms
on the grounds of fairness. Further,
limiting terms may encourage individuals to
rely on unfitness and/or the defence of mental impairment where this is
appropriate by
removing the uncertainty of an indefinite order. This will enable
people to receive appropriate rehabilitation and treatment in the
system rather than in prison. The knowledge that orders are for a finite period
may also facilitate better pathway planning
for reintegration into the
10.3.34 On the other hand, the rationales for imposing forensic orders are
conceptually different to imposing criminal sanctions —
the person has not
been found guilty and is not sentenced by the court. This distinction appears to
be undermined if the term of
a forensic order is set on the basis of a
‘hypothetical sentence’. Different considerations do apply where an
has not been found guilty and is not sentenced and so a forensic
order is imposed on a forward looking (risk posed by individual)
rather than
backward looking (proportionate sentence for the offence). However, that said,
there are very limited circumstances where
a court is able to detain individuals
found guilty on basis of prospective risk (other than dangerous offender
legislation which
is infrequently
10.3.35 After considering the competing views and the submissions received,
the Institute’s view is that indefinite detention
should be abolished and
limiting terms should be introduced. While the introduction of the
Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) was intended to provide a pathway
to release, it would appear that this objective has not been effectively
realised. Moreover,
while further reforms could be made to the indefinite
detention/supervision scheme to facilitate a more predictable and accessible
pathway to release, the Institute’s concern is that this model is too
susceptible to an undue focus on risk and prevention
rather than rehabilitation.
In addition, the Institute’s assessment is that current system does not
reflect the Act’s
underlying principles, in that it does not provide an
appropriate balance between individual freedom and autonomy and community
In fact, the Institute’s view is that the current model may
potentially impede community safety by acting as a disincentive
for offenders to
seek special orders and that the protection of forensic patients and the
community would be better served by the
introduction of a finite order.
10.3.36 The uncertain nature of release for individuals subject to an
indefinite order and the likelihood that many individuals will
spend longer
under supervision than if sentenced by a court acts as a disincentive to rely on
fitness to stand trial and/or the defence
of insanity in circumstances where
this may well be appropriate. As discussed at [
], there are significant issues with
the treatment and rehabilitation services available to individuals with mental
health impairments
and cognitive impairments who are incarcerated. Clearly,
these unmet needs have significant consequences for the individual but also
the community. While the community is protected while the person is in prison,
this protection is only short-term and does not
address community safety in the
longer term. Indefinite terms also affect the practical delivery of
rehabilitation services for forensic
patients and the Institute’s view is
that a finite term will provide a clearer framework to plan for the release from
order. There is also clear support for this approach in other
found unfit and not acquitted following a special hearing), the Australian
Capital Territory, South Australia and the
Commonwealth. It was also recommended
by the ALRC, a Senate Committee, the SASAC and the LRCWA.
10.3.37 Although the Institute is recommending the introduction of limiting
terms for restriction and supervision orders, the Institute
still recognises the
legitimate concerns about the unpredictability of progress in a
defendant’s treatment and rehabilitation
in these cases. While the
Institute does not recommend the retention of indefinite detention as the
appropriate response to these
concerns, the Institute’s view is that the
model that should be adopted is the introduction of limiting terms
the introduction of a preventative detention scheme that would allow for an
extension of the person’s forensic patient status.
A forensic patient
should also be able to apply for an order to be removed or varied prior the end
of the limiting term. Accordingly,
Recommendations 40, 42 and 43 are to be read
Recommendation
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) should be
amended by abolishing the indefinite nature of forensic orders and introducing
limiting terms.
Setting the limiting terms for restriction
and supervision orders in Tasmania
10.3.38 Once a limiting term is adopted for
restriction and supervision orders in Tasmania, it is necessary to decide the
which the limiting term is set.
10.3.39 In addressing the process of setting the limiting term, the NSWLRC
identified four basic models:
(1) Using the
hypothetical sentence
that would have been imposed had
the person been convicted in the ordinary way of the
This is the current
approach in New South Wales, the Commonwealth and the Australian Capital
(2) Using a
modified sentencing approach
such as exists in South
Australia, where the hypothetical sentence is imposed on the basis of the
objective facts only. Another variation
would be to specify that it relates to
the hypothetical non-parole period rather than the total sentence or to provide
that certain
mitigating factors are to be presumed (such as a guilty plea or
(3) Using a
fixed statutory formula
to determine the limiting
(4) Using a
time limit formulated by adopting a risk management approach
that determines a time limit taking into account ‘the likelihood of
rehabilitation, the likely length and success of treatment
(and impact on
offending behaviour) and future
10.3.40 Table 8.10 sets out arguments in favour
and against the different models considered by the NSWLRC for setting the
Table 8.10: Models identified by the NSWLRC for setting limiting
Arguments in favour
Arguments against
Hypothetical sentence-based approach
• Approach that courts are familiar with.
• Fairness requires that forensic patients should not been detained
for longer that if convicted in a normal trial.
• Sentencing principles recognise the interests of the community and
the victims.
• This is the least arbitrary.
• Sentencing principles may not be appropriate as defendants who are
unfit to stand trial or not guilty by reason of insanity
require treatment not
punishment. Under sentencing principles, proportionality is constrained by
community safety.
• Sentencing principles cannot be applied with reasonable accuracy
given the artificiality of imposing sentence on a person
who has not been found
• Limiting terms do not achieve outcomes commensurate with sentences
given that the person does not get a benefit from an early
guilty plea, may not
be able to put all the facts before the court and focuses on the total sentence
(not taking account of the fact
that sentenced offenders may be eligible for
• Creates the impression that the person is being punished, despite
not having been found guilty of an offence. Hunyor writes
approach suggests that there is a desire to hold people responsible and see them
punished that needs to be satisfied
such that a person isn’t perceived to
“get off more
• Encourages the development of informal tariffs related to just
deserts for the
Modified sentencing approach
• Could address some of the limitations identified with the
hypothetical sentence model by imposing a time limit equivalent
hypothetical non-parole period.
• Could provide that certain mitigating factors are presumed or
provide for a percentage-based discount for unknown mitigating
• Using a non-parole period ignores the role of supervision on
release on parole.
• Presuming mitigating factors would be very artificial.
Fixed statutory time limits (often based on maximum
• Certainty and consistency.
• Difficult to apply in Tasmania as all offences under the
Criminal Code
(other than murder and treason) have the same maximum
• Ignores the range of sentences imposed for offences.
• The relationship between the time limit and the offending conduct
ceases to be proportionate and becomes arbitrary.
Risk management approach
• This would be able to take into account the likelihood of
rehabilitation, the likely length and success of treatment (and
offending behaviour).
• The length of the term should be set by the need to protect the
community balanced against the principle that a person’s
liberty should be
subject to the minimum restriction
• Not an approach that the court is familiar with.
• Predictions of risk factors may be difficult at an early
10.3.41 The application of the hypothetical sentence approach is the
preferred approach in other jurisdictions. In other words, the
term is set by
reference to the sentence of imprisonment the court would have imposed if the
person had been found guilty in an ordinary
criminal trial. This means that, so
far as is possible, general sentencing principles such as retribution,
denunciation, proportionality
apply ‘as well as special principles that
apply when sentencing offenders with cognitive and mental health
impairments’.
as noted, it is recognised that this approach is ‘not without
difficulties, both conceptually and in
10.3.42 This approach was reaffirmed as the most appropriate approach by the
NSWLRC. This was also the recommendation of the
However, to address
some of the limitations of the model, the NSWLRC also recommended the following
measures to make sure that the
hypothetical sentence approach does not
overestimate the commensurate sentence:
(a) The court should estimate the sentence as if the person has been found
guilty at a normal trial, and also taking into account
the person’s
cognitive or mental health impairment; and
(b) In order to make sure that the limiting term is fair in comparison with
those imposed where a person is found guilty at a normal
trial, the court should
have a broad discretion to discount the sentence taking into account that it may
not be possible to demonstrate
particular mitigating factors such as remorse or
a guilty plea.
10.3.43 In the Issues Paper, the TLRI sought feedback in relation to how a
limiting term should be set for supervision and restriction
orders if one is
adopted in Tasmania.
If there is a time limit for restriction and supervision orders under the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas), on what basis should
it be determined?
10.3.44 The Institute received two submissions that addressed the method of
setting the limiting term.
10.3.45 As noted above, Walvisch did not support the introduction of limiting
terms given his views about the inappropriateness of
using sentencing
principles/maximum penalties as a reference point. Walvisch argued that:
The maximum penalty for an offence bears no connection to the time at which
it is appropriate to assess the risk a person may continue
to pose to the
community. That is an issue that relates to matters such as the nature of the
person’s impairment and the treatment
available for that impairment,
rather than the penalty for a charged offence.
For a similar reason, the measures should also not refer to the sentence that
would have been appropriate if the person had been convicted
of the offence
concerned. The extent of a person’s hypothetical blameworthiness for an
offence for which they have not been
convicted (even if modified to take into
account specific mitigating factors) bears no connection to the length of time
they should
serve under a supervision order before a review or release.
While EOT acknowledged the concerns about setting limiting terms based on a
sentencing approach, the submission expressed support
for the model proposed by
Legal Aid NSW. In their model, Legal Aid NSW proposed that nominal or limiting
terms be set equivalent
to the non-parole periods of the sentences that would
have been imposed had the person been found guilty. This approach was advocated
by EOT as providing an identifiable release date which would benefit the
wellbeing of the individual and conform to broader human
rights concerns:
Importantly, it would also provide those in detention with identifiable
future release dates which they could work toward. It would
also satisfy the
requirement to introduce improved human rights safeguards for those on
restriction orders. Under the present arrangements
persons who are detained may
express feelings of frustration and hopelessness about the uncertainty of their
future, in large part
because of the uncertainty of their period of detention.
Having no expected future release date gives little motivation to aim for
self-improvement or to address the underlying factors contributing toward their
original offending behaviour.
10.3.46 Clearly, there are conceptual and practical difficulties in setting a
limiting period regardless of the method chosen (see
Table 8.10). However, the
Institute does not consider that the difficulties in setting limits should mean
that indefinite terms should
be retained. Therefore, regardless of the problems
that have been identified, the Institute’s view is that a method should
adopted to allow courts to set the term. On this basis, the Institute’s
view is that the best approach to setting the limiting
terms is to adopt the
hypothetical sentencing method. This means that the court identifies the
hypothetical sentence that would have
been imposed had the person been convicted
in the ordinary way of the offence. The Institute recognises that there is a
artificiality in such a process. Furthermore, inevitably there are
concerns about linking the length of an order imposed following
a qualified
acquittal or where a finding cannot be made that the defendant is not guilty,
with the setting of terms using sentencing
principles. However, this approach
appears to be favoured by a majority of jurisdictions that have adopted limiting
terms. It addresses
issues of arbitrariness and fairness arising from the
current indefinite period of detention and allows a term to be set that is
broadly comparable with the sentence that would have been imposed.
10.3.47 In recommending that limiting terms be
based on hypothetical sentences, the Institute stresses that the objectives of
forensic system are different to the objectives of sentencing. Even though
the limiting term is set by reference to a notional sentence,
the limiting term
is not intended to be a sentence and does not operate as a sentence in the
ordinary way. The limiting term is instead
a signal to the individual and the
forensic mental health system that there is a defined release date in the
future, and the intention
is that the treatment and rehabilitation of the person
should be focused on release by that date. However, this does not preclude
earlier release or longer restriction/supervision where this is appropriate.
Recommendations
41. In imposing a forensic order under the
Criminal Justice (Mental
Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas), the court must nominate a limiting term, which
would be the court’s best estimate of the length of the sentence that
would have been imposed had the person been found guilty at a normal trial (a
hypothetical sentence).
42. A forensic patient should be able to apply to the Supreme Court for a
discharge of a restriction order or the variation or revocation
of a supervision
order prior to the expiry of the limiting term.
Consequences of reaching the limiting term
10.3.48 The consequences of reaching the limiting
term for the release of the individual must also be addressed. The term could be
an absolute limit (ie, the time at which the individual is released) or a limit
that is imposed with an option to extend. As noted,
a system of limiting terms
does not preclude an individual making an application to have their order
revoked or varied prior the
expiry of the limiting term (if the legislative test
is satisfied).
However, if a
limiting term is adopted, it is necessary to decide the consequences of reaching
the term set. It is necessary to determine
whether the limiting term would
operate as an
absolute limit
(as in the Australian Capital Territory and
the Commonwealth) or a
limit imposed with provision to extend
of restriction or supervision prior to the end of the limiting term (as exists
in New South Wales where limiting terms
apply for unfitness matters following a
special hearing and South Australia).
10.3.49 As discussed, in New South Wales provision was made in 2013 to allow
the Supreme Court to make extension orders for forensic
patients. This followed
recommendations of the NSWLRC. The threshold in the
Mental Health (Forensic
Provisions) Act 1990
(NSW) sch 1,
cl 2 is that an extension order can
(1) ... if and only if the Supreme Court is satisfied to a high degree of
probability that:
(a) the forensic patient poses an unacceptable risk of causing serious harm
to others if he or she ceases being a forensic patient,
(b) the risk cannot be adequately managed by other less restrictive
(2) The Supreme Court is not required to determine that the risk of a person
causing serious harm to others is more likely than not
in order to determine
that the person poses an unacceptable risk of causing serious harm to
The NSWLRC had identified a gap in the ability to transfer some forensic
patients to the civil mental health system at the end of
their limiting term in
circumstances where they still presented a risk of harm to the community. This
related to individuals who
did not satisfy the criteria for admission into the
civil mental health system.
In addition, the guardianship system does not provide a means to detain a person
for reasons of community
10.3.50 The NSWLRC stressed that this power is exceptional and should be
exercised sparingly, with strong justification and suitable
protections.
It emphasised
that the only justification for the making of the order should be the need to
protect the community. An order should
not be made for the purposes of treatment
or punishment.
It considered
that this approach would ensure community protection and provide ‘an
appropriate counterbalance to our recommendation
that limiting terms be applied
to people found NGMI’.
This cautious approach reflects the principles that apply to preventative
detention for offenders sentenced following a finding of
guilt, in cases
involving high-risk sex and violent offenders. Such offenders may be detained at
the end of their sentence where
the Supreme Court considers that they continue
to pose an unacceptable risk of serious
10.3.51 In South Australia, recent amendments have also made it possible for
the Supreme Court to make continuing supervision
The test in South
Australia is that the ‘court is satisfied, on the balance of
probabilities, that the defendant to whom the
application relates could, if
unsupervised, pose a serious risk to the safety of the community or a member of
the community.’
these provisions are intended to address concerns that a limited number of
people may pose an unacceptable risk of causing
harm to other people if released
from supervision at the end of the limiting term, and that such a risk cannot be
adequately managed
under the civil mental health regime.
10.3.52 Similarly, in Tasmania it can be argued
that extension orders are necessary because there are gaps in the civil system.
is provision for the MHT to make a treatment order under the
Health Act 2013
(Tas), which authorises treatment for an involuntary
patient. A treatment order lasts for up to six months and sets out treatment
a treatment plan. This can take place in a hospital, in the community or a
combination of both.
criteria that must be met for the MHT to make a treatment order are that: the
person has a mental illness; without treatment,
the mental illness will, or is
likely to, seriously harm the person’s health or safety or the safety of
other persons; the
treatment will be appropriate and effective; treatment cannot
be adequately given except under a treatment order; and the person
does not have
decision-making capacity.
Under the Act, an adult has decision-making capacity unless it is established
that they are unable to make a decision because of
an impairment of, or
disturbance in, the functioning of the brain and he or she is unable to
understand information relevant to the
decision, retain information relevant to
the decision, use or weigh information relevant to the decision or communicate
the decision.
However, there
may be people who refuse treatment but do not lack decision-making capacity.
Further, individuals may not meet the
definition of mental illness, such as a
person with an intellectual disability or acquired brain
10.3.53 There are also powers for intervention under the
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
(Tas). Under this Act, there is power for the
Guardianship and Administration Board to appoint a guardian, who can be provided
accommodation powers and health care
Accommodation powers
mean that the guardian has the authority to decide where and with whom the
person lives. This might include
accommodation in a group home or supported
residential facility.
guardian with health care powers can consent to medical treatment as well as
care provided by allied medical practitioners but
does not have the power to
authorise psychiatric treatment of a person with mental
A guardian can also
consent to or make decisions about a behaviour management
However, a guardian can
only be appointed where a person has a disability and because of that disability
they cannot make reasonable
personal and lifestyle decisions and the person is
in need of a guardian.
Board must consider whether the needs of the person could be met by other means
less restrictive of that person’s freedom
of decision and action and must
be satisfied that the order would be in the best interests of the
Further, as noted by
the NSWLRC, the principles underpinning guardianship ‘focus solely on the
best interests of the person
subject to the order. The need for community
protection is not a relevant
principle’.
basis, ‘[i]t is not the guardian’s role to safeguard the community,
although the guardian’s decisions may
Accordingly,
there are limitations in relation to the effectiveness of guardianship
arrangements to provide an appropriate means
to address concerns about community
safety. The Institute has made recommendations for reform in relation to the
functions and powers
of guardians. These reforms would allow guardians to take
into account harm to others as a relevant consideration when making
representative
However, a guardian could only exercise this decision-making power if the person
does not have the ability to make his/her own decision
or to consent to the
10.3.54 On the other hand, there are strong arguments against a preventative
detention scheme, including that forensic patients ‘should
not be subject
to further restriction on their liberty following the expiry of their limiting
term, apart from those that may be
imposed under the civil
reason, many stakeholders in the NSW review process expressed considerable
concern about the creation of a preventative
Further, preventative
detention schemes for forensic patients are said to violate Art 14 of the
which ‘prohibits the deprivation of liberty on the basis of
actual or perceived impairment even if additional factors or criteria
used to justify the deprivation of
generally, preventative detention schemes that apply to convicted offenders are
controversial because they offend against the
principles of proportionality and
finality in sentencing, they amount to double punishment and because prediction
of future risk
problematic.
As the TLRI has
written previously:
an assessment of the merits and the use of indefinite and preventative
detention regimes necessarily involves the balancing of potentially
conflicting
rights of victims, offenders, and society as a whole. This conflict of rights
unsurprisingly results in tensions at the
policy level, as Parliament and the
judiciary must grapple with the balance of ostensibly irreconcilable interests.
Secondly, indefinite
and preventative detention regimes are justified as a means
of preventing future harm, but the task of predicting future dangerousness
fraught with uncertainty and predictive models have been extensively criticised
for a tendency to over-predict
Such schemes are also contrary to international human rights instruments and
for this reason the courts and international tribunals
have stressed that their
powers must be exercised only in exceptional
circumstances.
10.3.55 In the Issues Paper, the TLRI sought feedback on whether, if a
limiting term is adopted, there is a need for a preventative
scheme that would
allow for an extension of supervision or detention or whether the current
Tasmanian civil arrangements sufficiently
enable risk to community safety to be
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) is amended
to provide for a limiting term for restriction and supervision orders, is it
necessary and appropriate to introduce
a preventative detention scheme that
would allow for an extension of the person’s forensic patient status?
10.3.56 Only three submissions addressed this question. The DPP reiterated
that restriction and supervision orders should be indefinite.
In contrast, as
noted above, O’Connell considered that it may be appropriate to make
provision for a preventative detention
scheme if a time limit is introduced for
restriction orders (which she supported).
10.3.57 EOT suggested an alternative approach to
the consequences of a limiting term for restriction orders. This derived from a
suggested by Legal Aid NSW. EOT’s view was that two periods should
be set for limiting terms: (1) a non-parole period; and
(2) a sentence. Based on
these two periods, EOT suggested the following approach:
• During the non-parole period, a person should only be released from a
restriction order if a certificate is issued by the
MHT and confirmed by the
Supreme Court;
• After the non-parole period has expired, the presumption should be
that the person is released in the following sequence:
o Conditional release at the end of the non-parole period
o Unconditional release at the end of the sentence period.
It was argued that this would ‘shift the legal presumption against
detention’ after the expiry of the notional non-parole
Importantly, it would not derogate the current powers of the Mental Health
Tribunal to issue a certificate that would enable the release
of a person
conditionally or unconditionally prior to the expiry of their nominal term. Nor
would it prevent the Supreme Court from
putting in place other orders or
conditions to come into effect on release after a nominal non-parole period,
such as a treatment
This model creates a rebuttable presumption of unconditional release at the
expiry of the sentence period, which means that the court
can order either
conditional release or no release at that time.
10.3.58 As indicated, the Institute’s view is that if limiting terms
are introduced for forensic orders, provision should be
made to allow those
orders to be extended in exceptional cases. Despite legitimate disquiet about
the implications for human rights
of preventative detention, the
Institute’s view is that accommodation needs to be made for the
unpredictability of treatment
and rehabilitation. A power for the prosecution to
apply to the court to extend the term of a restriction or supervision order is
necessary to address the issues of community protection in circumstances where
it would be unsafe to release a forensic patient at
the end of a finite term.
Accordingly, the Institute proposes a ‘half-way’ model between
indefinite detention (where
the onus is on the individual to justify release)
and a finite term where an individual is automatically released at the end of
term in all cases.
Recommendation
43. A limiting term should not operate as an absolute limit on the duration
of an order. There should be power for the prosecution
to make an application to
extend the order.
10.3.59 A further issue that requires resolution is how should a preventative
detention scheme be structured. The NSWLRC considered
four possible models in
this regard as set out in Table
Table 8.11: Advantages and disadvantages of models of preventative
Advantages/disadvantages of model
Apply or adapt the scheme for continued supervision of high-risk
Crimes (High Risk Offenders) Act 2006
(NSW) provides for
the continued supervision or detention of high-risk sex or violent offenders who
are due to be released.
• This model could be adapted to manage forensic patients who present
a risk of harm. The nature of the risk would need to be
framed differently given
that forensic patients have not been convicted of an offence.
• Decision to extend detention is made by Supreme Court.
• Safeguards: having two independent experts review the person and
the high threshold for making the order.
• Consistency in processes and procedures for forensic patients and
convicted offenders.
Allow the Mental Health Review Tribunal to classify the person as a
‘compulsory patient’ to provide for continued detention
supervision in the community.
• Allow the MHRT to make the decision to classify the person as a
‘compulsory patient’ to allow for continued detention
in a mental
health facility or discharge into the community under supervision.
• Concerns regarding lack of a judicial safeguard.
• No general system of preventative detention for convicted offenders
who pose a risk of harm at the end of their sentence and
so a system for
forensic patient may operate to treat people with cognitive and mental health
impairments in a discriminatory manner.
• However, this model would be developed specially for forensic
patients rather than being an adaption of a scheme designed
for convicted
high-risk offenders.
• Allows for ongoing supervision and review by the MHRT.
Amend the limiting term provision to provide that the court must release a
patient unless satisfied that the release of the person
will seriously endanger
the public.
• Provides the MHRT with a discretion to extend the limiting term for
individuals if they present a clear risk.
• Greater flexibility than having a limiting term that cannot be
• However, may be viewed as effectively removing the limiting term as
there will no longer be a definite end date for release
for any forensic
Change the civil scheme of involuntary detention to include people with
cognitive impairments.
• Amend the civil scheme of involuntary detention for people with
cognitive impairments by allowing for a parallel scheme for
involuntary
• Significant resource implications to create a civil detention
scheme for the involuntary detention of people with cognitive
impairments.
10.3.60 After considering these options, the NSWLRC recommended (and the
Parliament adopted) a model that is consistent with the provisions
that apply to
offenders who are subject to a sentence of imprisonment but adapted to
accommodate the management of forensic patients.
10.3.61 Key features of the NSW model are that:
(a) The Supreme Court makes the order on the basis of a twofold assessment of
the unacceptable risk of serious harm to others posed
by the forensic patient if
released from detention or supervision and the inadequacy of other less
restrictive means of managing
Considerations that the court has regard to include: the safety of the
community, expert reports, any orders or decisions of the MHRT,
person’s level of compliance with any obligations imposed while being a
forensic patient, especially while they were on
leave or conditional release;
the view of the court at the time the limiting term was imposed and a report
from the forensic patient’s
treatment team which would include information
arrangements
that do not involve continued supervision or detention are not
appropriate.
(b) The term of the extension order is five years subject to further
(c) The MHRT conducts regular reviews.
(d) The Supreme Court can revoke the extension order on the ground that
circumstances have changed significantly so as to render the
extension order
unnecessary.
The relevant NSW legislation is set out in full in Appendix 6. This also
reflects the South Australian approach (also set out in Appendix
10.3.62 In the Issues Paper, the Institute sought feedback as to the most
appropriate model if a preventative detention scheme were
to be adopted in
Tasmania. The Institute noted that the scheme could be based on the models
considered by the NSWLRC or some other
model proposed by stakeholders. For
example, a model based on the NSWLRC approach would allow an application to be
made to the Supreme
Court to extend the order. This would require determination
of the threshold test for extension and the term of the extension order.
Supreme Court could also be given a power to revoke the extension order and the
MHT could have responsibility for ongoing review.
If a preventative detention scheme is introduced, what model should be used?
What should the threshold test for an extension order
be and how long should an
extension order operate?
10.3.63 No submissions to the Institute addressed these questions.
10.3.64 The Institute’s view is that the NSW
model should be adopted in Tasmania to allow for the extension of orders beyond
the limiting term set by the court, with appropriate changes to reflect the
Tasmanian approach to decision-making and the role of
the MHT. This model is
based on the approach to the scheme of preventative detention that applies in
New South Wales for the continued
supervision or detention of high-risk sex or
violent offenders. It recognises the need to balance the risk of the discharge
or revocation
of the order with the least restriction principle and accommodates
the role of the MHT and the Supreme Court in the process. Accordingly,
Institute’s recommendation is that the scheme for the extension of orders
should have the following key features:
1. The DPP should be able to make an application to the Supreme Court prior
to the expiration of the limiting term for an extension
of a restriction order
or a supervision order. The DPP should also be able to apply for a restriction
order to be replaced with a
supervision order instead of an extension of the
restriction order.
2. The Supreme Court should consider the request for the extension order on
the basis of a twofold assessment of the unacceptable
risk of serious harm to
others posed by the forensic patient if released from detention or supervision
and the inadequacy of other
less restrictive means of managing the risk. This
regime reflects the principles contained in the
Criminal Justice (Mental
Impairment) Act 1999
, which provides that the ‘court is to
apply, where appropriate, the principle that restrictions on the
defendant’s freedom
and personal autonomy should be kept to the minimum
consistent with the safety of the community.’
3. Considerations that the court should have regard to include:
• the safety of the community
• expert reports
• any certificates issued by the MHT
• the person’s level of compliance with any obligations imposed
while being a forensic patient, especially while they
were on leave
• the view of the court at the time the limiting term was imposed
• a report from the forensic patient’s treatment team which would
include information about the need for ongoing management
of the person and the
reasons why arrangements that do not involve continued supervision or detention
are not appropriate
• a report on the attitudes of victims, if any, and next of kin
(These factors are broadly consistent with the provisions set out in the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
4. The term of the extension order should be five years subject to further
5. The MHT should be mandated to conduct annual reviews of the extended
forensic order.
6. The Supreme Court should have the power to make an interim extension order
if it appears that the limiting term or existing extension
order will expire
before the proceedings are determined and that the matters alleged in the
supporting documentation would, if proved,
justify the making of an extension
7. The Supreme Court should at any time be able to vary or revoke an
extension order on the application of the DPP or the person subject
forensic order if satisfied that circumstances have changed sufficiently to
render the order unnecessary.
Recommendation
44. The NSW model should be adopted in Tasmania to allow for the extension
of orders beyond the limiting term set by the court, with
appropriate changes to
reflect the Tasmanian approach to decision-making and the role of the Mental
Health Tribunal. The scheme for
the extension of orders should have the
following key features:
(a) The DPP should be able to make an application to the Supreme Court
prior to the expiration of the limiting term for an extension
of a restriction
order or a supervision order. The DPP should also be able to apply for a
restriction order to be replaced with a
supervision order instead of an
extension of the restriction order.
(b) The Supreme Court should make the extension order on the basis of a
twofold assessment of the unacceptable risk of serious harm
to others posed by
the forensic patient if released from detention or supervision and the
inadequacy of other less restrictive means
of managing the risk. This regime
reflects the principles contained in the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment)
, which provides that the ‘court is to apply, where
appropriate, the principle that restrictions on the defendant’s freedom
and personal autonomy should be kept to the minimum consistent with the safety
of the community.’
(c) Considerations that the court should have regard to include:
• the safety of the community
• expert reports
• any certificates issued by the MHT
• the person’s level of compliance with any obligations imposed
while being a forensic patient, especially while they
were on leave
• the view of the court at the time the limiting term was imposed
• a report from the forensic patient’s treatment team which
would include information about the need for ongoing management
of the person
and the reasons why arrangements that do not involve continued supervision or
detention are not appropriate
• a report on the attitudes of victims, if any, and next of
(d) The term of the extension order should be five years subject to further
(e) The MHT should be mandated to conduct annual reviews of the extended
forensic order.
(f) The Supreme Court should have the power to make an interim extension
order if it appears that the limiting term or existing extension
expire before the proceedings are determined and that the matters alleged in the
supporting documentation would, if proved,
justify the making of an extension
(g) The Supreme Court should at any time be able to vary or revoke an
extension order on the application of the DPP or the person
subject to the
forensic order if satisfied that circumstances have changed sufficiently to
render the order unnecessary.
Test for making,
varying, discharging or revoking orders under the
Criminal Justice (Mental
Impairment) Act 1999
10.3.65 In Tasmania, the
Criminal Justice
(Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) sets out the test for the Supreme Court
to apply when making, varying, discharging or revoking orders. The same
apply to all decision-making by the Supreme Court and are discussed
in detail at [
]. As noted, these provisions aim
to provide an appropriate balance between the need to protect the safety of the
community and the
principle of least restriction with the defendant’s
freedom and personal autonomy. In making this assessment, there is a focus
the legislation (and by the court) on the likely danger that the defendant poses
to other people if released. In other words,
a key feature of the test is an
assessment of whether the defendant is, or would if released be, likely to
another person or other persons generally.
10.3.66 This section of the Report focuses on whether there is a need to
reform the test of endangerment contained in the
Criminal Justice (Mental
Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) for making an assessment of whether to detain a
person under a supervision order, impose a supervision order or a treatment
order or release a person conditionally or unconditionally. In addition, it
considers the basis on which a forensic patient should
be released from
detention or supervision before the end of the limiting term. Consideration is
also given to whether it is desirable
to introduce statutory presumptions (in
favour of release or detention) that would operate to guide the Supreme
Court’s decision-making
when considering the release of an individual
before the end of the limiting terms. Accordingly, it is necessary to
(a) on what basis an order should be made, and
(b) on what basis a person can be discharged or have an order varied prior to
the expiry of the limiting term.
10.3.67 In the Issues Paper, the Institute outlined several reform options
that could be considered in the context of the Tasmanian
forensic mental health
system. These included:
(a) revisiting the role of dangerousness in making, varying and revoking
(b) including statutory presumptions in relation to the detention or release
of defendants;
(c) making changes to the model of decision-making;
(d) making changes to the leave system.
The endangerment test
10.3.68 The NSWLRC identified two common features in cases following a
finding at a special hearing or a finding of not guilty by
(a) the absence of established criminal responsibility, and therefore the
absence of any principled basis for punishment; and
(b) the possibility that the person’s cognitive or mental health
impairment may give rise to a risk of harm, and a consequent
restrictions on the person’s liberty to ensure the safety of the community
This means that punishment is irrelevant in these cases. Accordingly, the
limits of the person’s detention are guided by the
requirement to achieve
a balance between community safety and the individual’s freedom and
personal autonomy,
by the concept of risk. However, as McSherry has written, ‘the problem
really lies in drawing up appropriate criteria
which will lead to the detention
of those who really may do harm in the future, whilst allowing for the absolute
discharge of those
who do not pose a risk to the
As indicated,
the test in Tasmania is ‘likely to endanger’.
Position in other jurisdictions
While there are
differences in the process for making orders, the management and review of
forensic patients and the discharge of
orders in other Australian jurisdictions,
there are some broad similarities that are useful to note in the context of this
A brief summary of the approaches in other jurisdictions is provided in
Appendix 3. In particular, it can be seen that the concept
of endangerment is
often used as a decision-making criterion for making, varying or revoking
forensic orders. However, as shown in
Table 8.12, the way in which the test of
endangerment is framed differs between jurisdictions and also varies at
different decision-making
Table 8.12: Comparison of tests for making and discharging forensic
orders, Australian jurisdictions
Making orders
Varying or discharging orders
Serious endangerment
New South Wales (NGMI)
New South Wales
South Australia
Likely to endanger
South Australia
Northern Territory
Australian Capital Territory
Unacceptable risk to the safety of the community
Not a threat or danger
Commonwealth
Safety will or is likely to be seriously at risk
Northern Territory
Degree of risk
Western Australia
10.3.70 A key difference (as seen in Table 8.12) is that some jurisdictions
have adopted the requirement that the court consider whether
public safety would
endangered by the person’s release (rather than
‘likely to endanger’) as the threshold test for the release of
individual.
‘serious endangerment’ test encompasses ‘concepts of the
degree of harm and the degree of
In other words,
‘it encompasses the gravity of the possible harm in the event that the
risk eventuates’.
‘a small risk of serious harm occurring may amount to serious
endangerment, while a high risk of relatively trivial harm
New South Wales v XY
Court of Appeal confirmed that the test involves a consideration of the gravity
of the risk and the likelihood of the risk: this
means that it is necessary
‘to identify the nature of the harm which might follow from release, and
the chance of the harm
eventuating’.
indicated that if the conduct ‘which may occur would probably not have
serious consequences for any member of the public
if it did occur, a reasonably
high chance of occurrence would be
tolerable’.
However, if
‘the anticipated conduct ... involved serious physical harm and possibly
homicide, a much lower level of risk of
occurrence would need to be
established’.
In contrast, as set out at [
‘likely to endanger’ is predominately concerned with the degree of
risk of harm occurring rather than its gravity.
‘Likely to endanger’
involves an assessment of the risk of harm — ‘both the probability
of the harm occurring
and the gravity of the possible harm are relevant to
assessing the nature of the risk, but the probability of a risk occurring is
“critical concept of
endangerment”&#
Need for reform
. Other jurisdictions have reviewed the
circumstances in which a person may be made a forensic patient and the process
by which the
order is able to be varied or discharged and have examined the
principles and factors that should be considered by the court. This
has generally focused on the concepts of risk of harm and dangerousness.
10.3.72 In Victoria, the VLRC sought feedback on whether the concept of
endangerment is an appropriate basis for the court’s
assessment of whether
to detain or release a forensic patient. A common view was that
‘endangerment’ is an imprecise
concept that involves too much
subjective interpretation.
The NSWLRC considered that there is ‘very little guidance on what
[endangerment] meant’.
Similarly, other commentators have observed that the focus on dangerousness
provides little guidance as to how the court should exercise
discretion. They argue that this has resulted in the courts according
‘higher weight to factors relating to community
protection than factors
related to treatment and ongoing evidence of mental
concluded that a test based on an assessment of dangerousness is inadequate as
it is inconsistent with the test for determining
the detention of a patient in
the civil mental health system (which requires an assessment of whether it is
necessary for the protection
of the person or others from serious harm). It is
also inconsistent with contemporary language of risk
assessment.
The notion of
dangerousness is said to be inappropriate because it is ‘a vague and
unhelpful way of expressing the risk of
a particular individual causing
Instead, the
NSWLRC suggested that the language of risk better reflects the approach taken by
clinicians and health professionals
in the mental health
10.3.73 In response to concerns about the inadequacy of the current test, the
NSWLRC recommended ‘a risk-based threshold for
release [that] should
require that there be no significant risk of serious
This test would constitute an appropriate hurdle that protects both community
safety and the interests of the
individual.
In Victoria, a
different approach was recommended to address concerns about the language of
‘dangerousness’ and to move
to a ‘risk’-based test. The
VLRC recommended that ‘an “unacceptable risk” [is] an
appropriate measure
of the likelihood of risk the supervised person
This approach
was proposed for four reasons:
(1) it demonstrates that ‘there is some level of risk that will be
acceptable and will counteract any assumption that the person
must prove that
they pose no risk before their level of supervision can be
(2) it ‘recognises that assessing risk requires a level of subjective
judgment by the decision-maker on the level of risk that
society is prepared to
accept when balanced against the supervised person’s right to liberty and
(3) although ‘it incorporates some level of social judgement. A test
based on unacceptable risk is more in line with modern
risk assessment than a
test based on
dangerousness’;
(4) it ‘will encourage decision-makers to engage in more nuanced
assessments of a supervised person’s risk, rather than
a “black and
white” assessment of whether a person is “dangerous” or
dangerous”’.
10.3.74 The VLRC also suggested that the test should specify the type of harm
it seeks to prevent in order to provide clarity to decision-makers
and experts
applying the test. Accordingly, it recommended a test based on physical or
psychological harm to a
In New South Wales,
‘serious harm’ is nominated as the degree of harm to be judged
because it aligns closely with the
approach adopted in the civil mental health
Similarly, in
Tasmania, one of the criteria the MHT applies in making a treatment order uses
the terminology of ‘serious
10.3.75 In the Issues Paper, the TLRI sought feedback on the wording of the
Tasmania test in the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
and any possible concerns about its operation either generally or with regard to
particular categories of people, such as those
with cognitive impairments or
those with long-term mental illnesses. In particular, the TLRI sought feedback
on whether there should
be a change to the threshold for making, varying or
discharging an order under the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) to achieve a better balance between the risk to the community and the
interests of the individual.
Are there any difficulties that exist under the
Criminal Justice (Mental
Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) in relation to the making, varying or discharging
of orders for forensic patients?
Is the current approach to decision-making in relation to individuals subject
to forensic orders overly cautious? For example, is
too much emphasis placed on
the risk to the community and too little emphasis placed on the interests of the
Do you think that the test contained in the
Criminal Justice (Mental
Impairment) Act 1999
referring to ‘likely to
endanger’ should be changed to refer to a ‘significant risk of
serious harm’, an
‘unacceptable risk of causing physical or
psychological harm’ or some other test? Are there any other factors that
be included or removed from the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment)
10.3.76 Two submissions to the Institute addressed these questions. The DPP
stated that ‘the decision making is in accordance
with the principles
encapsulated in the legislation’ and it was his view that the current
‘likely to endanger’
test is appropriate. Accordingly, he did not
support any change. In contrast, in the context of reduced supervision levels,
wrote that the test should require ‘evidence that members of the
public will be seriously endangered as a result of reducing
the supervision
status of the person’.
10.3.77 After considering the competing views, the
Institute has concerns about the current test for the making, varying and
of the orders which requires the court to determine whether the
applicant is ‘likely to endanger’ the community. As noted,
is imprecise because its focuses on the likelihood of danger materialising
(understood to be a real chance or possibility)
rather than the level of harm.
Moreover, this approach does not reflect contemporary approaches to risk
assessment. Accordingly,
the Institute’s view is that the test should be
changed by removing the imprecise concept of ‘dangerousness’ and
replacing it with a test that sets out the nature of the harm contemplated.
Further, the Institute considers that the test should
be reformulated so that it
requires a risk assessment. This accords with modern risk assessment approaches
that move away from the
conflation of mental illness with dangerousness. With
regard to these matters, the VLRC’s recommended model provides a useful
precedent for Tasmania. In accordance with that model, the Institute recommends
that the level of harm should be an unacceptable
risk of causing physical or
psychological harm to a person or persons generally. The use of
‘unacceptable’ risk recognises
that some level of risk is acceptable
and allows the court to balance the level of risk that society is prepared to
accept that is
consistent with the person’s freedom and personal autonomy.
(other options unacceptable risk to the safety of the community/no
significant
risk of serious harm).
Recommendation
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
should be changed to refer to whether the defendant does, or would if released,
pose an unacceptable risk of causing physical or
psychological harm to a person
or persons generally.
Other factors to be included in the test for making, varying or
discharging the order
10.3.78 The VLRC also nominated other factors that may provide relevant
guidance to courts in making, varying and revoking treatment
recommended legislative amendments to require courts to take into account an
individual’s recovery and progress,
in terms of treatment and personal
improvement, when making decisions about changing their status from a custodial
supervision order
to a non-custodial supervision order or releasing them from a
non-custodial supervision
This change was
recommended to allow courts to be more responsive to people with intellectual
disabilities or other cognitive impairments,
and to recognise more positive
aspects of people’s recovery or
These matters could
also be the focus of inquiry at annual reviews conducted by the MHT, so that its
certificates can contain useful
information for the court on compliance with
treatment and rates of recovery, which will then inform the court’s own
10.3.79 As with the approach of the VLRC, the Institute considers that an
individual’s recovery and progress should be expressly
legislation as matters to be taken into account by the MHT in issuing a
certificate and by the court in making decisions
person’s status from a restriction order to a supervision order or to
revoke a supervision order
prior to the expiration of the limiting
Recommendation
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
should be amended to require the Mental Health Tribunal and the court to have
regard to the person’s recovery or progress in
terms of treatment
progression and personal improvement in making a decision to discharge a
restriction order, or to vary or revoke
a supervision order prior to the
expiration of the limiting term.
Need for statutory presumptions in relation to detention/supervision
10.3.80 In Tasmania, there is currently no
presumption in favour of release or detention/supervision based on the
assessment of risk
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas). Rather, the court makes its decision in relation to variation,
discharge or revocation by balancing a number of factors prescribed
Position in other jurisdictions
. Jurisdictions also differ
with respect to their statutory presumptions for and against release or
detention. For example, in New
South Wales, the MHRT must not release a forensic
patient unless it is satisfied that the public will not be seriously endangered.
This creates a presumption in favour of detention unless the decision-maker is
satisfied that the public will not be seriously endangered.
This presumption
applies to those found not guilty by reason of insanity and to those found not
fit to stand trial and not acquitted
at a special hearing prior to expiry of the
limiting term. This is also the case under the
Crimes Act 1914
and in Victoria
during the nominal term.
contrast, in some jurisdictions the decision-maker must order the release of a
forensic patient unless satisfied that the person
poses a risk (as defined in
that jurisdiction). This creates a presumption in favour of release. This is the
case in the Northern
Territory and in Victoria (after the expiry of the nominal
In some jurisdictions
there is no presumption in favour of release or detention — this is the
case in Tasmania and Western
The need for reform
. If a system of limiting terms is adopted
in Tasmania, consideration should be given to introducing statutory presumptions
release or reduced supervision prior to the expiry of the limiting term.
This is the approach in New South Wales, where there is
a presumption in favour
of detention when making decisions about release prior to the end of the
limiting term. The presumption is
that a ‘person will remain in detention
unless it can be positively established that their release ... will not present
Mental Health (Forensic Provisions) Act 1990
provides that
the court ‘must not make an order for the release of a forensic patient
unless it is satisfied ... that the safety
of the patient or any member of the
public will not be seriously endangered by the patient’s release’.
The NSWLRC recommended
that this presumption should be retained because it is
necessary for community
There is also a
presumption against release in South Australia, where the
Criminal Law
Consolidation Act 1935
(SA) provides that ‘the court cannot release a
defendant ... or significantly reduce the amount of supervision ... unless the
court is satisfied, on the balance of probabilities, that the safety of the
person or any member of the public will not be seriously
endangered by the
person’s release’. This is also the case in Queensland and under the
Crimes Act 1994
10.3.83 Accordingly, in the Issues Paper, the Institute asked:
If a system of limiting terms is adopted in Tasmania, should a presumption
against release or reduced supervision be created prior
to the expiry of the
limiting term and then a presumption in favour of release from
detention/discharge from supervision after the
expiry of the limiting term?
10.3.84 Only one submission to the Institute addressed this question. EOT
supported the introduction of a system of limiting terms
in Tasmania, and as
indicated at [
], considered that
there should be shifting presumptions within the model proposed. A court should
be required to set a nominal non-parole
period and a nominal head sentence when
imposing a supervision or restriction order. In EOT’s view, there should
be a presumption
in favour of conditional release at the end of the non-parole
period and unconditional release at the end of the sentence period.
10.3.85 In relation to the specific question
whether a presumption against release or reduced supervision should be
introduced into
the legislation to specify that the court must not release the
person unless it is satisfied in relation to risk, the Institute’s
that this not necessary. There are clearly enumerated legislative factors and
principles that give effect to the need to
ensure that any order is consistent
with the safety of the community. There is also the need to give explicit
consideration to the
risk of harm to the community.
Recommendation
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) should not
be amended to introduce a presumption that prior to the expiry of the limiting
term a court cannot discharge a restriction
order or revoke a supervision order
unless the court is satisfied in relation to the risk of harm test.
Making changes to the current decision-making model
10.3.86 In Tasmania,
the MHT reviews
forensic orders within 12 months of their making and then in each 12-month
period afterwards. The MHT can issue a
certificate if it determines that a
forensic order is no longer warranted or that the conditions of the order are
not appropriate.
However, it does not have the power itself to discharge or vary
the forensic order. This can only be done by the Supreme
Accordingly, there is
usually a two-step process (MHT review and Supreme Court hearing) to revoke or
discharge forensic orders, and
this may operate as a barrier for forensic
patients making an application to the Supreme Court to revoke or discharge an
Data from the MHT show
that it is not uncommon for a person to have received several certificates at
reviews conducted by the MHT
before a court application is made to discharge the
restriction or supervision order. Further, there are some individuals on
supervision
orders who have received numerous certificates from the MHT and have
not made applications to the Supreme Court for the revocation
of their orders.
Nevertheless, the two-step process may be viewed as providing an additional
safeguard for the community given that
a person’s mental health may
fluctuate. In this context, it is noted that the MHT data show that there are
some patients who
receive certificates at the MHT review (and who remain on the
forensic order) and subsequently have a review hearing where no certificate
issued. In addition, the Institute has identified differing approaches to the
issue of certificates by the MHT and the discharge
of orders by the Supreme
10.3.87 As identified in the Issues Paper, a possible way to deal with
difficulties in varying or discharging forensic orders is to
empower the MHT to
vary, discharge or revoke orders made under the
Criminal Justice (Mental
Impairment) 1999
(Tas). Some of these difficulties may, of course, be
ameliorated by the introduction of finite terms for forensic orders and by
changes to the test to be applied in varying or removing them. However,
these measures do not exclude the possibility of arming the
MHT with an
appealable power to vary, discharge or revoke orders prior to the end of the
limiting term. Extending the power of the
MHT in this way would remove the
unnecessary duplication in the current two-step process where the MHT reviews
matters and issues
certificates, but the forensic patient must then apply to the
Supreme Court for variation or discharge of forensic orders. The MHT
already has
power to make, vary, renew and discharge treatment orders and to determine leave
from the SMHU for patients subject to
restriction
Any disquiet about
extending the MHT’s powers in relation to forensic orders might be allayed
by making its decisions appealable.
This model would accord with the approach in
many other jurisdictions, as recognised by the
10.3.88 Other models of decision-making in relation to the review and release
of people subject to forensic orders have been adopted
in Australian
10.3.89 In the Issues Paper, the Institute sought feedback on whether there
should be change in the decision-making model that would
provide expanded powers
to the MHT to exercise powers of variation, discharge or revocation of forensic
orders under the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
Should there be a change in the judicial model of decision-making to allow
the Mental Health Tribunal to exercise powers of variation,
discharge or
revocation of forensic orders under the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment)
If there is a change to the decision-making model in Tasmania, is it
necessary to make changes in relation to the composition of the
panel that is
constituted to make decisions to discharge, revoke or vary forensic orders under
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
10.3.90 The Institute received two submissions
addressing this issue. The DPP stated that there should be no change: ‘The
are made by the court and as such it would be inappropriate for the
orders to be varied, discharged or revoked by the Tribunal’.
10.3.91 In contrast, Walvisch’s said that the MHT should have ‘an
appealable power to vary, discharge or revoke orders
made under the
Justice (Mental Impairment) 1999
Requiring individuals to attend the Supreme Court in order to finalise any
changes is unnecessarily burdensome. Moreover, given that
such a step is not
required for those who seek release from civil detention, this process appears
to be based on the fact that the
accused has committed a criminal offence.
However, as they have been acquitted of that offence (due to their impairment),
this factor
should be irrelevant to the mechanism for release.
10.3.92 After considering this issue, the Institute recommends that the dual
process of decision-making be retained so that the MHT
conducts annual reviews
and the Supreme Court makes decisions about the variation, discharge or
revocation of forensic orders prior
to the expiration of the limiting term. The
Institute believes that this model is most likely to ensure public confidence in
process. However, as noted, the Institute acknowledges that there are
problems with the current process including impediments to
applications being
made to the Supreme Court, a duplication of process and no legislative
requirement for the Supreme Court to give
weight to the MHT’s
recommendations. Accordingly, the Institute recommends the enactment of a
requirement for the court to
take account of the certificates and
recommendations made by the MHT and of a presumption in favour of varying,
revoking or discharging
a forensic order if a certificate is issued.
10.3.93 Another problem that was brought to the attention of the Institute
during the consultation process, is the effect of publicity
and media reporting
of cases which can discourage people from making applications to the Supreme
Court to have orders discharged,
varied or revoked. Media reporting may cause
‘setbacks in treatment and recovery due to publicity, the stigma
associated with
negative reporting of mental illness in the media and problems
associated with successful
reintegration’.
Tasmania, courts have inherent power to suppress the publication of proceedings
conducted in open court when this is considered
necessary for the administration
of justice.
However, this
power has received legislative recognition in Victoria in the
Crimes (Mental
Impairment and Unfitness to be Tried) Act 1997
(Vic). The court can exercise
this power where it is in the public interest to do
This test is different
than that under the
Open Court Act 2013
(Vic) s 18(1)(a), which allows a
court to make a suppression order if it is ‘necessary to prevent a real
and substantial risk
of prejudice to the proper administration of justice that
cannot be prevented by other reasonably available’. The need to provide
further protections was considered by the VLRC:
The Commission acknowledges and supports the powerful principle of open
courts. However, in recognition of the special vulnerability
of a person accused
of an offence under the CMIA, the importance of reintegration for community
safety and the rehabilitation prospects
of a person on a supervision order, the
Commission agrees with the views expressed in submissions and consultations that
there should
be a presumption in favour of suppressing information that may
identify a person under the
10.3.94 Providing anonymity for applicants to the
Supreme Court who seek to vary, discharge or revoke forensic orders was not
in the Issues Paper. However, based on the approach taken by the VLRC
and information provided to the Institute, the Institute recommends
consideration be given to the addition of a new provision in the
Justice (Mental Impairment) 1999
(Tas) that expressly provides for
suppression orders to be made and that prescribes the purposes of such orders as
being to enable
the long-term recovery of people subject to the Act and to
facilitate their reintegration for the protection of the
Recommendations
48. There should be a statutory requirement in the
Criminal Justice
(Mental Impairment) 1999
(Tas) for the court to take account of the
certificates and recommendations made by the Mental Health Tribunal with a
presumption
in favour of varying, revoking or discharging a forensic order if
the Mental Health Tribunal has issued a certificate.
49. Consideration should be given to the enactment of a new provision in the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) 1999
(Tas) that expressly empowers
courts to make suppression orders and that sets out that the purpose of making
suppression orders is
to enable the long-term recovery of people subject to the
Act and to facilitate their reintegration into the community for the protection
of the community.
Transition from forensic patient
10.3.95 In Tasmania, there is concern about the difficulty that forensic
patients encounter when transitioning from a restriction
order to a supervision
order or from a supervision order to a treatment order under the
Health Act 2013
(Tas). This difficulty stems from what has been described as
a ‘catch-22’ situation: because forensic patients are not
demonstrate how they may behave with a lower level of supervision, they are not
granted a lower level of
supervision.
10.3.96 There also appear to be difficulties in providing
‘step-up’ and ‘step-down’ options for a forensic
seeking to transition from a restriction order (with detention at the Wilfred
Lopes Centre) to detention in a community-based
facility. In
Secretary of the
Department of Health and Human Service v
the trial judge
attempted to construct a release order that would allow for the defendant to
move from the Wilfred Lopes Centre to
Tyenna Blue but with an option to have the
defendant moved back to Wilfred Lopes if
outlined the dilemma:
The dilemma can be readily stated. The aim is to permit greater flexibility
in the treatment of the applicant without the present
level of incarceration.
That flexibility requires compulsory return to the Wilfred Lopes Centre if the
regime is found to be unworkable.
Release to a less intensive institution or
centre is desirable if the Chief Forensic Psychiatrist believes, as a
consequence of medical
judgment, such a course to be apposite. Return to the
community simpliciter is not a present option. The Court is reluctant to leave
the present order in force without
However, the Court of Criminal Appeal found that the orders of the judge, in
attempting to permit, at the direction of the Chief Forensic
Psychiatrist, the
movement of the defendant in and out of the SMHU as deemed necessary and
treatment as an involuntary patient under
Mental Health Act 2013
(Tas) were not lawful.
held that it is not possible to use the conditions attached to a supervision
order ‘as a means of expanding the role of
a supervision order, and
creating a hybrid order somewhere between a supervision and restriction
10.3.97 Features of forensic mental health systems in other jurisdictions may
provide possible models to address such problems. These
include amendments to
leave provisions, the use of technology to enable better supervision of forensic
patients on leave or conditional
release and/or the creation of step-up and
step-down facilities.
Amendment to leave provisions
Boyd-Caine and Chappell
have observed that leave privileges:
are critical to the patient’s ability to progress through the forensic
system towards release. In the first instance, leave
privileges provide an
opportunity for patients to be tested in terms of responsibility, trust, insight
into their illness, and the
general progress of their rehabilitation. Leave
privileges are also gradual steps towards greater liberty and access to family,
and the broader
Leave in Tasmania is also critical to rehabilitation of forensic patients and
operates over the longer term with the aim of supporting
and facilitating the
discharge of restriction orders. However, this is not explicitly recognised in
Mental Health Act 2013
In the Issues Paper, an option identified for reform is to make changes to
the leave system so that there are more options in relation
to the type of leave
available, including the ability of the MHT to make extended leave orders to
provide forensic patients with
an opportunity to demonstrate their progress
towards rehabilitation. This reflects a graduated approach to release from
and is closely tied to rehabilitation and
reintegration.
It would also
address the concerns raised by the court in
of the supervision order as it would allow a person on a restriction order to
live outside the secure mental
health unit for extended periods of time (with
the ability to move the person back to the SMHU if required).
10.3.99 In Victoria, there is a unique system of leave that ‘specifies
the type of leave that is available based on the location
and duration of the
summarised the types of leave as
(a) Special leave – this allows a forensic patient on a custodial
supervision order to leave their place of detention and receive
services for a
period not exceeding seven days for the purposes of receiving medical treatment,
or 24 hours for non-medical treatment
purposes. This can be granted by an
authorised psychiatrist and can be suspended by the Chief Psychiatrist.
(b) On-ground leave – this allows a forensic patient to leave their
place of detention and receive services but requires them
‘within the surrounds’ of the place of detention. It can be
authorised by the Forensic Leave Panel and suspended
by the Chief
Psychiatrist.
(c) Limited off-ground leave – this allows a forensic patient, for a
maximum of six months, to leave their place of detention
between the hours of 6
am and 9 pm and outside those hours on a maximum of three days in any seven-day
period. It can be authorised
by the Forensic Leave Panel and suspended by the
Chief Psychiatrist.
(d) Extended leave – this allows forensic patients to leave the place
where they are being detained for a period of time not
exceeding 12 months. The
Supreme Court can make an extended leave order and it can be revoked by the
Chief Psychiatrist. It is also
a requirement that a custodial supervision order
not be varied unless a 12-month period of extended leave has been
Use of technology
In New South Wales, changes are
being introduced with a view to ensuring that people with cognitive and mental
health impairments
are better managed to improve community
One of the changes is
Mental Health (Forensic Provisions) Act 1990
(NSW) which will be
amended to allow the Mental Health Review Tribunal to impose ‘requirements
for the purposes of monitoring
(including by electronic means) compliance with
the conditions of release or
This reform
adopts recommendations of a review of forensic patients by the MHRT to allow the
use of GPS technology by treatment teams
and the MHRT ‘to better supervise
forensic patients on leave or conditional
It reflects a
review of the operation of the MHRT that proposed the amendment of the Forensic
Mental Health Services Policy ‘to
recognise advances in technology and the
readily available non-obtrusive technological solutions, including potential for
of mobile phone apps, which enable supervision of patients via
It was also
recommended that:
additional GPS mechanisms for supervising patients, and other technological
options as may be appropriate, be considered by treating
teams and the Tribunal
for use in developing the risk-management plan for supervising patients on leave
or conditional release; and
that the Tribunal have the power and discretion to
direct the use of GPS monitoring through mobile apps. These options are intended
to enhance community and victim confidence in the supervision of patients on
However, it was not recommended that permanent ankle bracelets be
Step-down/step-up facilities
Reviews conducted in
other jurisdictions have highlighted the need for step-down and step-up
facilities for forensic patients leaving
custodial supervision.
10.3.102 In South Australia, the SASAC reported that there is a recognised
need for an intermediate step between secure forensic mental
health detention
and being released — either conditionally or unconditionally — into
the community.
forensic facility in South Australia is James Nash House and it has a
‘step-down’ unit (Ashton House). However,
while the court was able
to order the release of a person from detention to release under licence in the
community to reside at Ashton
House, Ashton House did not operate as a step-up
There was no provision
for the Clinical Director to return a person to James Nash House without
applying to the court to suspend
or revoke a
Accordingly, the
SASAC concluded that there needed to be more flexibility to allow licensees to
be easily transferred between James
Nash House and Ashton House according to
clinical need with the MHT being empowered to assist with the efficient
operation of the
step-up and step-down process without need to apply to the
10.3.103 The VLRC also considered that incorporating more flexibility in
accommodation options and the type of order that could be
made could assist in
supporting the person and would be consistent with recovery oriented
It recommended the
‘establishment of a medium-secure facility as an approved mental health
service under the CMIA to provide
an intermediate step between the high-security
facility of Thomas Embling Hospital and community
accommodation’.
could also be used where people have breached conditions of a non-custodial
supervision order.
10.3.104 In Tasmania, the Anti-Discrimination Commissioner has argued that a
step-down unit or other forms of transitional facilities
would enable forensic
patients to transition back to the
This ‘would
risk of breaching Australian obligations
However, there are resourcing difficulties in using leave as a step towards
discharge of a restriction order as there is a lack of
appropriate accommodation
in the community (such as a step-down unit). There are also difficulties with
staffing so that forensic
patients may have leave cancelled due to a lack of
available staff to escort the person on supervised leave and this has potential
implications for the length of time that a patient is subject to a supervision
10.3.105 In the Issues Paper, the TLRI sought feedback about whether the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) and the leave
provision in the
Mental Health Act 2013
(Tas) provide an appropriate
pathway for gradual reintegration of a forensic patient into the community,
consistent with the principles
of least restriction and community safety. In
this regard, the Institute noted that options for reform could include changing
conditions that may attach to a supervision order, making changes to the
leave provisions and the creation of step-down/step-up facilities
to provide for
appropriate levels of supervision and flexibility to respond to patient
Are there any difficulties with the operation of the leave provisions under
Mental Health Act 2013
(Tas) that limit its utility in providing an
appropriate pathway for the gradual reintegration of a forensic patient into the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) provide
an appropriate pathway for gradual reintegration of a forensic patient into the
(a) Are the provisions regarding the conditions that may attach to a
supervision order adequate and appropriate? If not, what changes
should be made?
For example, would it be desirable for the provisions in relation to supervision
orders in the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) to be
amended to allow the court to impose conditions that the person reside in an
approved hospital if directed by the Chief
Forensic Psychiatrist or the Mental
Health Tribunal?
(b) Would changes to the leave provisions, such as providing for extended
leave, provide a more appropriate pathway for gradual reintegration
of a patient
into the community?
(c) Is there a need for a medium secure environment to operate as a
step-down/step-up facility for patients who are subject to a restriction
If so, should the Chief Forensic Psychiatrist, the Mental Health Tribunal and/or
the court have the ability to move a forensic
patient between Wilfred Lopes and
the medium secure facility? On what basis?
(d) Is there a technological solution that may be used to monitor forensic
patients to address concerns in relation to risk and community
(e) What are the cost implications of making these changes, including the
costs of supervision and of treatment services?
10.3.106 The Institute received two submission in
response to these questions.
10.3.107 O’Connell made observations in relation to need for a
step-down model:
In relation to the need for a medium secure unit, I do agree that a step-down
model is required. There is a stand-alone unit within
the WLC grounds that is
not utilized but could be used as a medium secure unit with access to more
lenient leave provisions. A forensic
hostel (as used in the UK) would also be
There is no
doubt that the poverty of appropriate supported accommodation delays
people’s rehabilitation and release by years. Community-based
supervision
is a much more cost effective option compared to a SMHU.
O’Connell believed that to address problems in the current system, the
legislation needed to be amended to ‘not only allow
for a provision of
gradual rehabilitation into the community but a mandated pathway for it’.
As noted, O’Connell highlighted
a lack services available to provide for
rehabilitation under the current system, with leave frequently cancelled or
delayed due
to staffing pressures.
10.3.108 EOT also believed that a legislative pathway for discharge from a
restriction order would lead to better planning to release
(and so facilitate
the reintegration of the person into the community):
The adoption of legislative changes enabling conditional or unconditional
release after a fixed period of detention would increase
the importance of
rigorous release planning, including the identification of community-based
support and rehabilitation pathways.
Whereas secure mental health facilities such as the Wilfred Lopes Centre may
be successful in addressing acute illness and provide
for the needs of high risk
patients, there is also a need to provide transitional arrangements that
encourage behaviour improvements
and enable those who are on restriction orders
to transition to community living options.
Ongoing support and risk management is best achieved by a graduated
transition from a forensic disability setting to a supported
‘step-down’
option and thereon to eventual release into the
community. This would enable the implementation of ongoing risk management
arrangements
to ensure both the client and the community are safeguarded and
that individuals are connected with the appropriate supports and
services to
meet their individual reintegration needs.
Whilst the Mental Health Tribunal currently has the capacity to determine
applications for leave from secure mental health units for
patients subject to
restriction orders, there are limited options outside of the Wilfred Lopes
Centre available for those who would
benefit from a more step-wise approach.
What this means in practice is that there are few transitional arrangements
between detention and release. Calls have previously been
made for a second
secure mental health centre similar to a group home for this purpose.
Providing a range of forensic services would require close and cooperative
multi-agency collaboration, with independent health and
social care services and
stakeholders committed to improving services for people with disability. When
transitioning clients from
facilities such as the Wilfred Lopes Centre to
community living options, adequate funding is required for the provision of
assessments and maintenance services to provide the requisite
interventions to ensure ongoing support and future risk management.
At a minimum, it should be a requirement that through-care plans be developed
for all patients on restriction orders. Such plans would
identify and support
treatment and rehabilitation services, including arrangements to enable the
person to transition into progressively
less restrictive environments and
eventually be reintegrated into the community.
Linkages to funding under the National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS) may
provide avenues to develop more flexible options for
forensic patients ready to
be conditionally released to live in the community.
10.3.109 These submissions highlight the practical barriers in the forensic
mental health system for individuals to progress from
a restriction order to a
supervision order. There are resourcing problems that affect the availability of
leave as well as the lack
of a ‘step-down’ facility in the
community. These issues at a crucial stage in the forensic mental health system
appear to undermine the intent of the
Criminal Justice (Mental
Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas). The submissions suggest that the lack of a
legislated pathway ‘out’ suggest that transitional arrangements back
to community living are not a priority. It is the Institute’s view that
this gap in the system needs to be addressed to ensure
that it operates more
effectively. If this is to be achieved, additional resourcing will be required
in the short-term as will the
cooperation of stakeholders. The Institute
recommends that this deficit in the system be addressed as a priority by
government. It
is likely that such an approach will ultimately result in greater
community safety, better protection of human rights of people with
mental health
and cognitive impairments and an overall cost saving to the community.
10.3.110 No submission addressed the introduction of an extended leave
provision (as exists in Victoria). However, as noted, extended
leave is a key
feature of the transition pathway in Victoria, and the Institute’s view is
that this model should be introduced
into the transition process. This would
allow people to have an extended period living in the community to demonstrate
their progress
towards reintegration and rehabilitation.
10.3.111 Submissions did not address technological solutions that may be used
to deal with concerns about risk and community safety.
Legislation (yet to
commence) will make such technology available in New South Wales so that the
MHRT will be able to order its use
as a condition of leave or conditional
release. However, it is noted that there are concerns about the necessity for
electronic monitoring
as well as its negative impact on rehabilitation and human
This is an issue that
requires further consideration and could be addressed as part of a review of
transition arrangements in Tasmania.
Recommendations
50. The Tasmanian Government should initiate a review to identify the
barriers in the forensic mental health system to patients’
reintegration
into the community with a view to ensuring that appropriate pathways are
available for the gradual reintegration of
forensic patients into the community,
consistent with the principles of least restriction and community safety.
51. As part of the review of the transition pathways from a restriction order
to a supervision order, consideration should be given
to the amendment of the
leave provisions so that an order can be made allowing forensic patients to
leave the SMHU for an extended
52. As part of the review, the use of technological
solutions to overcome concerns in relation to risk and community safety should
be considered.
Conditional release orders
10.3.112 There is no statutory limit contained in the
Criminal Justice
(Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) for conditional release orders. This
means that a conditional release order (or some conditions of an order) may be
and there is no provision in the legislation to have the conditions
varied or removed.
inflexibility may potentially cause unfairness.
Position in other jurisdictions
10.3.113 Only New South Wales (for defendants where a finding of not guilty
was unable to be made following a special hearing), Western
Australia (for
defendants found not guilty by reason of insanity) and the Commonwealth make
provision for a conditional release order
to be made by the
A bond may be made for
up to five years in New South Wales, three years in the Commonwealth legislation
and 24 months in Western
Australia, the court can make a conditional release order for five years for
summary and minor indictable
Approach to reform
10.3.114 In relation to conditional release orders under the
Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(e), there appears
to be a deficiency in the legislation as it does not provide a limiting or
maximum term for the bond or provide
any mechanism that would allow a person to
apply to have the terms of the conditional release order varied or discharged.
a court wished, it could provide for a person to be conditionally
released into the community under the supervision of Forensic Mental
Services or
the Chief Forensic Psychiatrist, for example, or to take medication, comply with
medical treatment, notify of a change
of address, employment or training or
comply with directions and these could be imposed indefinitely and with no
option to have them
removed or changed. In contrast, the term of a treatment
order under the
Mental Health Act 2013
(Tas) is six months and the limit
for a conditional release order imposed by the court as a sentence, is five
Other indefinite
orders under the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
provision for review and revocation.
10.3.115 Accordingly, the TLRI sought feedback on whether a limiting term
should be set for conditional release orders.
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
amended to provide for a limiting term for a conditional release order to
replace the current indefinite nature of these
10.3.116 No submissions received by the Institute addressed this issue.
However, the Institute’s view is there is a need for
reform. As noted, a
deficiency in the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(e) is that there is no mechanism that would allow a person to apply to
have the terms of the order varied or discharged (and no statutory
limit for the
term of the order limiting). Accordingly, the Institute’s view is that a
limit should be set. Based on the approach
in other jurisdictions, where the
period of the order is generally the same as the limit for good behaviour
bonds/conditional release
orders imposed as a sentence, the time limit for a
conditional release order under the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act
(Tas) should be equivalent to the period for a conditional undertaking
Sentencing Act 1997
, that is, five years.
Recommendation
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(e) should be amended to provide for a maximum time limit for a conditional
release order of five years.
The appropriateness of orders under the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) for people with intellectual
disabilities
10.3.117 The Tasmanian forensic mental health system has been criticised for
failing to provide a suitable framework for people with
intellectual
disability.
It has been
argued that people with intellectual disability ‘can sometimes be subject
to a restriction order largely as a result
of the failure to provide an
appropriate level of community support to prevent offending
behaviours’.
addition, a failure to provide appropriate services in the community may result
in people on supervision orders behaving ‘in
a manner that places both
themselves and others at substantial risk’ and being apprehended and
detained at the SMHU.
Further, there are problems in relation to patients with intellectual disability
being able to obtain discharge of orders because
‘the behavioural
manifestations of their intellectual disability ... are unlikely over time to be
seriously modified and thus
the level of risk to the community is unlikely to
substantially decline. It is only with appropriate levels of supervision that
risk of reoffending can be
mitigated’.
basis, the Forensic Mental Health Tribunal expressed concern ‘that
Tasmania’s secure mental health facility is
effectively being used to
“warehouse” people for whom the State is unable to provide
Case example
B was placed on a supervision order after being found unfit to stand trial
for a change of arson. He had a well-established history
of moderate
intellectual disability. He does not suffer from a major mental illness.
B worked in a full-time capacity and was a reliable worker. He maintained
stable accommodation in a shared flat over 15 months. He
was successful in
adhering to his supervision order for a period of approximately two years.
During this period, a 24 hour one-to-one
care package was in place.
According to reports received by the Tribunal, B only began to breach his
order when his support funding was pared back, resulting
in reduced supervision.
As a result, he absconded from his supervision program for five or so weeks
culminating in his apprehension
and detention at Wilfred Lopes Centre.
He remained in detention for a period of 16 months until an adequate support
package was made available.
10.3.118 Recently, amendments have been made to the
Criminal Justice
(Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) to provide enforcement provisions in
relation to conditional release orders made under
. In the second
reading speech, it was stated that:
Forensic orders are often not appropriate options for defendants who have an
intellectual disability. In such cases, release on conditions
may be appropriate
orders for the court to consider but the absence of a mechanism to enforce the
conditions imposed is problematic
and means judicial officers rarely use this
As noted, the TLRI’s examination of fitness to stand trial and insanity
cases between 2005 and June 2018, identified 12 cases
in the Supreme Court
involving individuals with intellectual disabilities with conditional release
orders being imposed in two cases,
restriction orders imposed in one case and
supervision orders being imposed in nine cases.
10.3.119 Similar concerns have been raised in other jurisdictions in relation
to the appropriateness of forensic orders for people
with cognitive impairments,
as have concerns that facilities and services designed primarily for people with
mental illnesses are
not appropriate. This latter issue was identified in South
Australia where the SASAC expressed the view that there needs to be a
secure facility for people with cognitive impairments, as well as
‘suitable purpose-built facilities or accommodation
for licensees with
cognitive impairments’.
The SASAC also considered measures that could be put in place in the absence of
a purpose-built facility and stated that it is ‘essential
that supported
accommodation tailored to the needs of individuals with cognitive impairments be
developed’.
Queensland, the Butler Report highlighted the inappropriateness of forensic
orders and detention in mental health units for people
with an intellectual
disability and pointed to the lack of appropriate facilities for such
10.3.120 Likewise, in Victoria, the VLRC highlighted disquiet about the
suitability of the system for people with intellectual or
other cognitive
impairment:
While arrangements for mental health treatment for people on supervision
orders are relatively well established, the same does not
exist for people with
an intellectual disability under the CMIA. Unlike people with a mental illness,
people with an intellectual
disability under the CMIA:
(a) rarely have their supervision order revoked
(b) lack a clear treatment pathway
(c) are not subject to clinical oversight by the Senior Practitioner
(d) lack secure accommodation facilities and accommodation options in the
In response, the VLRC made recommendations that would clarify supervision
responsibility for people with cognitive impairments and
mandate the preparation
of treatment plans.
10.3.121 The NSWLRC observed that ‘[a]n issue that has arisen
repeatedly ... is that the criminal justice and forensic systems
do not deal
effectively with people with cognitive
impairment’.
context of dispositional orders, these inadequacies are said to relate to the
very limited nature of services for people with
cognitive impairment in the
community, such as secure
accommodation.
stated that many of the issues were primarily operational rather than legal, and
accordingly recommended the development
of a working group to ‘develop an
action plan to deal with detention, care and community support of forensic
patients with
impairment’.
made recommendations to acknowledge cognitive impairment in the law including
renaming the relevant legislation the
Mental Health and Cognitive Impairment
(Forensic Provisions)
10.3.122 In light of these concerns, as part of its review, the Institute
sought feedback on the operation of the the current
Criminal Justice (Mental
Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) model for people with an intellectual disability
or cognitive impairment:
Are the orders available following a finding of not guilty by reason of
insanity or that a finding cannot be made that the defendant
was not guilty of
the offence charged under the current
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment)
(Tas) model appropriate for people with an intellectual disability
or cognitive impairment?
Are changes needed to the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act
(Tas) in terms of the orders available and the process to vary or
discharge an order to better meet the needs of people with an intellectual
disability or cognitive impairment? What are the likely cost implications of
making these changes?
Are changes needed to the services that support
Criminal Justice
(Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) model to ensure that it meets the needs
of people with an intellectual disability or cognitive impairment? What are the
cost implications of making these changes?
10.3.123 The Institute received two submissions that addressed these
questions, both of which focused on the differences between mental
illness and
cognitive impairment and the need for services to address the needs of people
with a cognitive impairment.
10.3.124 The submission from QAI concentrated on the needs of people with
cognitive impairments and distinguished these needs from
those with mental
In Queensland, the majority of defendants whom the court has determined to be
unfit have some form of intellectual impairment, and
the majority of those found
‘unsound’ have some form of mental illness. It is important to
distinguish the two. The first
group may need habilitation and education,
particularly in relation to offending behaviour, but intellectual impairment is
illness. The second group are more likely to have a mental illness
requiring treatment.
Further, it was argued that the staff at the major Queensland facilities do
not have the skills to cope with the rehabilitation needs
of people with
cognitive impairments.
10.3.125 In the Tasmanian context, EOT also made observations about the
appropriateness of the services provided at Wilfred Lopes
for people with
cognitive impairment:
The Wilfred Lopes Centre provides specialist mental health treatment for
prisoners with mental health issues that require specialist
treatment, people
who are on remand who require inpatient specialist care, and people who are
found unfit to plead or not guilty
by reasons of insanity and are under a
restriction order.
At the same time, however, the Centre is also in exceptional circumstances
used as a place of detention for prisoners with cognitive
or intellectual
disability and in many cases patients on restriction orders have comorbid
diagnoses, including intellectual disability,
cognitive disorders, physical
disability, substance or alcohol abuse disorders, dementia and/or acquired brain
The fact that a person who does not have a mental illness or whose mental
illness is one factor among a range of diagnoses can be
placed on a restriction
order has several implications. Not only does this mean that treatment for
mental illness may be secondary
to other therapeutic needs, it also means that
other forensic orders (such as a supervision order which places the person under
responsibility of the Chief Forensic Psychiatrist or a treatment order which
makes provision for treatment as specified under the
Mental Health Act
(Tas)) may not be suitable or applicable.
The default position then becomes one where a person is at risk of being
detained indefinitely because of a permanent impairment.
There are no less
restrictive options.
This means that the pathways out of detention are more complex and may
require more flexibility during detention and in planning for
The underlying principle for those who are held unaccountable for their
behaviour due to a finding of unfitness to plead should be
appropriate treatment and care. In the case of those with intellectual
disability, cognitive impairment or other complex
needs this may require more
extensive treatment and more complex rehabilitation services. In turn this will
require better integrated
models of clinical and non-clinical service provision
and more effective services aimed at transition to living in the community,
including community-based accommodation suitable for people with high and
complex needs.
These factors raise the question about whether there is a need to provide a
greater range of alternatives when imposing restriction
orders to enable more
flexible options for compulsory treatment and custody for people with cognitive
impairment or other intellectual
disability.
10.3.126 It appears that there are problems in the current forensic system
for people who do not have a mental illness, but who have
an intellectual
disability or cognitive impairment. These problems are clearly outlined in the
submission of EOT, which stresses
the unsuitability of many aspects of the
current system for people with intellectually disability and cognitive
impairments. Rehabilitation
pathways should be developed for people with
intellectual disabilities or cognitive impairments. The Institute recommends
matter be addressed in the review of the ‘step-down’
pathways for forensic orders.
Recommendation
54. Rehabilitation pathways should be developed for people with intellectual
disabilities or cognitive impairments. The Institute
recommends that this matter
be addressed in the review of the ‘step-down’ pathways for forensic
Appendix 1:
Proposed reforms to unfitness to stand trial test
England and Wales
– Criminal Procedure (Lack of Capacity)
3. Capacity to participate effectively in a trial
(1) This section has effect for the purposes of section 1.
(2) A defendant is to be regarded as lacking the capacity to participate
effectively in a trial if the defendant’s relevant
abilities are not,
taken together, sufficient to enable the defendant to participate effectively in
the proceedings on the offence
or offences charged.
(3) In determining that question, the court must take into account the
assistance available to the defendant as regards the proceedings.
(4) The following are relevant abilities—
(a) an ability to understand the nature of the charge;
(b) an ability to understand the evidence adduced as evidence of the
commission of the offence;
(c) an ability to understand the trial process and the consequences of being
(d) an ability to give instructions to a legal representative;
(e) an ability to make a decision about whether to plead guilty or not
(f) an ability to make a decision about whether to give evidence;
(g) an ability to make other decisions that might need to be made by the
defendant in connection with the trial;
(h) an ability to follow the proceedings in court on the offence;
(i) an ability to give evidence;
(j) any other ability that appears to the court to be relevant in the
particular case.
(5) For the purposes of subsection (4)(e) to (g), an ability to make a
decision is to be regarded as consisting of—
(a) an ability to understand information relevant to the decision,
(b) an ability to retain that information,
(c) an ability to use and to weigh the information when making the decision,
(d) an ability to communicate the
New South Wales
Mental Health (Forensic
Provisions) Act 1990
(NSW) should be amended to include a statutory fitness
test, as follows:
A person is unfit to stand trial if the person cannot be afforded a fair
trial because it is established on the balance of probabilities
that the person
is unable to do any one or more of the following:
(a) understand the offence with which the person is charged
(b) understand generally the nature of the proceeding as an inquiry into
whether it has been proved that the person committed the
offence charged
(c) follow the course of proceedings and understand what is going on in a
general sense
(d) understand the substantial effect of any evidence that may be given
against the person
(e) understand the information relevant to the decisions that the person will
have to make before and during the trial, and use that
information as part of a
rational decision making process
(f) communicate effectively with, and understand advice given by, legal
representatives, and
(g) provide the person’s version of the facts to the court, if
Section 6(1)
Crimes (Mental
Impairment and Unfitness to be Tried) Act 1997
(Vic) should be amended to
provide that a person is unfit to stand trial for an offence if, because the
person’s mental processes
are disordered or impaired, the person is or, at
some time during the hearing, will be:
(a) unable to understand the nature of the charge
(b) unable to understand the actual significance of entering a plea to the
(c) unable to enter a plea to the charge
(d) unable to understand the nature of the hearing (that it is an inquiry as
to whether the person committed the offence)
(e) unable to follow the course of the hearing
(f) unable to understand the substantial effect of any evidence that may be
given in support of the prosecution
(g) unable to decide whether to give evidence in support of his or her
(h) unable to give evidence in support of his or her case, if he or she
wishes to do so, or
(i) unable to communicate meaningful instructions to his or her legal
practitioner.
Commonwealth
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth) should be
amended to provide that a person is unfit to stand trial if the person cannot be
supported to:
(a) understand the information relevant to the decisions that they will have
to make in the course of the proceedings;
(b) retain that information to the extent necessary to make decisions in the
course of the proceedings;
(c) use or weigh that information as part of the process of making decisions;
(d) communicate the decisions in some
Appendix 2:
Schedule 1 – Mental health service delivery principles
1. The mental health service delivery principles are as follows:
(a) to respect, observe and promote the inherent rights, liberty, dignity,
autonomy and self-respect of persons with mental illness;
(b) to interfere with or restrict the rights of persons with mental illness
in the least restrictive way and to the least extent consistent
protection of those persons, the protection of the public and the proper
delivery of the relevant service;
(c) to provide a service that is comprehensive, accessible, inclusive,
equitable and free from stigma;
(d) to be sensitive and responsive to individual needs (whether as to
culture, language, age, religion, gender or other factors);
(e) to emphasise and value promotion, prevention and early detection and
intervention;
(f) to seek to bring about the best therapeutic outcomes and promote patient
(g) to provide services that are consistent with patient treatment
(h) to recognise the difficulty, importance and value of the role played by
families, and support persons, of persons with mental
(i) to recognise, observe and promote the rights, welfare and safety of the
children and other dependants of persons with mental illness;
(j) to promote the ability of persons with mental illness to make their own
(k) to involve persons receiving services, and where appropriate their
families and support persons, in decision-making;
(l) to recognise families, and support persons, of persons with mental
illness as partners, with mental health service providers,
in the provision of
their treatment and care to the extent that this is appropriate and consistent
with their own wishes;
(m) to respect the wishes of persons receiving services, and the wishes of
their families and support persons, to the maximum extent
consistent with the
health and safety of those persons and the safety of others;
(n) to promote and enable persons with mental illness to live, work and
participate in their own community;
(o) to operate so as to raise community awareness and understanding of mental
illness and to foster community-wide respect for the
inherent rights, liberty,
dignity, autonomy and self-respect of persons with mental illness;
(p) to be accountable;
(q) to recognise and be responsive to national and international clinical,
technical and human rights trends, developments and advances.
Appendix 3: Orders
available and making and discharging orders
Table A3.1: Orders available
Commonwealth
The court may order detention or make an order for release either
absolutely or subject to
conditions.
New South Wales
Unfit and not acquitted (following special hearing) (UNA)
If would not have imposed a sentence of imprisonment, then can impose any
other penalty or make any other order in normal trial of
proceedings.
If would have imposed sentence of imprisonment, then must nominate a
limiting term.
This can be
in a mental health facility (if the person is mentally ill or has a mental
condition and doesn’t object) or in
a place other than a mental health
facility (where not mentally ill or has mental condition but objects to
determination in mental
Not guilty by reason of insanity (NGMI)
Four orders: detention, conditional release, unconditional release and any
other order the court thinks
appropriate.
South Australia
If a person is declared liable to supervision, the court may release
unconditionally or make a supervision order committing the D
to detention or
releasing the defendant on
In relation to
summary and minor indictable offences the court can dismiss the charge and
release the person unconditionally, make
a supervision order or make an order
releasing the person on
The court must declare the person is liable to supervision under
order the person to be released
unconditionally.
supervision order can be a custodial supervision order or a non-custodial
supervision order.
Western Australia
Release the accused or make a custody
Unsound mind
If offence from Schedule 1 – the court must make a custody order and
if not a Schedule 1 offence, the court may release the
accused conditionally,
make a conditional release order, a community-based order or an intensive
supervision order or a custody
A court may either discharge the person or may order the person to be
admitted to an authorised mental health service to be dealt
with under the
Mental Health Act 2016
The Mental Health
Review Tribunal may make a forensic order (mental health) or forensic order
(disability).
In addition,
if a person is acquitted on the grounds of insanity, the Governor may order the
safe custody of the person during the
There is also provision for the Mental Health Court to deal with the matter
Mental Health Act 2016
(Qld) for some
In this case,
the Mental Health Court may make a forensic order (mental health) or forensic
order (disability) or make a treatment
Australian Capital Territory
In the Supreme Court, for non-serious offences, the court can make the
orders it considers appropriate, including that the accused
by detained in
custody for review by ACAT under the
Mental Health Act 2015
the accused submit to the jurisdiction of ACAT to allow the ACAT to make a
mental health order or a forensic mental health
order under the
Mental Health
. For serious offences, the court must make an order for review and
must, if taking into account the relevant criteria (outlined below)
accused to submit to the jurisdiction of ACAT for the purposes of making the
Northern Territory
The court must declare the person is liable to supervision under Division 5
or order the person to be released
unconditionally.
supervision order can be a custodial supervision order or a non-custodial
supervision order.
Table A3.2: Test for making orders
Commonwealth
Detained in hospital if the person is suffering a mental illness or a
mental condition for which treatment is available in a hospital
and the person
does not object, otherwise, order detention in a place other than a hospital,
including a prison.
court can order release if it is more appropriate to do
New South Wales
Whether or not imprisonment would have been imposed in course of normal
trial. There is no prerequisite in relation to endangerment
of the public but
this is taken into account in applying principles of sentencing.
Can only order conditional or unconditional release where satisfied on
balance that the safety of the person or any member of the
public will not be
seriously endangered if the person is released.
There are very limited decisions considering factors relevant to courts
decisions to detain or conditionally (or unconditionally)
release following a
finding of NGMI. In cases where courts have ordered that the person be released,
the factors that were considered
included the person’s diagnosis and
response to and compliance with treatment before and after the offending
conduct, the extent
to which the person understands the need for, and is willing
to accept ongoing treatment, the recommendations of treating and other
psychiatrists and accommodation
arrangements.
South Australia
Must take into account views of next of kin of the D and any victim (or
next of kin of the
The paramount consideration of the court in determining whether to release
a defendant must be to protect the safety of the community.
This outweighs the
principle that restrictions on the defendant’s freedom and personal
autonomy should be kept to a
Court should have regard to: the nature of the mental impairment; whether
the D is, or would if released be, likely to endanger another
person or other
persons generally; whether there are adequate resources available for the
treatment and support of the defendant
in the community; and whether the
defendant is likely to comply with the conditions of a licence and other matters
that the court
If going to release the defendant, require expert reports on the mental
condition of the defendant and the possible effects of the
proposed action on
the behaviour of the defendant. The court must also not release a person unless
satisfied on the balance of probabilities
that the safety of the person or any
member of the public will not be seriously endangered, and the attitudes of
victims and next
Court must apply the principle that restrictions on the defendant’s
freedom and personal autonomy should be kept to the minimum
consistent with the
safety of the
Court should have regard to: the nature of the mental impairment or other
condition or disability; the relationship between the impairment,
condition or
disability and the offending conduct; whether the D is, or would if released be,
likely to endanger themselves or another
person or other persons generally; the
need to protect people from such danger; whether there are adequate resources
available for
the treatment and support of the defendant in the community; and
other matters that the court thinks
If going to release the defendant, require expert reports on the mental
condition of the defendant and the possible effects of the
proposed action on
the behaviour of the
Western Australia
Custody order can only be made if the penalty is imprisonment and it is
appropriate having regard to the strength of the evidence
against the accused;
the nature of the alleged offence and the alleged circumstances of its
commission; the accused’s character,
antecedents, age, health and mental
conditions; and the public
Unsound mind
Custody order if sch 1 offence. Otherwise release the accused
unconditionally if it is just to do so having regard to the nature of
offence and circumstances of its commission, the accused’s character,
antecedents, age, health and mental conditions and
the public interest. The
court can only impose a conditional release order, a community-based order or an
intensive supervision order
if the order could have been made had the person
been found guilty of the
In making a decision in relation to an order for a person, the Mental
Health Court must have regard to the following: the relevant
circumstances of
the person; the nature of the offence to which the reference relates and the
period of time that has passed since
the offence was allegedly committed; and
any victim impact
The Court must make a forensic order if it is necessary because of the
person’s mental condition, to protect the safety of the
including from the risk of serious harm to other persons or
The court can decide that a forensic order for treatment in the community
only if the court considers there is not there is not an
unacceptable risk to
the safety of the community, because of the person’s mental condition,
including the risk of serious harm
to other persons or
Australian Capital Territory
In making a decision which could include an order for detention, the court
must consider: the nature and extent of the accused’s
mental impairment,
including the effect it is likely to have on the person’s behaviour in the
future, whether or not, if released,
the accused’s health and safety is
likely to be substantially impaired or the accused is likely to be a danger of
the community,
the nature and circumstances of the offence with which the
accused is charged, the principle that a person should not be detained
correctional centre unless no other reasonable options are available and any
recommendations made by the ACAT about how the
accused should be dealt
Northern Territory
Court must apply the principle that restrictions on the defendant’s
freedom and personal autonomy should be kept to the minimum
consistent with the
safety of the
Court should have regard to: the nature of the mental impairment or other
condition or disability; the relationship between the impairment,
condition or
disability and the offending conduct; whether the D is, or would if released be,
likely to endanger themselves or another
person or other persons generally; the
need to protect people from danger; whether there are adequate resources
available for the
treatment and support of the defendant in the community;
whether the D is complying with or likely to comply with the conditions
supervision order; and other matters that the court thinks
If going to release the defendant, require expert
Table A3.3: Term of order
Commonwealth
Maximum term is maximum period of imprisonment that could have been imposed
if the person had been convicted of the offence
New South Wales
Limiting term – best estimate of sentence would have considered
appropriate in normal trial. Must be released unconditionally
when the limiting
term expires.
The limiting term is governed by sentencing
principles.
upper limit and the person may be released sooner.
Indefinite but subject to review
court must set a nominal term (murder = 25 years, a serious offence = a period
equivalent to the maximum penalty, any other
offence with a statutory maximum =
half the maximum, any other offence = period specific by
) The court
undertakes a major review at least three months before the end of the nominal
South Australia
A limiting term equivalent to the period of imprisonment that would have
been appropriate if the defendant had been convicted of the
offence of which the
objective elements have been established. The court should not take into account
the defendant’s mental
impairment.
Western Australia
subject to review.
Indefinite with power to review. For prescribed offences, a period of not
more than 10 years (the non-revocation period) during which
the tribunal may not
revoke the forensic order, other than under s
In deciding the
non-revocation period, the court must have regard to the object of this Act in
relation to protecting the
Australian Capital Territory
Nominal term is set that is the best estimate of the sentence it would have
considered appropriate if the special hearing had been
a normal criminal
proceeding and must not order that the accused be detained for a period greater
than the nominated term.
Northern Territory
court must fix a term for the major review of the order (nominal term). This
term is set according to the following rules:
if offence carries a mandatory
life penalty or the court’s view that life imprisonment would have been an
appropriate penalty,
the court must fix the period that it would have set as the
non-parole period and in other cases, equivalent to the term of imprisonment
supervision that would have been appropriate to impose if he or she had been
found guilty of the
Table A3.4: Test for discharging or varying orders
Commonwealth
Attorney-General must be satisfied that the person is not a threat or
danger either to himself or herself or the
New South Wales
The Tribunal must not make an order for the release of a forensic patient
unless it is satisfied, on the evidence available to it,
that: the safety of the
patient or any member of the public will not be seriously endangered by the
patient’s release, and
other care of a less restrictive kind, that is
consistent with safe and effective care, is appropriate and reasonably available
the patient or that the patient does not require
Without limiting any other matters the Tribunal may consider, the Tribunal
must have regard to the following matters when determining
what order to make
illness or other mental condition;
whether there are reasonable grounds for
believing that care, treatment or control of the person is necessary for the
own protection from serious harm or the protection of others from
serious harm; the continuing condition of the person, including
deterioration in the person’s condition, and the likely effects of any
such deterioration; in the case of a proposed
release, a report by a forensic
psychiatrist or other person of a class prescribed by the regulations, who is
not currently involved
in treating the person, as to the condition of the person
and whether the safety of the person or any member of the public will be
seriously endangered by the person’s release; in the case of the proposed
release of a forensic patient subject to a limiting
term, whether or not the
patient has spent sufficient time in
South Australia
As with making order but test is serious endangerment.
As with making the
At the end of the
nominal period, there is a major review and there is a presumption that a
custodial supervision order will be varied:
the court must vary the order to a
NCSO unless satisfied on the evidence available that the safety of the person
the subject of the
order or members of the public will be seriously
endangered.
Western Australia
The Governor on advice from the Minister following a recommendation from
the Mental Impairment Accused Review
In making this
recommendation the MIARB takes into account: the degree of risk that the release
of the accused appears to present
to the personal safety of people in the
community or of any individual in the community; the likelihood that, if
released on conditions,
the accused would comply with the conditions; the extent
to which the accused’s mental impairment, if any, might benefit from
treatment, training or any other measure; the likelihood that, if released, the
accused would be able to take care of his or her
day to day needs, obtain any
appropriate treatment and resist serious exploitation; the objective of imposing
the least restriction
of the freedom of choice and movement of the accused that
is consistent with the need to protect the health or safety of the accused
any other person; and any statement received from a victim of the alleged
offence in respect of which the accused is in
On review by the MHT, the Tribunal must confirm the forensic order if the
order is necessary, because of the person’s mental
condition, to protect
the safety of the community, including from the risk of serious harm to other
persons or property.
must have regard to the relevant circumstances of the person subject to the
order, the nature of the unlawful act and the period
of time that has passed,
any victim impact statement and if the MHC made a recommendation in the order
for the person — the person’s
willingness to take part in the
It must also be
confirmed during any non-revocation
Australian Capital Territory
The Civil and Administrative Tribunal can consider the detention under a
court order and must consider:
(a) that detention in custody is to be regarded as a last resort and
ordered only in exceptional circumstances;
(b) the nature and extent of the person’s mental disorder or mental
illness, including the effect it is likely to have on the
behaviour in the future;
(c) whether or not, if released—
(i) the person’s health or safety would be, or would be likely to be,
substantially at risk; or
(ii) the person would be likely to do serious harm to others;
(d) if the court nominated a term under the
the nominated
May also make and review mental health orders and forensic mental health
Northern Territory
On the major review, the court must release the supervised person
unconditionally unless the court considers that the safety of the
person or the public will or is likely to be seriously at
At periodic reviews, the court must vary a custodial supervision to a
non-custodial supervision order unless satisfied on the evidence
that the safety
of the supervised person or the public will or is likely to be seriously at
Other factors as
with making the order.
Appendix 4: Fitness
to stand trial
Understand the nature of the charges
Enter a plea
Right to challenge juror
Understand the nature of the trial
Follow course of trial
Understand substantial effect of the evidence
Give instructions to legal practitioner
• Make a defence
Presser criteria
(NSW, Commonwealth, Queensland)
ALRC recommendations
• Understand the information relevant to the decisions that they will
have to make in the course of the proceedings
• Retain that information to the extent necessary to make decisions
in the course of the proceedings
• Use or weigh that information as part of the process of making
• Communicate decisions in some way
recommendations
Y and ability to understand the actual significant of entering a plea to
Communicate meaningful instructions
• Decide whether to give evidence
• Able to give evidence
NSWLRC recommendations
Not explicitly but general power to make decisions
Not explicitly but general power to make decisions.
Understand what is going on in a general sense
Communicate effectively with and understand advice given
• Understand the information relevant to the decisions that the
person will have to make before and during the trial and use
that information as
part of a rational decision making process
• Provide a version of facts to the court
South Australia
Y and respond rationally
Respond rationally to the charge
Follow the evidence
Give rational instructions
Western Australia
Y and effect of a plea
Y and understand the right
• Able to defend the charge
WA AG’s review
• Decide whether to give evidence
• Ability to give evidence
Northern Territory
Australian Capital Territory
Pritchard/John criteria
(England and Wales, Northern Ireland)
• Give evidence in own defence
Law Commission
Y – ability to make a decision
Not explicitly but incorporated in ability to make decisions that may need
Y and consequences of being convicted
• Make a decision about whether to give evidence
• To give evidence
• Make other decisions that might need to be made by the D in
connection with the trial
• Any other ability that appears relevant
Northern Ireland Law Reform Commission
Not explicitly but incorporated in ability to make decisions that may need
Not explicitly but incorporated in ability to make decisions that may need
Not explicitly but incorporated in ability to make decisions that may need
Not explicitly but incorporated in ability to make decisions that may need
• Give evidence in own defence
• Understand the information relevant to the decisions that they will
have to make in the course of the proceedings
• Retain that information
• Use or weigh that information as part of the process of making
• Communicate decisions
Y and effect of plea
Y and its purpose
• Any other factor that the court considers relevant
New Zealand
(statute supplemented by Presser)
Y and its purpose and consequences
Communicate adequately
• Make a defence
Y and possible consequences
• Conduct a defence
Appendix 5: Special
hearing provisions
Judge or jury
Conduct of hearing
Findings available
Legislation
New South Wales
Hearing is by judge alone unless election for a jury made
Conducted as close to a normal trial as is practicable, including:
• proof beyond a reasonable doubt
• may raise defences
• is entitled to give evidence
• to have legal representation
• Not guilty of the offence
• Not guilty on the grounds of mental illness
• On the limited evidence available, the accused committed the
offence charged or an alternative offence (finding of qualified
Mental Health (Forensic Provisions) Act 1990
Australian Capital Territory
Jury unless the accused makes an election to have judge alone
Physical elements of the offence
Conducted as nearly as possible as if it were an ordinary criminal
• Not guilty
• Satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the accused engaged in the
conduct required for the offence
Crimes Act 1990
(ACT) ss 317, 335(2)(b)
Northern Territory
Jury unless parties to the prosecution agree that the evidence established
the defence of mental impairment, the court may accept
Conducted as nearly as possible as if it were an ordinary criminal
proceeding including:
• Proof beyond reasonable doubt
• Rules of evidence apply
• May give evidence
• Raise any defence that could raise at trial
• Not guilty
• Not guilty because of mental impairment
• Committed the offence (qualified finding of guilt)
Criminal Code
(NT) ss 43V, 43X,
Conducted as nearly as possible as if it were an ordinary criminal
proceeding:
• Proof beyond reasonable doubt
• Rules of evidence apply
• May give evidence
Raise any defence that could raise at trial
• Not guilty
• Not guilty because of mental impairment
• Committed the offence (qualified finding of guilt)
Crimes (Mental Impairment and Unfitness to be Tried) Act 1997
ss 15, 16, 17
South Australia
Trial of objective elements of the offence
Exclude from consideration any question of whether the defendant’s
conduct is defensible
• Not guilty
• Objective elements are established
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
No special hearing
Criminal Code
(Qld) s 613;
Mental Health Act 2016
Western Australia
No special hearing but judge takes into account evidence against the
accused in determining the appropriate disposition
Criminal Law (Mentally Impaired Accused) Act 1996
England and Wales
Trial of facts (s 4A hearing) – proof that D did the act or made the
Can rely on certain defences (self-defence, mistake or accident) in limited
circumstances. This is where there is objective evidence
of the defence.
Insanity cannot be relied on
• Not guilty
• Finding that D did the act or made the omission
Criminal Procedure (Insanity) Act 1964
New Zealand
Satisfied on balance of probabilities that the evidence against the
defendant is sufficient to establish that the D caused the act
or omission
• Dismiss charges
• Record finding that satisfied of D’s involvement in the
Criminal Procedure (Mentally Impaired Persons) Act 2003
Appendix 6:
Extension of orders beyond limiting terms (New South Wales and South
Mental Health (Forensic Provisions) Act 1990
(NSW) Schedule 1
Extension of status as forensic patient
(Section 54A)
Extension of status as forensic patient
1 Extension orders for forensic patients
(1) The Supreme Court may, on application under
of this Schedule, make
an order for the extension of a person’s status as a forensic patient.
(2) An order made under this clause is an extension order.
2 Forensic patients in respect of whom extension orders may be
(1) A forensic patient can be made the subject of an extension order as
provided for by this Schedule if and only if the Supreme Court
is satisfied to a
high degree of probability that:
(a) the forensic patient poses an unacceptable risk of causing serious harm
to others if he or she ceases being a forensic patient,
(b) the risk cannot be adequately managed by other less restrictive
(2) The Supreme Court is not required to determine that the risk of a person
causing serious harm to others is more likely than not
in order to determine
that the person poses an unacceptable risk of causing serious harm to
Less restrictive means of managing a risk includes, but is not limited to,
a patient being involuntarily detained or treated under
Mental Health Act
Extension orders
Division 1 Application for extension order
3 Minister may apply for extension order
A Minister administering this Act may apply to the Supreme Court for an
extension order against a forensic patient.
4 Application for extension order
(1) An application for an extension order may be made in respect of a
forensic patient only if the forensic patient is subject to:
(a) a limiting term, or
(b) an existing extension order.
(2) An application in respect of a forensic patient may not be made more than
6 months before:
(a) the end of the forensic patient’s limiting term, or
(b) the expiry of the existing extension order,
as appropriate.
5 Requirements with respect to application
An application for an extension order must be supported by documentation:
(a) that addresses each of the matters referred to in clause 7 (2) (to the
extent relevant to the application), and
(b) that includes a report (prepared by a qualified psychiatrist, registered
psychologist or registered medical practitioner):
(i) that assesses the risk of the forensic patient causing serious harm to
others, and
(ii) that addresses the need for ongoing management of the patient as a
forensic patient and the reasons why the risk of the forensic
patient causing
serious harm to others cannot be adequately managed by other less restrictive
6 Pre-hearing procedures
(1) An application under this Part for an extension order must be served on
the forensic patient concerned within 2 business days
after the application is
filed in the Supreme Court or within such further time as the Supreme Court may
(2) The Minister applying for the extension order must notify the Tribunal as
soon as practicable after making the application.
(3) Subject to subclauses (7)–(9), the Minister applying for the
extension order must disclose to the forensic patient such
documents, reports
and other information as are relevant to the proceedings on the application
(whether or not intended to be tendered
in evidence):
(a) in the case of anything that is available when the application is made,
as soon as practicable after the application is made,
(b) in the case of anything that subsequently becomes available, as soon as
practicable after it becomes available.
(4) A preliminary hearing into the application is to be conducted by the
Supreme Court within 28 days after the application is filed
in the Supreme Court
or within such further time as the Supreme Court may allow.
(5) If, following the preliminary hearing, it is satisfied that the matters
alleged in the supporting documentation would, if proved,
justify the making of
an extension order, the Supreme Court must make orders:
(a) appointing:
(i) 2 qualified psychiatrists, or
(ii) 2 registered psychologists, or
(iii) 2 registered medical practitioners, or
(iv) any combination of 2 persons referred to in subparagraphs
to conduct separate examinations of the forensic patient and to furnish
reports to the Supreme Court on the results of those examinations,
(b) directing the forensic patient to attend those examinations.
(6) If, following the preliminary hearing, it is not satisfied that the
matters alleged in the supporting documentation would, if
proved, justify the
making of an extension order, the Supreme Court must dismiss the
application.
(7) A forensic patient in respect of whom an application for an extension
order has been made is, unless the Supreme Court otherwise
determines, entitled
to inspect or otherwise have access to any medical records in the possession of
any person relating to the forensic
(8) A representative of the forensic patient is entitled, at any time before
or during the proceedings on the application, to inspect
or otherwise have
access to any medical records in the possession of any person relating to the
forensic patient.
(9) Subject to any order or direction of the Supreme Court, in relation to an
inspection under subclause (8) of, or other access under
that subclause to, any
medical record relating to a forensic patient:
(a) if a medical practitioner warns the representative of the forensic
patient that it may be harmful to communicate to the forensic
patient, or any
other person, specified information contained in those medical records, the
representative is to have full and proper
regard to that warning, and
(b) the representative is not obliged to disclose to the forensic patient any
information obtained by virtue of the inspection or
other access.
Division 2 Determination of application
7 Determination of application for extension order
(1) The Supreme Court may determine an application under this Part for an
extension order:
(a) by making the order, or
(b) by dismissing the application.
(2) In determining whether or not to make an extension order, the Supreme
Court must have regard to the following matters in addition
to any other matter
it considers relevant:
(a) the safety of the community,
(b) the reports received from the persons appointed under clause 6 (5) to
conduct examinations of the forensic patient,
(c) the report of the qualified psychiatrist, registered psychologist or
registered medical practitioner provided under clause 5 (b),
(d) any other report of a qualified psychiatrist, registered psychologist or
registered medical practitioner provided in support of
the application or by the
forensic patient,
(e) any order or decision made by the Tribunal with respect to the forensic
patient that is relevant to the application,
(f) any report of the Secretary of the Ministry of Health, the Commissioner
of Corrective Services, the Secretary of the Department
of Family and Community
Services or any other government Department or agency responsible for the
detention, care or treatment of
the forensic patient,
(g) the level of the forensic patient’s compliance with any obligations
to which he or she is or has been subject while a forensic
patient (including
while released from custody subject to conditions and while on a leave of
absence in accordance with section 49
(h) the views of the court that imposed the limiting term or existing
extension order on the forensic patient at the time the limiting
extension order was imposed,
(i) any other information that is available as to the risk that the forensic
patient will in future cause serious harm to others.
(3) If the Supreme Court makes an extension order in respect of a forensic
patient, the Court is to notify the Tribunal of the making
of the order.
8 Term of extension order
(1) An extension order:
(a) commences when it is made, or when the limiting term or existing
extension order to which the forensic patient is subject expires,
whichever is
the later, and
(b) expires at the end of the period (not exceeding 5 years from the day on
which it commences) that is specified in the order.
(2) Nothing in this clause prevents the Supreme Court from making a second or
subsequent extension order against the same forensic
Continuation of order relating to forensic patient
The making of an extension order or interim extension order in respect of a
forensic patient does not affect the operation of any
order as to the forensic
patient’s care, detention, treatment or release from custody to which the
forensic patient was subject
immediately before the making of the extension
Division 3 Interim extension orders
10 Interim extension order
The Supreme Court may make an order for the interim extension of a
person’s status as a forensic patient if, in proceedings
on an application
for an extension order, it appears to the Court:
(a) that the limiting term or existing extension order to which the forensic
patient is subject will expire before the proceedings
are determined, and
(b) that the matters alleged in the supporting documentation would, if
proved, justify the making of an extension order.
11 Term of interim extension order
(1) An interim extension order commences on the day fixed in the order for
its commencement (or, if no such day is fixed, as soon
as it is made) and
expires at the end of such period (not exceeding 28 days from the day on which
it commences) as is specified in
(2) An interim extension order may be renewed from time to time, but not so
as to provide for the extension of the person’s
status as a forensic
patient under such an order for periods totalling more than 3 months.
11A Interim extension order to continue in force for 24 hours in certain
circumstances
(1) If the Supreme Court dismisses an application for an extension order in
respect of a forensic patient who is detained only as
a result of an interim
extension order, the Court may (on its own motion or on application) order that
the patient be detained for
a further period of up to 24 hours to enable a
medical practitioner or accredited person to assess whether a mental health
certificate
should be given in respect of the patient under
Mental Health Act 2007
(2) The order ceases to authorise the detention of the person if the medical
practitioner or accredited person making the assessment
decides not to give that
mental health certificate about the person.
Division 4 General
12 Extension order or interim extension order may be varied or
(1) The Supreme Court may at any time vary or revoke an extension order or
interim extension order:
(a) on the application of a Minister administering this Act or the forensic
patient, or
(b) on the recommendation of the Tribunal under section 47 (2A).
(2) The period of an order must not be varied so that the total period as
varied is greater than that otherwise permitted under this
(3) Without limiting the grounds for revoking an extension order or interim
extension order, the Supreme Court may revoke an extension
order or interim
extension order if satisfied that circumstances have changed sufficiently to
render the order unnecessary.
Part 3 Supreme Court proceedings
13 Nature of proceedings
Proceedings under this Schedule (including proceedings on an appeal under
this Schedule) are civil proceedings and, to the extent
to which this Schedule
does not provide for their conduct, are to be conducted in accordance with the
law (including the rules of
evidence) relating to civil proceedings.
14 Right of appeal
(1) An appeal to the Court of Appeal lies from any determination of the
Supreme Court to make, or to refuse to make, or to vary or
revoke an extension
(2) An appeal may be on a question of law, a question of fact or a question
of mixed law and fact.
(3) An appeal against the decision of the Supreme Court may be made, as of
right, within 28 days after the date on which the decision
was made or, by
leave, within such further time as the Court of Appeal may allow.
(4) The making of an appeal does not stay the operation of an extension
(5) If the Court of Appeal remits a matter to the Supreme Court for decision
after an appeal is made, the extension order the subject
of the appeal continues
in force, subject to any order made by the Court of Appeal.
(6) Without limiting any other jurisdiction it may have, if the Court of
Appeal remits a matter to the Supreme Court for decision
after an appeal is
made, the Court of Appeal may make an interim order revoking or varying an
extension order the subject of the
(7) This clause does not limit any right of appeal that may exist apart from
this Schedule.
15 Costs not to be awarded against forensic patient
An order for costs may not be made against a forensic patient in relation to
any proceedings under this Schedule (including proceedings
on an appeal under
this Schedule).
16 Preservation of Supreme Court jurisdiction
Nothing in this Schedule limits the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court apart
from this Act.
Part 4 Miscellaneous
17 Minister may require provision of certain information
(1) A Minister administering this Act may, by order in writing served on any
person, require that person to provide to the Minister
any document, report or
other information in that person’s possession, or under that
person’s control, that relates to
the behaviour, or physical or mental
condition, of any forensic patient who is subject to a limiting term.
(2) A person who fails to comply with the requirements of an order under this
clause is guilty of an offence.
Maximum penalty: 100 penalty units or imprisonment for 2 years, or both.
(3) A Minister administering this Act may request a court or the Tribunal to
provide to the Minister any document, report or other
information held by the
court or Tribunal that relates to the behaviour, or physical or mental
condition, of any forensic patient
who is subject to a limiting term.
(4) Despite any Act or law to the contrary, any document or report of a kind
referred to in subclause (1) or (3), or any copy of any
such document or report,
is admissible in proceedings under this Act (whether admission is sought by the
Minister to whom the document
or report was provided or by another Minister
administering this Act).
17A Information sharing
(1) A Minister administering this Act may disclose forensic patient
information obtained under this Act to any other Minister administering
(a) for the purpose of enabling or assisting either Minister to exercise
functions under this Act, or
(b) for the purpose of the administration or execution of this Act.
(2) In this clause:
forensic patient information means any document, report or other information
that relates to a forensic patient, including any such
information that is:
(a) personal information within the meaning of the
Information Protection Act 1998
Health Records and
Information Privacy
(b) health information within the meaning of the
Health Records and
Information Privacy Act 2002
18 Protection of certain persons from liability
No action lies against any person (including the State) for or in respect of
any act or omission done or omitted by the person if
it was done or omitted in
good faith for the purposes of, or in connection with the administration or
execution of, this Schedule.
19 Hearings
This Schedule does not affect the right of any party to proceedings under
this Schedule:
(a) to appear, either personally or by the party’s legal
representative, or
(b) to call witnesses and give evidence, or
(c) to cross-examine witnesses, or
(d) to make submissions to the Supreme Court on any matter connected with the
proceedings.
Bail Act 2013
Bail Act 2013
does not apply to or in respect of a person who is
the subject of proceedings under this Schedule.
21 Rules of court
(1) Rules of court may be made under the
Supreme Court Act 1970
regulating the practice and procedure of the Supreme Court in respect of
proceedings under this Schedule.
(2) This clause does not limit the rule-making powers conferred by the
Supreme Court Act 1970
22 Qualification of psychiatrists
For the purposes of this Schedule, a psychiatrist is not a qualified
psychiatrist unless he or she is a registered medical practitioner
fellow of the Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Psychiatrists.
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
Division 4 Subdivision 3 – Continuing supervision
269UA—Application for continuing supervision
(1) If a defendant is declared to be liable to supervision under Subdivision
2, whether before or after the commencement of this
section, the Crown may,
while the defendant remains liable to supervision, apply to the Supreme Court to
have the defendant declared
to be liable to supervision under a continuing
supervision order.
(2) An application cannot be made under subsection (1) more than 12 months
before the end of the limiting term fixed in respect of
the relevant supervision
order (and the limiting term will be taken to continue until the application is
determined by the Court).
(3) The Court must give the defendant at least 14 days written notice of the
date on which it intends to conduct the proceedings
to determine the
application.
(4) The Court must, before determining an application under this section,
direct that 1 or more legally qualified medical practitioners
(to be nominated
by a prescribed authority for the purpose) inquire into the mental condition of
the defendant and report to the
Court on the mental condition of the defendant,
(a) a diagnosis and prognosis of the condition; and
(b) a suggested treatment plan for managing the defendant's condition.
(5) Each of the following persons is entitled to appear and be heard in
proceedings under this section and must be afforded a reasonable
opportunity to
call and give evidence, to examine or cross-examine witnesses, and to make
submissions to the Court:
(a) the defendant (personally or by counsel);
(b) the Director of Public Prosecutions;
(c) the Commissioner for Victims’ Rights;
(d) with the permission of the Court—any other person with a proper
interest in the matter.
(6) The Court may also take the following matters into consideration when
determining an application under this section:
(a) any relevant remarks made by the court by which the defendant was
declared to be liable to supervision under
Subdivision 2
(b) the behaviour of the defendant while under supervision;
(c) any treatment, care and rehabilitation of the defendant while under
supervision;
(d) any reports tendered, and submissions made, to the Court under this
(e) the likelihood of the defendant committing an offence of a violent
nature should the defendant no longer be liable to supervision;
(f) the character, antecedents, age, means and physical and mental condition
of the defendant;
(g) the probable circumstances of the defendant should the defendant no
longer be liable to supervision;
(h) any other matters that the Court thinks are relevant.
(7) If the Court is satisfied, on the balance of probabilities, that the
defendant to whom the application relates could, if unsupervised,
pose a serious
risk to the safety of the community or a member of the community, the Court must
declare that, on the expiry of the
supervision order under Subdivision 2, the
defendant is liable to continuing supervision under this Subdivision.
269UB—Continuing supervision orders
(1) If, under
section 269UA
Supreme Court declares a defendant to be liable to continuing supervision, the
Court may make an order (a
continuing supervision
(a) committing the defendant to detention under this Subdivision; or
(b) releasing the defendant on licence.
(2) If a continuing supervision order is made releasing the defendant on
licence, the licence is subject to the following conditions:
(a) the conditions imposed by subsection (3);
(b) any other condition decided by the Court and specified in the
(3) Subject to this Act, every licence under this Subdivision is subject to
the following conditions:
(a) a condition prohibiting the defendant from possessing a firearm or
ammunition (both within the meaning of the
Firearms Act 2015
) or any part
of a firearm;
(b) a condition requiring the defendant to submit to such tests (including
testing without notice) for gunshot residue as may be
reasonably required by a
person or body specified by the Court.
(4) Without limiting the generality of subsection (2)(b), release on licence
under a continuing supervision order may, for example,
be subject to—
(a) a condition that the defendant reside at specified premises; or
(b) a condition that the defendant undergo assessment or treatment (or both)
relating to the defendant's mental condition; or
(c) a condition that the defendant be monitored by use of an electronic
device approved under
Correctional Services Act 1982
(d) any other condition that the Court thinks fit.
(5) The Court may only vary or revoke the conditions imposed by subsection
(3) if the defendant satisfies the Court, by evidence
given on oath,
(a) there are cogent reasons to do so; and
(b) the possession of a firearm, ammunition or part of a firearm by the
defendant does not represent an undue risk to the safety
of the public.
(6) A continuing supervision order remains in force against the defendant
until the order is revoked by the Court.
269UC—Variation or revocation of continuing supervision
(1) At any time after a continuing supervision order has been made in
respect of a defendant, the Supreme Court may, on the application
of the Crown,
the defendant, the Parole Board, the Public Advocate or another person with a
proper interest in the matter, vary or
revoke the order.
(2) If the Court refuses an application by or on behalf of a defendant for
variation or revocation of a continuing supervision order,
a later application
for variation or revocation of the order cannot be made by or on behalf of the
defendant for 12 months or such
greater or lesser period as the Court may direct
on refusing the application.
269UD—Appeal
(1) An appeal lies to the Full Court against a decision by the Supreme
(a) to make a declaration and order under this Subdivision; or
(b) not to make a declaration and order under this Subdivision.
(2) An appeal under this section may be instituted by the Crown or by the
(3) Subject to a contrary order of the Full Court, an appeal cannot be
commenced after 10 days from the date of the decision against
which the appeal
(4) On an appeal, the Full Court—
(i) confirm or annul the decision subject to appeal; or
(ii) remit the decision subject to appeal to the Supreme Court for further
consideration or reconsideration; and
(b) may make consequential or ancillary orders.
Appendix 7: Law
reform recommendations
Definition of mental impairment
Nature and quality
Unable to control conduct
Law Reform Committee
Inquiry into Access to and Interaction with the Justice System by People
with an Intellectual Disability and their Families and Carers
Provide a definition of mental impairment to encompass mental illness,
intellectual disability, acquired brain injuries and severe
personality
disorders (Recommendation 33)
No discussion
No discussion
No discussion
No discussion
New South Wales Law Reform Commission
People with Cognitive and Mental Health Impairments in the Criminal
Justice System: Criminal Responsibility and Consequences: Report
Defence should be renamed defence of mental health or cognitive
impairment.
The following definitions should be used:
Mental health impairment:
(a) Mental health impairment means a temporary or continuing disturbance of
thought, mood, volition, perception, or memory that impairs
emotional wellbeing,
judgment or behaviour, so as to affect functioning in daily life to a material
(b) Such mental health impairment may arise from but is not limited to the
(i) anxiety disorders
(ii) affective disorders
(iii) psychoses
(iv) substance induced mental disorders.
‘Substance induced mental disorders’ include ongoing mental
health impairments such as drug-induced psychoses, but do
not include substance
abuse disorders (addiction to substances) or the temporary effects of ingesting
substances.
For the purposes of this section ‘mental health impairment’
does not include a personality disorder.
(2) Cognitive impairment:
(a) Cognitive impairment is an ongoing impairment in comprehension, reason,
adaptive functioning, judgement, learning or memory that
is the result of any
damage to, dysfunction, developmental delay, or deterioration of the brain or
(b) Such cognitive impairment may arise from, but is not limited to, the
(i) intellectual disability
(ii) borderline intellectual functioning
(iii) dementias
(iv) acquired brain injury
(v) drug or alcohol related brain damage
(vi) autism spectrum disorders.
Verdict should be changed from ‘not guilty by reason of mental
illness’ to ‘not criminally responsible by reason
of mental health
or cognitive impairment.
Not in favour of changing law
Define wrong to mean ‘not reason with a moderate degree of sense and
composure about whether the conduct, as perceived by reasonable
people, was
wrong’ (enacting the ‘Porter
Argued test was functional, strongly supports and understood by both juries
and expert witnesses. Useful in the case of delusions,
where a person may
believe that the victim was a danger to the safety of his or her family may not
come within second limb as may
also know that killing is wrong but
approach enable proof that the person did not the act to be wrong by
inference from an ability to reason with sense and composure
conduct was wrong.
Supported introduction of volitional component
No discussion
Victorian Law Reform Commission
Review of the Crimes (Mental Impairment and Unfitness to be Tried) Act
1997: Report
Definition of mental impairment introduced in legislation. Mental
impairment should be defined as a condition that ‘includes,
limited to, mental illness, intellectual disability and cognitive
impairment’.
Should not include self-induced temporary conditions resulting from the
effects of ingesting substances.
Should include self-induced conditions that exist independently of the
effects of ingesting substances.
No change recommended
Remove ‘moderate degree of sense and composure’ with ‘did
not have the capacity to think rationally about whether
the conduct, as
perceived by reasonable’ on basis that clinicians found phrase vague,
subjective and difficult to apply in
situations in which most people would not
be acting with calmness and composure.
Opposed introduction of volitional component
No discussion
Law Reform Commission of Western Australia
Review of the Law of Homicide: Final Report
The definition of mental illness does not refer to ‘external’
extraordinary stimuli and so greater flexibility to deal
with conditions
resulting from a healthy mind’s reaction to
extraordinary
stimuli (such as hyperglycaemia, arteriosclerosis and epilepsy).
No change recommended.
Personality disorders should not either automatically included or excluded
from the definition.
Defence should be renamed ‘mental impairment’ and should
replace ‘unsoundness of mind’ with mental impairment.
Replace presumption of sanity with words ‘A person is presumed not to
have been suffering a mental impairment unless the contrary
No recommendation to change verdict from not guilty but replace
‘unsoundness of mind’ with ‘by reason of mental
impairment.
No consideration of reform options
No consideration of reform options
No consideration of reform options
Recommended retaining s 27 in relation to delusions (equivalent of section
16(3)) but amend the
Criminal Procedure Act 2004
(WA) to make it clear
that gives rise to qualified acquittal (not guilty by reason of mental
impairment).
Sentencing Advisory Council (SA)
Mental Impairment and the Law: A Report on the Operation of
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
(SA) (2014)
Defence still necessary as a means to protect the community and provide
individuals with the opportunity for treatment.
Three interrelated issues with definition: external factors test produce
anomalous results; difficulties surrounding the soundness
of mind test and
confusion in relation to personality disorders.
Recommended no change to specifically include or exclude any medical
conditions, including hypoglycemia or hyperglycemia and personality
Recommended retention of the current law in relation to intoxication and
Not necessary to define phrase nature and quality’ — well
understood and not difficult to explain; consistent with approach
in most other
Not replace ‘knowledge’ with ‘understanding’
— concerned about broad range of mental functions that
may be covered.
Little difficulty with current test. Unlikely make any substantive different in
Law unclear, especially in relation to whether ‘Porter
’ applies to all cases or is limited to specific types of
cases (such as those involving frenzy, uncontrolled emotion or suspended
Q should be not simply whether D knew that the conduct was wrong but
whether the D was unable to reason that it was wrong. The defence
should only
apply where the D was unable to think rationally, in the same way as other
people, in order to reason that the conduct
was wrong. Adopt Model Criminal Code
approach but delete words ‘with a moderate degree of sense and
composure’.
Strong reasons to remove it but for consistency with other jurisdiction
should be retained but should be made clear that D is totally
able to control
his or her conduct and that a partial inability to control conduct is not
sufficient.
Scottish Law Commission
Report on Insanity and Diminished Responsibility
Brief definition should be introduced — define mental disorder to
mean: (a) mental illness, (b) personality disorder or (c)
disability.
Should exclude psychopathic personality disorders
Should be renamed.
Test based on D’s ability to appreciate (rather than know) the nature
of his or her conduct. Eg woman who kills her children
by smothering them with a
pillow in belief that in doing so she will drive out demons from their souls. In
one sense she understands
the physical nature of her actions (she knows that
putting a pillow over their faces will stop them breathing) but in a wider sense
she doesn’t have a true or complete knowledge of her actions. A person who
lacks knowledge in this broader sense should be
exculpated.
Test should require D to have a deeper appreciation that the conduct was
wrong — and concluded test be defined in terms of D’s
inability at
the time of the offence to appreciate the wrongfulness of his or her
Opposed introduction of volitional component
No discussion
New Zealand Law Commission
Mental Impairment Decision-Making and the Insanity Defence: Report 120
No definition be introduced because of flexibility provided.
No change to verdict of acquittal on account of insanity.
Rejected move to broader concept of appreciation on basis that it does not
better job than the present defence of clarifying where
on the continuum the
line between sanity and insanity ought to be drawn.
No change — Porter gloss already part of the law and incorporating it
in legislation would make no material difference.
Opposed introduction of volitional component
No discussion
England and Wales Law Commission
Criminal Liability: Insanity and Automatism: Discussion Paper
Abolish insanity and create a new defence of ‘not criminally
responsible by reason of recognised medical condition’.
Should explicitly exclude intoxication and personality disorders.
Wholly lacked the capacity rationally to form a judgment about the relevant
conduct or circumstances.
Wholly lacked the capacity to understand the wrongness of what he or she is
charged with having done — extend ‘wrong’
Wholly lacked the capacity to control his or her physical acts.
Discussed delusions within the context of the other rules of
Appendix 8: Length
of restriction and supervision orders in comparison with median sentence
Table A8.1: Restriction orders – Smith’s study. Excludes
individuals who have been on orders for less than 2-year duration,
Period of incarceration of defendant
Median sentence 1990–2000
7 years and continuing
13 years, converted to a supervision order
which has run for 8 years and continuing
Head sentence 21 years
Non-parole period 14 years
2 years, converted to a supervision order
which has run for 8 years and continuing
16 years and continuing
2 years and continuing
Indecent assault
6 years and continuing
Table A8.2: Restriction orders 2010 to 30 June 2018. Excludes individuals
who have been on orders for less than 2 years duration
Period of incarceration of defendant
Median sentence 2008–14
6 years 9 months 29 days and continuing
Head sentence 20 years (single count)
Non-parole period (single count) 12 years and 3 months
16 years 5 months and 7 days converted to a supervision order which has run
for 2 years 2 months and 23 days and continuing
3 years 11 months 13 days and continuing
1 year and 9 months and 26 days converted to a supervision order which has
run for 17 years 9 months and 25 days
5 years 3 months 9 days and continuing
8 years 2 months and 8 days converted to a supervision order which has run
for 8 months and 9 days and continuing
7 months (48.1% custodial) (single count)
7 years and 10 days and continuing
6 years 7 months 5 days and continuing
1 year and 3 months (76% custodial) (single count)
Two years and 6 months and 17 days converted to a supervision order which
has run for 7 years 7 months and 22 days and continuing
3 years and 4.5 months (single count)
Driving offence
4 years 11 months and three days
Not able to make comparison
Table A8.3: Supervision orders – Smith’s study. Excludes
individuals who have been on orders for less than 2-year duration,
Period of supervision of defendant
Median sentence 1990–2000
3 years and continuing
5 years and finalised
5.5 years and continuing
9 years and continuing
Assault police
3 years set term
4.5 years and continuing
4–12 months (if custodial) depending on number of counts
8 years and finalised
Death by dangerous driving
2 years and continuing
False threat of danger
3 years and continuing
Generally non-custodial
2 years and finalised
Unlawfully injure property
4 years and continuing 6 months
Unlawfully setting fire to property
5.5 years and continuing 4 months
3 years and continuing
Maintain relationship with young person
2 years and continuing
18 months (single count)
Motor vehicle stealing
6 years and continuing
4 years and continuing
3 years (single count)
4 years and continuing
Sexual intercourse with young person
4 years and continuing
3 months (single count)
4.5 years and continuing
Not recorded
2 years set term
6 months (single count)
2 years set term
5 years and continuing
Table A8.4: Supervision orders. 2010–30 June 2018. Excludes
individuals who have been on orders for less than 2 years duration
Period of supervision of defendant
Median sentence 2008–14
Maintaining relationship with young person
8 years and 9 days
30 months (single count)
8 years and 17 days
1 year and 3 months (76% custodial) (single count)
12 years 3 months and 8 days
12 years 3 months and 5 days
3 years 15 days and continuing
5 years and 11 months and 5 days and continuing
Injure property
9 years and 2 days
Not available
8 years 2 months and 8 days
7 months (48.1% custodial) (single count)
9 years 7 days and continuing
12 years 3 months and 7 days and continuing
9 years and 11 months and 7 days
Set fire to vegetation/arson (include attempted)
6 years 6 months and 1 days
Arson only available (single count)
1 year and 3 months (46.2% custodial)
6 years 11 months and 9 days
12 years 1 month and 12 days and continuing
4 years 7 months and 23 days and continuing
7 years and 7 months and 26 days and continuing
11 years 9 months and 25 days and continuing
5 years 6 months and 20 days and continuing
12 years 8 months and 11 days
3 years and 4.5 months (single count)
False threat of danger
9 years 9 months and 14 days and continuing
Not available
Aggravated burglary
5 years 1 month and 12 days
Not available for single count
1 years and 2.5 months (all counts) (71% custodial)
Death by dangerous driving
10 years 5 months and 2 days
2 years (single count)
13 years 2 months and 12 days
Not available
Motor vehicle stealing
7 years and 13 days
Not available
Appendix 9: Submissions received
Organisation
Secretary, Department of Police, Fire and Emergency Management
D C Coates SC
Director of Public Prosecutions, Office of the Director of Public
Prosecutions
Mental Health Council of Tasmania
Jamie Walvisch
Faculty of Law, Monash University
Fabiano Cangelosi
Tasmanian President and State Director
Australian Lawyers Alliance
Georgina O’Donnell
Damien Minehan
Grant Blake
ForensiClinic Consulting Pty Ltd
Forensic and Clinical Psychology
Anti-Discrimination Commissioner
Equal Opportunity Tasmania
Marita O’Connell
Substantively Forensic Mental Health Services (THS), currently Department
Michelle O’Flynn
Queensland Advocacy Incorporated
Benedict Bartl
Policy Officer
Community Legal Centres Tasmania
Confidential
Confidential
Confidential
Facilitating Equal
Access to Justice: An Intermediary/Communication Assistant Scheme for
Final Report 23 (2018) vi–vii.
Department of Justice,
Disability Justice Plan for Tasmania 2017–2020
for signature 30 March
2007, 2515 UNTS 3
(entered into force 3 May 2008).
See Parts 4 and 5.
Review of the
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
, Final Report No 26
New South Wales Law Reform
Commission (‘NSWLRC’),
People with Cognitive and Mental Health
Impairments in the Criminal Justice System: Diversion
(2012) Ch 5.
See TLRI (n
See discussion of the
Diversion List at [2.2.2]–[2.3.3].
The eligibility criteria
state that an offender is eligible if he or she has (or is likely to have) a
mental illness, intellectual
disability, acquired brain injury, autism spectrum
disorder and/or a neurological impairment, including dementia: Magistrates Court
Tasmanian Magistrates Court Diversion List: Procedural Manual
Version 1.4
(2014) 5. Other eligibility criteria include: that the defendant
has not been charged with an excluded criminal offence that involves
violence or serious sexual assault, unless the court, at its discretion,
considers the harm minor; the impairment/s cause/s
a substantially reduced
capacity in at least one of the areas of self-care, self-management, social
interaction or communication;
a connection exists between the mental impairment
and/or mental illness and the offending behaviour, the defendant being likely to
derive benefit from participation in a problem-solving court process; the
defendant may not be eligible if, based on the opinion
of Forensic Mental Health
Services (Court Liaison) staff, he or she has exhausted all reasonable and
available treatment and/or support
services for the mental illness and/or
impaired intellectual functioning. The defendant must consent to participate in
including attending court regularly and following the reasonable
directions of Forensic Mental Health Services (Court Liaison) staff:
also F Davidson et al, ‘Mental Health and Criminal Charges: Variation in
Diversion Pathways in Australia’ (2017)
Psychiatry, Psychology and
online edition.
Magistrates Court Tasmania
E Newitt and V Stojcevski,
Mental Health Diversion List
(Evaluation Report, 2009) 13.
Magistrates Court Tasmania
Newitt and Stojcevski (n
Magistrates Court of
Annual Report 2015–16
(2016) 12–13.
I Bartkowiak-Théron
and J Fleming,
Integration and Collaboration: Building Capacity and
Engagement for the Provision of Criminal Justice Services to Tasmania’s
Mentally Ill
(TILES, University of Tasmania, 2011) 6.
A Loughlan,
Madness: Mental Incapacity in Criminal Law
(Oxford University Press, 2012)
The specific requirements of
the test contained in the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
are discussed further at [
Victoria Law Reform
Commission (‘VLRC’),
Review of the
Crimes (Mental
Impairment and Unfitness to be Tried) Act 1997
, Final Report 28 (2014)
Criminal Code
16. This is discussed further at [
This table is taken from the
Review of the Crimes (Mental Impairment and Unfitness to be Tried Act
, Consultation Paper (2013) 33.
Criminal Justice (Mental
Impairment) Act 1997
(Tas) ss 18, 21. These dispositions are discussed
further in Part 8.
Sentencing Act 1997
A mental illness is defined as a mental illness within the
meaning in the
Mental Health Act 2013
Mental Health Act
states that: ‘(1)(a) a person is taken to have a mental
illness if he or she experiences, temporarily, repeatedly or continually
(i) a serious impairment of thought (which may include delusions); or (ii) a
serious impairment of mood, volition, perception
or cognition; and (b) nothing
prevents the serious or permanent physiological, biochemical or psychological
effects of alcohol use
or drug-taking from being regarded as an indication that
a person has a mental illness. (2) However, under this Act, a person is
be taken to have a mental illness by reason only of the person’s –
(a) current or past expression of, or failure
or refusal to express, a
particular political opinion or belief; or (b) current or past expression of, or
failure or refusal to express,
a particular religious opinion or belief; or (c)
current or past expression of, or failure or refusal to express, a particular
philosophy;
or (d) current or past expression of, or failure or refusal to
express, a particular sexual preference or orientation; or (e) current
engagement in, or failure or refusal to engage in, a particular political or
religious activity; or (f) current or past engagement
in a particular sexual
activity or sexual promiscuity; or (g) current or past engagement in illegal
conduct; or (h) current or past
engagement in an antisocial activity; or (i)
particular economic or social status; or (j) membership of a particular cultural
racial group; or (k) intoxication (however induced); or (l) intellectual or
physical disability; or (m) acquired brain injury; or
(n) dementia; or (o)
temporary unconsciousness.’
Parliamentary
, House of Assembly, 23 March 1999, Part 2 33–114 (Patmore).
A Smith, ‘Out of the
Frying Pan: Forensic Mental Health Orders – Have Changes to the Review
Processes for People Found
“Unfit to Plead” or “Not Guilty by
Reason of Insanity” Enhanced the Liberty of the Subject?’ (2010)
Ibid 24. Smith referred to
at least two known examples of discharge after two years from a restriction
order imposed for the offence
Parliamentary
, House of Assembly, 23 March 1999, Part 2 33–114
Criminal Justice (Mental
Impairment) Act 1999
Parliamentary
, House of Assembly, 23 March 1999,
P Gooding et al,
‘Unfitness to Stand Trial and the Indefinite Detention of Persons with
Cognitive Disabilities in Australia:
Human Rights Challenges and Proposals for
[2017] MelbULawRw 11
Melbourne University Law Review
The identification of these
principles was drawn from the VLRC’s report: see VLRC (n
, opened for
signature 16 December
1966, 999 UNTS 171
(entered into force 23 March 1976) arts
14, 10, 26;
arts 4, 5, 12, 13 14. For a more detailed discussion of
these provisions in the context of fitness to stand trial, see
[4.3.3]–[4.3.5].
See for example, B McSherry
Unfitness to Plead and Indefinite Detention of Persons with Cognitive
Disabilities: Addressing the Legal Barriers and Creating Appropriate
Alternative
Supports in the Community
(Melbourne Social Equity Institute, 2017).
) 18 quoting A Mason, ‘Fair
Criminal Law Journal
Equality, Capacity
and Disability in Commonwealth Laws
, Final Report No 124 (2014)
194–195 quoting the VLRC (n
Submission 4, 8 agreeing
with the views expressed by Antony Duff,
Answering for Crime: Responsibility
and Liability in the Criminal Law
(Oxford University Press, 2007) 41.
Ibid quoting Duff 178.
Criminal Justice (Mental
Impairment) Act 1999
s 16(3)(b).
Criminal Justice (Mental
Impairment) Act 1999
Balance in the Forensic Mental Health System: Review of the Queensland Mental
Health Act 2000
(Final Report, 2006) 28–29 (the ‘Butler
Criminal Justice (Mental
Impairment) Act 1999
s 35(1)(b).
s 35(1)(a).
s 35(2)(a).
However, in
relation to supervision orders, the court does not require a report to determine
if the defendant should be detained
or subjected to a more rigorous form of
supervision or to vary in minor respects the conditions on which the defendant
was released:
) xv; NSWLRC,
People with Cognitive and
Mental Health Impairments in the Criminal Justice System:
Responsibility and Consequences
Report 138 (2013) 6–7. See
also Law Reform Committee, Parliament of Victoria,
Inquiry into Access to and
Interaction with the Justice System by People with an Intellectual Disability
and Their Families and Carers
(2013) 11 (‘Law Reform
Committee’); VLRC (n
) 2; K Dean et
The Justice System and Mental Health: A Review of the Literature
Australian Institute of
Health and Welfare,
The Health of Australia’s Prisoners 2015
Magistrates’ Court
Victoria, Submission No IDAJ31 to Law Reform Committee, Parliament of Victoria,
Inquiry into Access to and Interaction with the Justice System by People with
an Intellectual Disability and Their Families and Carers
(2011) 5 quoted in
Dean et al (n
) 13; Law Reform Committee (n
M Nixon et al,
‘Estimating the Risk of Crime and Victimisation in People with
Intellectual Disabilities: A Data-Linkage Study’
Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology
Law Council of Australia,
The Justice Project: People with Disability
, Consultation Paper (2017) 14
referring to C Jennings,
Triple Disadvantage: Out of Sight, Out of
Violence Against Women with Disabilities Project
(Domestic Violence and Incest Resource Centre, 2
Gooding et al (n
Dean et al (n
M Bagaric and R Edney,
Sentencing in Australia
(Thomson Reuters, 2016) 347.
Submission 12, 2 referring
to Australian Institute of Health and Welfare,
The Health of
Australia’s Prisoners 2015
Cat no PHE 207 (2015) Table S55.
NSWLRC (2013) (n
) 7; Dean et al (n
J Ogloff et al, ‘The
Identification of Mental Disorders in the Criminal Justice System’
Trends and Issues in Criminal Justice
334 (2007) 2.
C Cunneen et al,
Culture and Hyperincarceration: The Revival of the Prison
(Taylor and
Francis, 2013) 91 (references omitted).
See Appendix 8.
E Bevin, ‘New
taskforce to probe how mentally ill prisoners are dealt with after Voula
Delios’s murder’,
, 2 October 2018
<https://www.abc.net.au/news/2018-10-02/prisoner-mental-health-focus-of-new-taskforce/10328332>.
Submission 12 referring to
Australian Institute of Health and Welfare,
The Health of Australia’s
Prisoners 2015
Cat no PHE 207 (2015) Table
Custodial Inspector
Annual Report 2017–18
See discussion in
J Walvisch, submission to
Submission 4, 12.
See Bagaric and Edney (n
Channon v The Queen
(1978) 33 FLR 433
, 436–437 cited in
Acting Director of Public
Prosecutions v CBF
[2016] TASCCA 1
[42] (Porter J).
(1988) 164 CLR 465.
Ibid 476–477 (Mason
CJ, Brennan, Dawson and Toohey JJ).
Director of Public
Prosecutions (Acting) v CBF
[2016] TASCCA 1.
(2007) 16 VR 269, 276
(Maxwell P, Buchanan and Vincent JJA).
Startup v Tasmania
[2010] TASCCA 5
Groenewege v Tasmania
[2013] TASCCA 7
of Public Prosecutions (Acting) v CBF
[2016] TASCCA 1.
See Freiberg,
Freiberg’s Sentencing: State and Federal Law in Victoria
289–298; Bagaric and Edney (n
) 348–367; See D Gee and J Ogloff,
‘Sentencing Offenders with Impaired Mental Functioning: R v Verdins,
Buckley and Vo
[2007] at the Clinical Coalface’
Psychiatry,
Psychology and Law
for further discussion of these principles.
J Walvisch and A Carroll,
‘Sentencing Offenders with Personality Disorders: A Critical Analysis of
DPP (Vic) v O’Neill
[2017] MelbULawRw 29
Melbourne University Law Review
Ibid 423–424.
[2015] VSCA 325.
Walvisch and Carroll (n
Bagaric and Edney (n
Director of Public
Prosecutions v O’Neill
[2015] VSCA 325
, [74] as summarised in
Director of Public Prosecutions (Acting) v CBF
[2016] TASCCA 1
[39] (Porter J).
Director of Public
Prosecutions v O’Neill
[2015] VSCA 325
, [75] as summarised in
Director of Public Prosecutions (Acting) v CBF
[2016] TASCCA 1
(Porter J).
See discussion at [
Sentencing Act 1997
Comparative Review of National Legislation for the Indefinite Detention of
‘Dangerous Criminals’
Research Paper No 4
Sentencing Act 1997
s 19(1)(d).
in Tasmania
(Federation Press, 2
[2018] TASSC 49.
[1988] HCA 62
(1988) 165 CLR 611.
Ibid 617–618. See
also at 619.
See TLRI (n
See M Varheny et al,
‘Violence and Mental Illness: What is the True Story?’ (2016) 70(3)
Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health
It is noted that in
Western Australia in the period 1 July 2010 to 30 June 2015, 0.03 per cent of
matters finalised in the adult
courts involved accused who were found either
mentally unfit to stand trial or not guilty by reason of unsoundness of mind:
of the Attorney-General, Western Australia,
Review of the
Law (Mentally Impaired Accused) Act 1996
Final Report (2016) 27. In
Victoria, it was noted that insanity and fitness to stand trial cases made up
only approximately one percent
of the total cases that resulted in a sentence or
a CMIA order in the higher courts: VLRC (n
There were also three
cases identified where it was not possible to determine if the order made under
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) was a result of a
sentence imposed by the court or finding of unfitness or insanity.
The offence categories
are taken from the Australian Bureau of Crime Statistics,
Australian and New
Zealand Standard Offence Classification (ANZSOC)
Information provided by
Betty Evans, Department of Justice, email 2 April 2018.
These cases were
identified using a search for Magistrates Court decisions on the Australasian
Legal Information Institute (AUSTLII
Brazendale v O
[2008] TASMC 3
, the defendant unsuccessfully relied on the defence of
insanity in relation to charges of stalking and assault with indecent
McKenna v Smith
[2014] TASMC 11.
Bonde v Weate
[2017] TASMC 11.
Criminal Justice
(Mental Impairment) Act 1999
Heapes v The Queen
[2000] TASSC 77
, [17] (Evans J) citing
Kesavarajah v R
(1994) 181 CLR
R v Enright
[1990] 1 Qd R 563.
[1958] VicRp 9
[1958] VR 45.
Director of Public
Prosecutions (DPP),
Prosecution Policy and Guidelines
R v Chanthasaeng,
Songsagkong
[2008] NSWCS 122, [48] (Nicolson SC DCJ).
DPP Guidelines (n
[2011] ACTSC 56
(2011) 210 A Crim R
A White, S Meares and J
Batchelor, ‘The Role of Cognition in Fitness to Stand: A Systematic
Review’ (2014) 25
Journal of Forensic Psychiatry and Psychology
NSWLRC (2013) (n
) 17; Law Commission of England and Wales,
Unfitness to Plead: A Consultation Paper
Consultation Paper No
197 (2010) 59–60.
Emphasis added.
) [7.14], [7.18]; Department of the
Attorney-General, Western Australia (n
46; VLRC (n
); Law Commission of England
Unfitness to Plead Volume 1: Report
(Law Com No 364, 2016) 61;
Northern Ireland Law Reform Commission,
Unfitness to Plead
(2013) 27–28.
) 136; VLRC (n
) 70; Law Commission of England and Wales (n
) 27, 32; Law Commission of England and
Law Commission of England
and Wales (n
) 28; Law Commission of
England and Wales (n
Law Commission of England
and Wales (n
I Freckelton,
‘Rationality and Flexibility in Assessment of Fitness to Stand
Trial’ (1996) 19(1)
International Journal of Law and Psychiatry
54-55; VLRC (n
Commission of England and Wales (n
Freckelton (n
Law Commission of England
and Wales (n
) 64 citing R MacKay, B
Mitchell and L Howe, ‘A Continued Upturn in Unfitness to Plead –
More Disability in Relation to
the Trial Under the 1991 Act’
Criminal Law Review
A White et al, ‘The
Role of Cognitive Assessment in Determining Fitness to Stand Trial’ (2012)
International Journal of Forensic Mental Health
Ibid 108. See also A
White et al, ‘Fitness to Stand Trial in One Australian Jurisdiction: The
Role of Cognitive Abilities,
Neurological Dysfunction and Psychiatric
Disorder’ (2016) 23
Psychiatry, Psychology and Law
499; S van der
Wijngaart, R Hawkins and P Golus, ‘The Role of Psychologists in the South
Australian Fitness to Stand Trial
Process’ (2015) 22
Psychiatry,
Psychology and Law
See T Minkowitz,
‘Rethinking Criminal Responsibility from a Critical Disability
Perspective: The Abolition of Insanity/Incapacity
Acquittals and Unfitness to
Plead, and Beyond’
Griffith Law Review
discussion in P Gooding and C O’Mahoney, ‘Laws on Unfitness to Stand
Trial and the UN Convention on the Rights
of Persons with Disabilities:
Comparing Reform in England, Wales, Northern Ireland and Australia’
International Journal of Law, Crime and Justice
This critique is
summarised by Gooding et al (n
See discussion in A Arstein-Kerslake et al, ‘Human Rights and Unfitness to
Plead: The Demands of the Convention
on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities’ (2017) 17(3)
Human Rights Law Review
<https://doi.org/10.1093/hrlr/ngx025>.
Gooding and
O’Mahoney (n
) 131. See also
discussion in Arstein-Kerslake et al (n
Melbourne Social Equity
Addressing the Indefinite Detention of People with Cognitive and
Psychiatric Impairment Due to Unfitness to Plead Law
(Submission to the
Senate Community Affairs Reference Committee, 2016) 5–6.
Gooding et al (n
) 843. See UNCRPD,
Guidelines on Article
14 of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities: The Right to
Liberty and Security of Persons
with Disabilities
Minkowitz (n
However, the dismantling
of the regime suggested by Arstein-Kerslake et al (n
) 417–418 seems to require reshaping
of the law to such a degree as to amount to fundamental changes to the current
to stand trial doctrine that are akin to abolition. However, the authors
acknowledge that there will be cases where a person is unable
to participate in
their trial even with supports and that some alternative approach will be
necessary. They also acknowledge that
the reforms ‘will take time and will
probably require incremental change’: at 418.
See for example,
discussion in Arstein-Kerslake et al, ibid; Gooding and O’Mahoney (n
); Melbourne Social Equity Institute (n
); Gooding et al (n
Arstein-Kerslake et al (n
‘Evolving Conceptualisations of Legal Capacity and Criminal Law in
Australia’ (Presentation to the Legal Intersections
Resource Centre:
Disability at the Margins Vulnerability, Empowerment and the Criminal Law,
University of Wollongong, November 2013).
Gooding and
O’Mahoney (n
Arstein-Kerslake et al (n
Ibid 409–412.
This is discussed further
DPP, Walvisch, EOT,
ForensiClinic, QAI (proposed reform to test), ALA (proposed reform to test),
O’Connell (proposed reform
to the test).
Only the submission of
the DPP did not consider reform to be necessary.
Quoting Arstein-Kerslake
NSWLRC (2013) (n
) 30. See draft provision in Appendix 1. The
adoption of an underlying principles of a fair trial approach was not contained
in recommendation
of the VLRC (see draft provision Appendix 1) but was adopted
in the Crimes (Mental Impairment and Unfitness to be Tried) Amendment
(Vic) cl 8. This legislation has not been passed by the Victorian
Parliament.
See Appendix 4.
Law Commission of England
and Wales (n
) Recommendation 10.9,
W Brookbanks and R
Mackay, ‘Decisional Competence and “Best Interests”:
Establishing the Threshold for Fitness
to Stand Trial’
[2010] OtaLawRw 3
, 266. See also Law Commission of England and Wales (n
Law Commission of England
and Wales (n
Law Commission of England
and Wales (n
Ibid Recommendation
10.22; Law Commission of England and Wales (n
) Recommendation 7-1.
Department of the
Attorney General, Western Australia (n
NSWLRC (2013) (n
Gooding and
O’Mahoney (n
) referring to the
General Comment No 1: Equal Recognition Before the Law (Article 12)
S 3, 7. It is noted that
there is a review of the
Mental Health Act 2013
undertaken by the Department of Health and Human Services. A consultation has
been released with the date for submissions closing
on the 8 November 2019: see
Department of Health and Human Services, Statewide Mental Health Services,
Mental Health Act 2013
: Review of the Act’s Operation
(Consultation
Paper, 2019). Questions asked are whether the test for decision-making capacity
set out in section 7 of the Act operate
effectively and whether it is easy to
understand and apply for both adults and children?
) 74 referring to Freckelton (n
See Appendix 4.
Law Reform Committee (n
) Recommendation 29.
Ibid referring to the
submission of the Victorian Equal Opportunity and Human Rights Commission.
See ibid 76–77.
See [4.4.18] and
following for a discussion of the decision-making model.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
It is noted that the UNCRPD has argued
that substitute decision-making regimes such as guardianship ‘must be
abolished in order
to ensure that full legal capacity is restored to persons
with disabilities on an equal basis with others’: UNCRPD,
Comment No 1 (2014),
Article 12: Equal Recognition Before the Law
See discussion at [
], [4.4.31].
Law Commission of England
and Wales (n
See Department of the
Attorney-General, Western Australia (n
Law Commission of England
and Wales (n
) Recommendations
10.14–10.21. The draft legislation prepared by the Law Commission appears
in Appendix 1.
Northern Ireland Law
Reform Commission (n
Scottish Law Commission,
Report on Insanity and Diminished Responsibility
(2004) Recommendation
Criminal Procedure
(Scotland) Act 1995
s 53F(1) inserted by
Criminal Justice and Licensing
(Scotland) Act 2010
inserted by
Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Act 2010
It is noted that the
first three criteria were recommended by the VLRC: see VLRC (n
It is noted that the
option for a judge alone trial does not exist in Tasmania.
[4.4.41]–[4.4.42].
Gooding et al (n
Law Reform Committee (n
) 89. The recommendation of the VLRC for
courts to consider support measures that may assist an accused to stand trial
when determining
fitness was was adopted in the Crimes (Mental Impairment and
Unfitness to be Tried) Amendment Bill 2016
(Vic) cl 8. This legislation
has not been passed by the Victorian Parliament.
Law Commission of England
and Wales (n
NSWLRC (2013) (n
) Recommendation 2.2.
Department of the
Attorney-General, Western Australia (n
Recommendation 8.
Northern Ireland Law
Reform Commission,
Unfitness to Plead,
Consultation Paper
(2012) 120; Northern Ireland Law Reform Commission (n
Northern Ireland Law
Reform Commission, Consultation Paper
Northern Ireland Law
Reform Commission (n
) 86–87; ibid
See TLRI (n
See VLRC (n
) 87–94, Law Commission of England and
) 31–32, 37–55. See
also Gooding et al (n
Melbourne Social Equity
Institute (n
Ibid 5 referring to
Gooding and O’Mahoney (n
report that outlines the nature of supports that may be effective for persons
with cognitive disabilities in the criminal justice
system was published in
September 2017, in a project funded by the National Disability Research and
Development Grants, see McSherry
Law Commission of England
and Wales (n
Ibid. See [
NSWLRC (2013) (n
) 36; VLRC (n
NSWLRC (2013) (n
Law Commission of England
and Wales (n
NSWLRC (2013) (n
Ibid 36–37.
Law Commission of England
and Wales (n
NSWLRC (2013) (n
Ibid 81–82.
Ibid 81. It is noted that
a new provision that created a test for determining whether an accused was fit
to plead guilty to a charge
was adopted in the Crimes (Mental Impairment and
Unfitness to be Tried) Amendment Bill 2016
(Vic) cl 8. This legislation
has not been passed by the Victorian Parliament.
See [4.4.20].
See [4.4.70].
See [4.4.66].
Criminal Justice
(Mental Impairment) Act 1999
[2006] TASSC 21.
Criminal Justice
(Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(2005) 13 Tas SR 457, [14] (Crawford J).
Criminal Justice
(Mental Impairment) Act 1999
requirements for a special hearing are discussed in detail in
) 230 fn 32;
Criminal Code
(NT) s 43L;
Crimes (Mental Impairment and Unfitness to be Tried) Act 1997
(Vic) s 11.
It is noted that the Crimes (Mental Impairment and Unfitness to be Tried)
Amendment Bill 2016
(Vic) cl 9 provides that responsibility for
determining fitness to stand trial is to be decided by a judge (and not the
jury). This
legislation has not been passed by the Victorian Parliament.
) 230 fn 32.
Criminal Law
Consolidation Act 1935
Mental Health
(Forensic Provisions) Act 1990
Criminal Law (Mentally Impaired
Accused) Act 1996
Crimes Act 1900
Criminal Procedure
(Insanity) Act 1964
(UK) s 4(5).
It is noted that the
procedure under the
Criminal Code
(Qld) has fallen into disuse, and
fitness to stand trial is routinely dealt with by the Mental Health Commission
(MHC): J O’Leary,
S O’Toole and B Watt, ‘Exploring Juvenile
Fitness for Trial in Queensland’ (2013) 20
Psychiatry, Psychology and
Crimes Act 1900
Criminal Law (Mentally Impaired Accused) Act 1996
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
Crimes Act 1900
See VLRC (n
Ibid Recommendation 27,
Ibid Recommendation
Ibid 121, 126.
Mental Health Act 2016
Magistrates Court (Qld),
Practice Direction 1 of 2017:
Mental Health Act 2016
Proceedings in the
Magistrates Court
It is noted that proposed
reforms will strengthen the framework in NSW for diverting people with cognitive
and mental health impairment
charged with low level offending into the health
and disability sector, see NSW Government (Justice),
Forensic Mental Health
<https://www.justice.nsw.gov.au/Pages/Reforms/forensic-mental-health.aspx>.
Mentally ill is defined
Mental Health Act 2007
as a person who is suffering
from a mental illness and because of that illness, there are reasonable grounds
for believing that care,
treatment or control of that person is necessary of the
person’s own protection from serious harm, or for the protection of
from serious harm.
See NSWLRC (n
) 247–248. The court takes into account
the seriousness of the offence, the likely sentence if convicted, the
availability of
a treatment plan, the defendant’s criminal history and
failure of previous diversion: at 248–251.
Criminal Justice
(Mental Impairment) Act 1999
Marita O’Connell
(Submission).
EOT (Submission).
See Supreme Court of
Sentencing Hearings: Experts Reports on Mental Functioning of
(Practice Note SC CR 7, 2017).
Law Reform Committee (n
This was considered by
the VLRC: see VLRC (n
Queensland Health,
Role of the Court Liaison Service in the Magistrates Court
https://www.health.qld.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0021/640335/FAQ_Court_Liaison_Service.pdf
See [5.4.23].
See VLRC (n
) Recommendation 28(m).
DPP (Submission), Marita
O’Connell (Submission) and TasCOSS (Submission). It is also noted that
both TasCOSS and O’Connell
made submissions in relation to the need to
establish a legislative basis for the Diversion List.
It is noted that this
reference does not involve a review of the Diversion List. However, resource
issues for the list were raised
in three submissions, including in the
submission of TasCOSS who outlined the funding limitations of the service and
the need for
an increase in funding for the Diversion List and for the Court
Liaison Officers.
See VLRC (n
These matters were
contained in the submission of Walvisch.
It is noted that this
reference does not involve a review of the Diversion List. However, resource
issues for the list were raised
in CLC Tas submissions, including in the
submission of TasCOSS who outlined the funding limitations of the service and
the need for
an increase in funding for the Diversion List and for the Court
Liaison Officers.
Criminal Justice
(Mental Impairment) Act 1999
Department of Health and
Human Services (DHHS),
Mental Health Act
Criminal Justice
(Mental Impairment) Act 1999
[2005] TASSC 29
(2005) 13 Tas R 457.
Criminal Justice
(Mental Impairment) Act 1999
Criminal Code
Tasmania v Bosworth
[2005] TASSC 29
(2005) 13 Tas R 457
[33] (Crawford J).
DHHS, above n
, 98; Tasmania,
Parliamentary
, House of Assembly, 23 March 1999, Part 2 33–114
15 June 2015, Wood J
(Sentence).
] for further discussion of onus
and standard of proof for insanity.
Criminal Justice
(Mental Impairment) Act 1999
Tasmania v Bosworth
[2005] TASSC 29
(2005) 13 Tas R 457
[16] (Crawford J).
This is discussed at
[4.4.66]–[4.4.75].
In Western Australia, a
review conducted into the operation of fitness to stand trial did not recommend
that a special hearing be
adopted, but instead recommended that the juridical
officer was to have regard to whether there was a case to answer on the balance
of probabilities after inquiring into the question and informing him or herself
in any way the judicial officer thinks fit: Department
of the Attorney-General,
Western Australia, (n
) Recommendation
Gooding et al (n
See Appendix 5.
See Arstein-Kerslake et
See McSherry et al (n
) 19; ibid 403–404; Gooding et al (n
Gooding et al (n
Criminal Justice
(Mental Impairment) Act 1999
See Law Commission of
England and Wales (n
P Gooding et al,
‘Supporting Accused Persons with Cognitive Disabilities to Participate in
Criminal Proceedings in Australia:
Avoiding the Pitfalls of Unfitness to Stand
Trial Laws’ (2017) 35
Law in Context
64, 69 citing K Eagle and A
Ellis, ‘The Widening Net of Preventative Detention and the Unfit for
Trial’ (2016) 90(3)
Australian Law Journal
discussion of disposition.
See Appendix 8.
See ALRC (n
) Recommendation 3-1. See also TLRI (n
where recommendations
were made for a shift from the paternalistic ‘best interests’
approach to representative decision-making
based on a person’s will,
preferences and rights.
It is noted that Walvisch
considered that: ‘To be fully consistent with the presumption of innocence
(and the right to a fair
trial), however, I believe that there should be
provision for an accused (at his or her discretion) to have a matter re-heard,
if a special hearing has been held, if he or she regains fitness. This will
provide the accused with an opportunity to properly account
for his or her
actions, and to potentially clear his or her name’.
Arnstein-Kerslake (n
NSWLRC (2013) (n
Ibid 150 – 151.
This reflects the
approach to decision making taken in the TLRI,
Review of the
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
, Final Report No 26 (2018), see 192.
Criminal Law
Consolidation Act 1935
Criminal Code
s 43XA inserted by
Criminal Code Amendment (Mental Impairment and Unfitness
to be Tried) Act 2017
Crimes (Mental
Impairment and Unfitness to be Tried) Act 1997
(Vic) s 21(4). It is noted
that the VLRC has now recommended repeal of this provision: see VLRC (n
) 234 Recommendation 52.
SM v The Queen
VSCA 342. See discussion in VLRC (n
Law Commission of England
and Wales (n
Ibid 233, 236.
Law Commission of England
and Wales (n
See discussion at [
) 234; Law Commission of England and Wales (n
See Recommendation
See [7.5.177].
A Schloenhardt,
Queensland Criminal Law
(Oxford University Press, 2015) [17.1.2].
See A Simester and W
Brookbanks,
Principles of Criminal Law
(Thomson Reuters, 4
ed, 2012) 322–340, 347; S Bronitt and B McSherry,
Principles of
Criminal Law
(Lawbook Co, 3
ed, 2010) [4.30]–[4.35]; B
McSherry, ‘Defining What is a “Disease of the Mind”: The
Untenability of Current
Legal Interpretations’
Journal of Law
and Medicine
[5.11]–[5.44]; NSWLRC (2013) (n
[3.13]–[3.109].
[1843] EngR 875
(1843) 10 Cl&F 200
ER 718. See F McAuley,
Insanity, Psychiatry and Criminal Responsibility
(Round Hall Press, 1993) 18–26. For a summary of the history of the
insanity defence see R Mackay,
Mental Condition Defences in the Criminal
(Clarendon Press, 1995)
See summary in A Norrie,
Crime, Reason and History: A Critical Introduction to the Criminal Law
(LexisNexis, 2001) 179–180.
(1843) 10 Cl and Finn
200, 210; 8 ER 718, 722.
N Lacey, C Wells and O
Reconstructing Criminal Law
(Cambridge University Press,
ed, 2010) 95.
‘Provocation: The Case for Abolition’ in A Ashworth and B Mitchell
Rethinking English Homicide Law
(Oxford University Press, 1984).
Bronitt and McSherry write that ‘[t]he concept of criminal responsibility
is based on the
notion that individuals possess the capacity to make rational
choices in performing or refraining from performing acts’: Bronitt
McSherry (n
) 201, [4.05]. See
also P Fairall and S Yeo,
Criminal Defences
(Lexis Nexis, 4
[13.1]; S Yannoulidis,
Mental State Defences in Criminal
(Ashgate, 2012) 51–52.
Bronitt and McSherry (n
Lacey, Wells and Quick
Fairall and Yeo (n
) [13.1]. This is an argument from the
perspective of retributive theory.
[1933] HCA 1
(1933) 55 CLR 182
, Dixon J stated that ‘it is perfectly useless for
the law to attempt, by threatening punishment, to deter people from committing
crimes if their mental condition is such that they cannot be in the least
influenced by the possibility or probability of subsequent
punishment ... what
is the point of punishing people if they be beyond the control of the law for
reasons of mental health’.
R Heaton and C De Than,
Criminal Law
(Oxford University Press, 2011) 229.
Law Commission of England
Criminal Liability: Insanity and Automatism A Discussion Paper
(2013) 197.
Quoting A Duff,
Punishment, Communication, and Community
(Oxford University Press, 2001)
Quoting A Duff,
Answering for Crime: Responsibility and Liability in the Criminal Law
(Oxford University Press, 2007) 290–1.
All ER 673 (Lord
Diplock) quoted in Heaton and De Than (n
J Child and G Sullivan,
‘When Does the Insanity Defence Apply? Some Recent Cases’ (2014)
Criminal Law Review
Ibid. McSherry outlines
the ‘the tortuous legal interpretations of the term “disease of the
mind”’ and stated
that the question which underlies ‘I
believe, [is] simply this: is this individual likely to cause harm to others if
not confined?
If so then his or her mental condition will be considered to be
disease of the mind for the purposes of the insanity defence’:
McSherry (n
[1994] HCA 28
, 507. Leader-Elliott suggests that ‘it must now be taken that the
object of the presumption is to ensure that the issues of
fault, voluntariness
and insanity can be resolved without speculation about possible mental
abnormalities unless there is acceptable
evidence — usually medical
— of abnormality, disorder or disease’: I Leader-Elliott,
‘Case Comment:
Hawkins v the Queen
’ (1994) 18
Criminal Law
Bronitt and McSherry (n
D Howard and B Westmore,
Crime and Mental Health Law in New South Wales
(LexisNexis Butterworths,
ed, 2010) [6.28]; J Blackwood and K Warner,
Tasmanian Criminal
Law: Texts and Cases
(University of Tasmania Law Press, 2014) vol 1, 247;
[1982] Tas SR 35.
This has been interpreted
to mean intellectual disability.
See McSherry (n
[1933] HCA 1
, 188 (Dixon J).
(1985) 42 SASR 266
This was adopted by the High Court in
R v Falconer
(1990) 171 CLR 30, 53
(Mason CJ, Brennan and McHugh JJ), 60 (Deane and Dawson JJ); 78 (Toohey J), 85
(Gaudron J).
A Simester et al,
Simester and Sullivan’s Criminal Law: Theory and Doctrine
Publishing, 2013) 719.
See further Blackwood and
) vol 1, Chapter 5.
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 17(1);
[1947] St R Qd R 51, 61. It is noted that complex
questions arise in relation to the interaction of mental illness and alcohol
drugs for the purposes of the insanity and intoxication defences, see
Blackwood and Warner, ibid, 330.
Bratty v A-G (Northern
) [1963] AC 386.
[1993] 1 Qd
Bratty v A-G (Northern
) [1963] AC 386.
[1989] EWCA Crim 1
[1957] 1 QB
[1993] TASSC
Schloenhardt (n
[1989] EWCA Crim 1
, which was a case involving hyperglycaemia which is high blood sugar
resulting from a failure to take insulin. In contrast, in
[1973] EWCA Crim 1
, hypoglyceaemia was held not to be a mental disease because the condition
resulted in low blood sugar from an excess of insulin (which
the defendant had
administered as prescribed by the doctor).
[1957] 1 QB
All ER 673.
(1992) 75 CCC (3d)
See further discussion in Blackwood and Warner (n
) vol 1, 232–234.
Lusted v Kingston
[2016] TASMC 1
referring to
Coulsen v The Queen
[2010] VSCA 146.
(1985) 19 A
Crim R 129.
[1960] HCA 5
(1960) 105 CLR 295
Williams v The Queen
[1978] TASStRp 10
This has been considered in various law reform reports: Law Reform
Commission of Western Australia (‘LRCWA’),
A Review of the Law of
, Final Report 97 (2007) 229–230; NSWLRC (2013) (n
) 56–60. It is noted that Bronitt and
McSherry observe that the weight of psychiatric opinion is that antisocial
personality
disorder should not be equated with mental illness: Bronitt and
McSherry (n
[1933] HCA 1
(1933) 55 CLR 182
E Colvin and J
Criminal Law in Queensland and Western Australia: Cases and
(LexisNexis Butterworths, 6
ed, 2011) 464.
See discussion in
Blackwood and Warner (n
This illustration is
provided by D Caruso in D Caruso et al,
South Australian Criminal Law: Review
and Critique
(LexisNexis Butterworths, 2014) 396.
Schloenhardt (n
[1978] TASStRp 10
[1978] Tas SR 98.
Ibid 102 (Neasey J).
[1958] NZPoliceLawRp 16
(1958) NZLR 999.
Ibid 109 (Neasey J)
[1958] NZPoliceLawRp 16
(1958) NZLR 999
, 1009 (Gresson P).
(1993) 68 A Crim R 1.
[1960] HCA 5
(1960) 105 CLR 295
[1933] HCA 1
(1933) 55 CLR 182
(1993) 68 A Crim R
Blackwood and Warner (n
) vol 1, 250.
[1933] HCA 1
(1933) 55 CLR 182
189–190 cited by Gibson J in
[1959] TASStRp 25
[1959] Tas SR 209
Sentencing Advisory
Council, South Australia (‘SASAC’),
Mental Impairment and the
Law: A Report on the Operation of
Criminal Law Consolidation Act
(2014) 36. In South Australia, it has been estimated that
approximately 87% of all findings of ‘mental incompetence’
on this limb of the test and two per cent of mental impairment defences are
based on both limbs of the test, Appendix B,
It is noted that the
Institute has also identified one case where this limb and the irresistible
impulse limb were relied on and
the defence of insanity was successful.
18 July 2014
(Sentence).
Tasmania v P
CJ, 13 November 2013 (Sentence).
Tasmania v R
Pearce J, 14 March 2017 (Sentence).
[2010] WASCA 71.
See Blackwood and Warner
) vol 1, 256–261.
[1962] TASStRp 6
, 55 (Burbury CJ, Crisp and Cox JJ).
[1977] HCA 24
(1977) 51 ALJR 499
(Barwick CJ and Mason J).
Bronitt and McSherry (n
[1962] TASStRp 6
[2015] VSCA 325
Tasmania v G
Estcourt J, 4 September 2013 (Sentence).
Information provided by
Rochelle Mainwaring, Legal Aid.
Blackwood and Warner (n
) vol 1, 261.
[1993] TASSC 91.
(1991) 60 A Crim R 419
421 (Slicer J).
[1993] TASSC 91
(Crawford J).
Blackwood and Warner (n
) vol 1, 275.
Ibid citing
, unreported 7/1991.
[1982] TASRp 20
[1982] Tas R 199.
It is noted that
changes are proposed to the defence in reforms to the forensic mental health
system in NSW. These will include changing
the legal term from ‘not guilty
by reason of mental illness’ to ‘act proven but not criminally
responsible by reason
of cognitive or mental health impairment’ and the
terms ‘cognitive impairment’ and ‘mental health
impairment’
defined, see NSW Government (Justice),
Forensic Mental
Health Reforms
Supporting Victims Factsheet
<https://www.justice.nsw.gov.au/Pages/Reforms/forensic-mental-health.aspx>.
[1933] HCA 1
(1933) 55 CLR 182
Bratty v AG
(Northern Ireland)
[1963] AC 386, 412
[1973] EWCA Crim 1
(1973) QB 910
Radford v The Queen
(1985) 42 SASR, 274
–275, where
the contrast is drawn between a pathologically infirm mind and ‘the
reaction of a healthy mind to extraordinary
external stimuli’.
Willgoss v The
[1960] HCA 5
(1960) 105 CLR 295.
Sodeman v The
(1936) CLR 192;
(1985) 19 A Crim R 129.
Stapleton v The
[1952] HCA 56
(1952) 86 CLR 358
It is noted in
that this excludes from consideration whether the defendant could
reason with a moderate degree of sense and composure as set out
[1933] HCA 1
(1936) 55 CLR 182.
Note that a definition
of mental impairment was contained in the Crimes (Mental Impairment and
Unfitness to be Tried) Amendment Bill
(Vic) cl 5. This legislation
has not been passed by the Victorian Parliament.
Blackwood and Warner (n
) vol 1, 280; See also S Yeo,
‘Commonwealth and International Perspectives on the Insanity
Criminal Law Journal
; N Morris,
Madness and
the Criminal Law
(University of Chicago Press, 1982).
Simester et al (n
) 724. See Appendix 7 for a summary of recent
law reform considerations.
Law Commission of England
and Wales (n
Impairment Decision-making and the Insanity Defence
, Report 120 (2010)
This is the summary of
Morris’ argument for the abolition of the insanity defence provided by M
Hathaway, ‘The Moral
Significance of the Insanity Defence’
The Journal of Criminal Law
Law Reform Commissioner
of Tasmania,
Insanity, Intoxication and Automatism
, Report No 61 (1989)
Recommendations 1 and 2.
See Morris (n
); N Morris, ‘Psychiatry and the
Dangerous Criminal’
Southern California Law Review
See Minkowitz (n
); C Slobogin, ‘Eliminating Mental
Disability as a Legal Criterion in Deprivation of Liberty Cases: The Impact of
the Convention
on the Rights of Person With Disabilities on the Insanity
Defence, Civil Commitment, and Competency Law’
International
Journal of Law and Psychiatry
See Law Reform Commission
of Victoria,
Mental Malfunction and Criminal Responsibility
, Report 34
It is noted that, in
Tasmania, evidence of mental illness falling short of insanity can be used to
deny specific intention and actual
or imputed knowledge, see
[1994] HCA 28
(1994) 179 CLR 500
(1994) 4 Tas R 376.
This case is discussed at [
Simester et al (n
) 719–720. It is noted that some
commentators have argued that civil commitment would not be appropriate
following acquittal
as this ‘is equally discriminate under the CRPD and
relies on discriminatory perception of risk based on the existence of a
disability: Minkowitz (n
) 455 referring
to Beaupert and Steele (2014).
United National High
Commissioner for Human Rights, ‘Thematic Study on Enhancing Awareness and
Understanding of the Convention
on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities’ UN Doc A/HRC/10/48 (26 January 2009) [47]
http://www.ohchr.org/EN/Issues/Disability/Pages/ThematicStudies.aspx
See also Minkowitz (n
); Slobogin (n
Slobogin (n
Law Commission of England
and Wales (n
) 33 summarising
Morris’ argument.
Law Reform Commissioner
of Tasmania (n
Law Commission of England
and Wales, (n
Law Commission of England
and Wales (n
) 37 citing S Morse and M
Hoffman, ‘The Uneasy Entente Between Insanity and Mens Rea: Beyond
Clark v Arizona
Scholarship at Penn law
, Paper 143,
M Wondemaghen,
‘Testing Equality: Insanity, Treatment Refusal and the CRPD’ (2018)
Psychiatry, Psychology and Law
2 referring to the
Commissioner for Human Rights,
Who Gets to Decide? Right to Legal
Capacity for Persons with Intellectual and Psychosocial Disabilities’
(2102) Council for Europe, Strasbourg 7.
Wondemaghen, ibid 10.
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 18.
, 13 November
2013 (Blow J).
People with
Cognitive and Mental Health Impairments in the Criminal Justice System:
Criminal Responsibility and Consequences
, Consultation Paper 6 (2010)
Law Commission of England
and Wales (n
See discussion from [
See discussion from
In this regard, the most
significant difference was that the defence would apply if a person wholly
lacked the capacity to rationally
form a judgment about the relevant conduct.
This replaced the test that the person did not know the nature and quality of
Law Commission of England
and Wales (n
Ibid 29. This is set out
in Appendix 7.
Ibid 20. Note that the
proposal in relation to wrongfulness represented a shift in English law which
currently requires a lack of
understanding that the act was legally wrong to a
new position (as with Tasmania) that required a lack of understanding that the
act was morally wrong (one that the person sought not to do): at 59.
Ibid 54 quoting R Schopp,
Automatism, Insanity and the Psychology of Criminal Responsibility
Ibid 43–44.
Ibid 48–49.
See J Rumbold and M
Wasik, ‘Special Feature on Automatism’ (2015) 55
Science and the Law
147; R Mackay, ‘An Anatomy of Automatism’
Medicine, Science and the Law
150; L Claydon and P Catley,
‘Abolishing the Insanity Verdict in the United Kingdom: A Better Balance
Between Legal Rules and
Scientific Understanding?’ in S Moratti and D
Patterson (eds),
Legal Insanity and the Brain: Science, Law and European
(Hart Publishing, 2016) 207.
Rumbold and Wasik (n
A Duff, ‘Incapacity
and Insanity: Do We Need the Insanity Defence?’ in B Livings, A Reid and N
Mental Condition Defences and the Criminal Justice System
(Cambridge Scholars Publishing, 2015) 166. However, it was noted that the
three incapacities set out by the Law Commission may be
included as being
relevant to establish this incapacity, for example if a person had ‘some
radical impairment or deficiency
in at least one of these three
sub-capacities’.
A Ashworth,
‘Insanity and Automatism: A Discussion Paper’ [2013]
Criminal Law
NSWLRC (2013) (n
It is noted that the use
of provisional recommendations in a Discussion Paper instead of a Consultation
Paper reflected the need
to allocate resources within the project to where there
was a greater need for practical reforms identified and this was in relation
fitness to stand trial. In contrast, in response to the Scoping Paper, there was
little evidence of a practical problem in relation
to the operation of the
insanity defence’: Law Commission of England and Wales (n
) 2. The Law Commission indicated that it had
published its provisional proposals ‘to contribute to the broader public
on the reform of the criminal justice system as it relates to mentally
disordered defendants: at 3.
Walvisch illustrates how
this might work in the following example: ‘where prescribed medication
controls a small risk of an
individual becoming violent, but the side-effects of
taking the medication are so unpleasant for the individual that he or she is
starting to seriously consider committing suicide, the reasons for stopping the
medication may outweigh the reasons for continuing
to take it. Thus, in
determining whether or not an individual has breached his or her prospective
responsibilities, a judge will
need to balance his or her reasons for acting in
the relevant way against the reasons for not doing so. The individual should
be considered to have breached his or her responsibilities if, on balance,
the judge finds that he or she should not have acted in
that way’. In
addition, it would be necessary to take into account ‘practical factors
such as access to mental health
services and affordability of treatment’
as ‘an individual should not be held responsible for failing to manage his
her mental health if doing so was not reasonably practicable in the
circumstances.’
Fairall and Yeo (n
See the VLRC,
to Homicide
, Final Report (2004) [5.11]–[5.44]; NSWLRC (2013) (n
) Chapter Three; Bronitt and McSherry (n
) [4.30]; Schloenhardt (n
) [17.1.2].
Hogan’s Criminal Law
(Oxford University Press, 13
Law Commission of England
and Wales (n
See Table 7.2.
See Table 7.2.
See NSW Government
(Justice) (n
ForensiClinic, MHCT,
TasCoss, EOT, DPFEM.
Walvisch’s proposal
was that ‘the name of the defence should reflect its legal basis (rather
than any underlying medical
concepts). For example, were the test suggested in
the previous paragraph implemented, it should be called ‘Not criminally
responsible due to a lack of reasons-responsiveness’ (or something
NSWLRC (2013) (n
See Tables 7.1 and
Section 269A
Law Consolidation Act 1935
See Table 7.2.
See Appendix 7. It is
noted that ‘mental impairment’ was defined in the Crimes (Mental
Impairment and Unfitness to be
Tried) Amendment Bill 2016 (Vic) cl 5. This Bill
has not been passed by the Victorian Parliament.
See Appendix 7.
Reforms proposed in NSW
define cognitive impairment and mental health impairment: NSW Government
(Justice) (n
See Appendix 7.
See Appendix 7.
There is a slight
difference in wording in the ACT legislation, where the reaction of a healthy
mind to extraordinary stimuli is
referred to as a ‘reactive
condition’, see Table 7.1.
See NSW Government
(Justice) (n
P Fairall and S Yeo (n
) [13.66]; See also VLRC,
Defences to
, Options Paper (2003) [5.15]–[5.19]; VLRC (n
); NSWLRC (2013) (n
); Law Commission of England and Wales(n
Child and Sullivan (n
A Ashworth and J Horder,
Principles of Criminal Law
(Oxford University Press, 7
This is discussed from
Recommendation 24.
) 143, 228–229.
Law Commission of England
and Wales (n
NSWLRC (2013) (n
Ibid 54. Note the
proposed definition of mental health impairment (as set out in Table 7.2) does
not refer to personality disorders
(either to include or exclude). Cognitive
impairment is also defined as an ongoing impairment in comprehension, reason,
functioning, judgment, learning or memory that affects the functioning
of the person in daily life to a material extent, and that
is the result of any
damage to, dysfunction, developmental delay, or deterioration of the brain or
mind. Cognitive impairment may
arise from conditions such as intellectual
disability, dementia and acquired brain injury: see NSW Government (Justice) (n
NSWLRC (2013) (n
See Everymind,
Tasmanian Communications Charter: A State-Based Approach to Mental Health and
Suicide Prevention, Adapted from the National Communications
See ibid 16.
See Table 7.2.
) 64 quoting NZLC, 4.8.
) xiii, 6–7, 138.
See Law Commission of
England and Wales (n
NSWLRC (2013) (n
Angus Thompson,
‘Only a Quarter of Mentally Ill Offenders Diverted to Treatment:
Report’ 18 August 2019,
Sydney Morning Herald
<https://www.smh.com.au/national/nsw/only-a-quarter-of-mentally-ill-offenders-diverted-to-treatment-report-20190816-p52hvx.html>.
Personal Communication,
Sallie Mclean email 4 October 2019.
Scottish Law Commission
Law Commission of England
See Table 7.2. There is
no express inclusion or exclusion of personality disorders in the reforms
proposed in NSW: see NSW Government
(Justice) (n
See NSWLRC (2013) (n
Law Commission of England
and Wales (n
See Appendix 7. It is
noted that personality disorders were expressly excluded from the definition of
mental impairment in the Crimes
(Mental Impairment and Unfitness to be Tried)
Amendment Bill 2016
(Vic) cl 5. This legislation has not yet been passed
by the Victorian Parliament.
the Law Relating to Self-Defence
, Final Report No 20 (2015)
A Carroll et al,
‘Drug-induced Psychoses and Criminal Responsibility’
Behavioral Sciences and the Law
Ibid 127–128
referring to T Butler and S Allnutt,
Mental Illness Among NSW Prisoners
(NSW Corrections Health Service, 2003) 30.
NSWLRC (2013) (n
[2018] NSWCCA 210
[76] (the Court).
See VLRC (n
) 114, Recommendation 24.
Ibid 114–115.
‘Forensic Considerations of Substance-Induced Psychosis’ (2013) 41
Journal of American Academy of Psychiatry and the Law
Section 269A(1)
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
It is noted that was the
Crimes (Mental Impairment and Unfitness to be Tried) Amendment Bill 2016
(Vic) cl 5 defined mental impairment to exclude the case of a person whose
mental functioning is impaired solely as the result of
drugs or alcohol. This
legislation has not been passed by the Victorian Parliament.
) 97 Recommendation 11.
NSWLRC (2013) (
Simester et al (n
) 713. It is noted that in England, the
second limb of the insanity defence has been interpreted as referring to
wrong rather than morally wrong and this had significantly
restricted the operation of the defence, see Law Commission of England
Law Commission of England
and Wales, (n
) 12; Bronitt and McSherry (n
See Table 7.1.
NSWLRC (2013) (n
See Table 7.1.
S Allnutt, A Samuels and
C O’Driscoll, ‘The Insanity Defence: from Wild Beasts to
M’Naghten’ (2007) 15(4)
Australasian Psychiatry
See Table 7.1.
See Table 7.1.
Allnutt, Samuels and
O’Driscoll (n
Bronitt and McSherry (n
A Kenny, ‘The
Psychiatric Expert in Court’ (1984) 14
Psychological Medicine
299 quoted in Allnutt, Samuels and O’Driscoll (n
Law Commission of England
and Wales (n
Ibid 2. As discussed
below, the Law Commission has proposed a radical change to the law. However,
most reform projects have made
recommendations in relation to aspects of the law
but essentially retained the
approach. For example, in
New Zealand it was observed that the defence of insanity is ‘troubled in
principle, and has occasionally
produced off or anomalous results in practice.
Furthermore, the fact that the insanity defence is not very often relied upon is
in itself a reason for failing to formulate morally and legally sound
criteria for it’: NZLC (n
However, despite the ‘not insignificant problems’ with the insanity
defence, the NZLC did not recommend its reform:
Law Commission of England
and Wales (n
NSWLRC (2013) (n
These difficulties were
observed by the Law Commission of England and Wales,
Insanity and Automatism:
A Scoping Paper
8. The exception is where the offender has
appealed their conviction on the basis of unsuccessful reliance on insanity.
See [7.5.3].
See TLRI (n
) Part 2, in particular [2.2.14].
[1993] TASSC 91
(Crawford J).
[1994] HCA 28
(1994) 179 CLR 500.
Fairall and Yeo (n
This was the view
expressed in Blackwood and Warner (n
1, 230. It would also appear to be the approach of both Slicer J and the Court
of Criminal Appeal in
, who viewed the competing claims as being of
reliance on insanity (qualified acquittal) or reliance on s 16(3) for the
purposes of
self-defence (complete acquittal).
This is certainly the
effect of the
rules on delusions. As Sullivan observes in
relation to the third limb of
, ‘[t]he remarks that
D will be “exempt from punishment”, is intended to mean that D will
be able to rely on the
insanity defence, not because of a reliance on
self-defence’: Child and Sullivan (n
) 792. See D Baker,
Glanville Williams
Textbook of Criminal Law
(Sweet & Maxwell, 3
[27–017]; Law Commission of England and Wales,
Insanity and Automatism:
Supplementary Material to the Scoping Paper
(2012) 4.59 fn 62. See also
Western Australia v Macdonald [No 2]
[2010] WASC 355.
It was also the
approach in New Zealand before the provision dealing with delusions was removed:
see Simester and Brookbanks (n
write that ‘the McNaghten Rules and earlier New Zealand legislation
contained a provision that persons suffering “specific
delusions”,
but otherwise sane, were not to be acquitted on the grounds of insanity unless
the delusions would, if true, have
justified or excused the act’: at 328.
Although more recently, in the United Kingdom, an offender relied on an insane
to provide the basis for his genuine belief in the need for
self-defence but not for the purposes of assessing whether the amount
used was reasonable: see
[2014] 1 WLR 3354
[2013] EWCA Crim
, [36] (Davis LJ); R Mackay, ‘
: Defendant Charged with
Affray and Assault After Attacking Police — Crown Accepting Psychiatric
Evidence that Defendant Believed
Evil Spirits were Trying to Harm Him’
Criminal Law Review
544; T Storey, ‘Self-Defence: Insane
Delusions and Reasonable Force’ (2014) 78
Journal of Criminal Law
) 15 Recommendation 2.
Ibid 42 Recommendation
) [27-019].
This was the situation in
two Western Australian cases where the delusions did not provide basis for
self-defence: see
Garrett v R
[1999] WASCA 169
Western Australia v
[2010] WASC 355.
‘“Specific Delusions” in the Insanity Defence’
Criminal Law Quarterly
, 464 referring to comments
made by Glanville Williams.
This was the approach in
[2014] 1 WLR 3354.
See Child and Sullivan (n
See TLRI (n
) [4.2.1]–[4.2.19].
Model Criminal
Code — Chapter 2, General Principles of Criminal Responsibility
Report (1992) [43].
[2003] ATCSC 96.
Child and Sullivan (n
Simester at al (n
Bronitt and McSherry (n
) 213–218; Fairall and Yeo (n
) [13.30]; W Brookbanks,
‘Insanity’ in W Brookbanks and A Simpson (eds),
Psychiatry and
(LexisNexis, 2007) 142; G Williams,
Criminal Law: The General
ed, 1961) [160]; Law Reform Commission of Canada,
Criminal Law, The General Part: Liability and Defences
, Working Paper 29
(Ottawa: Minster of Supply and Services Canada, 1982) 48 cited in Bronitt and
McSherry (n
(1990) 62 CCC (3d) 193.
See also Colvin and McKechnie (n
) 17.20; J Devereux and M Blake,
Criminal Law in Queensland and Western Australia
(Lexis Nexis,
ed, 2013) [8.115]; Klinck (n
); P Fairall, ‘The Exculpatory Force of
Delusions – A Note on the Insanity Defence’ (1994) 6
57, 59; Ormerod (n
It should be noted that
the former Canadian provision, s 16(3) of the
Criminal Code
it clear that such an accused would receive an acquittal on the grounds of
insanity (not a complete acquittal). Its repeal followed
the Report of the Law
Reform Commission of Canada that stated that ‘[m]edical opinion rejects
the idea of partial insanity
and legal scholarship stresses the injustice and
illogicality of applying to the mentally abnormal a rule requiring normal
within their abnormality; a paranoiac killing his [or her] persecutor
will be acquitted only if the imagined persecution would have
justified the
killing by way of self-defence — the law requires him [or her] to be sane
in his [or her] insanity. For this
reason, it is suggested that the rule on
insane delusions be abandoned’: Law Reform Commission of Canada (n
[1933] HCA 1
, 189–190 cited by Gibson J in
[1959] TASStRp 25
[1959] Tas SR
(1990) 62 CCC (3d) 193
236 (Lamer CJC). Note that Slicer J distinguished this case in
(1991) 60 A Crim R 419
Simester et al (n
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 16(3).
This was the view of
Slicer J in
(1991) 60 A Crim R 419, 427. See Howard and Westmore (n
) [6.47–6.50].
[1993] TASSC 91
(Crawford J).
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 16(3) substantially reproduces the statement of the House of Lords
M’Naghten’s
case about the effect of insane delusions on
criminal responsibility, where the accused is not otherwise legally insane
this case ‘the defendant’s responsibility is judged by
reference to the facts as he supposed them to be and not the actual
facts’. See Baker (n
[27–017]; Law Commission of England and Wales (n
) 4.59 fn 62. Although note
[2014] 1 WLR 3354
where the accused was able to rely on insanity and
self-defence in tandem: see discussion in Child and Sullivan (n
); Mackay (n
Ibid. However, the LRCWA
relied on the first instance judgment of Slicer J in
(1991) 60 A
as justification for a continued need for the provision and did not
refer to the subsequent Court of Criminal Appeal judgment.
See discussion at [
Law Commission of England
and Wales (n
Bronitt and McSherry
Ibid 251–252.
Similar comments were made by the Law Commission of England and Wales (n
Law Commission of England
and Wales (n
Criminal Code
(Cth) s 7.3(4) (prosecution may raise if the court gives leave);
(ACT) s 28(6) (prosecution may raise if the court gives leave);
Criminal Code
(NT) s 43F(1) (may be raised by court, on application by
prosecution, or on own initiative);
Crimes (Mental Impairment and Unfitness
to be Tried) Act 1997
(Vic) s 22(1) (prosecution may raise if the court
gives leave), s 22(2) (if admissible evidence raises the issue, judge must
the jury to consider);
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
(may be raised by prosecution, or by court on own initiative
‘in the interests of the proper administration of justice’).
See above n
NSWLRC (2013) (n
) 75 and Recommendation 3.3.
‘Appearing for the Mentally Impaired: Not Guilty Mental Illness Conference
to In-house Solicitors Legal Aid NSW’
http://www.publicdefenders.nsw.gov.au/Pages/public_defenders_research/Papers%20by%20Public%20Defenders/public_defenders_papers_pd.aspx
NSWLRC (2013) (n
R v Falconer
(1990) 171 CLR 30, 62.
NSWLRC (2013) (n
NSWLRC (2013) (n
) 74; NZLC (n
NSWLRC (2013) (n
In support Walvisch
referred to
Faretta v California
[1975] USSC 147
, 834 (1975).
Referring to
(1977) 16 OR (2d) 129;
(1980) 33 OR (2d) 78;
[1991] 1 SCR 933
, [219]–[222] (L’Heureux-Dubé
]–[7.3.27].
NSWLRC (2013) (n
Criminal Code
(Cth) s 7.3(3);
Criminal Code
(ACT) s 28(5)–(6);
(NT) s 43D(2);
Crimes (Mental Impairment and Unfitness to be Tried)
(Vic) s 21(3).
NSWLRC (2013) (n
) Recommendation 3.4.
Scottish Law Commission
) 64–65; Law Commission of
England and Wales (n
Crimes Act 1900
s 321(2)(b)
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
Crimes (Mental Impairment and Unfitness to be Tried)
(Vic) s 21(4);
Criminal Procedure Act 2004
Criminal Procedure (Mentally Impaired Persons) Act 2003
(NZ) s 20(2).
) 235 quoting Model Criminal Code Officers
General Principles of Criminal Responsibility
Report (2007) 47.
) 229 referred to in VLRC (n
Law Commission of England
and Wales (n
) 76; LRCWA (n
) 235 quoting Model Criminal Code Officers
General Principles of Criminal Responsibility
, Final Report
) 235 quoting Model Criminal Code Officers
General Principles of Criminal Responsibility
, Final Report
(2007) 47; Law Commission of England and Wales (n
Ibid 234 Recommendation
For more information in
relation to the role of the Director of Public Prosecutions see
http://www.dpp.tas.gov.au/about_us
ForensiClinc, DPP and
See NSWLRC (2013) (n
Acts Interpretation
Criminal Code Act
(Tas) s 4(3).
Blackwood and Warner (n
Criminal Code Act
(Tas) s 4(3);
Gow v Davies
[1992] TASSC 8
[1992] 1 Tas R 1.
Intoxication
and Criminal Responsibility
Criminal Justice
(Mental Impairment) Act 1999
Sentencing Act 1997
Criminal Justice
(Mental Impairment) Act 1999
Sentencing Act 1997
Criminal Justice
(Mental Impairment) Act 1999
For more information
http://www.dhhs.tas.gov.au/service_information/services_files/mental_health_services/forensic_mental_health_service/wilfred_lopes_centre
Criminal Justice
(Mental Impairment) Act 1999
Sentencing Act 1997
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
Criminal Justice
(Mental Impairment) Act 1999
Mental Health Act
medical practitioner may also apply to the MHT to vary the order or authorise or
seek authorisation for urgent circumstances
Mental Health Act
It is noted that in two
of the three conditional release orders imposed in the Supreme Court, the limits
were 12 months and three
years. However, in one case, it appears that an order
was imposed where some conditions were indefinite. The person was released
condition that: (1) For a period of two years he attend such educational and
other programs as directed by the Chief Forensic
Psychiatrist or officer acting
on his behalf; (2) He submit to testing for drug use as directed by the Chief
Forensic Psychiatrist
or his nominee; (3) He submit to medical, psychological or
psychiatrist assessment or treatment as directed by the Chief Forensic
Psychiatrist or his nominee, see
, 22 July 2008 (Slicer J).
Criminal Justice
(Mental Impairment) Act 1999
Secretary of the
Department of Health and Human Services v Horacek
[2009] TASSC 65
These enforcement
provisions were introduced in 2016 by the
Crimes (Miscellaneous Amendments)
(Tas) to address an oversight in the
Criminal Justice (Mental
Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas). In the second reading speech, it was noted that
‘forensic orders are often not appropriate options for defendants who
an intellectual disability. In such cases, release of conditions may be
appropriate orders for the court to consider but the
absence of a mechanism to
enforce the conditions imposed is problematic and means judicial officers rarely
use the section’:
Parliamentary Debates
Assembly, 24 May 2016, 3.20 pm (M Ferguson).
Criminal Justice
(Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(1) do not appear in
, it appears that the courts rely on this
provision in making a determination of the appropriate order.
(1) do not appear in
, it appears that the courts rely on this
provision in making a determination of the appropriate order.
order is made under the
Sentencing Act 1997
(Tas), the court is not able
to impose a restriction order unless it would have imposed a sentence of
imprisonment,
It is noted these factors
have been identified as being relevant to the making of a forensic order in NSW
for offenders found not
guilty by reason of mental illness, see NSWLRC (2013) (n
) 159. See also I Freckelton,
‘Applications for Release by Australians in Victoria Found Not Guilty of
Offences of Violence
by Reason of Mental Impairment’
International Journal of Law and Psychiatry
Criminal Justice
(Mental Impairment) Act 1999
Criminal Justice
(Mental Impairment) Act 1999
s 37(3)(b).
It is noted that the MHT
data identified one further person who has been subject to several supervision
orders with the latest order
suspended during a period of imprisonment.
Information provided by
Sarah Piggott, Legal Aid Commission of Tasmania, email 3 July 2018.
Criminal Justice
(Mental Impairment) Act 1999
Ibid 30(3).
Mental Health Tribunal
(Tasmania),
Annual Report 2015–16
Mental Health Tribunal
(Tasmania),
Annual Report 2017–18
Criminal Justice
(Mental Impairment) Act 1999
[2012] VSCA 198
[2008] TASSC 85.
Ibid [25] (Tennent
[2009] TASSC 65.
Ibid [75] (Tennent
[2008] TASSC 85.
Ibid [74], [75].
Ibid [75] (Tennent J)
[1998] VSC 90
(1998) 104 A Crim R 29.
Ibid [76] (Tennent J)
Boughey v R
(1986) 161 CLR 10
Tillmanns Butcheries Pty Ltd v
Australian Meat Industries Employees’ Union
(1979) 42 FLR 331.
Ibid [77] (Tennent J)
Attorney-General (NSW) v Winters
[2007] NSWSC 1071
(2007) 176 A Crim R 249.
Ibid [78] (Tennent
In this case, the
identified restriction on the defendant’s freedom and personal autonomy
created by the supervision order
as distinct from the community treatment order
arose for the way in which the order could be revoked or varied: ibid (Tennent
[2008] TASSC 85.
[2009] TASSC 65.
[2012] VSCA 198
(2012) 38 VR 618.
Ibid [57]–[59].
[2008] TASSC 85.
Mental Health Act
Ibid sch 1.
There were also two
leave of absence applications that involved varying the leave of absence and one
case involving the extension
of a leave of absence, Mental Health Tribunal (n
Melbourne Social Equity
Institute (n
) 18. Smith writes that
‘it is arguable that changing the decision maker from the Cabinet to the
Courts has resulted in few
if any improvements to a rehabilitated
defendant’s prospects of release’: Smith (n
Crimes (Mental
Impairment and Unfitness to be Tried) Act 1997
(Vic) s 35(3);
(NT) s 43ZG(6). See discussion in VLRC (n
) 363. It is noted that changes were proposed
to the review provisions in Victoria in the Crimes (Mental Impairment and
to be Tried) Amendment Bill 2016 (Vic) including the introduction of
initial progress reviews, further progress reviews and major
progress reviews.
This legislation has not been passed by the Victorian Parliament.
See Appendix 3 for more
See Appendix 3 Table A3.3
for details of the provisions in each jurisdiction.
) 180–181 Recommendation 7.2.
) Recommendation 15.
) Recommendation 7-2.
Senate Community Affairs
Reference Committee,
Indefinite Detention of People with Cognitive Impairment
in Australia
Report (2016) 70–71.
) 244–245 Recommendation 36.
) 360, 361 Recommendation 83.
) 198; SASAC (n
) 145; NSWLRC (2013) (n
) 167; VLRC (n
NSWLRC (2013) (n
Ibid 167; ALRC (n
) 198; SASAC (n
) 145; VLRC (n
Office of Public
Prosecutions, Victoria,
Submission to Review of the Crimes (Mental Impairment
and Unfitness to be Tried) Act 1997 Consultation Paper
) 24. See also Office of the
Anti-Discrimination Commissioner,
Submission of the Anti-Discrimination
Commissioner, Tasmania, to the Australian Law Reform Commission’s Inquiry
into Equality,
Capacity and Disability in Commonwealth Laws
The findings from this
research are set out in Appendix 8.
NSWLRC (2013) (n
J Hunyor, ‘A
Kangaroo Loose in the Top Paddock: Criminal Justice. Mental Impairment and
Fitness for Trial in the Northern Territory’
(Uluru Criminal Law
Conference, 2012) 20.
Melbourne Social Equity
Institute (n
Gooding et al (n
Arstein-Kerslake et al (n
Minkowitz (n
Ibid. See also Gooding
and O’Mahoney (n
NSWLRC (2013) (n
NSWLRC (2013) (n
Ibid 179. This is
discussed further at [
NSWLRC (2013) (n
Ibid 360. See
Recommendation 83.
T Boyd-Caine and D
Chappell, ‘The Forensic Patient Population in New South Wales’
Current Issues in Criminal Justice
NSWLRC (2013) (n
Boyd-Caine and Chappell
NSWLRC (2013) (n
Office of the
Anti-Discrimination Commissioner
) 44; Smith (n
) 344. See also J Ruffles,
The Management
of Forensic Patients in Victoria: The More Things Change, the More They Remain
(PhD thesis, unpublished Monash University 2010) 175–178.
I Freckelton, ‘The
Preventative Detention of Insanity Acquitees: A Case Study in Victoria’ in
B McSherry and P Keyzer
Dangerous People: Policy, Prediction and
(Routledge, 2011) 83, 94. See also B McSherry, ‘Legal Issues:
Criminal Detention of Those with Mental Impairment’
Law and Medicine
Freckelton (n
, where Evans
J referred to four cases where an application to revoke a supervision order was
refused. Only one of these cases was
publicly available as it involved an
unsuccessful appeal against the refusal of the judge to revoke the supervision
See TLRI (n
See NSWLRC (2013) (n
See ibid 174.
See ibid 175.
See ibid 176.
See ibid 172–178,
A Freiberg, ‘The
Disposition of Mentally Disordered Offenders in Australia: “Out of Mind,
Out of Sight” Revisited’
Psychiatry, Psychology and the
For example, in New
Zealand, the limiting term is 10 years from the date of making the order if the
offence is punishable by life
imprisonment, or otherwise half the maximum term
of imprisonment for the offence,
Criminal Procedure (Mentally Impaired
Person) Act 2003
(NZ) ss 30(1)–(2) (unfit only as people found not
guilty by reason of insanity are subject to an indefinite order: s 33). In
Victoria, legislation sets the nominal term for offences based on the maximum
term for the offence: see Appendix 3.
NSWLRC (2013) (n
NSWLRC (2013) (n
] for a discussion of the test for
making, varying or revoking an order.
In New South Wales, the
NSWLRC reported that 10 out of 54 (19 per cent) forensic patients have been
detained beyond their limiting
term as an involuntary patient under the
Mental Health Act 2007
(NSW): NSWLRC (2013) (n
Ibid 318–319.
Mental Health
(Forensic Provisions) Act 1990
(NSW) amended by
Mental Health (Forensic
Provisions) Amendment Act 2013
(NSW) s 54A, sch 1;
Criminal Law
Consolidation Act 1935
inserted by
Criminal Law
Consolidation (Mental Impairment Act) 2017
Criminal Law
Consolidation Act 1935
inserted by
Criminal Law
Consolidation (Mental Impairment Act) 2017
For a discussion of a
treatment order, see Mental Health Tribunal,
The Mental Health Tribunal:
Orders, Hearing and Reviews: Information for Patients, their Carers and Support
Mental Health Act 2013
See discussion in
in relation to the meaning of mental illness.
For detailed discussion
of the nature of guardianship, see Guardianship and Administration Board,
Private Guardian’s Handbook: Information for Guardians Appointed by the
Guardianship and Administration Board
Ibid 23, 25.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
NSWLRC (2013) (n
) 317. It is noted that the TLRI has
recommended a shift to representative decision-making rather than acting in the
‘best interests’
of a person: see TLRI (n
NSWLRC (2013) (n
) [7] cited in Gooding et al (n
See Sentencing Advisory
Council, Tasmania (‘TSAC’),
Sex Offence Sentencing
Report No 4 (2015) 107; TLRI (n
) 1–2 citing
Veen v The Queen
[1979] HCA 7
(1979) 143 CLR 458
, 463–465 (Stephen J);
Fardon v Attorney-General
[2004] HCA 46
(2004) 223 CLR 575
, 623 [124]–[125] (Kirby J);
McGarry v The
[2001] HCA 62
(2001) 207 CLR 121
, 141–142 [61] (Kirby J);
[1996] HCA 24
, 122–123 (McHugh J);
Buckley v The Queen
[2006] HCA 7
(2006) 80 ALJR
, [7], [21], [43];
[1996] VicRp 43
(1996) 1 VR 585
Director of
Public Prosecutions (WA) v Mangolamara
(2007) 169 Crim R 379, [165] (Hasluck
Director of Public Prosecutions (WA) v GTR
[2007] WASC 318
(McKechnie J);
Director of Public Prosecutions (WA) v Comeagain
, [20] (McKechnie J);
DPP v McIntosh
[2013] TASSC 21
, [50] (Wood
J); Bernadette McSherry, ‘Throwing Away the Key: The Ethics of Risk
Assessment for Preventative Detention Schemes’
(2014) 21(5)
Psychiatry,
Psychology and Law
779; David Ruschena, ‘Determining Dangerousness:
Whatever Happened to the Rules of Evidence?’
(2003) 10(1)
Psychiatry,
Psychology and Law
; Jessica Black, ‘Is the Preventative Detention
of Dangerous Offenders Justifiable?’ (2011) 6(3)
Journal of Applied
Security Research
317; Russ Scott, ‘Risk Assessment and Sentencing of
Serious Sex Offenders’ (2008) 15(2)
Psychiatry, Psychology and Law
188; Stephen J Morse, ‘Preventative Confinement of Dangerous
Journal of Law, Medicine and Ethics
Dimock, ‘Criminalizing Dangerousness: How to Preventatively Detain
Dangerous Offenders’ (2015) 9
Criminal Law and Philosophy
Warner, ‘Sentencing Review 2002–2003’
Law Journal
; Charles Ewing, ‘Preventative Detention and Execution:
The Constitutionality of Punishing Future Crimes’ (1991) 15
Human Behavior
139; Tamara Tulich, ‘Post-Sentence Preventive Detention
and Extended Supervision of High Risk Offenders in New South Wales’
[2015] UNSWLawJl 29
University of New South Wales Law Journal
; Geraldine Mackenzie
and Nigel Stobbs,
Principles of Sentencing
(Federation Press, 2010)
NSWLRC (2013) (n
) 320–321, 332.
This information set out
in ibid 323–333.
For example, the
Disability Act 2006
NSWLRC (2013) (n
Mental Health (Forensic
Provisions) Act 1990
(NSW) sch 1 div 2 cl 7.
) 375; NSWLRC ibid 157–158.
McSherry (n
It is noted that the
Crimes (Mental Impairment and Unfitness to be Tried) Amendment Bill 2016
(Vic) changed the test from one of dangerousness to one of risk (whether the
person poses an unacceptable risk of serious harm). This
legislation has not
been passed by the Victorian Parliament.
It is noted that the
Crimes (Mental Impairment and Unfitness to be Tried) Amendment Bill 2016
(Vic) changed the test from one of dangerousness to one of risk (whether the
person is likely to pose a risk of serious harm). This
legislation has not been
passed by the Victorian Parliament.
It is noted that South
Australia adopted a serious endangerment test to strengthen the test for
release, see
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
s 269T(2)(ba)
stipulates that the court cannot release a defendant or significantly reduce the
degree of supervision unless satisfied on
the balance of probabilities, that the
safety of the person or any member of the public will not be seriously
endangered by the person’s
NSWLRC (2013) (n
) 208 citing
[2012] VSCA 198
[2014] NSWCA 466.
Ibid [169] (Basten
Ibid [168] (Basten JA).
NSWLRC (2013) (n
[2012] VSCA 198
NSWLRC (2013) (n
NSWLRC (2013) (n
Ibid 214 referring to
Howard and Westmore (n
NSWLRC (2013) (n
Ibid 216. It is noted
that the operation of the release provisions in New South Wales was the subject
of a review: see NSW Government
Mental Health Review Tribunal: A
Review in Respect of Forensic Patients
NSWLRC (2013) (n
Mental Health Act 2013
NSWLRC (2013) (n
See VLRC (n
) Recommendation 91.
Crimes Act 1914
Mental Health Act 2016
Crimes (Mental
Impairment and Unfitness to be Tried) Act 1997
(Vic) s 32(2).
Ibid s 35(3)(i).
Criminal Justice
(Mental Impairment) Act 1999
Criminal Law (Mentally Impaired
Accused) Act 1996
NSWLRC (2013) (n
See Appendix 3.
It is noted that a
certificate issued by the MHT is not a pre-requisite for the discharge of the
order and an offender may apply
Criminal Justice (Mental
Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas), see [
Mental Health Act
) 80. It was noted that this is also the
position in Canada.
See VLRC (n
Tasmania v G and T
[2014] TASSC 71
, 6–7 (Pearce J).
Crimes (Mental
Impairment and Unfitness to be Tried) Act 1997
(Vic) s 75(1).
Ibid Recommendation
[2009] TASSC 65.
Tyenna Blue is an
approved hospital under the MHA and is a ‘six bed, high dependency unit
which provides 24 hour care to individuals
with a serious mental illness who
require treatment in a secure environment’: Department of Health and Human
Your Statewide and Mental Health Services Placement
http://www.dhhs.tas.gov.au/career/home/careers_archive/education/rntp/practice_settings/rntp_mental_health_nurses
Secretary of the
Department of Health and Human Service v Horacek
[2009] TASSC 65
T Boyd-Caine and D
Chappell (n
) 350; VLRC, above n
See NSW Government
(Justice) (n
Mental Health
(Forensic Provisions) Act 1990
inserted by the
Health (Forensic Provisions) Amendment (Victims) Act 2018
(NSW) (yet to
NSW Government (Justice)
NSW Government (Health)
) 13 (Recommendation 20).
Ibid 13 (Recommendation
Ibid xxxv, 430
Recommendation 100.
Office of the
Anti-Discrimination Commissioner (n
See Royal Australian and
New Zealand College of Psychiatrists,
Electronic Monitoring of People
Utilising Forensic Mental Health Services: Position Statement 95
In contrast, under the
Sentencing Act 1997
the court may conditionally release an
offender on the offender giving an undertaking with conditions attached for a
period not exceeding
See Appendix 3 Table
Mental Health
(Forensic Provisions) Act 1990
Crimes (Sentencing
Procedure) Act 1999
Crimes Act 1914
Criminal Law (Mentally Impaired Accused) Act 1996
Sentencing Act 1995
(conditional release order), 62(5)
(community-based order) and 69(6) (intensive supervision order). It is noted
that the LRCWA has
recommended the removal of these sentencing options and their
replacement with a supervised release order with the conditions set
Mentally Impaired Accused Review Board (MIARB): see LRCWA (n
) 243 Recommendation 35.
Criminal Law
Consolidation Act 1935
(SA) div 3A.
Mental Health Act
Sentencing Act 1997
Office of the
Anti-Discrimination Commissioner (n
Ibid 46 citing Tasmanian
Forensic Mental Health Tribunal,
Annual Report 2011–2012
Ibid citing Tasmanian
Forensic Mental Health Tribunal,
Annual Report 2011–2012
Ibid 46–47.
Parliamentary Debates
, House of Assembly, 24 May 2016 [3.20 pm], (M
Butler Report (n
Ibid 439 Recommendations
NSWLRC (2013) (n
Ibid 9, 10 Recommendation
Ibid 12 Recommendation
Law Commission of England
Unfitness to Plead – Volume 2: Draft Legislation
Com No 364, 2016) 16–17.
NSWLRC (2013) (n
) 31–32 Recommendation 2.1.
) 79 Recommendation 15.
) Recommendation 7-1.
Crimes Act 1914
Mental Health
(Forensic Procedure) Act 1990
Criminal Law
Consolidation Act 1935
Crimes (Mental
Impairment and Unfitness to be Tried) Act 1997
(Vic) ss 18(4), 23.
Ibid s 26(2).
Criminal Law
(Mentally Impaired Accused) Act 1996
Schedule 1 includes murder, manslaughter, sexual penetration without consent and
sexual coercion, assault occasioning bodily harm,
indecent assault, stealing a
motor vehicle in circumstances of aggravation and criminal damage.
Criminal Code
(Qld) ss 613, 647.
Mental Health Act
Criminal Code
(Qld) s 647(2).
Mental Health Act
Crimes Act 1900
Criminal Code Act
(NT) ss 43I, 43X.
Crimes Act 1914
Note that for acquittal because of mental illness, the
court must order detention in safe custody in prison or in a hospital, subject
to discretion to release the person:
Crimes Act 1914
NSWLRC (2013) (n
) 159 referring to
R v Shan Shan Xu (no 2)
[2005] NSWSC 70
Criminal Law
Consolidation Act 1935
Crimes (Mental
Impairment and Unfitness to be Tried) Act 1997
(Vic) s 39(1).
Ibid s 40(1).
Ibid s 40(2). There
were changes proposed to the test in the Crimes (Mental Impairment and Unfitness
to be Tried) Amendment Bill
(Vic). This legislation has not been
passed by the Victorian Parliament.
Criminal Law
(Mentally Impaired Accused) Act 1996
Mental Health Act
Crimes Act 1900
Criminal Code Act
(NT) s 43ZM.
Crimes Act 1914
Section 20BJ
has been interpreted to mean that
‘the length of the period of detention should be fixed by reference to the
sentence which
would have been imposed if the person had been found
R v Goodfellow
(1994) 33 NSWLR 308
R v Robison
[2004] VSC 505
(2004) 11 VR 165.
Mental Health
(Forensic Procedure) Act 1990
(NSW) s 23(1)(b).
NSWLRC (2013) (n
Crimes (Mental
Impairment and Unfitness to be Tried) Act 1997
(Vic) s 27.
Ibid s 35. Changes
to the review system were set out in the Crimes (Mental Impairment and Unfitness
to be Tried) Amendment Bill 2016
(Vic). This legislation has not been
passed by the Victorian Parliament.
Criminal Law
Consolidation Act 1935
Criminal Law
(Mentally Impaired Accused) Act 1996
Mental Health Act
Prescribed offences are murder, manslaughter, grievous
bodily harm and rape.
Section 457
applies in relation to a person with a dual
disability.
Crimes Act 1900
Criminal Code Act
(NT) s 43ZC.
Ibid ss 43ZG(2),
Crimes Act 1914
Mental Health
(Forensic Procedure) Act 1990
(NSW) s 43.
Crimes (Mental
Impairment and Unfitness to be Tried) Act 1997
(Vic) ss 32(2), 35(3),
Ibid s 35(3)(b). It
is noted that the Crimes (Mental Impairment and Unfitness to be Tried) Amendment
(Vic) changed the test from one of dangerousness to one of risk
(whether the person poses an unacceptable risk of serious harm). This
legislation has not been passed by the Victorian Parliament.
Criminal Law
(Mentally Impaired Accused) Act 1996
Mental Health Act
Mental Health Act
Criminal Code Act
(NT) s 43ZG(6).
Ibid s 43ZH.
See also the test
set out in the Crimes (Mental Impairment and Unfitness to be Tried) Amendment
(Vic). This legislation has not been passed by the Victorian
Parliament.
The provision to
dispense with special hearings was inserted by the
Criminal Code Amendment
(Mental Impairment and Unfitness to be Tried) Act 2017
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (2.76 MB)
PDF format (3.14 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter