URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/lawreform/VLRC/2019/39.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:51:27
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Neighbourhood Tree Disputes [2019] VLRC 39
A COMMUNITY LAW REFORM PROJECT
A COMMUNITY LAW REFORM PROJECT
Terms of reference
Executive summary: neighbourhood tree disputes
The law provides limited remedies
A new Neighbourhood Tree Disputes Act
Key features of the new Act
The scope of the Act
Future review
Recommendations
1. Introduction to neighbourhood tree disputes
Introduction
Origins of the project
The Commission’s process
Submissions
Consultations
Interstate reviews and tree dispute Acts
Structure of the report
2. The scope of the neighbourhood tree dispute problem
Introduction
Prevalence of tree disputes
Tree disputes in the courts
Volume of tree enquiries received by the Dispute Settlement Centre of Victoria
Community responses about the frequency of tree disputes
Damage to property and dropping of leaf litter
Harm to people
Bushfire risk
Economic loss
Objecting to tree works conducted by the tree owner
Tree works undertaken without consent or that harm the tree
Tree disputes in rural settings
Other types of tree disputes
Impact of tree disputes on neighbours
Breakdown of neighbour relations
Significant costs
Emotional toll of tree disputes
Greater impact on vulnerable people
Factors contributing to tree disputes
Breakdown in communication
Lack of knowledge about trees
Problems obtaining expert assistance
Different expectations about living near trees
The Commission’s conclusion
26 Introduction
3. Current tree dispute law in Victoria
Introduction
Insurance claims
Abatement/’self-help’
Neighbour-led resolution
Alternative dispute resolution
The role of the Dispute Settlement Centre of Victoria
Court-referred alternative dispute resolution
Court proceedings
Other laws affecting tree management
Community responses—the current law
Lack of clarity
Other laws add complexity
Existing remedies are limited in value
Litigation is difficult and costly
Low awareness and lack of information
The balance of competing rights
The Commission’s conclusion
4. The need for a new Act to resolve neighbourhood tree disputes
Approaches to tree disputes in other jurisdictions
Tree dispute Acts in other states
Community responses—options for reform
Option 1: Retain the existing system
Option 2: Introduce a new tree disputes Act
Option 3: Alternative options
The Commission’s conclusions—options for reform
The limitations of only focusing on informal resolution
The limitations of going to court
A new Tree Disputes Act is needed
Other reform ideas
Policy themes that should underpin the new Act
Provide a clear dispute resolution pathway
Resolve disputes efficiently and inexpensively
Establish clear decision-making principles
Provide practical and effective remedies
Balance competing rights and interests
Use expert decision makers and expert evidence
Interact simply with other laws
Notify purchasers and new owners of land about existing disputes or Orders
Provide accessible laws, information and support
Resolve disputes with professional assistance
Trees, land and proximity
Definition of ‘tree’
The Commission’s conclusions—definition of ‘tree’
To which land should the Act apply?
The Commission’s conclusions—to which land should the Act apply?
Proximity to affected neighbour’s land
The Commission’s conclusions—proximity to affected neighbour’s land
Trees on boundaries
The Commission’s conclusions—trees on boundaries
Parties to a tree dispute
Who can commence an action?
The Commission’s conclusions—who can commence an action
Who can be found liable?
The Commission’s conclusions—who can be found liable?
What problems are within the scope of the new Act?
Other jurisdictions—problems within scope
Community responses—problems within scope
The Commission’s conclusions—problems within scope—damage and harm
Who should be notified of an action?
Other jurisdictions—who should be notified?
Community responses—who should be notified?
The Commission’s conclusions—who should be notified?
Application requirements
Other jurisdictions—application requirements
The Commission’s conclusions—application requirements
Other jurisdictions—resolving disputes informally
Neighbour-led negotiation and community-based mediation
A formal requirement in the interstate Acts for ‘reasonable attempts to reach agreement’
Branch removal notices in the interstate Acts
General notice process in the Tasmanian Act
Community responses—resolving disputes informally
Community responses—Community-based alternative dispute resolution
Community responses—Abatement
Community responses—a formal requirement in the new Act for ‘reasonable attempts to reach agreement’
Community responses—Tree owner responsibilities
Community responses—Branch removal notices
The Commission’s conclusions—resolving disputes informally
Encouraging informal resolution in the new Act
Community resources
Community-based alternative dispute resolution
Modification of abatement
Not recommended: a formal requirement in the Act for ‘reasonable attempts to reach agreement’
Not recommended: tree owner responsibilities in the Act
For future consideration: branch removal notices
In which forum should disputes be resolved?
Magistrates’ Court of Victoria
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal (VCAT)
The approach in other jurisdictions
New South Wales
International jurisdictions
Community responses—important characteristics of a tree dispute forum
The Commission’s conclusions—where should tree disputes be resolved?
VCAT to determine tree disputes under the new Act
Alternative options
The nature of jurisdiction given to VCAT
Diversity jurisdiction
The expertise of decision makers
8. VCAT decision-making principles and expert evidence in neighbourhood tree disputes
Introduction
Decision-making principles
Decision-making guidelines in planning schemes
Decision-making principles in other jurisdictions
New South Wales
Community responses—decision-making principles
Protecting the community from harm or damage
‘First in time’ principle
Past actions of the parties
The Commission’s conclusions—decision-making principles
One list of decision-making principles
Principles should be mandatory
Principles should be non-exhaustive
Other Acts and laws
The benefits of trees
Location and health of the tree and impact of works
Past actions of parties
‘First in time’ principle
Recognised weed
Not recommended: Tree removal as a last resort
Expert evidence—planning schemes
Expert evidence—local laws
Expert evidence—VCAT
Other jurisdictions—expert evidence
Community responses—expert evidence
Qualifications of arborists
Duty to the Court
The quality of expert reports
The Commission’s conclusions—expert evidence
Evidence-based decision making
Expert’s duty to VCAT
Concurrent evidence
New South Wales
Community responses—orders available
The Commission’s conclusions—orders available
Access to a neighbour’s land
Ongoing maintenance orders
Australian Standards and arborist qualifications
Not recommended: Tree removal as a last resort
Legal costs
Notification of orders
Appealing VCAT orders
Other jurisdictions—appeals
New South Wales
Community responses—appeals
The Commission’s conclusions—appeals
Varying or revoking an order
Recommendations
Enforcement of orders
Enforcement in VCAT
Other jurisdictions—enforcement of orders
New South Wales
Community responses—enforcement of orders
The Commission’s conclusions—enforcement of orders
Penalties for failure to comply
Councils should not enforce VCAT orders
Empowering the applicant to give effect to a VCAT order
The Planning and Environment Act
Permit process
Restrictions on tree works in planning provisions
Section 173 agreements
Local tree protection laws made under the Local Government Act
The Heritage Act
The Aboriginal Heritage Act
The Fences Act
Other Victorian Acts
Country Fire Authority Act
Metropolitan Fire Brigades Act
Electrical Safety Act
Transport legislation and road reserves
Public Health and Wellbeing Act
Victorian Conservation Trust Act
Conservation, Forests and Lands Act
Commonwealth law: the Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act
Community responses—interaction of laws
Interaction of laws
Bushfire protections
Other jurisdictions—interaction of laws
New South Wales
The Commission’s conclusions—interaction of laws
The Planning and Environment Act
The Commission’s conclusions—a new exemption to the VPPs to cover tree disputes
Recommendations
The Commission’s conclusions—further consideration of trees planted or maintained as a condition of existing planning
The Commission’s conclusions—further consideration of Section 173 agreements
The Commission’s conclusions—local tree protection laws
The Commission’s conclusions—the Heritage Act
The Commission’s conclusions—the Aboriginal Heritage Act
The Commission’s conclusions—the Fences Act
The Commission’s conclusions—noxious weeds
The Commission’s conclusions—the Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act
The Commission’s conclusions—further consultation required on some other Acts
Affected neighbour must inform new tree owners
How are purchasers informed?
Tree owner must inform new tree owners
Both the tree owner and affected neighbour must inform purchasers
Joinder of parties
Notice to local councils
Failure to provide notice
Community responses—new owners of land
New affected neighbours
New tree owners
Informing potential purchasers
Joining new parties to proceedings
A searchable database
The Commission’s conclusions—new owners of land
Providing certainty
When should new owners be bound?
What should be disclosed?
How should notice be provided?
If purchasers are not informed
Joining new parties to proceedings
Not recommended: a searchable database of orders
Current resources
Responsible tree planting
Talking with your neighbour
Engaging an arborist
Alternative dispute resolution
Court/Tribunal resources
New South Wales
Community responses—community resources
The Commission’s conclusions—community resources
A new tree disputes website
Information provided by VCAT
Local council resources
Further community education
Online dispute resolution
Community responses—online dispute resolution
The Commission’s conclusions—online dispute resolution
Other options for law reform
Improving local laws and a greater role for councils
Greater recognition of the benefits of trees
Issues beyond the scope of this inquiry
Trees on public land
Access to sunlight and views
Illegal removal of vegetation
Review of the new Act
Supplementary consultation
Neighbourhood Tree Disputes
A COMMUNITY LAW REFORM PROJECT
Published by the Victorian Law Reform Commission
The Victorian Law Reform Commission was established under the
Law Reform Commission Act 2000
(Vic) as a central agency for developing law
reform in Victoria.
© Victorian Law Reform Commission 2019.
This publication of the Victorian Law Reform Commission follows the Melbourne
University Law Review Association Australian Guide to
Legal Citation (3rd ed,
This report reflects the law at 6 June 2019. Title: Neighbourhood Tree
Report / Victorian Law Reform Commission
ISBN: 978-0-9943725-1-2
Series: Report (Victorian Law Reform Commission) 39
acting chair
Bruce Gardner PSM (commenced February 2019)
The Hon. Philip Cummins AM (until February 2019)
commissioners
Liana Buchanan*
Dr Ian Hardingham QC* Professor Bernadette McSherry* Dan Nicholson
Alison O’Brien PSM* Gemma Varley PSM*
The Hon. Frank Vincent AO QC
Commissioners working on this project
chief executive officer
Merrin Mason
Lindy Smith (Acting CEO)
reference team
Emma Cashen (team leader)
Natalie Lilford (community law reform manager) Hana Shahkhan
cover design
text layout
Neighbourhood Tree Disputes
A COMMUNITY LAW REFORM PROJECT
Victorian Law Reform Commission GPO Box 4637
Melbourne Victoria 3001 Australia
DX 144, Melbourne
333 Queen Street Melbourne Victoria 3000 Australia
+61 3 8608 7800
1300 666 555
(within Victoria)
+61 3 8608 7888
law.reform@lawreform.vic.gov.au
www.lawreform.vic.gov.au
Applying the new Act to neighbourhood tree
disputes 66
Introduction 66
Trees, land and proximity 66
Definition of ‘tree’ 66
The Commission’s
conclusions—definition of ‘tree’ 70
To which land should the Act apply? 71
The Commission’s conclusions—to
which land should the Act apply? 76
Proximity to affected neighbour’s land
The Commission’s
conclusions—proximity to affected neighbour’s land 83
Trees on boundaries 85
The Commission’s conclusions—trees
on boundaries 88
Parties to a tree dispute 90
Who can commence an action? 90
The Commission’s conclusions—who
can commence an action 91
Who can be found liable? 91
The Commission’s conclusions—who
can be found liable 94
What problems are within the scope of the new
Other jurisdictions—problems within scope
Community responses—problems within scope
The Commission’s
conclusions—problems within scope – damage and harm 100
Who should be notified of an action?
Other jurisdictions—who should be
notified? 103
Community responses—who should be
notified? 104
The Commission’s conclusions—who
should be notified? 104
Application requirements 105
Other jurisdictions—application requirements
The Commission’s
conclusions—application requirements 108
Informal resolution of neighbourhood tree
disputes 112
Introduction 112
ther jurisdictions—resolving disputes
informally 112
Neighbour-led negotiation and community-based
mediation 112
Abatement 113
Informal resolution in the interstate Acts
A formal requirement in the interstate Acts for
‘reasonable attempts
to reach agreement’ 115
Tree owner responsibilities in the interstate
Branch removal notices in the interstate Acts
General notice process in the Tasmanian Act
Community responses—resolving disputes
informally 119
The Commission’s
conclusions—resolving disputes informally 125
Encouraging informal resolution in the new Act
Community resources 125
Community-based alternative dispute resolution
Modification of abatement 127
Not recommended: a formal requirement in the Act for
‘reasonable attempts
to reach agreement’ 129
Not recommended: tree owner responsibilities in the
For future consideration: branch removal
notices 130
Not recommended: a general notice process
Resolving neighbourhood tree disputes in
Introduction 134
In which forum should disputes be resolved?
Magistrates’ Court of Victoria
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal
The approach in other jurisdictions 141
International jurisdictions 147
Community responses—where should tree
disputes be resolved? 148
Community responses—important
characteristics of a tree dispute forum 151
The Commission’s conclusions 152
VCAT to determine tree disputes under the new
Alternative options 155
The nature of jurisdiction given to VCAT
Diversity jurisdiction 157
VCAT process for tree disputes 158
The expertise of decision makers 159
On-site hearings or inspections 160
VCAT decision-making principles and expert
evidence in neighbourhood
tree disputes 162
Introduction 162
Decision-making principles 162
Decision-making guidelines in planning schemes
Local laws 164
Decision-making principles in other
Community responses—decision-making
principles 169
The Commission’s
conclusions—decision-making principles 172
One list of decision-making principles
Principles should be mandatory 172
Principles should be non-exhaustive 173
Other Acts and laws 173
The benefits of trees 173
Location and health of the tree and impact of
Past actions of parties 174
‘First in time’ principle
Recognised weed 175
Not recommended: Tree removal as a last resort
Expert evidence 177
lanning schemes 177
cal laws 179
ther jurisdictions 182
Community responses—expert evidence
The Commission’s conclusions—expert
evidence 187
Evidence-based decision making 187
Minimum qualification requirements 188
Expert’s duty to VCAT 189
Concurrent evidence 189
Guidelines for written reports 190
Orders, appeals and enforcement in
neighbourhood tree disputes 194
Introduction 194
Other jurisdictions—orders available
Community responses—orders available
The Commission’s
conclusions—orders available 197
Access to a neighbour’s land 197
Planting a replacement tree 198
Ongoing maintenance orders 198
Australian Standards and arborist
qualifications 199
Not recommended: Tree removal as a last resort
Legal costs 200
Notification of orders 201
Appeals 201
Appealing VCAT orders 201
Other jurisdictions—appeals 203
Community responses—appeals 204
The Commission’s
conclusions—appeals 205
Varying or revoking an order 205
Enforcement of orders 207
Enforcement in VCAT 207
Other jurisdictions—enforcement of
Community responses—enforcement of
The Commission’s
conclusions—enforcement of orders 213
Penalties for failure to comply 214
Councils should not enforce VCAT orders
Empowering the applicant to give effect to a
VCAT order 215
Interaction of the new Neighbourhood Tree
Disputes Act with other laws 218
Introduction 218
The Planning and Environment Act 219
Local tree protection laws made under the
Local Government Act 228
The Heritage Act 229
The Aboriginal Heritage Act 230
The Fences Act 231
The Catchment and Land Protection Act
Other Victorian Acts 232
Country Fire Authority Act 232
Metropolitan Fire Brigades Act 233
Electrical Safety Act 233
Transport legislation and road reserves
Public Health and Wellbeing Act 233
Flora and Fauna Guarantee Act 234
Victorian Conservation Trust Act 234
Conservation, Forests and Lands Act
Commonwealth law: the Environment Protection
and Biodiversity
Conservation Act 236
Community responses—interaction of laws
ther jurisdictions—interaction of laws
The Commission’s
conclusions—interaction of laws 244
The Planning and Environment Act 244
The Commission’s conclusions—a new
exemption to the VPPs to cover
tree disputes 245
The Commission’s
conclusions—further consideration of trees planted or
maintained as a condition of existing planning
permits 249
The Commission’s
conclusions—further consideration of Section 173 agreements 251
The Commission’s conclusions—local
tree protection laws 252
The Commission’s conclusions—the
Heritage Act 253
The Commission’s conclusions—the
Aboriginal Heritage Act 255
The Commission’s conclusions—the
Fences Act 255
The Commission’s conclusions—noxious weeds
The Commission’s conclusions—the
Environment Protection and Biodiversity
Conservation Act 257
The Commission’s
conclusions—further consultation required on some
other Acts 257
New owners of land and neighbourhood tree
disputes 260
Introduction 260
New South Wales 260
Queensland 261
Tasmania 262
Community responses—new owners of land
The Commission’s conclusions—new
owners of land 268
Providing certainty 268
When should new owners be bound? 269
Who should inform purchasers? 270
What should be disclosed? 270
How should notice be provided? 270
If purchasers are not informed 271
Joining new parties to proceedings 272
Not recommended: a searchable database of
Community resources for neighbourhood
tree disputes 276
Introduction 276
Current resources 276
Responsible tree planting 276
Talking with your neighbour 277
Engaging an arborist 278
Alternative dispute resolution 279
Court/Tribunal resources 279
Other jurisdictions—community resources
Community responses—community resources
The Commission’s
conclusions—community resources 283
A new tree disputes website 283
Information provided by VCAT 285
Improving awareness of DSCV 286
Local council resources 286
Further community education 287
Other matters and conclusions 290
Introduction 290
Online dispute resolution 290
Community responses—online dispute
resolution 292
The Commission’s
conclusions—online dispute resolution 292
Other options for law reform 293
Improving local laws and a greater role for
councils 293
Greater recognition of the benefits of trees
Issues beyond the scope of this inquiry
Trees on public land 297
Access to sunlight and views 298
Illegal removal of vegetation 300
Review of the new Act 301
Appendix A: Submissions 304
Appendix B: Consultations 306
Appendix C: Online survey questions
Bibliography 312
The tree which moves some to tears of joy is in the eyes of others only a
green thing that stands in the way.
—William Blake,
The Letters
This report responds to a number of suggestions from the community about an
urgent need to improve the law to help neighbours resolve
their disputes about
trees. The inquiry was initiated by the Commission as part of its community law
reform program.
Neighbourhood tree disputes affect many people in the Victorian community and
may become more common as our population expands and
our gardens get smaller.
Similarly, as our communities place increasing importance on the urban forest,
and become more aware of
climate change, there may be more objections about the
removal of vegetation in our neighbourhoods.
Tree disputes are often about overhanging branches, encroaching roots, leaf
litter, the presence of large trees close to boundary
lines, and the loss of
vegetation. Because of the proximity of neighbours and the tendency of these
disputes to harm neighbour relations,
it is important to resolve them quickly.
Often this does not occur because the current methods for resolving tree
disputes are unclear
and confusing. As a result, disputes may remain unresolved
and neighbourly relations may be strained. In exceptional cases, criminal
actions may occur.
It is hoped that the recommendations made in this report will bring greater
clarity to the law governing the resolution of neighbourhood
tree disputes in
The key recommendation is for the introduction of a Neighbourhood Tree
Disputes Act that will assist people to resolve their disputes
affordably and effectively. Management of the new Act should be given to the
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal
(VCAT). VCAT’s processes are
informal, flexible and widely accessible, and its matters are concluded
I wish to thank the many people who provided submissions, met with the
Commission, completed the online survey and otherwise assisted
inquiry. Your valuable contributions have helped the Commission formulate
its recommendations and we are grateful
for your time and attention to the
This inquiry was led by the Hon. Philip Cummins AM, Chair of the Commission,
until his passing in February 2019. The report’s
delivery has been
consequently delayed. Philip was passionate about involving the community in law
reform and believed that the Commission’s
community law reform function
was fundamental to its role. He enjoyed engaging with people about how the
law could be improved and how it could keep pace with community ideas and
expectations. Philip approached this inquiry with great
enthusiasm and guided
the direction of the final report.
I thank the Commissioners who comprised the Division that worked on this
Inquiry: Liana Buchanan, Dr Ian Hardingham QC, Alison O’Brien
Professor Bernadette McSherry and Gemma Varley PSM. They have contributed as a
group to the Commission’s thinking about
the practical problems facing the
community and the recommendations for change. I particularly thank Gemma Varley
who gave her time
generously and provided additional expert guidance and
The production of this report has been a lengthy and complex undertaking,
involving consideration of many areas of law. I am grateful
to the research
and policy team who have worked tirelessly
to produce high quality work. Emma Cashen completed the Commission’s
consultations and led the production of the report with
expertise and
commitment. I thank Hana Shahkhan and
Anna Woods for their dedication to this project. Their research, writing and
analytical skills were invaluable.
My thanks to Natalie Lilford, Community Law Reform Manager, who led the
development of the consultation paper and conducted early
consultations that
shaped the direction of this report before she commenced parental leave. Andrea
Lane provided invaluable research
assistance in the final stages. Nick Gadd
expertly guided the editing and production process. Gemma Walsh has provided
research and library resource support. Finally, my thanks to the CEO,
Merrin Mason, for her assistance and guidance over the course
of this inquiry
and Lindy Smith, Acting CEO, in the final stages.
I commend this report to you.
Bruce Gardner PSM
Acting Chair
Victorian Law Reform Commission June 2019
of reference
Matter initiated by the Commission pursuant to
section 5(1)(b)
Victorian Law Reform Commission Act 2000
(Vic) on 8 June 2017.
The Victorian Law Reform Commission will examine the current legal framework
for resolving disputes between neighbours about trees
on private neighbouring
land that cause damage and/ or harm (‘neighbourhood tree disputes’),
and consider whether the
law should be amended to provide just, effective and
timely methods for resolution of neighbourhood tree disputes.
In conducting this review, the Commission will have particular regard to:
• recent legal developments in Australian and international
Queensland, and
• any alternative schemes for resolving neighbourhood tree disputes.
The Commission will not consider:
• disputes concerning trees situated on public land
• disputes concerning the obstruction of sunlight and views by
neighbouring trees. The Commission will report to the Attorney-General
A common law self-help remedy that in the context of this
report allows
affected neighbours
to remove parts of a tree that
onto their land up to their boundary line.
Affected neighbour
The person whose land (or use of the land) is
affected by the
neighbour’s tree; usually the plaintiff (aggrieved party) in court
proceedings.
Alternative dispute resolution (ADR)
Any formal process, other than court or tribunal proceedings, in which an
impartial person assists parties to resolve their disputes.
A qualified professional trained in cultivating, caring for,
and maintaining trees.
Australian Qualification Framework (AQF)
The national policy for regulating qualifications in Australian education and
training, incorporating the qualifications from each
education and training
sector into a single comprehensive national framework. The AQF sets out specific
formal training standards
and people working in the
tree-care industry.
Cause of action
The facts that give rise to a legal claim and
entitle a person to have a matter heard in a tribunal or court.
A term used in the report to describe a negative impact on
property or land, including property being destroyed.
Dispute Settlement Centre of Victoria (DSCV)
Government-funded provider of free dispute settlement services to the
Victorian community.
Diversity jurisdiction
The authority to exercise judicial power to
resolve disputes
between residents of different states.
Encroachment
When a tree (or parts of a tree) crosses over boundary
enters adjoining land.
A term used in the report to describe an impact on the health or
safety of a person, including injury or death.
Informal dispute resolution
Negotiating an outcome outside court or
tribunal proceedings. It
encompasses legal methods such as
, and interpersonal methods
such as neighbours talking to each other to resolve a dispute.
The authority of a court or tribunal to hear cases
brought to it.
Laws passed by local councils to protect public health,
safety and amenity. Tree protection laws are an example of local laws.
A method of dispute resolution that involves bringing
parties together to discuss a dispute and reach an agreement.
Land and Environment Court of New South Wales (NSWLEC)
Online dispute resolution (ODR)
In New South Wales, the court that hears neighbourhood tree disputes.
A range of technology-assisted methods for resolving disputes.
Planning scheme
A planning scheme is a statutory document which sets
objectives, policies and provisions for the use and development of land.
Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal (QCAT)
Resource Management and Planning Appeal Tribunal (RMPAT)
In Queensland, the tribunal that hears neighbourhood tree disputes.
In Tasmania, the tribunal that hears neighbourhood tree disputes.
Responsible authority
Planning and Environment Act 1987
(Vic), a responsible
authority, usually the local council, is the party responsible for the
administration and enforcement of a
planning scheme
The right to bring proceedings before a court or tribunal. To
have standing in a case a person must be able to show that they have
interest in the case, for example, because of possible effects on themselves,
their property or activities.
Statutory scheme
A scheme based on specific legislation passed by
Parliament,
rather than on the common law (judge-made law).
A civil wrong, and type of
cause of action
. Nuisance,
negligence and trespass to land are types of torts.
The person who owns the land on which the relevant tree is
Urban forest
The urban forest refers to trees and other vegetation
urban space. Many Victorian councils have policies relating to the protection
and preservation of the urban forest.
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal (VCAT)
Victorian Planning Provisions (VPPs)
In Victoria, the tribunal that hears civil and administrative claims.
A set of stardard planning provisions that are incorporated into local
planning schemes
summary: neighbourhood tree disputes
1 On 8 June 2017 the Commission initiated an inquiry on ways to provide just,
effective and timely methods for resolving neighbourhood
tree disputes on
private land in Victoria.
2 The Commission’s key recommendation is to introduce a Neighbourhood
Tree Disputes Act. This recommendation responds to community
calls for better
guidance from the law about how to resolve these disputes.
The scope of the problem
3 In an increasingly urbanised environment, people’s decisions about
their land and trees can have a significant effect on their
neighbours’
Concerns about neighbourhood trees were
the third most common enquiry to the
Dispute Settlement Centre of Victoria from December 2011 to May 2017.
4 Most disputes relate to overhanging branches, encroaching roots and the
presence of large trees, but other issues also exist.
5 Although tree disputes are common, few of them go to court or are resolved
with legal assistance because legal action is expensive
and outcomes are
uncertain. People often contact multiple agencies for assistance and are
frustrated when they cannot obtain clear
advice about what they can or cannot do
to resolve their dispute. As a consequence, tree disputes may remain unresolved.
problematic because quick resolution is desirable.
Tree disputes give rise to impassioned responses because they can be seen to
challenge a person’s ownership and enjoyment
of their land. They can
cause significant distress and lead to or amplify poor relations between
neighbours. Sometimes they escalate
to trespass, criminal damage or other
criminal behaviour.
6 While these disputes may appear straightforward, they are often complex.
They have an emotional dimension and a range of factors
prevent them from being
resolved, including:
• different expectations about living near trees
• the breakdown in communication between neighbours
• incorrect assumptions about the causes of problems
• difficulties obtaining timely arboricultural advice
• a lack of knowledge about how trees grow and interact with built
structures.
7 Tree disputes may have a greater impact on people who face physical or
financial difficulties carrying out tree works, maintaining
vegetation or
negotiating with a neighbour.
The law is complex
8 The current methods for resolving these disputes—from informal
negotiation to litigation—are unclear and confusing.
The law is not stated
in a single document, so it is hard to know what can and cannot be done to
resolve concerns, and hard to negotiate
a resolution.
9 Information to help people resolve their disputes is hard to find.
Community members must piece together information published by
government and community agencies to work out a possible resolution process.
10 The community does not have a good understanding of which experts can
assist them. In particular, there is a lack of understanding
qualifications of arborists.
The law provides limited remedies
11 Legal action in relation to tree disputes in Victoria is currently based
on the common law torts of negligence, nuisance and trespass.
These torts do not
allow much scope to obtain a remedy that will prevent damage or harm from
occurring. Affected neighbours may have
to wait for the damage or harm to occur
before they can take legal action. This is reactive and counter-productive.
12 An affected neighbour who exercises their common law right to abate by
pruning to a boundary line cannot recoup any costs from
the tree owner. They may
be left significantly out of pocket or unable to arrange any tree works because
of the costs involved. The
legal requirement to return abated vegetation can
itself create disputes or make existing problems worse, particularly when
throw vegetation back over the fence.
13 These disputes can be characterised as a competition of rights: the tree
owner’s right to use and enjoy the land in any
lawful manner, and the
affected neighbour’s right to enjoy their land without unreasonable
interference. However, they have
another dimension. The need to retain and
protect vegetation is increasingly important to our community because it
improves the
liveability of our urban environments.
14 Some councils receive as many enquiries about the loss of vegetation from
a neighbour’s property as they do about a neighbour’s
tree causing
damage or harm to the affected neighbour’s property. The main remedies are
court orders for an injunction or damages.
These remedies ‘aim to rectify
specific personal losses, but do not address the interests of the public at
large in the aesthetic,
historical, cultural or environmental values associated
with trees’.1
A new Neighbourhood Tree Disputes Act
15 The Commission recommends the introduction of a Neighbourhood Tree
Disputes Act in Victoria, managed by the Victorian Civil and
Administrative
Tribunal (VCAT).
16 New South Wales, Queensland and Tasmania have enacted legislation to
govern the resolution of tree disputes. The legislative schemes
in New South
Wales and Queensland appear to have had positive outcomes. The Tasmanian scheme
only commenced in December 2017. The
number of applications handled by the
Land and Environment Court of New South Wales (NSWLEC) and the Queensland
Administrative Tribunal (QCAT) each year is relatively low, and the
Commission has been advised that matters can be resolved
quickly and
affordably. These schemes provide a good guide for Victoria.
17 A new Act is the best way to ensure the fast, cheap and effective
resolution of these disputes. Community responses overwhelmingly
support this
1 Margaret Davies and Kynan Rogers, ‘Tale of a Tree’
Flinders Law Journal
18 The aims of the new Act are to:
• provide a clear dispute resolution pathway that encourages people to
resolve disputes informally between themselves
• enable disputes to be resolved efficiently and inexpensively
• establish clear decision-making principles to guide the community
their own disputes
• provide practical and effective remedies
• balance competing rights and interests fairly and transparently and
use evidence- based decision making
• interact simply with other laws without disrupting established policy
wherever possible.
19 Supporting material should be created to help the community
understand:
• how the new Act works in practice
• how to progress a matter through VCAT
• what professional assistance is available
• how to manage vegetation to prevent disputes arising.
Key features of the new Act
Cause of action
20 It is recommended that the new Act enable VCAT to make orders:
• to restrain or remedy damage to the affected neighbour’s land
or property that is caused by a tree, or prevent damage
that is likely to occur
within the next 12 months
• to address existing harm to anyone on the affected neighbour’s
land that is caused by a tree, or prevent harm that is
likely to occur within
the next 12 months.
21 The Commission has not considered a compensation scheme for harm suffered.
Instead the focus in the new Act is on practical remedies
related to tree
management.
22 The Commission considers that the torts of trespass, negligence and
nuisance should continue to be available in the courts because
they can provide
unique remedies in broader contexts that may be useful.
23 Interference caused by a tree that amounts to annoyance but does not cause
actual property damage or harm should not be actionable
under the new Act.
Matters such as the dropping of leaf litter that creates a mess in a
neighbour’s driveway are an ordinary
part of community life in urban
environments. Similarly, unless an affected neighbour could establish that an
overhanging branch
was causing damage or harm, the Act would not provide a
The scope of the Act
24 The Commission’s recommendations about the scope of the new Act
• ‘Tree’ should be defined broadly to include Australian
flora and introduced trees, and all parts of a tree, as
well as dead trees,
trees that have been removed and plants that resemble a tree in form and
• The Act should apply to trees on residential land and to other
designated land zones. The Act should also apply to land that
substantial character of the zones designated in the Act. The exclusion of some
farming and rural land and land that
is used for commercial timber plantations is consistent with interstate Acts.
The Commission recommends that the breadth of the zoning
provisions is
revisited when the Act is reviewed and that further consultation occur with
farmers and users of agricultural land
at that time.
• An affected neighbour’s land must adjoin a tree owner’s
land with a common boundary, or be separated by a thoroughfare
or other area
specified in the Act.
• If a tree straddles a boundary line, an affected neighbour should be
able to bring a claim regardless of how much of the tree
is on the affected
neighbour’s land.
• Legal action may be commenced by an affected neighbour who is the
owner of the affected land, or an occupier where the owner
has refused to take
action. Action can only be brought against the owner of the land with the
25 The Commission recommends that VCAT consider developing an application
form based on those used in the NSWLEC and QCAT. The form
should ask for
extensive information from the parties upfront to help the decision maker
determine the suitability of matters for
alternative dispute resolution and to
narrow the issues in dispute if the matter proceeds to a hearing.
Informal resolution
26 Introducing a new Act and providing clarity in the law will assist the
community to resolve their disputes informally outside VCAT.
A new Act will also
reduce the number of enquiries to the Dispute Settlement Centre of Victoria and
and mediate disputes.
27 Resolving disputes informally allows neighbours to come up with creative
solutions and maximises the chances of preserving neighbourly
relations. It is
also cheaper than going to court.
28 The Commission makes recommendations to improve awareness about existing
informal resolution options such as:
• abatement
• neighbour-led negotiation
• free mediation via the Dispute Settlement Centre of Victoria.
29 The common law remedy of abatement should be modified by the new Act so
that pruned tree branches and other material are not required
to be returned to
the tree owner. The Commission identified that this common law requirement can
make disputes worse.
30 Some community responses favoured including responsibilities for tree
owners in legislation. The Commission does not support
the introduction of
non-binding
responsibilities for tree owners, or a requirement that parties have
attempted to resolve the dispute informally before VCAT will
make an order
or the matter can proceed to a hearing, as occurs in some states.
31 The Commission provides its preliminary views about including a formal
branch removal process in the new Act to address concerns
branches that do not result in damage or harm to people. This mechanism is
included in legislation in Queensland
and Tasmania. The Commission suggests that
the usefulness of this process be considered when the Act is reviewed. At that
time Government
should consult with the Queensland and Tasmanian governments,
dispute resolution centres and community legal centres about the effectiveness
of this mechanism interstate and how it might work in Victoria.
VCAT to determine tree disputes
32 Tree disputes should be adjudicated in VCAT because its processes are most
suited to the needs of the community. A VCAT framework
will ensure that costs
are kept to a minimum.
It will be possible to use VCAT’s existing alternative dispute
resolution programs, as well as its expertise in planning
and environment
matters and civil claims. VCAT is specifically designed for parties without
legal representation and is less formal
than a court.
The expertise of decision makers
33 The Commission recommends that Government consider appointing to VCAT
expert members with extensive arboricultural experience to
hear these disputes
on site, as occurs in New South Wales. Alternatively, VCAT should consider the
Queensland approach of using Tribunal-appointed
independent tree assessors to
conduct on-site inspections and provide reports to VCAT, with the cost shared by
the parties.
Decision-making principles
34 The new Act should facilitate evidence-based, transparent and consistent
decision making. This will require mandatory and comprehensive
decision-making
principles to help decision makers to balance competing rights and interests
fairly and transparently. They will
also help people to resolve their own
disputes outside a formal VCAT hearing or in mediation.
35 Decision-making principles are a feature of comparable interstate
legislation and some local council and planning laws in Victoria.
recommended that the list of decision-
making principles in the Act be comprehensive but also provide VCAT with the
discretion to consider additional relevant matters. Principles
• the broader benefits of the tree to the community
• the requirements of other laws
• whether anything other than the tree may have contributed to the
damage or harm
• whether the tree existed first in time
• the location and health of the tree
• any steps taken by the affected neighbour or owner to resolve the
Expert evidence in VCAT
36 VCAT hearings should be informed by arboricultural evidence.
37 The Commission recommends minimum qualification standards for arborists
and independent tree assessors who provide evidence to
VCAT. Minimum
qualification levels will help ensure trees are properly assessed in accordance
with industry-approved risk assessment
methods and will guide the community when
hiring arborists.
38 VCAT should develop a specific Practice Note about the need to demonstrate
a causal link, supported by expert evidence, between
the tree and the harm (for
example, a medical condition) that is the subject of the application.
39 Additional recommendations outline requirements for expert report
Remedies and appeals
40 The Commission recommends that the Act should provide for timely,
practical and effective remedies for tree disputes. These will
provide guidance
to the community about the likely outcomes if a matter proceeds to hearing.
41 Tree works conducted pursuant to orders should comply with Australian
pruning standards and be carried out by a suitably qualified
arborist as
determined by VCAT.
42 While existing appeal mechanisms in VCAT are appropriate, the new Act
should allow the parties to apply to VCAT to vary or revoke
the original order
where new circumstances are not accommodated in the original order. Trees are
dynamic, living organisms and the
facts relating to disputes can change over
time. However, such applications should be limited to one per year to prevent
applications and provide certainty to the parties.
43 The new Act should include a penalty for failure to comply with an order.
To facilitate the
practical resolution of a dispute, where an order is not complied with, the
Commission recommends that a party be able to apply to
VCAT for permission to
enter the tree owner’s land and carry out the works themselves. Reasonable
costs incurred as a result
should be able to be recouped from the non-complying
party as a debt in the relevant court and safeguards should apply for entry
the neighbour’s land.
Interaction with other laws
44 In the interests of adopting a straightforward, accessible and timely
statutory scheme, the Commission wishes to avoid the involvement
of multiple
decision makers and multiple decision-making frameworks. To achieve this, orders
made under the new Act should supersede
some requirements under other laws,
subject to safeguards.
45 These safeguards will ensure that VCAT can consider information that would
have been considered under the other law. Other responsible
authorities will be
invited to participate in the hearing process. Additional safeguards are
recommended for particular laws.
The need to obtain a planning permit to carry out works on a tree
46 The Commission recommends that the existing permit exemptions in the
Victoria Planning Provisions under the
Planning and Environment Act 1987
(Vic) be expanded to include orders under the new Act. This would mean an
Order under the new Act would have effect despite any requirement
to obtain a
permit to remove, prune or destroy vegetation under overlay requirements or
native vegetation provisions. If the requirements
of the new Act were satisfied
a party would not need to obtain a permit under these planning provisions before
applying to VCAT for
a remedy. Recommended safeguards aim to ensure minimal
interruption to established policies.
47 Local laws made under the
Local Government Act 1989
(Vic) often
protect ‘significant’ trees and require the owner to obtain a permit
to carry out works to the canopy or the
root protection zone.
48 An affected neighbour is often unable to apply for a permit to conduct
works on a protected tree because local laws generally only
allow the tree owner
(or someone with their written permission) to apply for a permit. Fulfilling
this requirement would be impractical
and place an unreasonable burden on
applicants.
49 An order under the new Act should override local laws. Safeguards should
extend to giving significant weight in the decision-making
process to local laws
and policies already in place.
The Heritage Act
50 Generally, a permit or permit exemption is required to carry out works to
heritage-listed trees or heritage-listed places containing
trees under the
Heritage Act 2017
(Vic). Heritage laws will only allow the owner of a
tree (or someone with their written permission) to apply for a permit or
An affected neighbour may be unable to resolve their dispute if the
tree is heritage-listed.
51 The Commission recommends amending the
Heritage Act
to provide that it is
subject to any order made pursuant to the new Act where the tree has been
assessed as posing an imminent
danger to life or property. Because
heritage-listed trees are important to
Victoria, the Commission recommends interfering with existing laws only in
emergencies. VCAT would need to consider the factors Heritage
Victoria would
have addressed in a permit decision, and any replanting requirements to maintain
the heritage value of the landscape.
The Aboriginal
Heritage Act
Aboriginal Heritage Act 2006
(Vic) aims to protect Aboriginal
cultural heritage. The Act requires a permit or a permit exemption to carry out
works to protected
vegetation, for example an Aboriginal scarred tree. Because
ownership of Aboriginal cultural heritage is determined by traditional
the Act does not limit those who may apply for a permit or exemption. The
Commission concludes that decisions about works
to protected trees under this
Act are best left to Registered Aboriginal Parties or Aboriginal Victoria.
The Fences Act
53 The Magistrates’ Court has jurisdiction to decide matters under the
Fences Act 1968
The Commission recommends that if a tree is causing damage to a fence,
or forms part of a fence that is causing or is likely
to cause damage or
harm, VCAT should have the jurisdiction to make orders in relation to both the
tree and the fence. It would
be prudent in this situation for orders to be
made about the tree and the fence at the same time by the same decision maker.
Commission recommends amending the
to provide VCAT with this
The Catchment and Land Protection Act
Catchment and Land Protection Act 1994
(Vic) places obligations
on land owners to manage listed weeds. Directions can be issued under this Act
to land owners to take measures
to control or eradicate weeds.
55 The new Act should apply to recognised weeds that meet the definition of
‘tree’ in the Act and where the problem caused
by the weed fits
within the ambit of the proposed Act. To do otherwise would prevent a number of
tree disputes from being resolved.
VCAT should consider any past actions taken
by the landowner under this Act when determining the scope of orders.
Other Acts and laws
56 This report provides the Commission’s views about the interaction of
the new Act with other existing planning mechanisms
and laws. Further
consultation is required to determine the extent to which some of these laws
might interact with the new Act.
New owners of land
57 The new Act should clearly outline the rights and obligations of new land
owners about trees that have been or are the subject
of a formal tree dispute.
This will give the tree dispute finality, and the parties certainty, about how
to manage the tree. It will
also avoid duplication of legal proceedings. The new
Act should:
• require relevant matters to be disclosed to potential purchasers
before sale
• hold new owners responsible for complying with orders from the date
of settlement
• state that only immediate new owners may benefit from orders
• avoid adding extra steps or complexity to the sale of land
Future review
58 The new Act should be reviewed after five years of operation to determine
if it is achieving its objectives. The Commission
identifies some particular
matters for consideration by Government when the Act is reviewed.
59 The Commission’s preliminary views on some matters beyond the scope
of this inquiry are provided at the conclusion of this
report, as well as other
issues that should be considered by the Government in designing the new Act, for
example online dispute
resolution.
Recommendations
1 A new Act should be introduced to govern the process for resolving disputes
between neighbours about trees on private land in Victoria.
The new Act could be
titled the Neighbourhood Tree Disputes Act.
2 The Act should define ‘tree’ to mean:
(a) any woody perennial plant
(b) any plant resembling a tree in form and size
(c) vines, cacti, palms, bamboo
(d) any other plant prescribed by Regulations.
3 ‘Tree’ should also include:
(a) all parts of the tree, whether joined to the main structure or
(b) a tree that has been partially or wholly removed
(c) a dead tree.
4 The Act should apply to trees on privately owned land that is:
(a) within a zone designated residential, commercial, industrial, green
wedge, rural living and rural conservation under a Victorian
planning scheme or
a zone that has the substantial character of one of these zones, or
(b) within a special purpose zone designated as capital city, docklands,
activity centre, priority development, comprehensive development
(c) prescribed in regulations.
5 The Act should not apply to land that is zoned farming, rural activity,
special use, urban floodway or port or to land that is used
for commercial
timber plantation.
6 The Act should apply only where an affected neighbour’s land adjoins
the tree owner’s land.
7 The Act should define ‘adjoin’ to mean land that shares a
common boundary, or would share a common boundary were it
not separated by:
(a) a public road
(b) a pedestrian path
(c) a laneway
(d) a bridge
(e) a culvert or
(f) other similar thoroughfare prescribed in Regulations.
8 If a tree subject to the dispute straddles boundary lines the Act
(a) allow the affected neighbour to bring an application irrespective of the
proportions of the tree on each parcel of land, and
(b) provide the Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal with a discretion
to consider the proportions of the tree on each party’s
land in making
9 A determination about the proportions of the tree owned by the respective
parties should be made by measuring the location of
the base of the trunk at
ground level on each parcel of land.
10 A person may apply to the Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal for
an order under the Act if they are:
(a) the owner of the land affected by a tree (affected neighbour), or
(b) an occupier of land affected by a tree if the owner of land has refused
to commence proceedings.
11 The Act should allow an application to be brought against the owner of the
land on which the tree is situated (the tree owner).
12 An applicant may apply to the Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal
for an order under the Act to:
(a) restrain or remedy damage to the affected neighbour’s land or
property that is caused by a tree
(b) prevent damage to the affected neighbour’s land or property that is
caused by a tree that is likely to occur within the
next 12 months
(c) address existing harm to anyone on the affected neighbour’s land
that is caused by a tree
(d) prevent harm to any person on the affected neighbour’s land that is
caused by a tree that is likely to occur within the
next 12 months.
13 The affected neighbour should be required to notify affected parties of an
application and the remedies sought within 21 days of
lodging the
application.
14 ‘Affected parties’ should be defined in the Act to mean:
(a) the tree owner/s
(b) any relevant authority that would otherwise be required to issue consent
in relation to any works to the tree
(c) any other person that the applicant thinks will be affected by the
15 The Act should state that the Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal
may waive these notice requirements where the tree poses
an imminent risk of
causing damage or harm or where it is appropriate in the circumstances to do
16 The Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal should consider developing
a detailed application form that is modelled on the
application forms for
initiating a tree dispute in the Land and Environment Court of New South Wales
and the Queensland Civil
Administrative Tribunal. Additional information should be sought in the
application form about:
(a) the species of the tree and whether it is a recognised weed
(b) the steps the parties may have already taken to resolve their dispute
(c) how the decision-making principles in the Act are addressed
(d) the zone of the land the tree is situated on and any applicable planning
scheme, overlay or other requirement affecting the management
of the tree that
the applicant is aware of under the
Planning and Environment Act 1987
(Vic) or any other Act or law
(e) whether any remedies are sought under the
Fences Act 1968
to rectify damage to a fence caused by a tree or to prevent damage or harm
from a tree that forms part of a fence
(f) any assessments or quotes that may have already been obtained from
(g) whether the applicant is the owner or occupier of the land. If the
applicant is an occupier of land, evidence that the owner has
refused to make an
application
(h) whether any party has entered into a contract for the sale of land to
ensure that the Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal
is aware of all
relevant parties to the dispute.
(i) the names of other parties and information about proportional ownership
if a tree trunk straddles a boundary.
17 The Act should state that the affected neighbour and tree owner are
encouraged to resolve their dispute informally but that the
affected neighbour
may apply to the Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal to resolve the
18 The Act should include a non-exhaustive list of examples of informal
resolution approaches including:
(a) communicating with the other party to notify them of the issues
(including providing a quotation or arborist’s assessment)
and negotiate
(b) exercising the right to abate
(c) engaging in alternative dispute resolution, such as mediation through the
Dispute Settlement Centre of Victoria.
19 The Act should modify the common law right to abate to the extent that
abated tree parts such as branches, roots, fruit and other
material are not
required to be returned to the tree owner unless the neighbours have agreed
20 The Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal should have original but
not exclusive jurisdiction to determine tree disputes
under the new Act.
21 Any Government consideration of diversity jurisdiction issues that apply
to the Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal should
also include
consideration of the new Act.
22 The Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal should consider extending
the Fast Track Mediation and Hearing Program administered
by the Dispute
Settlement Centre of Victoria in VCAT to suitable tree disputes.
23 Government should consider appointing members with arboricultural
expertise to the Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal
to hear tree
dispute matters. Alternatively, in order to obtain expert opinions on
arboriculture matters and to obtain the
complete context of the dispute,
the Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal should consider adopting the
Queensland Civil
and Administrative Tribunal approach of using independent tree
assessors throughout Victoria.
24 The Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal should conduct on-site
final hearings or on- site inspections for all tree disputes.
25 The Act should state that before determining an application the Victorian
Civil and Administrative Tribunal must consider the following
matters to the
extent that they are relevant to an application:
(a) the location of the tree in relation to the boundary of the land and any
structures or premises
(b) the condition of the tree in respect of its health and structural
(c) whether works to the tree would require any consent or authorisation
under other Acts or laws and, if so, whether the consent
or authorisation has
been obtained
(d) the provisions of the planning scheme which apply to the land under the
Planning and Environment Act 1987
(Vic) including relevant zones and
overlays and the provisions of other relevant Acts or laws that apply to the
land or tree
(e) the impact any pruning, including the impact of maintaining the tree at a
particular height, width or shape, would have on the
(f) any contribution the tree makes to:
i. the amenity of land on which it is situated, including its contribution to
sun, wind, noise, odour
ii. the local ecosystem and biodiversity
iii. the natural landscape and scenic value of the land
(g) whether the tree has any historical, cultural, social or scientific
value. This includes a tree that is part of Aboriginal
cultural heritage under
Aboriginal Heritage Act
(Vic) or is a registered tree or is situated in a Victorian
heritage place under the
Heritage Act 2017
(h) any impact the tree has on soil stability, the water table or other
natural features of the land or locality
(i) anything, other than the tree, that has contributed, or is contributing,
to any harm or damage or likelihood of harm or damage,
i. any act or omission by the applicant and the impact of any other trees
owned by the applicant
ii. any steps taken by the applicant or the owner of the land on which the
tree is situated to prevent or rectify damage
(j) whether the tree and any risk, obstruction or interference associated
with the tree existed before the affected neighbour began
to occupy the land
affected by the tree
(k) whether the tree is a recognised weed
(l) such other matters as the decision-making body considers relevant in the
circumstances of the case.
26 The Act should require that arborists who provide evidence to the
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal hold a relevant arboricultural
qualification of minimum Australian Qualifications Framework (AQF) Level 5 or
equivalent and have at least two years practical experience.
27 The Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal should direct experts in
tree dispute matters to comply with clause 11 of Practice
Note PNVCAT2:
Expert Evidence, 1 October 2014 with the following additional
requirements:
(a) a requirement that the on-site assessment has been undertaken during the
three months leading up to the hearing
(b) a detailed description of the assessment methodology relied upon,
including the date of the tree inspection and any limitations
(c) a record of the expert’s observation of the tree, providing an
assessment of the categories for the tree’s health,
condition, form and
(d) a photograph supporting observations and highlighting points of
(e) details of the local planning scheme overlays and local laws applying to
(f) information about whether the tree is remnant, indigenous, native, exotic
or weed species
(g) information about the retention value of the tree based on the objectives
of the local planning scheme or the local law.
28 The Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal should develop a Practice
Note about the requirement for a causal link between
the tree and any harm, such
as a medical condition, that is the subject of an application.
29 The Act should provide the decision maker with broad discretion to make
such orders as it considers appropriate, including:
(a) requiring the taking of specified action
(b) enabling entry to land for the purposes of carrying out an order or to
obtain a quote for carrying out the tree works
(c) requiring the payment of the costs of tree works
(d) requiring the payment of compensation for property damage
(e) requiring a replacement tree to be planted in a specified location and to
be maintained to mature growth if a tree is ordered
to be removed, or
(f) requiring ongoing maintenance for a specified time period.
30 The Act should require that work that is carried out pursuant to orders
complies with the relevant Australian Standards and undertaken
by a suitably
qualified arborist as determined by the Victorian Civil and Administrative
31 The Act should require the Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal
to provide a copy of any orders made to any relevant
authority who would
otherwise be required to authorise or consent to works on the tree.
32 Where new circumstances are not accommodated in the original order,
the Act should allow the tree owner or affected neighbour
or immediate
successors in title to apply to the Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal
to vary or revoke the original order.
33 The Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal’s powers in
determining the application to vary or revoke the order should
be stated in the
Act as the power to:
(a) affirm the original order
(b) vary the original order by altering the terms of the order or by
substituting any other order that the Victorian Civil and Administrative
Tribunal may make under the new Act
(c) revoke an existing order.
34 The applicant should provide notice in writing of the application to vary
or revoke the original order to the original parties
to the dispute as well as
any other affected parties that were given notice of the original application or
any successors in title.
35 The Act should only provide for one application to vary or revoke the
order per year.
36 The Act should include a penalty, to be determined by Government, for the
failure to comply with an order.
37 If an order has not been complied with by the required time, the Act
should provide that a party may apply to the Victorian Civil
and Administrative
Tribunal to seek permission to enter the tree owner’s land and carry out
the works specified in the order
themselves. Reasonable costs incurred as a
result of carrying out the order should be able to be recouped from the
non-complying
party as a debt in the relevant court.
38 The right of the affected neighbour to enter a tree owner’s land
should be subject to the requirement that:
(a) reasonable notice is given to the owner of land or occupier whose land is
to be accessed by the applicant
(b) access only occurs at a reasonable time during the day
(c) any other requirements that the Victorian Civil and Administrative
Tribunal considers are appropriate, for example, that relevant
insurance is
obtained by the applicant.
39 The Commission recommends exemptions in the Victoria Planning Provisions
be expanded to enable an order made under the Act to have
effect despite any
requirement to obtain a permit in a Victorian Planning Scheme to remove, lop or
destroy vegetation under a:
(a) Significant Landscape Overlay
(b) Environmental Significance Overlay
(c) Vegetation Protection Overlay
(d) Heritage Overlay
(e) Native Vegetation Particular Provision.
40 Where an exemption referred to in Recommendation 39 applies, the following
safeguards should apply:
(a) the relevant responsible authority must be notified of the application
and invited to participate in hearings
(b) the Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal must consider the factors
that the responsible authority would have been required
to consider in
determining a matter under the
Planning and Environment Act 1987
i. the objectives of planning in Victoria
ii. the provisions of the relevant planning scheme that apply to the land the
subject of the application, including decision-making
guidelines in planning
iii. information provided by the responsible authority.
41 Orders under the Act should have effect regardless of requirements for
consent or authorisation under local tree protection laws
made under the
Local Government Act 1989
42 Where Recommendation 41 applies, the following safeguards should
(a) the Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal must afford the relevant
council tree protection laws significant but not determinative
weight in the
decision-making process
(b) the Tribunal should invite council to appear at a tree dispute hearing or
to provide a written submission.
Heritage Act 2017
(Vic) should be amended to
provide that the operation of the
Heritage Act
is subject to any order under
the new Act where the Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal determines
that a registered tree
or a tree situated in a heritage place poses an imminent
danger to life or property.
44 Where Recommendation 43 applies, the following safeguards should
(a) Heritage Victoria must be notified of the application and be invited to
participate in the hearing
(b) the Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal should consider the
factors that Heritage Victoria would have been required to
take into account
pursuant to the
Heritage Act 2017
(Vic) and any information provided by
Heritage Victoria.
45 Where a registered tree under the
Heritage Act 2017
tree in a heritage-listed place is ordered to be removed by the Victorian
Civil and Administrative Tribunal under
the Act, the Tribunal should have
regard to any replanting requirements that Heritage Victoria may consider
necessary to maintain
the heritage value of the landscape.
Section 30C
Fences Act 1968
(Vic) should be amended to
provide the Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal with jurisdiction to
make orders under the
where a tree:
(a) has caused, is causing, or is likely in the next 12 months to cause
damage to a dividing fence, or
(b) forms part of the fence that has caused, is causing, or is likely in
the next 12 months to cause damage to property or harm
to any person.
47 The Act should apply to recognised weeds provided that the weed is a
‘tree’ and has caused, is causing or is likely
to cause damage to
property or land or harm to people in the next 12 months.
48 The Act should state that new owners of land should be bound by and
benefit from the outcome of legal action.
49 The Act should state that new owners are bound to the extent the original
owner has not completed the order or has an ongoing obligation
to carry out the
50 Only immediate new owners may benefit from orders made in the original
owner’s favour.
51 The Act should state that the date from which new owners will be bound and
will benefit from the outcome of legal action is the
date of settlement.
52 Any timeframes stipulated in the orders should re-commence on the date of
settlement.
53 The Act should state that purchasers should be notified of any legal
action commenced or underway at the time of the sale, or orders
made under the
Act. The Act should further state that copies of the application or order must
be provided with a Section 32 Vendor
54 The Due Diligence Checklist under Division 2A of the
Sale of Land Act
(Vic) should be amended by Consumer Affairs Victoria to include
information about the effect on new owners of legal action and orders
the proposed Act.
Sale of Land Act 1962
(Vic) should be amended to include a
provision under
that requires disclosure of legal action under the
proposed Act at the time of sale, or if
legal action has concluded, disclosure of incomplete or ongoing orders. The
Sale of Land Act 1962
(Vic) should also stipulate that copies of the
application and order are to be provided.
56 If a party to a tree dispute enters into a contract of sale of land while
legal action under the Act is underway, the Act should
require that party to
notify the Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal about the sale as soon as possible after the contract
of sale has been fully executed.
57 A website should be established by the Department of Justice and Community
Safety which would provide:
(a) guidance on how to negotiate with your neighbour, including a sample
standard letter that affected neighbours can use to communicate
with the tree
owner about a problem tree
(b) information about informal dispute resolution mechanisms
(c) detailed information on alternative dispute resolution and a link to the
Dispute Settlement Centre of Victoria website
(d) guidance on engaging appropriately qualified arborists
(e) a step-by-step overview of the Act
(f) information on how to commence proceedings
(g) guidance about how to seek information about other laws that may apply
from government authorities and local councils.
58 The Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal should provide supporting
information for parties about the operation of the Act
and Tribunal processes.
Resources could include:
(a) a detailed information guide, similar in format to the guide developed by
the Magistrates’ Court for fencing disputes
(b) information about key decisions made under the Act
(c) an annotated version of the Act outlining how the Tribunal has
interpreted particular provisions and highlighting key cases
(d) a link to the Dispute Settlement Centre of Victoria website
(e) key Practice Notes relevant to tree disputes, for example, about the
provision of expert evidence and alternative dispute resolution.
59 The services of the Dispute Settlement Centre of Victoria should be
promoted more broadly. Community engagement workshops could
be conducted for the
arboricultural industry and other interested organisations and professional
60 Local councils should continue to provide resources to the community
relevant to tree disputes. These resources could include:
(a) tree planting guidelines suited to local areas
(b) fact sheets on the application of local tree protection laws
(c) information about engaging appropriately qualified arborists.
61 The arboricultural industry should provide information to the community
qualified arborists.
62 The Minister should review the Act after a period of five years from the
date of commencement to determine whether the policy objectives
remain valid and whether the legislation remains appropriate for securing those
objectives. A report on the outcome of
the review should be tabled in each House
of Parliament within 12 months after the end of the review.
63 Matters that should be examined as part of the review include:
(a) the effectiveness of zoning provisions in the Act
(b) the effectiveness of the definition of adjoining land in the Act
(c) if there is a need for the Act to be expanded to include a formal branch
removal notice process
(d) if there is a need to expand the scope of the Act to trees blocking
access to sunlight and views (including high hedges).
Introduction to
neighbourhood tree disputes
2 Introduction
Origins of the project
The Commission’s process
Structure of the report
Introduction to
neighbourhood tree disputes
Introduction
1.1 This report arises from the Victorian Law Reform Commission’s
community law reform project on neighbourhood tree disputes.
It follows public
consultation on the issues and a consultation paper published in December
Section 5(1)(b)
Victorian Law Reform Commission Act 2000
(Vic) states that one of the Commission’s functions is to examine and
make recommendations to the Attorney- General on issues
that are of general
community concern but are relatively minor. The term ‘relatively
minor’ means limited in size and
scope and not requiring the significant
deployment of Commission resources.
1.3 The impetus for this work often comes from community suggestions about
how to improve Victorian law. In undertaking community
law reform projects, the
Commission aims to provide workable solutions to gaps or inadequacies in the law
so that reform delivers
real benefits to the community.
1.4 The Commission’s priority for this review has been the effective
and efficient resolution of disputes between neighbours
land (‘tree disputes’).
1.5 The Commission recommends the introduction of a dedicated Act to govern
the resolution of neighbourhood tree disputes in Victoria.
The Commission
recommends that the new Act be administered by the Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal (VCAT).
Origins of the project
1.6 This project responds to enquiries and suggestions from the community.1
The Commission was told that it is common for tree disputes
to arise about
encroaching roots, overhanging branches, leaf litter and concerns about trees
causing damage to property or harm to
people. Neighbourhood tree disputes can
create significant disharmony between neighbours and can be difficult to
resolve. Recouping
costs associated with tree works was also raised as a
difficult issue.
1.7 The Dispute Settlement Centre of Victoria (DSCV) offers a free statewide
dispute resolution service for neighbourhood disputes
in Victoria that includes
mediation. Concerns about neighbourhood trees were the third most common enquiry
to DSCV from December
2011 to May 2017.2 DSCV suggested that the community found
the existing common law remedies hard to access and confusing.3
1 The Commission received five enquiries on this issue from
2 Information provided by the Dispute Settlement Centre of Victoria (DSCV) as
part of a data request from the Commission, August 2017
and clarification of
data provided in May 2019. This is discussed in Ch 2.
3 Information provided by DSCV as part of a data request from the Commission,
August 2017.
1.8 Given the volume and frequency of neighbourhood
tree disputes, the Commission determined that a review of the current law
the resolution of these disputes was timely.
1.9 In June 2017 the Commission initiated the Neighbourhood Tree Disputes
inquiry. To confine the project within the parameters of
a community law reform
project, the terms of reference exclude consideration of disputes about trees on
public land or disputes about
trees that block sunlight and views.
1.10 This inquiry remains larger in scope than most community law reform
projects. This is because even a small neighbourhood tree
dispute can present a
range of complex and multifaceted law reform issues.
1.11 The terms of reference for the inquiry are on page xii.
The Commission’s process
1.12 The Commission Chair, the Hon. Philip Cummins AM established a Division
which he chaired. The Division members were Liana Buchanan,
Dr Ian Hardingham
QC, Professor Bernadette McSherry, Alison O’Brien PSM, and Gemma Varley
1.13 The Chair died in February 2019. Bruce Gardner PSM has chaired the final
stages of this inquiry.
1.14 The Commission has been greatly assisted by community contributions in
consultations and in submissions.
Submissions
1.15 In December 2017 a consultation paper was published identifying the
current law and outlining common types of tree disputes.
It put forward a range
of options for reform. The consultation paper invited members of the community
who had been affected by the
law or had a view about what the law should be to
make a submission.
1.16 Thirty-eight submissions were received, the majority of which are
available on the Commission’s website. A list of all
stakeholders who made
submissions is at Appendix A. Submissions were received from a broad
cross-section of interested parties including
arborists, academics, legal
practitioners, private home owners, local councils, industry bodies and
associations, and the Magistrates’
Court of Victoria.4
1.17 Confidential submissions have not been published on the
Commission’s website.
These confidential submissions have informed the Commission’s thinking.
However, in accordance with the Commission’s submission
policy, they have
not been referred to in this report unless permission has been sought from the
author. Where this has occurred,
no identifying information has been provided in
Consultations
1.18 In the course of this inquiry, the Commission undertook 16 formal
consultations with individuals and groups who have particular
experience or
knowledge of tree disputes.
1.19 Consultations were undertaken in inner metropolitan and outer Melbourne.
Responses were also received from regional Victoria.
Commission staff spoke with
members of the public, arborists, four local councils, an academic, and
representatives from government
agencies and departments. Consultation meetings
were also held with VCAT, the Land and Environment Court of New South Wales
and the Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal (QCAT).
4 The views expressed in the submissions are those of the individuals or
organisations who submit them and their publication does
any acceptance of, or agreement with, these views by the Commission. The
Commission’s Submissions’
Policy is available on its website:
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Submissions Policy
(Web Page, 5 March
https://www.lawreform.vic.gov.au/about-us/policies/
submissions-policy
1.20 A list of individuals and organisations the
Commission consulted with is at Appendix B.
1.21 An online survey was conducted with members of the community,
particularly those who might not have had the time to make a formal
submission.
The survey contained 15 questions about people’s experiences of trying
to resolve tree disputes with their neighbours
and how to improve the law to
has treated those submissions
anonymously for the purposes of this report. See
Appendix C for the survey.
Interstate reviews and tree dispute Acts
1.22 Reviews by other law reform bodies and interstate government agencies
were of great assistance to the Commission.5 Following
these reviews, New South
Wales, Queensland and Tasmania introduced legislation to govern the resolution
of tree disputes:
Trees (Disputes Between Neighbours) Act 2006
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants Act 2017
1.23 The Acts have modernised and simplified the law to better assist the
community in these states. Subsequent statutory reviews
on the effectiveness of
the new Acts in New South Wales and Queensland have also been of assistance.6
These reviews and reforms are
discussed in more detail in Chapter 3.
1.24 While it is helpful and appropriate to review and consider approaches
to tree disputes in other jurisdictions, these reforms
must be considered in
their legislative, financial and
social contexts. They have been a helpful guide for the Commission where
suited to local Victorian circumstances.
Structure of the report
1.25 This report is divided into 13 chapters.
considers the prevalence of neighbourhood tree disputes
in Victoria. It examines the common features of neighbourhood tree disputes
well as the impact they have on neighbours. It concludes by exploring some of
the factors that contribute to these disputes.
describes the current law that applies to the
resolution of these disputes and identifies some of its limitations.
considers the need for change in more detail. It
briefly examines dispute resolution pathways that have been introduced in other
Community responses to the preliminary reform ideas presented in
the consultation paper are also examined. It concludes by recommending
introduction of a new Act in Victoria to regulate neighbourhood tree disputes
and identifying the public policy principles that
should underpin it.
5 New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Neighbour and Neighbour Relations
(Report No 88, 1998); Department of Justice and
Attorney-General (Qld),
Review of Neighbourly Relations: Trees
(Discussion Paper, July 2008); Tasmania Law Reform Institute,
Trees and Hedges: Access to Sunlight and Views
(Report No 21, January
6 Department of Justice and Attorney-General (NSW),
Review of the
(Disputes Between Neighbours) Act 2006
(NSW) (Report, 2009); Queensland Law
Reform Commission,
Review of the
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and
Trees) Act 2011
(Report No 72, December 2015).
considers the scope of the new Act. It explores what
should be notified of an application that is made.
examines the importance of informal resolution of tree
disputes and how to improve and facilitate this.
explores the recommendation that VCAT should adjudicate
disputes under the new Act. It examines the way dedicated tree dispute Acts
operate interstate and identifies the type of jurisdiction that should be
granted to VCAT. It also considers VCAT’s processes
for managing those
considers the decision-making principles to be included
in the new Act to guide VCAT decision makers and the community about the
application
of the law. It also examines the role of experts in the
decision-making process.
explores the types of orders that should be available
under the new Act and how orders should be enforced and appealed.
looks at the complex issue of how a new Act should
interact with existing laws and regulations that already protect trees or limit
action in relation to trees on private land in Victoria.
recommends steps to better notify purchasers of land
and new owners about the existence of VCAT applications or orders made under
contains recommendations for providing the community
with clear and helpful information about how to resolve tree disputes. It also
explores possible ways to prevent these disputes from arising.
concludes this report and suggests other issues that
should be considered by the Victorian Government in designing a new Act, for
example the suitability of online dispute resolution for tree disputes.
Preliminary views on some matters beyond the scope of the
inquiry are also
provided. The report concludes with the recommendation that the operation of the
new Act should be reviewed after
five years to determine whether the Act is
achieving its objectives. The Commission identifies some matters for Government
consideration
when the Act is reviewed.
The scope of the
neighbourhood tree dispute problem
8 Introduction
8 Prevalence of tree disputes
12 Types of tree disputes
17 Impact of tree disputes on
19 Factors contributing to tree
24 The Commission’s conclusion
The scope of the
neighbourhood tree dispute problem
Introduction
2.1 This chapter examines the scope of the neighbourhood tree dispute problem
and identifies the frequency of tree disputes in Victoria.
It then explores the
common types of tree disputes that occur and the impact they have on
neighbours.
2.2 The potential for these disputes to seriously damage neighbour relations
makes it important for them to be resolved quickly and
effectively. Identifying
some of the underlying causes of disputes has helped the Commission to develop
its reform recommendations
and guide policy development for the new Act. These
underlying factors are discussed at the end of the chapter.
Prevalence of tree disputes
2.3 Determining the frequency and number of tree disputes in the community is
difficult. Disputes are not commonly litigated in court.
However, data provided
by the Dispute Settlement Centre of Victoria (DSCV) and anecdotal information
from local councils, government
bodies, arborists and lawyers indicate that a
significant number of tree disputes occur in Victoria.1
2.4 Disputes do not appear to be limited to particular locations or types of
property interest. The Commission received responses
from landowners, tenants,
businesses and other organisations in metropolitan, regional and rural areas
Tree disputes were reported between neighbours who
occupy their property only periodically, such as in the case of a holiday home,2
and where a large tree sits on a common boundary that is shared by multiple
properties.3
Tree disputes in the courts
2.5 Few tree disputes are litigated in the courts. According to DSCV data,
‘matters that proceed to Court are usually much more
serious, and
typically involve some degree of property destruction or damage’.4
1 Submissions 7 (Ben Kenyon), 21 (Pointon Partners Lawyers), 25 (City of
Boorondara), 30 (Law Institute of Victoria), 31 (Barwon Community
Service); Consultations 3 (HVP Plantations), 4 (Participants in facilitated
discussion at VTIO ArborCamp2018), 6 (Ben Kenyon),
8 (City of Boroondara), 9
(Nillumbik Shire Council), 10 (Baw Baw Shire Council), 12 (City of Port
Phillip), 13 (Aboriginal Victoria),
16 (Heritage Victoria); Survey Respondents
43, 79, 103; Information provided by the Dispute Settlement Centre of Victoria
as part of a data request from the Commission, August 2017 and
clarification of data provided in May 2019.
2 Submission 8 (Victoria Thieberger); Consultation 7 (Dispute Settlement
Centre of Victoria).
3 Submissions 8 (Victoria Thieberger), 38 (L. Barry Wollmer).
4 Information provided by DSCV as part of a data request from the Commission,
August 2017.
2.6 The infrequent litigation of less serious
matters appears to be largely because taking legal action is too expensive and
are uncertain.5 Tree disputes are not typically handled by community
legal centres or covered by Victoria Legal Aid grants for legal
assistance.6 The
low rates of litigation are discussed further in Chapter 3.
2.7 If legal action is commenced, it generally occurs in the
Magistrates’ Court of Victoria, which has jurisdiction over small
claims up to the value of $100,000.7 However, the number of tree disputes filed
and determined by the Magistrates’ Court
is unknown because the court does
not report these decisions and does not distinguish between the causes of
action, for example nuisance.
2.8 The Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal also hears cases about
problems caused by trees as part of its review jurisdiction
and Environment Act 1987
2.9 The Commission is aware of only six reported cases from higher courts9
within Victoria.10 The older case of
Barton v Chhibber
11 is the only
reported case heard by the Supreme Court of Victoria. A neighbourhood dispute
‘the heart of the matter’ in
another Victorian Supreme Court case pertaining to conditions of planning
permits.12 The
majority of reported cases from higher courts involving tree
disputes were initiated in the Magistrates’ Court, and later transferred
to the County Court.13
Volume of tree enquiries received by the Dispute
Settlement Centre of Victoria
2.10 Tree disputes that are not litigated are likely to go unrecorded unless
the parties have contacted DSCV. DSCV is part of the
Victorian Department of
Justice and Community Safety and provides free dispute resolution services
across 14 metropolitan and regional
locations in Victoria.14
2.11 Data from DSCV indicates that enquiries relating to trees15 were the
third most common enquiry to DSCV over the 5.5-year period
from December 2011
to May 2017. In that time 18,727 of 109,039 DSCV community enquiries
related to trees.16 This
represents an average of 17.2 per cent of
DSCV’s total workload over that period or approximately
3,400 enquiries per year. The rate remains relatively constant over that
time.17 The highest percentage of tree-related enquiries
(19.2 per cent)
occurred in 2012, with the lowest (15.7 per cent) recorded in 2014.18
2.12 DSCV provided a breakdown of cases received by season, highlighting an
increase in enquiries in the spring and summer months.
DSCV attributes this to
springtime vegetation growth and people spending more time outdoors.19
5 Submissions 21 (Pointon Partners Lawyers), 31 (Barwon Community Legal
Service); Survey Respondents 6, 53, 118.
6 Barwon Community Legal Service noted that community legal centres may not
have the resources to take matters to court and that Victoria
Legal Aid does not
assist with tree disputes: Submission 31. Applicable means testing may
disqualify an affected neighbour, depending
on their income and assets: Victoria Legal Aid, ‘12—Means
VLA Handbook for Lawyers
(Web Page, 28 September 2018)
<https://handbook.vla.vic.gov.au/handbook/12-means-test>.
Magistrates’ Court Act 1989
(definition of
‘jurisdictional limit’), 100. The jurisdiction of the
Magistrates’ Court of Victoria is explored
in more detail in Ch 7.
c v Bayside CC
, where the tree owner and neighbours wanted a tree protected under a
Vegetation Protection Order removed due to fears of damage/harm.
See also Clay
Lucas, ‘Appalling Display of Incompetence: Council Lashed in Stinging VCAT
(online, 23 May 2016) <https://
www.theage.com.au/national/victoria/appalling-display-of-incompetence-council-lashed-
in-stinging-vcat-ruling-20160522-gp10o5.html>.
9 This includes the County and Supreme Courts of Victoria. For more
information on Victorian courts and tribunals, see Court Services
Victorian Courts and Tribunals
(Web Page, 2019) <https://
www.courts.vic.gov.au/court-system/victorian-courts-and-tribunals
City of Richmond v Scantelbury
[1991] VicRp 44
[1991] 2 VR 38
Hiss v Galea
[2012] VCC 710
Marshall v Berndt
[2011] VCC 384
Corporation SP020030 v Keyt
[2016] VCC 1656
Pearson v Greater Shepparton
[2017] VCC 468
Traian v Ware
[1957] VicRp 28
[1957] VR 200.
11 (1988) Aust Torts Reports 80-185
12 See, eg,
Manderson v Wright
[2016] VSC 677
[42] which concerned a
neighbourhood dispute about whether the removal of native vegetation was
permitted pursuant to a restrictive
covenant and neighbourhood design plan.
13 See, eg,
Hiss v Galea
[2012] VCC 710
Marshall v Berndt
[2011] VCC 384
14 See generally Dispute Settlement Centre of Victoria,
Page, 4 January 2019) <https://
www.disputes.vic.gov.au/about-us
15 Cases are assigned one main issue type upon intake with DSCV. Many
enquiries involve multiple issues: these statistics reflect
enquiries that were
categorised on intake as relating to ‘trees’, ‘shrubs’
or ‘creepers’.
16 Information provided by DSCV as part of a data request from the
Commission, August 2017.
19 Information provided by DSCV as part of a data request from the
Commission, August 2017 and November 2018 and clarification of
data provided in
2.13 DSCV reported anecdotally that tree-related enquiries most commonly
involve overhanging branches and encroaching tree roots
that cause damage to
property as well as hedging that might obstruct the owners’ view. A
further quantitative breakdown of
specific tree-related issues affecting
neighbours who contact DSCV is not available.20 DSCV data also suggests
that it received
more enquiries in the relevant period from metropolitan areas
than regional areas.21
2.14 ENSPEC, an arboricultural consulting firm, noted some limitations in the
data reported in the consultation paper on the prevalence
of tree disputes in
the community:
What is not provided in [the DSCV] data is the number of [tree disputes] that
were trivial matters, such as falling leaves. It is
reasonable to expect that
most trivial complaints would not go beyond an initial enquiry. The DSCV
statistics provided suggest
that few of these may actually be cases of
genuine or substantial harm as only 5.3% of cases
are successfully resolved with DSCV assistance. A better analysis of the
available data, or better data, may provide a more accurate
picture of the scope
of the problem that actually requires an avenue of resolution provided through
reform of the law.... This begs
the question of whether there is actually a
significant issue, or just a high level of unreasonable expectation or confusion
community?22
2.15 Further consideration of the data from DSCV suggests that the number of
matters that progressed to mediation or reached assisted
settlement from
December 2011 to May 2017 is much smaller than the number of tree enquiries
DSCV originally received. Only
5.3% of the enquiries resulted in a dispute
resolution outcome -whether through mediation, or where DSCV facilitated an
for parties directly, or provided advice to enable parties to resolve
their matter. This differs from the average dispute resolution
outcome rate for
other matters which is much higher at 15-16%. This information indicates
that tree enquiries are less likely
than other matters to progress to a dispute
resolution outcome.23
2.16 As ENSPEC suggests this may be because not all of these original
enquiries amounted to disputes about ‘genuine or substantial
and perhaps some enquiries were from people who were merely seeking information.
DSCV points to a wide range of factors
to explain the lower resolution rates for
tree disputes that includes unclear rights and
obligations, minimal scope for negotiation and considerable barriers to
resolving through Court. Another factor identified is low
awareness in the
community about rights and obligations. It suggests that ‘many DSCV
customers contact the centre to purely
enquire about their rights and
obligations with regard to tree issues. At the time of contact, there may not be
a dispute or it may
be too early in the process for DSCV to facilitate a
resolution’.24 DSCV’s dispute resolution process is discussed in
Chapter 3. Several stages are identified before a matter is assessed as suitable
for mediation—clarifying issues in dispute,
answering questions and
discussing options.
2.17 While acknowledging that DSCV refers a smaller number of matters to
mediation than it receives as enquiries, the Commission
remains of the
view that the level of enquiries to DSCV (an average of approximately 3400
per year over the relevant period)
and the proportion of DSCV’s workload
that this represents, being 17.2%, are significant.25 Further, In the
financial year DSCV reported over 26,000 unique page views for
its online content relating specifically to trees.26
20 Information provided by DSCV as part of a data request from the
Commission, August 2017 and November 2018. DSCV also reports that
enquiries also
commonly relate to the obstruction of a view by a hedge. The obstruction of
sunlight and views is beyond the scope
of this inquiry.
21 Information provided by DSCV as part of a data request from the
Commission, August 2017 and November 2018.
22 Submission 18 (ENSPEC).
23 Information provided by DSCV as part of a data request from the
Commission, August 2017.
26 Information provided by DSCV as part of a data request from the
Commission, April 2019. DSCV expects this number to rise in the
future as these
webpages continue to be externally linked and are more easily found in internet
DSCV via email as part of a data request from
the Commission, November 2018.
Community responses about
the frequency of tree disputes
2.18 Submissions and consultations also suggested a high incidence of tree
disputes in the community. The Law Institute of Victoria
stated that tree
disputes ‘occur with relative frequency’27 and Barwon Community
Legal Service reported that between
April 2017 and March 2018 it provided legal
advice to eight clients with tree disputes.28 Arborists suggested that they come
tree disputes frequently during the course of their work.29
2.19 This accords with information provided by the Land and Environment Court
of New South Wales (NSWLEC) which estimated that in
New South Wales the tree
disputes that proceed through to the Court represent only a small proportion of
those occurring in the community.30
2.20 Many people in Victoria contact their local council, community legal
centre or an arborist for assistance with a tree dispute.31
Victorian councils
do not typically keep formal records of the number of enquiries relating to tree
disputes, which they view as
private, civil matters outside the role of local
councils. Local councils typically refer such enquiries to DSCV.32
2.21 However, some local councils were able to provide estimates on the
number of enquiries they receive. The number varies depending
on the degree of
vegetation in local council areas, the location of the council and
record-keeping practices. The City of Boroondara
reported that it receives
‘multiple daily enquiries’ from residents asking for help with tree
disputes.33 Nillumbik Shire
Council reported that it receives approximately two
enquiries a week.34 The City of Port Phillip estimated that it receives
approximately
20 enquiries a year.35 Baw Baw Shire Council reported that its
front desk staff receive enquiries about tree disputes ‘from
2.22 HVP Plantations is a private timber plantation business that shares
boundaries with rural and residential neighbours. It becomes
involved in
approximately 10 tree disputes a year, which it resolves informally.37
2.23 Aboriginal Victoria suggested that it receives 6 to 10 enquiries a week
from individuals wanting to know whether a particular
tree is protected under
Aboriginal Heritage Act 2006
(Vic) and how this might affect proposed
development works on nearby land.38 Heritage Victoria also reported that it
receives a small
number of enquiries about disputes between neighbours
concerning trees of heritage value.39
2.24 The Commission is of the view that the data from DSCV suggests that
issues about trees do arise frequently in the community (whether
or not they
become disputes) and that more clarity in the law and a clearer dispute
resolution process would be useful. This data
is supported by community
responses. The Commission is of the view that reforms may not only reduce the
large number of enquiries
to DSCV, but also better assist DSCV to resolve
27 Submission 30 (Law Institute of Victoria).
28 Submission 31 (Barwon Community Legal Service).
29 Submissions 7 (Ben Kenyon), 27 (Name withheld); Consultation 4
(Participants in facilitated discussion at VTIO ArborCamp2018).
30 Consultation 11 (Land and Environment Court of New South Wales).
31 Submissions 1 (Ian Collier), 4 (Name withheld), 8 (Victoria Thieberger),
17 (Name withheld), 25 (City of Boorondara), 31 (Barwon
Community Legal
Service), 34 (Allan Day), 36 (Monique Onezime); Consultations 1 (Aldo Taranto),
8 (City of Boroondara), 9 (Nillumbik
Shire Council), 10 (Baw Baw Shire Council),
12 (City of Port Phillip), 14 (Robert Mineo).
32 Consultations 7 (Dispute Settlement Centre of Victoria), 8 (City of
Boroondara), 9 (Nillumbik Shire Council), 10 (Baw Baw Shire
Council); 12 (City
of Port Phillip).
33 Submission 25 (City of Boroondara).
34 Consultation 9 (Nillumbik Shire Council).
35 Consultation 12 (City of Port Phillip).
36 Consultation 10 (Baw Baw Shire Council).
37 Consultation 3 (HVP Plantations).
38 Consultation 13 (Aboriginal Victoria).
39 Consultation 16 (Heritage Victoria).
2.25 The consultation paper identified that encroachment of branches or tree
roots are the most common cause of tree-related problems
in cases brought before
a court. This likely reflects the seriousness of the damage, which would justify
the expense and time involved
in taking court action.40
2.26 Case law suggests that overhanging branches can affect neighbouring
properties by taking up space or dropping leaf litter, and
by causing damage to
property by exerting pressure on or falling onto structures.41 Encroaching roots
may cause damage to structures
and foundations, as well as to other plants, and
may pose a safety hazard.42 Trees may also cause harm to neighbours by affecting
their health or causing injuries, including by triggering allergies, causing
injury from falling branches or trees, or creating trip
hazards from structures
compromised by root growth.43
2.27 The most common tree disputes referred to in community responses were
• overhanging branches44
• encroaching roots45 or
• the presence of large trees46 or the proximity of trees to boundaries
between properties.47
2.28 Community responses also reveal disputes about:
• increased bushfire risk48
• economic loss49
• neighbours objecting to tree works conducted by neighbouring tree
• tree works undertaken without the tree owner’s consent or that
harm the tree51
• particular issues unique to rural settings.52
2.29 A smaller number of people identified circumstances involving dead
trees53, the spread of weeds54 or trees hosting pests55 as
other conditions
causing tree disputes.
40 See generally
City of Richmond v Scantelbury
[1991] VicRp 44
[1991] 2 VR 38
Yang v Scerri
[2007] NSWLEC 592
Hiss v Galea
[2012] VCC 710
Owners Corporation SP020030 v Keyt
[2016] VCC 1656
Rogerson v Dean
[2017] NSWLEC 1209.
41 See, eg,
Wilson v Farah
[2017] NSWLEC 1006
Yang v Scerri
[2007] NSWLEC 592.
42 John Roberts, Nick Jackson and Mark Smith,
Tree Roots in the Built
Environment
(Arboricultural Association, UK, 2005) 369.
43 See, eg,
Owners Corporation SP020030 v Keyt
[2016] VCC 1656
Leonardi v Watson & Harloe
[2015] QCATA 192
[2015] NSWLEC 1057
Rogerson v Dean
[2017] NSWLEC 1209
[2008] NSWLEC 1249.
44 Submissions 5 (Name withheld), 9 (Dr Karen Smith), 19 (Anne Richter), 31
(Barwon Community Legal Service), 36 (Monique Onezime);
Consultations 8 (City of
Boroondara), 9 (Nillumbik Shire Council); information provided by DSCV as part
of a data request from the
Commission, November 2018. In addition, 75.38% of
survey respondents reported overhanging branches as the main issue in their tree
dispute: Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Neighbourhood Tree Disputes Survey
The Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal (QCAT) also
identified that disputes over overhanging branches are the most common
dispute for which people take legal action in QCAT. In 2018, approximately 52
out of a total of 205 tree disputes concerned
overhanging branches. A further 33
applications included overhanging branches as one of the reasons for the
application: Consultation
15 (Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal).
45 Submissions 1 (Ian Collier), 17 (Name withheld), 22 (Name withheld), 30
(Law Institute of Victoria); Consultations 4 (Participants
in facilitated
discussion at VTIO ArborCamp2018), 6 (Ben Kenyon), 10 (Baw Baw Shire Council),
12 (City of Port Phillip); information
provided by DSCV as part of a data
request from the Commission, November 2018. In addition, 53.85% of survey
respondents reported
encroaching tree roots as the main issue in their tree
dispute: Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Neighbourhood Tree Disputes Survey
46 Submissions 1 (Ian Collier), 22 (Name withheld), 24 (Name withheld), 36
(Monique Onezime).
47 Submissions 1 (Ian Collier), 6 (Name withheld); Consultations 8 (City of
Boroondara), 9 (Nillumbik Shire Council).
48 Submissions 5 (Name withheld), 6 (Name withheld), 13 (Mandy Collins), 19
(Name withheld), 22 (Name withheld); Consultation 10 (Baw
49 Submissions 22 (Name withheld), 28 (HVP Plantations); Survey Respondent
50 Consultations 8 (City of Boroondara), 9 (Nillumbik Shire Council), 10 (Baw
Baw Shire Council).
51 Submission 17 (Name withheld); Consultation 7 (Dispute Settlement Centre
of Victoria).
52 Submissions 13 (Mandy Collins), 28 (HVP Plantations); Consultation 10 (Baw
Baw Shire Council).
53 Submission 19 (Name withheld); Consultation 14 (Robert Mineo). People may
perceive a dead tree as an even greater risk of damage
or harm. One community
member explained that their neighbour’s tree is ‘dry and dead and
presents an even greater fire
danger’: Submission 19 (Name withheld).
54 Submission 30 (Law Institute of Victoria); Consultation 4 (Participants in
facilitated discussion at VTIO ArborCamp2018); Survey
Respondent 99.
55 Submission 4 (Name withheld).
Damage to property and
dropping of leaf litter
2.30 The most common complaint spoken about to the Commission was damage to
property,56 followed closely by tree disputes over the
dropping of leaf
2.31 Damage to a dividing fence was the most common example of damage to
property.58 Other types of damage to property, attributed
commonly to
encroaching roots,59 included damage to building foundations,60 paving,61
driveways,62 stormwater facilities, polyvinyl
chloride (PVC) pipes,63 substrate
(in the form of heaving)64 and landscaping (for example, grass and soil).65
2.32 Concerns about leaf litter included problems with leaves, nuts, fruit,
twigs or small branches, depending on the species of tree.66
Community members
affected by leaf litter reported that it resulted in the blocking of roof
gutters67 (most common), the littering
of driveways, open spaces and pools,68
and led to noise, for example, from the dropping of gumnuts or berries onto hard
surfaces.69
Harm to people
2.33 A smaller number of people cited harm (or injury) to people as a reason
for tree disputes, particularly due to concerns about
living near overhanging
branches, encroaching roots and large trees.70 HVP Plantations described these
‘life and limb issues’.71 Some
specifically expressed concern about the risk of harm to children playing
in backyards,72 the triggering of allergies due to pollen73 and loss of
life.74 The City of Boroondara receives approximately six
claims relating to
pollen allergies each year.75
2.34 One submission noted ‘an insurance company may be able to
restore/rebuild a building damaged by a tree, but it cannot restore
body or human life’.76
2.35 The City of Boroondara advised that it had received reports from
neighbours experiencing ‘psychological distress’
due to the fear and
stress of living near a tree they think may drop or fall.77 A survey respondent
reported that they had been involved
with tree disputes involving
‘psychological harm’ caused by the ‘assumed risk of tree
failure’.78
56 Submissions 1 (Ian Collier), 22 (Name withheld), 27 (Name withheld), 30
(Law Institute of Victoria); Consultations 1 (Aldo Taranto),
4 (Participants in facilitated discussion at VTIO ArborCamp2018), 9
(Nillumbik Shire Council), 8 (City of Boroondara); In addition,
50.77% of survey
respondents reported damage to property as the main issue in their tree dispute:
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Neighbourhood Tree Disputes Survey
QCAT also identified that tree disputes over damage to
property are the second-most common type of dispute for which people take legal
action in QCAT: Consultation 15 (Queensland Civil and Administrative
57 Submissions 1 (Ian Collier), 25 (City of Boorondara), 27 (Name withheld),
36 (Monique Onezime); Consultations 6 (Ben Kenyon), 10
(Baw Baw Shire Council).
In addition, 49.23% of survey respondents reported leaf litter as the main issue
in their tree dispute:
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Neighbourhood Tree
Disputes Survey
58 Submissions 1 (Ian Collier), 5 (Name withheld), 28 (HVP Plantations);
Consultations 3 (HVP Plantations), 8 (City of Boroondara),
10 (Baw Baw Shire
Council); Survey Respondent 53.
59 Submissions 30 (Law Institute of Victoria), 31 (Barwon Community Legal
Service); Consultation 4 (Participants in facilitated discussion
ArborCamp2018).
60 Consultation 8 (City of Boroondara).
62 Consultation 6 (Ben Kenyon).
63 Consultations 4 (Participants in facilitated discussion at VTIO
ArborCamp2018), 8 (City of Boroondara).
64 Consultation 4 (Participants in facilitated discussion at VTIO
ArborCamp2018).
65 Submission 1 (Ian Collier); Survey Respondent 99.
66 Submissions 1 (Ian Collier), 5 (Name withheld), 9 (Dr Karen Smith), 27
(Name withheld); Consultation 6 (Ben Kenyon).
67 Submissions 1 (Ian Collier), 5 (Name withheld), 27 (Name withheld), 36
(Monique Onezime); Consultation 9 (Nillumbik Shire Council).
68 Submission 27 (Name withheld); Information provided by a community member
to the Commission, 1 March 2018.
69 Information provided by a community member to the Commission, 1 March
2018; Survey Respondent 72.
70 Submissions 5 (Name withheld), 6 (Name withheld), 9 (Dr Karen Smith), 19
(Name withheld), 22 (Name withheld), 24 (Name withheld),
36 (Monique Onezime);
Consultations 3 (HVP Plantations), 6 (Ben Kenyon), 9 (Nillumbik Shire Council),
10 (Baw Baw Shire Council).
71 Consultation 3 (HVP Plantations).
72 Consultations 3 (HVP Plantations), 9 (Nillumbik Shire Council).
73 Submission 9 (Dr Karen Smith); Consultations 6 (Ben Kenyon), 8 (City of
Boroondara).
74 Submissions 24 (Name withheld), 38 (L. Barry Wollmer).
75 Consultation 8 (City of Boroondara).
76 Submission 38 (L. Barry Wollmer).
77 Consultation 8 (City of Boroondara).
78 Survey Respondent 108.
2.36 Some people reported that the mere presence of
trees in some circumstances, without any actual or tangible adverse consequence,
was the cause of their dispute.79 For example, the presence of large trees80
resulted in heightened fear or anticipation of falling
trees or branches,81
especially in windy conditions.82 Neighbours described concerns about living
near trees that were 16 metres
to 50 metres high.83 One affected neighbour
stated, ‘The
tree that really frightens me is a big 40 meter single tree
‘trunk’ which doesn’t have boughs and is entirely inside
tree owner’s] boundary but leaning towards my house. I feel very nervous
seeing it bending around in strong winds’.84
Another community member
‘I consider that I am in danger of a huge tree or part thereof, failing
on my house and seriously injuring, maiming or killing
someone on my
property’.85 Large dead trees were also described as posing a greater risk
of eventually falling.86
Bushfire risk
2.37 Some responses also identified that tree disputes can occur about the
bushfire risk posed by trees.87 One person suggested that
they live in a country
town with a designated high bushfire risk and that their property’s
Bushfire Attack Level (BAL) rating,88
as assessed by the County Fire Authority,
was high because of vegetation on neighbouring land. The
community member suggested that the high cost of removing the vegetation
contributed to the dispute being left unresolved. However,
it was noted that
this cost ‘would be miniscule’ compared to the potential loss of
property if a bushfire occurred.89
Economic loss
2.38 One submission suggested that trees on neighbouring land could
contaminate their land or potentially lead to economic loss, for
example in the
form of loss of business.90 Another submission was concerned about the
devaluation of their property due to the perceived
real risk posed by a neighbour’s tree.91 HVP Plantations raised the
issue of the economic cost of tree maintenance along newly
subdivided boundaries
for rural landowners.92 The costs associated with abating trees was also
noted.93 One survey respondent described
the effect of neighbouring trees on
their business:
Use of our headland will be affected...Trees are expected to reach final
height of around 12–15m and will negatively affect
our viticultural
business. Needles of this species (pine radiata) is expected to spoil the soil
quality, which again will impact
our [business] with expected long term loss of
fruit quality and quantity.94
Objecting to tree works conducted by the tree
2.39 Not all tree disputes focus on how a tree is adversely affecting
neighbouring property.95 Some tree disputes may occur when a
neighbour wants to
retain surrounding vegetation and objects to the pruning or removal of a tree by
its owner.96
79 Submissions 9 (Dr Karen Smith), 22 (Name withheld), 24 (Name withheld), 27
(Name withheld), 30 (Law Institute of Victoria), 36
(Monique Onezime);
Consultations 1 (Aldo Taranto), 3 (HVP Plantations), 8 (City of Boroondara), 9
(Nillumbik Shire Council), 10 (Baw
Baw Shire Council).
80 Submissions 24 (Name withheld), 27 (Name withheld), 38 (L. Barry
81 Submissions 30 (Law Institute of Victoria), 36 (Monique Onezime);
Consultations 1 (Aldo Taranto), 3 (HVP Plantations), 8 (City
of Boroondara),
9 (Nillumbik Shire Council), 10 (Baw Baw Shire Council).
82 Submissions 3 (HVP Plantations), 9 (Dr Karen Smith), 22 (Name withheld),
24 (Name withheld).
83 Submissions 1 (Ian Collier), 22 (Name withheld), 24 (Name withheld), 34
(Allan Day); Survey Respondent 93.
84 Submission 24 (Name withheld).
85 Submission 38 (L. Barry Wollmer).
86 Submission 19 (Name withheld); Consultation 14 (Robert Mineo).
87 Submissions 5 (Name withheld), 6 (Name withheld), 13 (Mandy Collins), 19
(Name withheld), 22 (Name withheld); Consultation 10 (Baw
88 A Bushfire Attack Level (BAL) is a way of measuring a building’s
ability to withstand bushfire attack: Department of Environment,
Land, Water and
Planning (Vic), ‘Minimum Construction Standard’,
Building in
Bushfire Prone Areas
(Web Page, 4 April 2019) <https://
www.planning.vic.
gov.au/policy-and-strategy/bushfire-protection/building-in-bushfire-prone-areas>.
89 Submission 13 (Mandy Collins).
90 Confidential submission.
91 Submission 22 (Name withheld).
92 Submission 28 (HVP Plantations).
93 Submission 19 (Name withheld), 36 (Monique Onezime)
94 Survey Respondent 99.
95 Submissions 17 (Name withheld), 31 (Barwon Community Legal Service).
96 Consultations 8 (City of Boroondara), 9 (Nillumbik Shire Council), 10 (Baw
Baw Shire Council).
2.40 The Commission observes that trees on private
land are usually privately owned, but the benefits of living in a treed
environment
are shared. Neighbours may enjoy the increased shade, cooling
properties, biodiversity and aesthetic value of a neighbour’s
tree.97 Baw
Baw Shire Council suggested that its residents are generally environmentally
conscious and prefer to retain as much
vegetation as possible.98 It reported
that many of the enquiries it receives are from concerned residents wanting
to know whether
not a neighbouring tree owner is permitted to cut or remove a tree,
especially where the resident believes the tree is a significant
tree protected
under the local council’s planning scheme, or forms part of an endorsed
landscape plan contained in a planning
2.41 Nillumbik Shire Council stated that approximately half of the enquiries
removed on neighbouring property.100 The Council noted that sometimes residents
make early enquiries before
they become involved in a tree dispute to ascertain rights and
responsibilities about a neighbouring tree and any applicable planning
or exemptions.101
Tree works undertaken without consent or that harm
2.42 Another type of tree dispute may occur where an affected neighbour
decides to take matters into their own hands and trim or cut
down a tree in
excess of their right to abate102 and without the permission or consent of the
tree owner.103 This may involve trespassing
on the tree owner’s land.104
Abatement is discussed in Chapter 3.
2.43 Sometimes a tree itself may be affected by activities carried out on
neighbouring land. One person, also a tree owner, described
a situation where
their neighbour began excavation along the boundary fence which included cutting
back at least 15 substantial roots
their tree, estimated to be over 100 years old. The tree was located two
metres from the boundary and the submitter believes this
activity seriously
affected the health of their tree.105
2.44 In some situations, if a tree dispute remains unresolved, people have
resorted to illegal action such as poisoning their neighbour’s
In one case, reported in the media, a couple were convicted and fined for
criminal damage in the Geelong Magistrates’
Court after
they pleaded guilty to poisoning more than 40 cypress trees on neighbouring
properties.107 The Geelong Advertiser reported that the
couple were alleged to
have poisoned the trees following longstanding disputes over the trees which
they claimed had caused root
damage to their land and property.108
97 That trees have a quantifiable economic benefit is increasingly well
recognised. See, eg, the discussion in Greg M Moore, ‘The
Importance and
Value of Urban Forests as Climate Changes’ (2012) 129(5)
The Victorian
98 For example, Baw Baw Shire Council informed the Commission that their
local community strongly support large, old trees and have
created the
Drouin Ficifolia Festival to celebrate some of them: Consultation 10 (Baw Baw
Shire Council). The community interest
group, Friends of Drouin’s Trees,
also operates in Baw Baw Shire and works to conserve and raise awareness about
significant
trees and vegetated spaces in Drouin. The group has also published a
booklet that ‘aims to showcase the incredible wealth of
remnant and planted trees’: Friends of Drouin’s Trees,
(Booklet, 2018) 1.
99 Consultation 10 (Baw Baw Shire Council). 100 Consultation 9 (Nillumbik
Shire Council).
102 Abatement is a ‘self-help’ remedy developed under the common
law for any type of private nuisance. In the context
of tree disputes,
it allows neighbours to take matters into their own hands and abate the
interference caused by the tree
up to boundary lines without entering the tree
owner’s land: see
Lemmon v Webb
[1895] AC 1;
Young v Wheeler
[1987] Aust Torts Reports 80–126, 68,970.
103 Consultation 7 (Dispute Settlement Centre of Victoria).
104 See, eg, Order of Magistrate J Lesser (Magistrates’ Court of
Victoria, H13012408, 14 February 2018) referred to in Khaleda
‘Every Neighbour’s Worst Nightmare: Family Comes Home to Find
Beloved Trees Destroyed by Chainsaw Wielding Man’,
Daily Mail Australia
(online,11 May 2017) <https://
www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-4494582/Family-returns-home-backyard-trees-CHOPPED-down.html
105 Submission 17 (Name withheld).
106 Consultation 6 (Ben Kenyon).
107 Order of Magistrate M P Coghlan (Magistrates’ Court of Victoria,
F13605089, 19 January 2016).
108 Karen Matthews, ‘Geelong Court—Couple Pleads Guilty to
Poisoning Neighbours’ Trees’,
Geelong Advertiser
(online, 20
January 2016)
www.geelongadvertiser.com.au/news/crime-court/geelong-court-lovely-banks-couple-pleads-guilty-to-poisoning-neighbours-trees/
news-story/e65a9b00bdf98c5f7938c4e88ce2d2ba>.
Tree disputes in rural
2.45 HVP Plantations told the Commission that in the rural context, the
escape of livestock following damage to a fence caused by
a tree can be a
concern as well as the cross- pollination of plant species.109 HVP also
identified that concerns about trees arise
where ‘treed land adjoin
habitation’ and there is a ‘risk that trees will fall across people
or buildings’.110
Others identified that concerns can arise over the
bushfire risk posed by vegetation on neighbouring land in country areas.111
Other types of tree disputes
2.46 The Law Institute of Victoria (LIV) noted the role of conservation
covenants in tree disputes. Conservation covenants are voluntary
entered into by landowners to protect vegetation on their land (see Chapter
10). These agreements bind all future
owners and prevent development that will
interfere with the protected vegetation.112 The LIV explained:
[W]here farming and conservation interact, each landowner may be concerned
that the neighbouring operations will create obstacles
for their individual
goals as landowners:
a farmer may be concerned by the spread of weeds, or an increase in native
fauna such as kangaroos, as a result of the conservation
covenant, whereas the
covenantor might be concerned with chemical spray drift, soil disturbance and
noise, caused by farming operations.113
2.47 Arborists and local councils reported that tree disputes can also arise
in the development context when, for example, a developer
may be attempting to
remove trees without
a permit or damaging trees on neighbouring land.114 The trend of
‘moonscaping’ in developments to remove all existing
vegetation on a
plot to make way for built structures was also noted.115
2.48 Tree disputes have also been known to occur over the removal of or
damage to Aboriginal scarred trees or other culturally significant
vegetation.116
2.49 Tree disputes can be multifaceted and may involve a combination of
factors described above. As one community member described:
My neighbour’s tree branches overhang the boundary fence and intrude
into my yard. The trees are pushing the fence and a section
of fence has become
loose. The trees pose a fire risk as they are only 1.5 metres away from my
house. The tree branches reach the
roof gutters of my house and fill the gutters
with leaves and branches.117
109 Consultation 3 (HVP Plantations).
110 Submission 28 (HVP Plantations).
111 Submission 13 (Mandy Collins); Consultation 10
(Baw Baw Shire Council).
112 Submission 3
Institute of Victoria); see, eg, Department of the Environment and Energy (Cth),
Conservation Covenants
http://www.environment.gov.au/biodiversity/conservation/covenants
113 Submission 30 (Law Institute of Victoria).
114 Consultation 6 (Ben Kenyon), Submission 12 (City of Port Phillip).
115 Consultation 6 (Ben Kenyon), Submission 12 (Dr Gregory Moore OAM).
116 Consultation 13 (Aboriginal Victoria). Scarred trees have had
their bark removed for various purposes by Aboriginal
people. These
trees are protected at law:
Aboriginal Heritage Act 2006
see also Victorian Government, ‘
Aboriginal Scarred
Aboriginal Victoria
(Brochure, June 2008)
<https://w.
www.vic.gov.au/aboriginalvictoria/heritage/aboriginal-cultural-heritage-of-victoria/aboriginal-
places-object
s-and-land-management.html>. Scarred
trees are discussed in more detail in Ch 10; recently there has been
Djab Wurrung people in western Victoria for highway upgrades: see
Hayman-Reber, ‘Djab Wurrung Protestors Continue Their Fight for Sacred
(online, 23 March 2019) <
https://www.sbs.com.au/
nitv/article/2019/03/23/djab-wurrung-protesters-continue-their-fight-sacred-trees
117 Submission 5 (Name withheld).
Impact of tree disputes
on neighbours
2.50 The following negative impacts of tree disputes were raised in responses
to the consultation paper:
• the breakdown of neighbour relations and cessation of all
communication118
• incurring significant costs and being out-of-pocket119
• being unable to pay for the costs of repairs or maintenance120
• having to sell the affected property and move away121
• economic loss (especially in regional areas where land is farmed or
used commercially)122
• feeling frustrated and distressed because of involvement in a
protracted dispute 123
• being anxious or fearful about a tree falling and causing damage or
harm, especially during turbulent weather124
• having to call the police or being charged with a criminal offence
(for example, assault) resulting from an escalated tree
dispute.125
2.51 The Tasmania Law Reform Institute identifies that these disputes can
have ‘consequences for the wider community through
their potential to
create civic discord and lead to instances where laws are ignored or purposely
broken’.126
2.52 The stress and anxiety that can be caused by tree disputes is compounded
by the frustration people experience when they attempt
to resolve these
disputes. Confusion can arise about rights and responsibilities, potentially
exacerbating existing tensions and
prolonging disputes.
Breakdown of neighbour relations
2.53 Like other types of neighbourhood dispute, tree disputes can severely
affect once- amicable neighbour relationships or may be
the final straw in a
pre-existing conflict.127 They can create considerable stress and anxiety and
can significantly impair people’s
experience of living in their homes.128
The LIV explained that tree disputes ‘often affect an individual’s
right to quiet
enjoyment of their land, which can have a significant impact on
their livelihood.’129
2.54 The proximity of one’s neighbours can lead to more frequent
reminders about interference and interactions with them, and
the feeling of
having one’s sense of ownership challenged, and so tree disputes can
escalate quickly with serious consequences.130
118 Submissions 6 (Name withheld), 17 (Name withheld); Consultation 1 (Aldo
119 Submissions 1 (Ian Collier), 19 (Name withheld).
120 Submissions 24 (Name withheld), 31 (Barwon Community Legal Service);
Survey Respondent 6.
121 Consultation 1 (Aldo Taranto); Survey Respondent 61.
122 Survey Respondent 99.
123 Submission 22 (Name withheld).
124 Submissions 22 (Name withheld), 24 (Name withheld), 36 (Monique Onezime);
Survey Respondent 108.
125 Submissions 24 (Name withheld); Survey Respondent 44.
126 Tasmania Law Reform Institute,
Problem Trees and Hedges: Access to
Sunlight and Views
(Report No 21, January 2016) 8.
127 Victoria Legal Aid,
Disputes With Neighbours
(Web Page, 25 March
www.legalaid.vic.gov.au/find-legal-answers/disputes-with-
neighbours>; Tasmania Law Reform Institute,
Problem Trees and Hedges:
Access to Sunlight and Views
(Report No 21, January 2016) 8.
128 Submissions 6 (Name withheld); 17 (Name withheld); 22 (Name withheld), 24
(Name withheld), 36 (Monique Onezime); Survey Respondents
44, 61, 108; Lynda
Cheshire and Robin Fitzgerald, ‘From Private Nuisance to Criminal
Behaviour: Neighbour Problems and Neighbourhood
Context in an Australian
City’ (2015) 30(3)
Housing Studies
100, 101; Mediation SA,
Preventing Conflicts in the Modern Neighbourhood: Tips on Being a Good
(Guide, 2015) 61.
129 Submission 30 (Law Institute of Victoria).
130 Submissions 9 (Dr Karen Smith), 24 (Name withheld); Consultation 12 (City
of Port Phillip); Survey Respondent 44.
2.55 Some community members who had experienced a
tree dispute described having a poor relationship with their neighbour as a
This ranged from a relationship becoming ‘strained’,132
or being verbally ‘abuse[d] over the fence’,133 through
intervention.134
2.56 Tree disputes can also lead to applications for a personal safety
intervention order.135 In Miles v Barca136 Justice Byrne of
the Supreme Court
Although there have been pre-existing differences, even feuds, between the
neighbours, the incident which provoked this proceeding
concerned a manna gum
tree which grows on the Miles property close to the Barca boundary.137
Significant costs
2.57 In some cases, the cost of repairing damaged property, or of tree works
or engaging an arborist may be quite substantial. These
costs may not be able to
be recouped from the tree owner. For example, one person stated that it would
cost over $2000 to have overhanging
branches cut up to the boundary line.138
2.58 An arborist recounted a tree dispute concerning the roots of a tree that
had grown into and under a neighbouring property. This
had destroyed storm water
facilities, which led to heaving of substrate and caused the corner of the
building to drop. PVC pipes
were also broken. The total cost of the damage was
estimated to be over $60,000.139
2.59 Some people noted that they simply could not pay for the cost of tree
works or the cost of repairs.140
Emotional toll of tree disputes
2.60 Some community members described the emotional toll of being involved in
a tree dispute. They reported feelings of frustration
and distress, especially
with protracted disputes that cannot be resolved.141
2.61 Some people also reported feeling anxious or fearful about occupying
their homes, or yards especially during turbulent weather
or bushfire
Greater impact on vulnerable people
2.62 Some people in the community can face greater challenges when trying to
resolve tree disputes. Barwon Community Legal Service
(BCLS) noted that the
eight clients who sought its legal assistance with a tree dispute between April
2017 and March 2018 were ‘largely
the most vulnerable in our community
being elderly or suffering from mental illness’ and that all of these
clients ‘identified
their income level as low with the majority receiving
their only income from Centrelink’.143
2.63 Arborist Robert Mineo suggested that some older people may become more
frequently involved in tree disputes because it is more
difficult for them to
maintain and manage problem trees.144 Financial incapacity to engage an arborist
to assess a tree or prune
overhanging branches was also noted in a
submission.145
131 Submissions 6 (Name withheld), 17 (Name withheld); Consultation 1 (Aldo
132 Submission 22 (Name withheld).
133 Submission 6 (Name withheld).
134 Submissions 24 (Name withheld); Survey Respondent 44.
135 See, eg,
Miles v Barca
(2003) VSC 376
; Victoria Legal Aid,
Disputes With Neighbours
(Web Page, 25 March 2019) <
www.legalaid.vic.gov.
au/find-legal-answers/disputes-with-neighbours>. A personal safety
intervention order is an order made by a magistrate to protect
a person from
physical or mental harm caused by someone who is not a family member.
136 (2003) VSC 376
Miles v Barca
(2003) VSC 376
138 Survey Respondent 72.
139 Consultation 4 (Participants in facilitated discussion at VTIO
ArborCamp2018).
140 Submissions 24 (Name withheld), 31 (Barwon Community Legal Service);
Survey Respondent 6.
141 Submissions 22 (Name withheld), 36 (Monique Onezime).
142 Submissions 22 (Name withheld), 24 (Name withheld), 36 (Monique Onezime);
Survey respondent 108.
143 Submission 31 (Barwon Community Legal Service). 144 Consultation 14
(Robert Mineo).
145 Submission 6 (Name withheld).
2.64 BCLS gave an example of a client who is
‘elderly so cannot cut and return the branches herself nor can she afford
her aged pension on hiring someone [to do so]’.146
2.65 One person stated, ‘I am now left with gutters and downpipes full
of leaves and debris which is a constant, expensive and
losing battle for a
70-year-old to maintain’.147
2.66 Another stated:
Neighbours trees hang over [the] fence and close to my roof, I’m a
pensioner and can’t cut them myself and can’t
afford to have them
cut constantly ... I can’t do it physically. It’s dangerous I could
get hurt and ... the financial
burden is too much.148
2.67 DSCV explained that ‘Older people and pensioners are often left
feeling disempowered. They do not have support, language
skills, money or
confidence to take legal action. They may also be intimidated by
mediation.’ Accordingly, ‘DSCV takes
steps that participation occurs
with adequate support to address any power imbalance, interpreter services
to combat language issues and referrals to legal services or financial
counsellors as required’.149
Factors contributing to tree disputes
2.68 In exploring community responses to the consultation paper, the
Commission has identified factors that contribute to tree disputes.
All of these
factors can prolong and heighten disputes.
Breakdown in communication
2.69 Almost all available community resources about tree disputes stress the
importance of communicating respectfully with neighbours
in recognition of the
fact that communication can quickly descend into conflict.150
2.70 Many affected neighbours reported that when they approached the tree
owner, they were ignored or, in some cases, met with
hostility.151 A lack
of clarity in the law means that there is no motivation for a neighbour to
engage in conversations
or be reasonably expected to manage their tree in a
certain way. It was also stated that pre-existing conflict between neighbours
can cause or exacerbate tree disputes.152
Lack of knowledge about trees
Lack of understanding about the biology of trees
2.71 Many arborists noted that a lack of knowledge about trees contributed to
the occurrence of tree disputes. Many community members
are unaware of how trees
live and grow, and how they interact with built structures in urban
environments.153 This lack of knowledge
leads to negative perceptions within the
community about living near trees, described by arborists as generally
‘misplaced’154
or ‘dramatically inflated’.155
146 Submission 31 (Barwon Community Legal Service).
147 Submission 1 (Ian Collier).
148 Submission 6 (Name withheld).
149 Consultation 7 (Dispute Settlement Centre of Victoria) and clarification
of data information provided in May 2019.
150 See, eg, Victoria Law Foundation, ‘
Neighbours, the Law and You:
Your Guide to Neighbourhood Laws in Victoria
Victoria Legal Aid
(Brochure, March 2015) 4 <https://
www.victorialawfoundation.org.au/publication/neighbours-the-law-and-you/read
Peter Cotter, ‘Neighbour Disputes’ in Naomi Saligari (ed),
Law Handbook 2019: Your Practical Guide to the Law in Victoria
Legal Service, 41st ed, 2019) 539–40.
151 Submissions 6 (Name withheld), 36 (Monique Onezime), 38 (L. Barry
Wollmer); Consultation 1 (Aldo Taranto); Survey Respondents
152 Consultation 11 (Land and Environment Court of New South Wales).
153 Submissions 9 (Dr Karen Smith), 12 (Dr Gregory Moore OAM), 18 (ENSPEC),
25 (City of Boorondara); Consultations 2 (Dr Gregory Moore
OAM), 4 (Participants
in facilitated discussion at VTIO ArborCamp2018), 6 (Ben Kenyon).
154 Consultation 2 (Dr Gregory Moore OAM).
155 Consultation 6 (Ben Kenyon).
2.72 Dr Gregory Moore OAM stated that ‘we don’t understand our
own flora’. He explained that most people do not
know that, for example,
once the canopy of an oak tree has fully formed, it remains that way, with no
dramatic changes. Similarly,
eucalypts are misunderstood—these trees
repeatedly shoot up and ‘die back’ as part of their natural growth
not because they are dying. Dr Moore also stated that many people
attribute summer limb drop156 to certain species of trees, even
though there is
no arboricultural data or evidence to suggest some species of tree are more
prone to this than others.157
2.73 Arborists at VTIO ArborCamp agreed that ‘education is a big
issue’ and that a lack of education and knowledge fuels
tree disputes.
Many of these arborists suggested that they play a significant role in educating
the public on how trees grow. It
was identified that better education about the
biology of trees, tree management and the importance of
the urban forest could alleviate neighbours’ concerns about trees. The
Commission was told that most people do not realise that
properly managing a
tree is a long-term task, sometimes with no quick fix.158
Incorrect assumptions about the causes of problems
2.74 ENSPEC, an arboricultural consulting firm, told the Commission that
healthy trees pose no greater risk than built structures
in urban and
residential settings. However, it is common for people to fear the dropping of
overhanging branches or the falling
of entire trees, especially in storms, more
than the failure of other structures on or near their property. ENSPEC further
Management of unreasonable risk is appropriate; however, the elimination of
all risk from any cause, including trees, is not practical.
The very small risk
of physical harm to persons that the total population of trees represent is
outweighed by the benefits that the
trees provide. Overall risk from trees is
extremely low.159
2.75 Many arborists suggest that it is common for people to believe that
trees pose a risk or are at fault without any evidence. The
perception about the
tree often does not accord with tree biology or arboriculture.160 Arborist Ben
Kenyon noted that many engineers
and plumbers wrongly attribute structural or
plumbing damage to neighbouring trees, thus fuelling people’s misplaced
perceptions
and disputes.161
2.76 A further issue can arise where, despite an arborist’s assessment
that a tree poses no risk of damage or harm, people insist
on pruning or cutting
off overhanging branches thereby damaging the health of a tree and creating an
increased risk. Dr Moore explained
that pruning a branch results in changes to
the dynamic forces of a tree, which means it may shed a branch elsewhere. This
increase if a neighbour or a tree lopper without arboricultural
expertise cuts or prunes encroaching tree parts indiscriminately.162
2.77 Damage attributed to a tree’s root system was identified by
arborists as the most common example of community perceptions
and arboricultural
evidence being at odds. Arborist Dr Karen Smith noted:
There are also many deeply held beliefs about trees that bear no rigorous
scrutiny when our understanding of tree biology and arboriculture
examine them. This is especially so regarding tree roots.163
156 The falling of a branch from an otherwise healthy tree is commonly known
as ‘sudden limb failure’ or ‘summer
branch drop’:
Richard W Harris, ‘Summer Branch Drop’ (1983) 9(4)
Arboriculture,
Huggett v Burrowes
[2015] NSWLEC 1057
157 Consultation 2 (Dr Gregory Moore OAM).
158 Consultation 4 (Participants in facilitated discussion at VTIO
ArborCamp2018).
159 Submission 18 (ENSPEC).
160 Submissions 7 (Ben Kenyon), 9 (Dr Karen Smith), 12 (Dr Gregory Moore
OAM), 18 (ENSPEC); Consultations 2 (Dr Gregory Moore OAM),
4 (Participants
in facilitated discussion at VTIO ArborCamp2018), 6 (Ben Kenyon), 8 (City of
Boroondara).
161 Consultation 6 (Ben Kenyon).
162 Consultation 2 (Dr Gregory Moore OAM).
163 Submission 9 (Dr Karen Smith).
2.78 Many people believe that their neighbour’s tree roots are causing
problems with their foundations, dwellings and plumbing.
However, the
Commission was told by arborists that property damage is a
‘multi-factorial issue’ with arboricultural
assessments often
showing that damage is caused by poorly installed or ageing infrastructure or
pipes that have cracked due to
poor quality, rather than the entry of roots. Mr
Kenyon observed that root damage can be easy to prove or disprove by cutting
the ground or using other root detection techniques.164
2.79 The Commission was told that tree roots do not, contrary to popular
perceptions, exert enough pressure to crack pipes or damage
installed infrastructure’ such as, for example, a concrete slab. It is
also rare for tree roots to crack
concrete footings unless they grow in a
very specific upwards direction.165 Roots also tend to grow in the shallow
layers of soil.166
2.80 Dr Smith further described the complexities that arise in assessing
property damage from tree roots:
It was never possible to attribute all the damage to the tree, once data such
as moisture at footing depth, footing information, age
of the house and
construction information have been taken into consideration. Once real data was
collected and examined the complainants
came to understand that the tree was not
the sole cause of the damage. Property damage was never attributed to any more
of the cost of repairs. In many cases collecting data on soil moisture
at footing depth would eliminate the tree altogether. This
soil moisture data
often showed that cracked pipes, failed Victorian footings or damaged down pipes
were the cause of damage. If
the footings were damp where damage had occurred it
was often leaking pipes or failed storm water that had caused footings to
2.81 Early management techniques, such as proper tree placement on properties
and early formative pruning, can be used to prevent
tree disputes from arising
in the first place.168 However, it was acknowledged that without widespread
community awareness about
arboriculture and tree management, community members
cannot be expected to always be proactive in the management of trees on their
2.82 Dr Moore also explained that the insurance industry can also fuel
people’s perceived risk of trees. Dr Moore described
advertisements
from a well-known insurance company that offered to charge people lower
premiums if they had no trees on their
land. He also suggested that stories in
the media about trees falling in storms can exacerbate people’s existing
misperceptions
of trees when they are buying or living on vegetated land.170
Problems obtaining expert assistance
2.83 An arborist is a qualified professional trained in cultivating, caring
for, and maintaining trees.171 Arborists are best placed
to assess the health
and condition of trees and any possible impact or interference they will
have on built structures. Private
arborists reported that they are frequently
164 Consultation 6 (Ben Kenyon).
165 Consultation 2 (Dr Gregory Moore OAM).
166 Submission 12 (Dr Gregory Moore OAM).
167 Submission 9 (Dr Karen Smith).
168 Submission 12 (Dr Gregory Moore OAM); Consultation 4 (Participants in
facilitated discussion at VTIO ArborCamp2018).
169 Consultation 4 (Participants in facilitated discussion at VTIO
ArborCamp2018).
170 Consultation 2 (Dr Gregory Moore OAM).
171 See Aboriculture Australia,
Australian Qualification Framework (AQF)
and Australian Training Programs
ttp://arboriculture.org.au/Qualification
172 Submission 9 (Dr Karen Smith); Consultation 4 (Participants in
facilitated discussion at VTIO ArborCamp2018).
2.84 Ben Kenyon stated that developers and town planners did not routinely
rely on arborist reports 20 years ago. Mr Kenyon noted,
however, that there is
greater awareness about and importance placed on arboriculture by the general
community now, particularly
as people become more environmentally conscious.
Mr Kenyon explained that this change is also reflected in current local laws
and local council policies that seek to protect and maintain the urban
Role of arborists
2.85 Arborists use a range of tools or assessment methods to determine
whether or not a tree is the cause of damage to property or
whether or not a
tree will fall or drop branches. Dr Moore explained that a properly qualified
arborist will be able to tell whether
or not a tree has or will shed a major
limb simply by looking at it. Arborists may also employ manual techniques, such
knife or ground-penetrating radar, to detect the presence of
2.86 A number of arborists agreed that the most common approach when they are
involved in an issue involving a dispute with a neighbour,
is to explain to
their client the option to abate up to the boundary line.175 They may even
advise the client about the importance
of abating a tree in accordance with any
relevant Australian Standards,176 although one arborist acknowledged that this
may be unclear
and vague advice to give community members.177 On the other hand,
some arborists reported that when it comes to the legal dimensions
dispute, they may simply tell their clients to seek legal advice.178
2.87 Some arborists may simply perform an assessment of the tree or complete
the requested tree works, while others may provide additional
advice about how
to resolve the tree dispute or perform an improvised dispute resolution role
involving both neighbours.179
2.88 One arborist stated that they offer to do a tree amenity evaluation to
quantify the tree’s value; without a quantifiable
amount, it can be hard
for an arborist to explain what the neighbour will lose if they remove or prune
Not following advice and not understanding qualifications
2.89 People do not always rely on expert assistance or advice.181 Where they
do, the Commission has been told that the community is
unlikely to give much
weight to whether or not an arborist is suitably qualified to carry out tree
works or assessments.182
2.90 Community members do not have a good understanding about the different
qualifications and roles of arborists183 and information
on what level of
qualification is advisable for particular tree works may not be easy for the
community to find.184 For example,
people may not know the difference between a
‘tree lopper’ and a highly qualified arborist skilled in the
and management of trees.185 A tree lopper may
173 Consultation 6 (Ben Kenyon); see, eg,
Tree Protection Local Law No.22
(Frankston City Council); City of Greater Bendigo,
Management Policy
(16 August 2017) 4; see also
City of Melbourne, Urban
Forest Strategy—Making a Great City Greener 2012–2032
2012); City of Stonnington,
Urban Forest Strategy 2017–2022
(Report, June 2017) 4.
174 Submission 12 (Dr Gregory Moore OAM).
175 Consultations 4 (Participants in facilitated discussion at VTIO
ArborCamp2018), 14 (Robert Mineo).
176 See, eg, Standards Australia,
Pruning of Amenity Trees
4373-2007) (Sydney, NSW: Standards Australia, 2007)
177 Consultation 4
(Participants in facilitated discussion at VTIO ArborCamp2018).
181 Submission 18 (ENSPEC); Consultation 4 (Participants in facilitated
discussion at VTIO ArborCamp2018).
182 Consultation 4 (Participants in facilitated discussion at VTIO
ArborCamp2018).
183 Submission 18 (ENSPEC); Consultation 4 (Participants in facilitated
discussion at VTIO ArborCamp2018). This is discussed in more
detail in Chapter
184 Despite the framework of qualifications, the arboricultural industry is
unregulated, which has led to instances of underqualified
people carrying
out work and performing low-quality assessments. For this reason,
Arboriculture Australia, the national
peak body for arborists, has
introduced a voluntary industry licence to promote quality of practice:
Arboriculture Australia,
Australian Arborist Industry Licence
(Information Brochure, version 04, 2017)
http://arboriculture.org.au/License
185 Consultations 4 (Participants in facilitated discussion at VTIO
ArborCamp2018); 9 (Nillumbik Shire Council), 14 (Robert Mineo).
be more willing to simply remove a tree or indiscriminately cut away
branches. On the other hand, a qualified arborist can assess
the health of the
tree and help people come up with ways to manage any nuisance or risk.186
2.91 Most arborists are qualified in accordance with the Australian
Qualifications Framework (AQF).187 An AQF Level 3 arborist would
Certificate III in arboriculture and have the skills and knowledge to work as
an arboricultural tradesperson and provide
basic tree care and management. An
AQF Level 5 arborist would hold a diploma and be able to work independently as a
consultant or
in a supervisory role.
2.92 Arboricultural organisations and local councils commonly advise that
arborists of minimum AQF Level 3 should be engaged for tree
works, such as
pruning or lopping.188 However, if the tree’s health and associated risks
need to be assessed, then engaging
an arborist with minimum AQF Level 5
qualifications is necessary because these are more complex assessments that
high level of training, knowledge and experience’.189
Obtaining advice too late
2.93 Sometimes arborists advise that talking to tree owners and affected
neighbours about the history of the tree, amenity value,
recreational benefits
and environmental benefits (for example, hosting birdlife) may help to dispel
misplaced perceptions. However,
arborists noted that they tend to be engaged
too late and it is harder to quell people’s often misplaced fears
trees because their views become more and more entrenched and the
dispute continues to escalate.190 In addition, neighbours
usually have
not taken any steps to resolve the dispute before an arborist is called. Some
arborists reported that their appointments
with neighbours are usually in the
form of ‘whispered conversations’ or ‘secret
meetings’.191
Different expectations about living near
2.94 People hold different expectations about living near trees and this
itself can be a cause of dispute.
2.95 The Commission was told that some people, who may not be physically or
financially able to clear their property of leaf litter
or prune a tree, may be
less tolerant of trees and more likely to become involved in a dispute.192
2.96 On the other hand, others may greatly value trees and may seek out leafy
and highly vegetated areas to live in. HVP Plantations
noted that many of its
residential neighbours choose to live near its plantations due to the vegetated
green space it provides.193
Some local councils with a high level of vegetation
and green space also noted that many of their residents choose to live in
areas to be near trees.194
186 Consultations 2 (Dr Gregory Moore OAM), 4 (Participants in facilitated
discussion at VTIO ArborCamp2018).
187 The Australian Qualifications Framework (AQF) is the agreed policy of
Commonwealth, state and territory Ministers for regulating
qualifications in the
Australian education and training system: Australian Qualifications Framework,
What is the AQF?
www.aqf.edu.au/what-is-the-aqf
188 Consultation 8 (City of Boroondara); see also Standards Australia,
Pruning of Amenity Trees
(AS 4373-2007) (Sydney, NSW: Standards
Australia, 2007).
189 See, eg, City of Kingston,
Arboricultural Reporting Guidelines for
Planning and Developments
(25 June 2013) 1
www.kingston.vic.gov.au/Property-and-Development/Planning/Planning-Useful-Forms-and-Links
see also City of Boroondara,
Arboricultural Report Writing Guide: Guide for
the Preparation of Preliminary Arboricultural Reports, Arboricultural Impact
Assessments,
Root Investigation/ Mapping Reports, Tree Management and
Protection Plans and Transplant Method Statements
(Guidelines, June 2017) 3;
Consultations 11 (Land and Environment Court of New South Wales); 12 (City of
Port Phillip).
190 Consultations 2 (Dr Gregory Moore OAM), 4 (Participants in facilitated
discussion at VTIO ArborCamp2018).
191 Consultations 4 (Participants in facilitated discussion at VTIO
ArborCamp2018), 6 (Ben Kenyon).
192 Consultations 4 (Participants in facilitated discussion at VTIO
ArborCamp2018), 14 (Robert Mineo).
193 Consultation 3 (HVP Plantations).
194 Consultations 9 (Nillumbik Shire Council), 10 (Baw Baw Shire
2.97 Nillumbik Shire Council stated that the
Nillumbik community can be divided with respect to the value placed on
vegetation—those
who want to maintain vegetation and enjoy living in a
green wedge195 versus those who are risk-averse and want vegetation removed
reduce the risk of bushfire or for other reasons.196 Baw Baw Shire Council also
stated that its community can be divided about
the value placed on
vegetation.197
The Commission’s conclusion
2.98 Tree disputes in the Victorian community are common. They are driven by
factors such as a lack of knowledge about trees, a breakdown
in communication
between neighbours, different expectations about living near trees, as well
people’s different circumstances
and a failure to obtain timely
professional advice.
2.99 The most common types of tree dispute involve overhanging branches,
encroaching roots and concerns about the risks posed by
large trees. Tree
disputes can encompass a wide range of issues. They can have a negative impact
on people’s relationships
with their neighbours, may cause them to incur
significant costs which are hard to recover, and can take an emotional toll.
nature of tree disputes makes quick resolution desirable. The next
chapter considers the limitations of the current law in assisting
resolve their disputes and the underlying reasons for reform.
Planning and Environment Act 1987
areas of metropolitan Melbourne that lie outside the Urban Growth Boundary are
known as green wedges: Department of Environment
Water Land and Planning,
What are Green Wedges
(Web Page, 5 April 2019) <https://
www.planning.vic.gov.au/policy-and-strategy/green-wedges
196 Consultation 9 (Nillumbik Shire Council).
197 Consultation 10 (Baw Baw Shire Council).
Current tree dispute
law in Victoria
26 Introduction
Insurance claims
Abatement/’self-help’
Neighbour-led resolution
Alternative dispute resolution
31 Court proceedings
Other laws affecting tree management
Community responses—the current
49 The Commission’s conclusion
Current tree dispute
law in Victoria
Introduction
3.1 This chapter examines the limitations with the way the law currently
assists people to resolve their tree disputes. Community
responses on this issue
are also canvassed.
3.2 Depending on the circumstances of the dispute and the resources
available, neighbours can currently take a number of steps to
attempt to resolve
their tree dispute:
• making an insurance claim
• abatement/’self-help’
• neighbour-led informal resolution
• alternative dispute resolution, or
• court proceedings.
3.3 A detailed discussion of these steps appears in the consultation paper
and they are briefly discussed below. Navigating these
steps can be confusing as
it is difficult to find definitive statements of rights and responsibilities.
Inadequacies in the law create
confusion, compound community frustrations and
prolong disputes.
3.4 The Commission concludes that there is currently no clear, accessible
process for resolving tree disputes.
Insurance claims
3.5 One of the first steps an affected neighbour may take when a tree on
neighbouring land damages their property is to contact their
3.6 Household insurance may cover damage caused by trees. These policies
generally cover ‘the cost of rebuilding or repairing
your home’ when
damage occurs in circumstances that are out of the policy holder’s
control, including natural disasters
and storms.1 However, the scope of the
cover differs from one insurer to another.2 Common general exclusions for damage
trees include damage caused by tree roots.3
3.7 Generally speaking, a householder’s insurance will only cover
damage to their property. Where a tree falls across boundary
lines and damages a
neighbour’s property, the likely course of action is for the affected
neighbour to claim on their own insurance.4
1 Australian Securities and Investments Commission (ASIC),
‘MoneySmart’,
(Web Page, 19 December 2018)
www.moneysmart.gov.au/insurance/home-insurance
2 ASIC encourages consumers to carefully examine each provider’s
Product Disclosure Statement (PDS) before purchasing and relying
insurance coverage: Australian Securities and Investments Commission (ASIC),
‘MoneySmart’,
(Web Page, 19 December 2018)
www.moneysmart.gov.au/insurance/homeinsurance
3 See, eg, AAMI,
(1 October 2013) 39; RACV,
and Policy Booklet
(29 September 2017) 63.
4 For a landowner to be found liable, generally they will need to be aware
that the tree is near the boundary and in a dangerous condition
to a species which is known to drop branches: see Financial Rights Legal Centre,
If a Tree Falls in a Storm Who Pays for its Removal?
(Factsheet, 2018)
<https://insurancelaw.org.au/factsheets/>.
3.8 Where the tree owner can be shown to be at
fault (for example, they had knowledge of the poor condition of the tree), the
neighbour’s insurance company may seek to recover from the tree
owner’s insurance company.5
3.9 Insurance cannot, however, prevent damage. An insurance claim is only
possible once damage or harm (injury) has occurred. An insurance
provider cannot
enforce pre-emptive measures such as trimming, pruning or removing a tree to
prevent damage.
Abatement/’self-help’
3.10 Abatem
ent is a ‘self-help’ remedy
developed under the common law for any type of private nuisance. In the
context of tree
disputes, it allows neighbours to take matters into their
own hands and abate the interference caused by the tree up to boundary
without entering the tree owner’s land.6 For example, an affected
neighbour may prune overhanging branches up to boundary
lines or may install a
root barrier.
3.11 The common law allows:
this private and summary method of doing one’s self justice ... because
injuries of this kind, which obstruct or annoy such
things as are of daily
convenience and use, require an immediate remedy and cannot wait for the slow
progress of the ordinary forms
3.12 This remedy is currently advised and encouraged where appropriate by
community resources.8 It is useful in situations where a
part of a tree has
encroached over boundary lines but has not caused the level of
interference—unreasonable interference—needed
to establish nuisance
or has not yet caused actual physical damage. The use of abatement may also
prevent damage from arising.9
3.13 Any encroaching branches or roots that are removed remain the property
of the tree owner, and must be returned, in order to avoid
liability for the
separate common law tort of conversion.10 An affected neighbour does not need to
give notice to the tree owner
to abate up to the boundary line,11 particularly
where ‘there is immediate danger to life or health so as to render it
to wait’.12
3.14 An affected neighbour must abate cautiously to avoid damage and ensure
that they do not trespass or act negligently.13 If a tree
is damaged by the
actions of an affected neighbour, they can be found liable for criminal
5 See Financial Rights Legal Centre,
Falls in a Storm Who Pays for its Removal?
(Factsheet, 2018)
<https://insurancelaw.org.au/factsheets/>.
Lemmon v Webb
[1895] AC 1;
Young v Wheeler
[1987] Aus Torts
Reports 80–126, 68,970.
7 William Blackstone,
Commentaries on the Laws of England, Book III
(Cadell and Davies, 15th ed, 1809) 6.
8 See, eg, Dispute Settlement Centre of Victoria,
(Web Page, 24
April 2019) <https://
www.disputes.vic.gov.au/information-and-advice/
trees-0>; Victoria Law Foundation,
‘Neighbours, the Law and You:
Your Guide to Neighbourhood Laws in Victoria
Victoria Legal
Brochure, March 2015) <
https://www.legalaid.vic.gov.au/find-legal-answers/free-publications-and-resources/neighbours-law-and-you
Peter Cotter, ‘Neighbour Disputes’ in Naomi Saligari (ed),
Law Handbook 2019: Your Practical Guide to the Law in Victoria
Legal Service, 41st ed, 2019) 543–4. But note that the use of abatement
more generally to remedy other types of
private nuisances ‘tends to be
discouraged save in relation to minor annoyances ...’: Paula Giliker,
in Carolyn Sappideen and Prue Vines (eds),
Fleming’s The Law of Torts (Lawbook Co., 10th ed, 2011) 487 [21.280].
9 Kit Barker, Peter Cane, Mark Lunney and Francis Trindade,
Torts in Australia
(Oxford University Press, 5th ed, 2012) [5.1.7.3].
Robson v Leischke
[2008] NSWLEC 152
(2008) 72 NSWLR 98
[57] citing
Mills v Brooker
[1919] 1 KB 555
Lemmon v Webb
[1893] UKLawRpAC 55
[1894] AC 1.
Traian v Ware
[1957] VicRp 28
[1957] VR 200
13 Paula Giliker, ‘Nuisance’ in Carolyn Sappideen and Prue Vines
Fleming’s The Law of Torts
(Lawbook Co.,10th ed, 2011) 487
[21.280]. However existing case law which states abatement must be carried out
‘reasonably’
or ‘only as far as is necessary’ or that
the person is ‘bound to use due care and skill to avoid causing
may not provide a conclusive answer as to whether abatement must
be carried out cautiously to avoid damage in the specific context
overhanging branches or encroaching roots: Queensland Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
(Report No 72, December 2015) [3.220]–[3.233].
Crimes Act 1958
3.15 The costs of abatement cannot generally be
15 Abatement may be limited in circumstances
where the tree is protected under a planning scheme or other law.16
3.16 Abatement by entering the tree owner’s property may only be
justified in rare circumstances where ‘there is an immediate
life or health so as to render it unsafe to wait’.17
It is considered prudent to notify the property owner before entering their
land.18 Abating in this way also means that the affected
neighbour will lose
their right to claim damages for the nuisance, because of ‘the degree of
self-help and potential damage
to the other party involved in going on to the
land of the other party, and interfering with it’.19
Neighbour-led resolution
3.17 Neighbours may seek to resolve problems relating to trees informally,
without the involvement of lawyers or formal dispute resolution.
3.18 Some government and community organisations have published useful
resources aimed at helping neighbours resolve their tree dispute.
These include
the Dispute Settlement Centre of Victoria (DSCV), the Victoria Law Foundation
and Fitzroy Legal Service’s Law
Handbook.20 Local council websites and
customer service centres often provide a range of information and links, with
significant
variation in detail between councils.21
3.19 Most emphasise resolving disputes informally wherever possible. These
resources are guides only, providing general information,
not legal advice.
3.20 Common themes contained in these information sources include:
• approaching neighbours calmly and respectfully
• explaining concerns clearly and openly
• considering the neighbours’ point of view
• workshopping possible solutions
• seeking professional advice and quotations where necessary, so each
party can negotiate from an informed position
• the desirability of reaching a solution, as neighbourhood disputes
can easily escalate and have detrimental effects on both
parties’ living
situations.
3.21 Other points of contact for information include Arboriculture Australia,
the Victorian Tree Industry Organisation, individual
community legal centres,
the Federation of Community Legal Centres, Victoria Legal Aid, the Law Institute
of Victoria (LIV) and private
3.22 DSCV also provides conflict coaching and dispute resolution advice over
the phone, including options, strategies and negotiation
techniques to help
people resolve their disputes between themselves.22
Young v Wheeler
[1987] Aus Torts Reportss 80–126, 68,972;
City of Richmond v Scantelbury of Strata Plan No 14198 v Cowell
24 NSWLR 478
where it is stated that the affected neighbour has a duty to
mitigate damages and, where abatement is carried out to do so, then
recoverable. Hodgson J quotes Jenkins LJ in
Davey v Harrow Corporation
[1958] 1 QB 60
[487]: ‘Is there any duty to mitigate? Can a
person who sees encroaching roots on his land build a house and wait for
fall down?’ and continues that, in his view, an affected neighbour
‘does, nevertheless, have the usual obligation
to mitigate damages; and
accordingly, he has the obligation to take reasonable steps to keep these
damages to a minimum, and has
the corresponding right to claim from the
adjoining owner the expenses associated with these reasonable steps’. See
Giliker, ‘Nuisance’ in Carolyn Sappideen and Prue Vines
Fleming’s The Law of Torts
(Lawbook Co., 10th ed, 2011) 487,
525 [21.280].
16 For example, where a tree is protected under an overlay within a local
council planning scheme. This is discussed further in Chapter
Traian v Ware
[1957] VicRp 28
[1957] VR 200
, 207. See also Kit Barker, Peter Cane,
Mark Lunney and Francis Trindade,
The Law of Torts in Australia
University Press, 5th ed, 2012) [5.1.7.3].
Traian v Ware
[1957] VicRp 28
[1957] VR 200
Proprietors of Strata Plan No 14198 v Cowell
(1989) 24 NSWLR 478
487. Hodgson J continues: ‘However, I do not think that the law attached
such a consequence to the taking of steps on one’s
own land, such as the
cutting back of tree branches or tree roots.’
20 Dispute Settlement Centre of Victoria,
(Web Page, 24 April
https://www.disputes.vic.gov.au/information-and-advice/trees-0
Victoria Law Foundation, ‘
Neighbours, the Law and You: Your Guide to
Neighbourhood Laws in Victoria
Victoria Legal Aid
(Brochure, March 2015) <https://
www.legalaid.vic.gov.au/find-legal-answers/free-publications-and-resources/neighbours-law-and-you
Peter Cotter, ‘Neighbour Disputes’ in Naomi Saligari (ed),
Law Handbook 2019: Your Practical Guide to the Law in Victoria
Legal Service,
41st ed, 2019) 543–4.
21 See, eg, City of Boroondara,
Neighbouring Trees
(Web Page, 2019)
www.boroondara.vic.gov.au/waste-environment/trees-and-
naturestrips/neighbouring-trees>.
22 Dispute Settlement Centre of Victoria,
Dispute Advice
(Web Page, 4
April 2019) <https://
www.disputes.vic.gov.au/about-us/dispute-
3.23 Neighbours may also contact an arborist to
obtain quotes for tree works or to assess the health of the tree. If informal
is ineffective, neighbours may elect to engage in alternative dispute
resolution or take legal action by going to court.
Alternative dispute resolution
3.24 Alternati
ve dispute resolution (ADR) refers to
a decision-making process other than judicial determination (by a court or
tribunal), in which
an impartial person helps parties resolve their dispute.
There are many forms of ADR, ranging from the facilitative and exploratory
(mediation), active and advisory (conciliation), through to processes that
decide the result (arbitration).23
3.25 There are many private ADR practitioners who may be engaged by people in
dispute. One way community members can seek out private
mediators is through the
LIV’s Mediators Directory, which provides details of approved legal
practitioners qualified to conduct
mediations.24
3.26 DSCV offers a free mediation service to the community to assist with a
range of disputes including tree disputes.25
The role of the Dispute Settlement Centre of
3.27 DSCV is
funded by Government to provide a
front-line resolution service offering:
• information and education to help people understand their rights and
responsibilities regarding an issue or dispute
• options for further advice and resources to help people resolve the
dispute themselves
• a range of dispute resolution services to assist parties.26
3.28 DSCV provides a range of dispute resolution services, depending on the
nature of the dispute. They include:
• targeted advice
• conflict coaching
• shuttle negotiation
• telephone mediation
• abbreviated mediation with a sole mediator
• a half-day mediation with two mediators.27
3.29 People involved in a tree dispute most commonly make contact with
• to obtain the help of an impartial third party to make a decision
• to seek information about the law or confirm how the law may apply to
their dispute
• to obtain assistance with tree maintenance issues due to age/health
(for example, cleaning leaf litter from gutters)
• when there is pre-existing neighbour conflict and the tree dispute is
the final straw, or
• when they have exhausted all other steps leading up to mediation or
legal action.28
23 Peter Butt (ed),
Butterworth’s Concise Australian Legal
(LexisNexis/Butterworths, 3rd ed, 2004) ‘alternative
dispute resolution’.
24 Law Institute of Victoria,
(Online Database)
www.liv.asn.au/mediators
25 See Dispute Settlement Centre of Victoria,
(Web Page, 3
June 2019) <https://
www.disputes.vic.gov.au/about-us/mediation-0
26 See generally, Dispute Settlement Centre of Victoria,
Page, 4 January 2019) <https://
www.disputes.vic.gov.au/about-us
27 Information provided by the Dispute Settle Centre of Victoria (DSCV) as
part of a data request from the Commission, November 2018
and clarification of
data provided in May 2019.
28 Consultation 7 (Dispute Settlement Centre of Victoria).
3.30 When a person first contacts DSCV, they speak
to a Dispute Assessment Officer (DAO) who provides general support and advice on
dispute resolution, including:
• listening to the client’s concerns
• helping to clarify the issues
• answering questions
• providing techniques and strategies for resolving the dispute
• referring clients to other specialist services where needed.29
3.31 DSCV informs clients that tree disputes are governed by the common law
and that it cannot provide legal advice. DSCV focuses
on reshaping the
conversation and discussing dispute resolution options rather than legal
3.32 With the client’s consent, a DAO may also contact the other
party to the dispute.31 Where the other party agrees
to participate, the DAO
will work to identify the issues in the dispute, suggest options to parties and
try to resolve the matter
separately with each party over the phone. If this
fails, the dispute may be referred to accredited mediators within DSCV.32
3.33 If a dispute is assessed as suitable for mediation,33 it can be
scheduled quickly (generally within two weeks of referral) and
location suitable to the parties. Mediation is voluntary and proceedings are
confidential. The mediator will invite the
parties to share their views, explain
what has led to the dispute, and how they propose to resolve the issue. Parties
may be in the
same room, or in separate rooms, with a mediator acting as an
intermediary.34
3.34 A mediation if successful results in a written agreement. Agreements
reached in DSCV mediations are not legally binding.35 Parties
are informed by
DSCV that with both parties consent they can present their agreement to a lawyer
to render the good faith agreement
legally binding.36
Court-referred alternative
dispute resolution
3.35 The courts may also employ court-ordered ADR processes (with or without
the consent of the parties) to help parties resolve their
disputes without a
formal hearing.37 For example, the Civil Claims Program in the
Magistrates’ Court allows the Court to refer
certain matters to DSCV for
compulsory mediation.38 After successful mediation it communicates the outcome
The mediated agreements generally take the form
of consent orders, terms of settlement, or the filing of a notice of
discontinuance
from court or tribunal proceedings.39
29 Information provided by DSCV as part of a data request from the
Commission, August 2017 and clarification of data provided in May
30 Consultation 7 (Dispute Settlement Centre of Victoria).
31 DSCV explains that it ‘will send a letter with a Department of
Justice & Community Safety letterhead requesting that
the person call the
centre to discuss the issue further’: Dispute Settlement Centre of
(Web Page, 3 June 2019) <https://
www.disputes.vic.
gov.au/information-and-advice/dscv-faqs>.
32 Information provided by DSCV as part of a data request from the
Commission, November 2018 and clarification of data provided in
33 Considerations include: whether both parties genuinely want to resolve the
dispute; whether the parties are able to understand
and participate in the
mediation process; the level of vulnerability of either party, e.g. mental
health issues; whether either party
has expressed fear of the other party, or
has been harmed or threatened with violence by the other party; any previous
failed attempts
at mediation; whether the issue is substantial enough to
mediate: Dispute Settlement Centre of Victoria,
(Web Page, 3
www.disputes.vic.gov.au/about-us/mediation-0
34 Information provided by DSCV as part of a data request from the
Commission, November 2018.
35 Parties are informed by DSCV that their written mediation agreements may
be drawn up into a formal written contract by an external
legal practitioner:
information provided by DSCV as part of a data request from the Commission, 16
October 2017.
36 Information provided by DSCV in May 2019.
37 See, eg,
Magistrates’ Court Act 1989
Court Act 1958
Supreme Court Act 1986
38 This is only available for some Magistrates’ Courts and is limited
to civil claims under $40,000: Dispute Settlement Centre
of Victoria,
Claims Program
(Web Page, 24 April 2019) <https://
www.disputes.vic.gov.au/about-us/civil-claims-program
Further information about the jurisdiction and processes of the courts,
including Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR) programs,
is provided in Ch
39 See generally Magistrates’ Court of Victoria,
Page, 14 January 2019)
https://www.mcv.vic.gov.au/civil-matters/resolving-
dispute/mediation
; Dispute Settlement Centre of Victoria,
Civil Claims
(Web Page, 22 May 2019) <https://
www.disputes.vic.gov.
au/about-us/civil-claims-program>.
3.36 DSCV has also recently partnered with the
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal (VCAT) to administer Fast Track
and Hearing (FTMH)40 at VCAT. FTMH aims to resolve disputes at
VCAT as quickly as possible through mediation or to progress
to a hearing on the
same day if required.41
Court proceedings
3.37 Parties in a tree dispute may also initiate legal proceedings in court.
As described in Chapter 2, this does not occur often.
3.38 The resolution of tree disputes in Victoria is currently based on the
law of torts, which has largely been developed through
judge-made case law (the
‘common law’).42 There is no legislation specific to the process for
resolving private tree
disputes between neighbours in Victoria.
3.39 A tort is a ‘civil wrong’ that confers civil liability on
the wrongdoer.43 Torts cover a variety of acts or omissions
that infringe on a
person’s ‘fundamental liberties, such as personal liberty, and
fundamental rights, such as property
rights, and provide protection from
interferences’.44
3.40 If one party decides to take their dispute to court, it will usually be
heard in the Magistrates’ Court of Victoria.45
Some cases involving large
claims will be heard in the County Court of Victoria,46 or, in cases involving
very large or complex claims,
in the Supreme Court of Victoria.47
3.41 In order to bring a tree dispute to court, neighbours will usually have
to rely on one or more of the torts of nuisance, negligence
and trespass.48 Each
of these torts is outlined briefly in Table 1 below.49
Table 1: Overview of relevant torts
Circumstances that give rise to the tort
Where there is unreasonable interference with the use and enjoyment of land
(which includes damage to property)
Where damage, loss or injury results from a negligent act
Where there is an unauthorised entry to land
40 The Dispute Settlement Centre of Victoria refers to this program as the
‘Civil Mediation at VCAT Program’: Dispute
Settlement Centre of
Civil Mediation at VCAT Program
(Web Page, 7 June 2019)
https://www.disputes.vic.gov.au/about-us/civil-mediation-at-vcat-
>. See also Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
Report 2017–2018
(Report, 2018) 25.
41 Supplementary Consultation 1 (Victorian Civil and Administrative
42 Kit Barker, Peter Cane, Mark Lunney and Francis Trindade,
Torts in Australia
(Oxford University Press, 5th ed, 2012) [1.4]. Unlike
statute law, common law rules are not set out in a single document but are
contained in the judgments of a range of courts and tribunals: Peter
Butterworths’ Concise Australian Legal Dictionary
(LexisNexis/Butterworths, 3rd ed, 2004) ‘case law’ and
‘common law’.
However, in recent times, certain torts have undergone law
reform—‘Despite their common law origins, most tort actions
subject to some statutory variation of the common law principles by state
and territory legislation. Numerous statutes limit
actions or defences, provide
limitation periods, cap or exclude awards of damages, and provide for survival
of actions’: Australian
Law Reform Commission,
Traditional Rights and
Freedoms—Encroachments by Commonwealth Laws
(Final Report No 129,
2015) [16.23], n 38. This is particularly true of negligence, which has been
given a statutory framework in
the respective civil liability statutes of each
state and territory: see, eg,
Wrongs Act 1958
that statutory amendments do not override or affect common law principles
associated with negligence unless otherwise stated:
Wrongs Act 1958
43 Peter Butt (ed),
Butterworths’ Concise Australian Legal
(LexisNexis/Butterworths, 3rd ed, 2004) ‘tort’.
44 Australian Law Reform Commission,
Traditional Rights and
Freedoms—Encroachments by Commonwealth Laws
(Final Report No 129,
2015) [16.21].
45 The Magistrates’ Court has jurisdiction to hear civil matters where
claims for works or damages are no more than $100,000:
Magistrates’
Court Act 1989
(definition of ‘jurisdictional
limit’), 100(1)(a)–(b).
46 ‘The Court has jurisdiction to hear and determine all applications,
clams, disputes and civil proceedings regardless of the
the subject-matter as are not by this or any other act excluded from its
County Court Act 1958
damages it can award: see County Court of Victoria,
(Web Page, 2019)
www.countycourt.vic.gov.au/learn-about-court/court-divisions
47 See, eg, the Major Torts List which is ‘designed to facilitate and
expedite the passage of significant tortious claims
o trial’: Supreme Court of Victoria,
Practice Note SC CL 4: Major Torts List,
1 October 2018 <https://
www.supremecourt.vic.gov.au/law-and-practice/specialist-
areas-of-law/major-torts-list>.
48 See, eg,
Robson v Leischke
[2008] NSWLEC 152
(2008) 72 NSWLR 98
[36]; Submission 16
(Magistrates’ Court of Victoria).
49 But only to the extent each is relevant to resolving tree disputes. The
tort of negligence, for example, is an extremely complex
and technical area of
law which will not be discussed in its entirety in this report.
3.42 The tort (civil wrong) of nuisance can be classified as a public
nuisance, or a private nuisance.50 Neighbours in tree disputes
will rely on
private nuisance (nuisance).51
3.43 In legal terms, a nuisance relates to an act or omission that causes
substantial and unreasonable interference with the affected
neighbour’s
land or their enjoyment of land.52 It is ‘a tort directed against the
plaintiff’s enjoyment of their
rights over the land’53 and is
inextricably linked to a person’s proprietary interests over the land they
3.44 In the context of tree disputes, nuisance can cover situations where a
tree encroaches on neighbouring land,54 causes physical
damage to neighbouring
land, or interferes with the comfortable and convenient enjoyment’ of a
person’s land.55
3.45 Nuisance claims in tree disputes are often a balancing exercise between
the tree owner’s right to enjoy and use their land
in any lawful manner
that they see fit, and the affected neighbour’s right to use and enjoy
their land without unreasonable
interference.56
3.46 In order for an affected neighbour to take legal action for unreasonable
interference with the use and enjoyment of their land,
they must be in actual
and exclusive possession of the land.57
3.47 Unreasonable interference with the use and enjoyment of land has been
described as occurring when substantial and unreasonable
‘annoyance, or
discomfort’ is caused.58 This is judged against the common law standard of
a ‘reasonable user’,
which requires that any minor or trifling
interference will be considered part of the ordinary neighbourly exchange of
and take, live and let live’.59
3.48 Barker et al explain this as follows:
when people live in close proximity to one another they have to be prepared,
to some extent, to allow others to do things that annoy
them at times when they
would prefer to be left in peace and quiet if they, in turn, want to be able to
behave in a way that might
annoy their neighbours and at a time when their
neighbours would prefer they did not.60
3.49 Therefore, liability will only be imposed ‘where the harm or risk
to one is greater than [what] one ought to be required
to bear under the
circumstances’.61 In making this determination the court will balance a
number of factors:
• the character of the neighbourhood in which the interference
50 Kit Barker, Peter Cane, Mark Lunney and Francis Trindade,
Torts in Australia
(Oxford University Press, 5th ed, 2012) 185.
51 Unless the context indicates otherwise, all references to
‘nuisance’ should be taken to refer to the tort of private
52 LexisNexis,
Halsbury’s The Laws of Australia
(at 21 March
2018) 415 Tort, ‘Private and Public Nuisance’ [415-605]; see, eg,
Sedleigh- Denfield v O’Callaghan
[1940] UKHL 2
[1940] AC 880
Robson v Leischke
[2008] NSWLEC 152
(2008) 72 NSWLR 98
[91] citing
Sedleigh-Denfield v O’Callaghan
[1940] UKHL 2
[1940] AC 880
54 See, eg, LexisNexis,
Halsbury’s The Laws of Australia
March 2018) 415 Tort, ‘Private Nuisance’ [415-630].
Robson v Leischke
[2008] NSWLEC 152
(2008) 72 NSWLR 98
[54] citing
Thompson-Schwab
[1956] 1 All ER 652
Mendez v Palazzi
(1976) 68 DLR
Owners of Strata Plan No 13218 v Woollahra Municipal
[2002] NSWCA 92
(2002) 121 LGERA 117
, 135. It is generally accepted that
interference resulting in personal injury has been absorbed by the law of
negligence:
Burnie Port Authority v General Jones Pty Ltd
[1994] HCA 13
179 CLR 520
where the High Court of Australia absorbed the rule in
[1866] UKLawRpExch 36
(1866) LR 1 Ex 265
into the tort of
negligence. Barker et al elaborate that claims for damages for past personal
injury or damage to property framed as nuisance are likely
to be treated by a
court as a claim in negligence: Kit Barker, Peter Cane, Mark Lunney and Francis
The Law of Torts in Australia
(Oxford University Press, 5th ed,
56 LexisNexis,
Halsbury’s The Laws of Australia
(at 21 March
2018) 415 Tort, ‘Private Nuisance’ [415-620] citing
Sedleigh-Denfield v O’Callaghan
[1940] UKHL 2
[1940] AC 880
Esso Petroleum Co Ltd
[1961] 2 All ER 145
57 This means freehold owners in possession of land, or tenants or licensees
with exclusive possession. See Kit Barker, Peter Cane,
Mark Lunney and
Francis Trindade,
The Law of Torts in Australia
(Oxford University Press,
5th ed, 2012) [5.1.4];
Robson v Leischke
[2008] NSWLEC 152
(2008) 72 NSWLR 98
58 Paula Giliker, ‘Nuisance’ in Carolyn Sappideen and Prue Vines
Fleming’s The Law of Torts
(Lawbook Co., 10th ed, 2011) 487
Bamford v Turnley
(1862) 122 ER 27, 32–3.
60 Kit Barker, Peter Cane, Mark Lunney and Francis Trindade,
Torts in Australia
(Oxford University Press, 5th ed, 2012) [5.1.2.2].
61 Paula Giliker, ‘Nuisance’ in Carolyn Sappideen and Prue Vines
Fleming’s The Law of Torts
(Lawbook Co., 10th ed, 2011) 487,
499 n 98 citing American Law Institute,
Restatement
(Second) of the Law
of Torts 2d (1965) § 822. In other words, ‘there must be an
inconvenience materially interfering with
the ordinary comfort physically of
human existence, not merely according to elegant and dainty habits of living
but according to
plain and sober notions among ordinary people’: Paula
Giliker, ‘Nuisance’ in Carolyn Sappideen and Prue Vines (eds),
Fleming’s The Law of Torts
(Lawbook Co., 10th ed, 2011) 487, 500
Walter v Selfe
[1851] EngR 335
(1851) 4 De G & Sm 315
• the extent of the interference
• the sensitivity of the affected neighbour
• whether an intention to harm exists.62
3.50 Importantly, there is no need to prove that actual physical damage has
resulted from a nuisance where the dispute concerns comfort
and amenities.63
However, mere
encroachment of overhanging branches is unlikely to constitute nuisance
unless some sort of ‘special damage’ is proven
to have been
‘suffered by the neighbour as a result of the encroachment’.64
3.51 Where actual physical damage has resulted, such as a crack in concrete
foundations, or damage to a dwelling, then the presence
of damage makes the
interference unreasonable.65 Because damage can be objectively assessed, the
relative weight of
factors such as the characteristics of the neighbourhood, the extent of the
interference, sensitivity and improper motive are not
as relevant.66
3.52 Under a common law action in nuisance, anyone who created the nuisance
can be found liable. That is, there is no need for the
defendant to have any
interest in the land.67 This means that private nuisances can be created not
only by landowners and tenants,
but also by independent contractors undertaking
work on the land.68 However, generally speaking, ‘most private nuisances
created by private landowners’.69
3.53 The tree owner must be at ‘fault’ for a nuisance claim.70
This will depend on whether the tree owner has created,
adopted or continued the
nuisance.71 A tree owner can ‘create’ a nuisance by
‘deliberately or recklessly’72
using their land in a way that will
cause harm to their neighbour, or where they knew or ought to have known that
the nuisance was
reasonably foreseeable.73
3.54 A tree owner might create a nuisance to their neighbour’s land by
carrying out works to their own tree, for example ‘by
taking action which
adversely affects the health of their tree or its structural stability’
such as by ‘allowing a tree
to become unsafe or unsound so that it or
parts of it, fall onto the neighbour’s land’.74
3.55 A tree owner may also be considered liable where a third party
(including a tenant) creates a nuisance if they authorised
them to carry out
activities that would naturally and necessarily result in nuisance.75
62 See Paula Giliker, ‘Nuisance’ in Carolyn Sappideen and Prue
Vines (eds)
Fleming’s The Law of Torts
(Lawbook Co., 10th ed, 2011)
487 [21.90] –[21.110].
63 Kit Barker, Peter Cane, Mark Lunney and Francis Trindade,
Torts in Australia
(Oxford University Press, 5th ed, 2012) [5.1.2].
Robson v Leischke
[2008] NSWLEC 152
(2008) 72 NSWLR 98
[56] citing
(1985) 3 BPR 9592, 9594. For examples of cases where overhanging
branches have been held to constitute nuisance, see
Robson v Leischke
[2008] NSWLEC 152
(2008) 72 NSWLR 98
St Helen’s Smelting Co v Tipping
(1865) 11 ER 1483;
Kraemers v Attorney-General
[1966] TASStRp 15
[1966] Tas SR 113
Corbett v Pallas
(1995) LGERA 312.
66 Thomson Reuters,
The Laws of Australia
(at 28 April 2016) 33 Torts,
‘7 Nuisance’ [33.7.250]; cf Kit Barker, Peter Cane, Mark Lunney and
Francis Trindade,
The Law of Torts in Australia
(Oxford University Press,
5th ed, 2012): ‘Liability in private nuisance for damage caused by
overhanging branches or the encroachment
of tree roots depends on proof of
negligence’ [5.1.8.2].
67 Kit Barker, Peter Cane, Mark Lunney and Francis Trindade,
Torts in Australia
(Oxford University Press, 5th ed, 2012) [5.1.5]; see also
LexisNexis,
Halsbury’s The Laws of Australia
(at 21 March 2018) 415
Tort, ‘Strict Liability of Creator’ [415-715].
68 Kit Barker, Peter Cane, Mark Lunney and Francis Trindade,
Torts in Australia
(Oxford University Press, 5th ed, 2012) [5.1.5].
Robson v Leischke
[2008] NSWLEC 152
(2008) 72 NSWLR 98
[44]–[45]. Preston CJ
also notes that ‘Fault generally involves foreseeability’: [45].
71 LexisNexis,
Halsbury’s The Laws of Australia
(at 21 March
2018) 415 Tort, ‘Liability’ [415-710]; see also
[2008] NSWLEC 152
(2008) 72 NSWLR 98
[47] –[50].
72 This ‘covers all those cases of obvious or “patent”
nuisances’:
Robson v Leischke
[2008] NSWLEC 152
(2008) 72 NSWLR 98
[48] citing A M
Jones & M A Dugdale (eds),
Clerk & Lindsell on Torts
Maxwell, 19th ed, 2006) 1184 [20–39].
Robson v Leischke
[2008] NSWLEC 152
(2008) 72 NSWLR 98
[48] citing A M Jones & M
A Dugdale (eds),
Clerk & Lindsell on Torts
(Sweet & Maxwell, 19th
ed, 2006) 1184 [20–39].
Robson v Leischke
[2008] NSWLEC 152
(2008) 72 NSWLR 98
75 Thomson Reuters,
The Laws of Australia
(at 28 April 2016) 33 Torts,
‘7 Nuisance’ [33.7.540]. See also
De Jager v Payneham &
Magill Lodges Hall Inc
(1984) 36 SASR 498
3.56 A tree owner will have ‘adopted’ the nuisance caused by the
tree where they make use of it, such as by using it for
reduction.76 A tree owner will be considered to have ‘continued’ the
nuisance where they fail to stop
the nuisance being caused by the tree within a
reasonable time.77
3.57 A tree owner will be liable where they knew or ought to have known of
the nuisance and did not take reasonable steps to mitigate
foreseeable interference.78 The court will weigh the likely cost and
inconvenience of mitigating or removing the interference
against any damage or
discomfort that the affected neighbour may experience.79
3.58 Where a nuisance can be shown, a tree owner may not be liable if they
have a legal defence. Some common defences are:
• The tree owner had statutory authority for their action—where
an action is authorised by an Act and the nuisance is
an inevitable consequence,
it is not unlawful.80
• The nuisance was consented to—a tree owner may rely on the
express or implied consent of an affected neighbour as a
defence. For example,
if a tree that is causing a nuisance is maintained for an agreed common benefit,
such as providing shade, then
the affected neighbour may forego any right
against the tree owner because of the agreement reached.81
• The affected neighbour contributed to the problem—the tree
owner’s liability may be reduced where the affected
neighbour is found to
have acted without reasonable care for their own property, contributing to the
resulting damage for which they
seek relief.82
3.59 A perso
n must commence legal action within the
time limits set out in the Limitations of Actions Act 1958 (Vic). In the case of
an affected neighbour must generally bring legal action for nuisance
within six years of the date the nuisance occurred.83
3.60 There are three remedies available for nuisance: abatement, injunction
and damages.84 Abatement is often exercised before an
affected neighbour pursues
an action for nuisance in court. Where the affected neighbour takes the matter
to court, they may seek
an injunction or damages.
76 Joel Silver,
Nuisance by Tree—Who’s the Guilty Tree?
(Paper, Owen Dixon Chambers, 18 May 2015) [46]. However, Silver explains:
‘For trees, it is more probable that a defendant will
“continued” a nuisance than “adopted” it, simply because
fewer factual situations permit the nuisance
caused by trees to be
adopted.’: [40].
77 See, eg,
City of Richmond v Scantelbury
[1991] VicRp 44
[1991] 2 VR 38
Robson v Leischke
[2008] NSWLEC 152
(2008) 72 NSWLR 98
78 See, eg,
City of Richmond v Scantelbury
[1991] VicRp 44
[1991] 2 VR 38
Robson v Leischke
[2008] NSWLEC 152
(2008) 72 NSWLR 98
City of Richmond v Scantelbury
[1991] VicRp 44
[1991] 2 VR 38
80 This is because it is presumed that Parliament, in authorising activities
capable of causing nuisance, has already balanced within
the statute ‘the
rights of individuals against the benefit to the public of certain
nuisance-creating activities’: Paula
Giliker, ‘Nuisance’ in
Carolyn Sappideen and Prue Vines (eds),
Fleming’s The Law of Torts
(Lawbook Co., 10th ed, 2011) [21.220]. See also
Fullarton v North
Melbourne Electric Tramway & Lighting Co Ltd
[1916] HCA 12
(1916) 21 CLR 181.
81 Paula Giliker, ‘Nuisance’ in Carolyn Sappideen and Prue Vines
Fleming’s The Law of Torts
(Lawbook Co., 10th ed, 2011) 487
82 A finding of contribution does not, however, fully defeat a nuisance
Wrongs Act 1958
Stockwell v State of
[2001] VSC 497
[624]–[627].
Limitations of Actions Act 1958
(Vic) s 5(1)(a).
84 Thomson Reuters,
The Laws of Australia
(at 28 April 2016) 33 Torts,
‘7 Nuisance’ [33.7.820].
3.61 An injunction is a court order restraining the
tree owner from performing or continuing the interference.85 It is the main
awarded to an affected neighbour in an action for nuisance.86 It is most
suited to types of interference which are recurrent and
infringe on the affected
neighbour’s right to use and enjoy their land, as opposed to those causing
damage to property.87
3.62 An injunction may be granted to prevent future nuisance even though the
nuisance does not exist at the time the injunction is
sought.88 The threshold
for this type of injunction is high and requires ‘proof that the
apprehended damage ... is imminent
or likely to occur in the near future and ...
that the damage [will be] very substantial or almost irreparable’.89
3.63 A court may also make an award of damages to an affected neighbour,
which is monetary compensation for any material loss or damage
that has already
occurred as a reasonably foreseeable consequence of the nuisance.90 Damages may
be sought for material loss or damage
to land, possessions, or for the loss of
profits which would have otherwise been earned from use of the land.91 Damages
can be awarded
alone or in combination with an injunction.92
3.64 A tree o
wner may be negligent where they fail
to exercise reasonable care in relation to their tree.93 Negligence occurs
where the tree
owner breaches the duty of care they owe to the affected
neighbour, causing the affected neighbour to suffer a reasonably foreseeable
3.65 Negligence is largely based on the common law but it has also undergone
statutory reform in the
Wrongs Act 1958
(Vic).95 Common law principles and
elements relating to negligence are now restated in, clarified by or altered by
3.66 In order to establish negligence, the affected neighbour must prove all
of the following:97
• that the tree owner owed them a duty of care—this duty of care
is fulfilled by adhering to a standard of care that a
‘reasonable person
of ordinary prudence’ would adhere
to in order to avoid ‘unreasonable risk or danger to others’.98
It is well established that neighbours owe each other
this duty of care.99
85 An injunction may be prohibitive, in that it orders the tree owner to stop
certain actions; or mandatory, in that it orders the
tree owner to carry
out a certain act. An injunction must clearly identify how it is to be complied
with: Kit Barker, Peter
Cane, Mark Lunney and Francis Trindade,
The Law of Torts in Australia
(Oxford University Press, 5th ed, 2012)
86 Kit Barker, Peter Cane, Mark Lunney and Francis Trindade,
Torts in Australia
(Oxford University Press, 5th ed, 2012). [5.1.7.1].
87 Ibid [5.1.7.2].
88 LexisNexis,
Halsbury’s The Laws of Australia
(at 21 March
2018) 415 Tort, ‘Injunctions’ [415-850]. Known as a
(Latin) injunction, meaning ‘because he or she fears’:
Peter Butt (ed),
Butterworths’ Concise Australian Legal Dictionary
(LexisNexis/Butterworths, 3rd ed, 2004) ‘quia timet’.
Robson v Leischke
[2008] NSWLEC 152
(2008) 72 NSWLR 98
[58], [67]. An affected
neighbour may also seek an injunction before the hearing (an interlocutory
injunction), but only if there
is a ‘serious question to be tried’
and if it is appropriate on ‘the balance of convenience’ to restrain
the tree owner in such a way before the hearing:
Australian Broadcasting
Corporation v O’Neill
[2006] HCA 46
(2006) 227 CLR 57
90 Paula Giliker, ‘Nuisance’ in Carolyn Sappideen and Prue Vines
Fleming’s The Law of Torts
(Lawbook Co., 10th ed, 2011)
487 [21.260];
Overseas Tankship (UK) Ltd v The Miller Steamship Co
Wagon Mound No. 2) [1967] 1 AC 617. Damages are particularly suitable for tree
disputes where an injunction would be ineffective,
such as when the dispute
concerns interferences causing damage to property.
91 Paula Giliker, ‘Nuisance’ in Carolyn Sappideen and Prue Vines
Fleming’s The Law of Torts
(Lawbook Co., 10th ed, 2011) 487
[21.260]. See also
Robson v Leischke
[2008] NSWLEC 152
(2008) 72 NSWLR 98
Hunter v Canary Wharf Ltd
[1997] AC 655, 706. However, where interference
is caused without materially damaging the property, damages cannot be awarded
a decrease in the value of the affected neighbour’s property. This
is because damages for nuisance seek to provide relief
for infringement of the
right to use and enjoy the land. Thus, damages compensate for the
plaintiff’s subjective experience
of past discomfort or inconvenience:
Thomson Reuters,
The Laws of Australia
(at 1 June 2016) 33 Torts,
’7 Nuisance’ [33.7.880]. Equitable damages (cf common law damages),
instead of an injunction
for future nuisance (quia timet injunction), may
be awarded in rare circumstances: Thomson Reuters,
The Laws of Australia
(at 1 June 2016) 33 Torts, ’7 Nuisance’ [33.7.890].
92 Kit Barker, Peter Cane, Mark Lunney and Francis Trindade,
Torts in Australia
(Oxford University Press, 5th ed, 2012) [5.1.7.2].
Wrongs Act 1958
(definition of
‘negligence’).
94 Prue Vines, ‘Negligence: Introduction’ in Carolyn Sappideen
and Prue Vines (eds),
Fleming’s The Law of Torts
(Lawbook Co., 10th
ed, 2011) 119, 122; see also
Robson v Leischke
[2008] NSWLEC 152
(2008) 72 NSWLR 98
95 See, eg,
Wrongs Act 1958
96 But note that statutory amendments do not override or affect common law
principles associated with negligence:
Wrongs Act 1958
97 Prue Vines, ‘Negligence: Introduction’ in Carolyn Sappideen
and Prue Vines (eds),
Fleming’s The Law of Torts
(Lawbook Co., 10th
ed, 2011) 119, 122.
98 Barbara McDonald, ‘Standard of Care’ in Carolyn Sappideen and
Prue Vines (eds),
Fleming’s The Law of Torts
(Lawbook Co., 10th ed,
2011) 123, 123.
Robson v Leischke
[2008] NSWLEC 152
(2008) 72 NSWLR 98
[96]; see also the seminal
Donoghue v Stevenson
[1932] AC 562, 580;
Stockwell v State of
[2001] VSC 497
[392] in which Gillard J states: ‘authorities
in the past have established that in certain circumstances, an occupier of
owes a duty of care to an adjoining land owner to avoid damage,
resulting from something moving onto an adjoining property by reason
action or inaction on the first property’.
• that the tree owner breached that duty—a person may breach a
duty of care through a positive act or omission that falls
short of the standard
of care, unless they have taken precautions to safeguard against foreseeable
risks that are ‘not insignificant’.100
• that the affected neighbour suffered harm—
Wrongs Act 1958
(Vic) defines harm broadly as ‘any kind of
harm’, which includes personal injury or death; and damage to property and
economic loss.101
• that the harm was caused by the breach (causation) and that it was
not too remote. To determine causation, the court will
use a two-step approach
that involves determining first, factual causation102 and second, the scope of
liability.103 Factual causation
obliges the court to ask whether the affected
neighbour would still have suffered their loss but for the negligence of the
tree owner.104
If factual causation
is established, the court must then consider the scope of liability. This
involves a determination about ‘whether or not to
attribute the harm
suffered to the negligence act for the purposes of deciding who, if anyone, is
liable to pay compensation’.
This test ‘involves policy
considerations and is value laden, and hence takes account of social, moral and
economic factors’.105
3.67 To determine whether the harm suffered was not too remote, the court
will consider whether the harm is a reasonably foreseeable
consequence of the
negligent conduct.106 There must have been a real (not far-fetched) risk that
the negligent conduct would cause
the type of harm in question.107
3.68 In tree disputes where damage to property is concerned, negligence is
often submitted as an alternative cause of action
to nuisance.108 Where
personal injury is alleged in a tree dispute, it is more likely that negligence
will be exclusively relied
3.69 There are four defences available against claims of negligence. These
• Voluntary assumption of risk—a negligence claim may be defeated
where the tree owner can prove that the affected neighbour
fully understood the
extent of the risk
Wrongs Act 1958
; Thomson Reuters,
The Laws of
(at 1 June 2016) 33 Torts, ‘2 Negligence’ [33.2.1510].
The double negative, ‘not insignificant’, is a statutory
formulation
based on the common law: see
Wrongs Act 1958
Wyong Shire Council v Shirt
[1980] HCA 12
(1980) 146 CLR 40
, 47 in which Mason J states
that ‘not insignificant’ risks are those that are ‘not
far-fetched or fanciful’.
Wrongs Act 1958
The foreseeability of risks and whether or not a person has adequately
taken precautions against them will depend on balancing
factors such as the
probability of the risk occurring, the severity of the harm if it does, the cost
and difficulty of taking precautions
against the risk and the social utility of
the conduct that creates the risk:
Wrongs Act 1958
balancing of these factors will depend on the particular facts of each case:
Vairy v Wyong Shire Council
[2005] HCA 62
(2005) 223 CLR 422
[40] (McHugh J). The
balancing of these factors is commonly referred to in law as ‘the calculus
of negligence’:
Kit Barker, Peter Cane, Mark Lunney and Francis Trindade,
The Law of Torts in Australia
(Oxford University Press, 5th ed, 2012)
[8.3]. Courts have also developed principles to infer negligent conduct where,
for example,
evidence may be circumstantial: see generally Kit Barker, Peter
Cane, Mark Lunney and Francis Trindade,
The Law of Torts in Australia
(Oxford University Press, 5th ed, 2012) Ch 8.7.
101 Damage to property includes damage caused to anything on the land,
including chattels or possessions. Personal injury
refers to physical
bodily injury—cf mental harm, which is a separate category of harm: see
Wrongs Act 1958
and Kit Barker, Peter Cane, Mark
Lunney and Francis Trindade,
The Law of Torts in Australia
University Press, 5th ed, 2012) Ch 9.4. Economic loss is an
‘injury to person or property resulting in
immediate or subsequent
detriment to a person’s income or wealth’: Peter Butt (ed),
Butterworths’ Concise Australian Legal Dictionary
(LexisNexis/Butterworths, 3rd ed, 2004) ‘economic loss’.
Wrongs Act 1958
s 51(1)(a):
that the negligence was a
necessary condition of the occurrence of the harm.
Wrongs Act 1958
s 51(1)(b):
that it is appropriate for the
scope of the negligent person’s liability to extend to the harm so
104 This is known as the ‘but for test’: Kit Barker, Peter
Cane, Mark Lunney and Francis Trindade,
The Law of Torts in
(Oxford University Press, 5th ed, 2012) [10.2.1]. If complex
circumstances exist, where, for eg, the harm cannot readily be attributed
to the tree owner’s negligent conduct, then the court may apply common
law principles to make a determination. These
principles relate to,
for example, where there are alternative, multiple or hypothetical
causes, or intervening causes
that break the chain of causation (novus
actus interveniens): see generally Margaret Beazley, ‘Damage’ in in
Sappideen and Prue Vines (eds),
Fleming’s The Law of Torts
(Lawbook Co., 10th ed, 2011) [9.70], [9.190]; Kit Barker, Peter Cane,
Mark Lunney and Francis Trindade,
The Law of Torts in Australia
(Oxford University Press, 5th ed, 2012) [10.3.2]. See also
which states: ‘In determining in an
appropriate case, in accordance with established principles, whether
that cannot be established as a necessary condition of the
occurrence of harm should be taken to establish factual causation,
the court is
to consider (amongst other relevant things) whether or not and why
responsibility for the harm should be imposed on
the negligent party.’
105 Mirko Bagaric and Sharon Erbacher, ‘Causation in Negligence: From
Anti-jurisprudence to Principle – Individual Responsibility
Cornerstone for Attribution of Liability’
Journal of Law and
Overseas Tankship (UK) v Morts Dock & Engineering Co Ltd
(Wagon Mound No. 1)
[1961] UKPC 1
[1961] AC 388.
Overseas Tankship (UK) v Morts Dock & Engineering Co Ltd
(Wagon Mound No. 1)
[1961] UKPC 1
[1961] AC 388
Overseas Tankship (UK) Ltd v The
Miller Steamship Co
(Wagon Mound No. 2) [1967] AC 617, 643. The exact extent
of the harm does not have be foreseeable: see, eg, ‘the “thin
skull” rule’ and ‘extent of harm’ in Kit Barker, Peter
Cane, Mark Lunney and Francis Trindade,
The Law of Torts in Australia
(Oxford University Press, 5th ed, 2012) [10.3.4.1]–[10.3.4.2].
108 See, eg,
Marshall v Berndt
[2011] VCC 384
Corporation SP020030 v Keyt
[2016] VCC 1656
Robson v Leischke
[2008] NSWLEC 152
(2008) 72 NSWLR 98
; Kit Barker, Peter Cane, Mark
Lunney and Francis Trindade,
The Law of Torts in Australia
University Press, 5th ed, 2012) 653.
and freely chose to accept or ignore it, thus voluntarily assuming the
risk.110 Where the risk is obvious, the court will presume
the affected
neighbour was aware of the risk.111
• Statutory defences—some defences are included in the
(Vic). These include the statutory defences relating to ‘good
Samaritans’ and volunteers.112
• Illegality—the fact that a person was engaged in an illegal
activity at the time they suffered harm does not necessarily
automatic defence for the negligent party.113 A duty of care may still be owed
to a person engaged in an illegal activity
in certain circumstances.114 The
court may take into consideration whether or not
the person bringing the claim was engaged in illegal activity and reduce an
award of damages to reflect this engagement.115
• Contributory negligence—where the affected neighbour fails to
take reasonable care for their own safety, and this failure
contributes to their
injury, the court may find contributory negligence.116
3.70 Neglige
nce claims must be brought before a
court within three years of the harm being discoverable (that is, it is known
identified), or within 12 years of the date the negligent act
occurred, whichever occurs first.117 For negligence resulting in damage
property, a person must bring legal action within six years of the date the
negligent act occurred.118
3.71 The main remedy for negligence is financial compensation (damages). The
Wrongs Act 1958
(Vic) sets out various thresholds of harm and caps for
monetary amounts that must be applied when awarding damages.119 Damages are
appropriate to remedy past
, one-off losses such as
personal injury, or damage to property. An injunction is usually ineffective in
these situations, as the
risk of these events and losses recurring is likely to
be low.120 For example, where an old, decaying tree falls and causes damage
property or injury to a person on neighbouring land, it is unlikely that this
event will recur.121
110 This defence is also known by the Latin maxim
volenti non fit injuria:
Thomson Reuters,
The Laws of Australia
(at 1 June 2016) 33 Torts,
‘9 Defences’ [33.9.880] citing R P Balkin and J L R Davis,
(Lexis Nexis/Butterworths, 5th ed, 2013) [10.27], the second edition
of which is cited in
Woods v Multi-Sport Holdings Pty Ltd
(2002) 208 CLR
J); see also
Monie v Commonwealth
[2007] NSWCA
230 [75]–[76] (Campbell JA);
Wrongs Act 1958
. Whether or not the affected neighbour understood the extent of the
risk is a subjective assessment based on their actual knowledge:
The Laws of Australia
(at 1 June 2016) 33 Torts, ‘9
Defences’ [33.9.910];
The Insurance Commissioner (Qld) v Joyce
[1948] HCA 17
(1948) 77 CLR 39.
111 Unless the affected neighbour can prove, in turn, on the balance of
probabilities that they were in fact not aware of the risk.
An ‘obvious
risk’ is a risk that would have been obvious to a reasonable person in the
position. This includes ‘risks
that are patent or a matter of common
knowledge’. Furthermore, a risk can be obvious even if it ‘has a low
probability
of occurring’ and ‘is not prominent, conspicuous or
physically observable’. A risk will not be obvious if the
risk is created
because a person has failed to properly ‘operate, maintain, replace,
prepare or care for’ an item or
‘living thing’ unless
‘the failure itself is an obvious risk’: see generally
112 A ‘good Samaritan’, acting in good faith and without
financial reward, can rely on
Wrongs Act 1958
relieve themselves of liability.
provides a similar defence for
volunteers engaged in community work; liability is conferred onto the community
organisation for which
they volunteer although exceptions may apply: see
Wrongs Act 1958
; see generally
Wrongs Act 1958
113 Thomson Reuters,
The Laws of Australia
(at 27 May 2016) 33 Torts,
‘9 Defences’ [33.9.980].
114 To establish illegality as a defence a relationship must exist between
the criminal act and the act of negligence. A common example
given is that of a
burglar who suffers a motor vehicle collision on a highway on their way to a
professional engagement. The harm
suffered by the burglar is independent of the
crime: Thomson Reuters,
The Laws of Australia
(at 27 May 2016) 33 Torts,
‘9 Defences’ [33.9.990].
Wrongs Act 1958
; Kit Barker, Peter Cane, Mark Lunney
and Francis Trindade,
The Law of Torts in Australia
(Oxford University
Press, 5th ed, 2012) 624; James Goudkamp, ‘Defences to Negligence’
in Carolyn Sappideen and Prue Vines
Fleming’s The Law of Torts
(Lawbook Co, 10th ed, 2011), 317, [12.440].
116 James Goudkamp, ‘Defences to Negligence’ in Carolyn Sappideen
and Prue Vines (eds),
Fleming’s The Law of Torts
(Lawbook Co,
10th ed, 2011), 317, [12.30]; see also
Wrongs Act 1958
However, unlike contributory negligence in a nuisance claim, liability for
negligence can also be fully defeated by contributory
negligence if the court
thinks it just and equitable to do so:
Wrongs Act 1958
Limitations of Actions Act 1958
(Vic) s 27D.
118 Ibid s 5(1)(a).
119 For example, ‘in Victoria the threshold for non-economic loss
requires the plaintiff to have suffered a “significant
Significant injury is defined in
Wrongs Act 1958
and depends on assessment of the degree of impairment, according to a procedure
laid down, by an approved medical practitioner
or a medical panel.’: Loane
Skene and Harold Luntz, ‘Effects of Tort Law Reform on Medical
Australian Law Journal
358–9; see also
Wrongs Act 1958
, VB, VBAA and
120 Stephen Sugarman, ‘Damages’ in Carolyn Sappideen and Prue
Vines (eds),
Fleming’s The Law of Torts
(Lawbook Co, 10th ed, 2011)
261 [10.10].
121 See, eg,
Timbs v Shoalhaven City Council
[2004] NSWCA 81
(2004) 132 LGERA 397
note that the subject tree was on council land.
3.72 Trespass to land122 (trespass) is unauthorised entry onto land.123 Legal
action can be taken against the person entering without
authority.124
3.73 In the context of tree disputes, trespass may be claimed by the tree
owner for unpermitted entry to land by the affected neighbour
in two situations.
First, where the affected neighbour abates (cuts back overhanging vegetation)
beyond their boundary line
from their own land and onto the tree owner’s
land.125 Secondly, where the affected neighbour physically enters the tree
land without permission.
3.74 Land relates not only to ‘the surface of any ground, soil or earth
but also any buildings or structures that might be affixed
to it ... both things
growing on the surface (such as trees and grass) and minerals under the
surface’.126
3.75 Every unpermitted entry onto land, no matter how minor, is considered a
trespass,127 even if the trespass does not cause any
material damage.128
3.76 The owner of land affected must be in actual, exclusive possession of
the land to bring an action for trespass.129 The trespasser
must intend the
trespass; that is, they ‘deliberately and wilfully’ interfered with
the tree owner’s exclusive
possession.130
3.77 The most obvious form of trespass is entering land without permission.
Trespass may also occur when, for example, objects are
placed over boundary
lines and left on the land.131 As Justice Bollen explained in the South
Australian case of
Gazzard v Hutchesson
,132 trespass can be found without
entry onto another’s land when an affected neighbour uses a stepladder to
lean over a boundary
line and cut their neighbour’s roses. The trespass
will continue for as long as the intrusion remains.133
3.78 The encroachment of roots or branches over boundary lines, however, will
not constitute trespass because it is unintended.134
An action in nuisance would
be better suited to these situations.135
3.79 An affected neighbour may rely on the following defences against
trespass:136
• Necessity—a belief that the trespass was reasonably necessary
to preserve life or protect property from real and imminent
122 A number of forms of trespass exist, including to land, property and to
the person. For the purposes of this report, and unless
the context indicates
otherwise, all references to ‘trespass’ should be considered to mean
‘trespass to land’.
123 See generally
Plenty v Dillon
(1991) 171 CLR 635
LexisNexis,
Halsbury’s Laws of Australia
(at 21 March 2018) [415
Tort], ‘2 Torts Derived from Trespass’ [415-480].
124 See LexisNexis,
Halsbury’s The Laws of Australia
March 2018) 415 Tort, ‘Unjustified Entry’ [415-480] citing
Entick v Carrington
[1765] EWHC J98
(1765) 19 St. Tr. 1030
(1873) 4 AJR 152
Plenty v Dillon
(1991) 171 CLR 635
Summary Offences Act 1966
125 See, eg,
Gazzard v Hutchesson
(1995) Aust Torts Reports
81–337, 62,360.
126 Kit Barker, Peter Cane, Mark Lunney and Francis Trindade,
Torts in Australia
(Oxford University Press, 5th ed, 2012) [4.2.1].
Plenty v Dillon
(1991) 171 CLR 635
, 639 citing
Lord Camden LCJ
in Entick v Carrington
[1765] EWHC J98
(1765) 19 St. Tr. 1030
Plenty v Dillon
(1991) 171 CLR 635
, 645, 654–55; Kit Barker,
Peter Cane, Mark Lunney and Francis Trindade,
The Law of Torts in
(Oxford University Press, 5th ed, 2012) [4.2.2].
129 Where a property is being rented, only a tenant with exclusive
possession can bring an action for trespass. A licensee
(someone with
permission to be on the land but without a tenancy agreement) may also be able
to sue third parties for trespass
in certain circumstances:
South Wales v Ibbett
[2006] HCA 57
(2006) 229 CLR 638
[29]; Kit Barker, Peter Cane, Mark
Lunney and Francis Trindade,
The Law of Torts in Australia
University Press, 5th ed, 2012) [4.2.2].
130 The affected neighbour may also be deemed to have intended trespass where
they are reckless as to the consequences or negligent:
see LexisNexis,
Halsbury’s The Laws of Australia
(at 21 March 2018) 415 Tort,
‘Unjustified Entry’ [415-480]; Kit Barker, Peter Cane, Mark Lunney
and Francis Trindade,
The Law of Torts in Australia
(Oxford University
Press, 5th ed, 2012) [4.2.2].
131 Kit Barker, Peter Cane, Mark Lunney and Francis Trindade,
Torts in Australia
(Oxford University Press, 5th ed, 2012) [4.2.5.3].
132 (1995) Aust Torts Reports 81–337, 62,360.
133 Kit Barker, Peter Cane, Mark Lunney and Francis Trindade,
Torts in Australia
(Oxford University Press, 5th ed, 2012) [4.2.5.3].
134 See, eg,
Lemmon v Webb
[1894] UKLawRpCh 70
[1894] 3 Ch 1
, 24 affirmed on other grounds in
Lemmon v Webb
[1895] AC 1 cited in
Robson v Leischke
[2008] NSWLEC 152
72 NSWLR 98
136 Re-entry onto land and lawful authority are also defences to trespass to
land but are not discussed here.
137 Kit Barker, Peter Cane, Mark Lunney and Francis Trindade,
Torts in Australia
(Oxford University Press, 5th ed, 2012) [4.4.1]. The
situation believed by the affected neighbour to compel them to act to preserve
life and property must be ‘an urgent situation of imminent peril’
that ‘existed actually, and not merely in the
belief of the [affected
neighbour]’:
Southwark London Borough Council v Williams
Cope v Sharpe
[1912] UKLawRpKQB 215
[1912] 1 KB 496
• Consent—an affected neighbour will
not be liable for trespass where they had consent to act in the way that they
3.80 Mistake which results in trespass, however reasonable, will not be a
defence.139
3.81 A perso
n must bring legal action within six
years of the date the trespass occurred.140
3.82 A tree owner may seek an injunction or damages as a remedy for trespass.
An injunction may be sought to restrain a person from
continuing to
trespass.141
3.83 Damages may be sought even if the trespass does not cause any material
damage to the land or property on the land.142 This is
the purpose of an action for trespass to land is not merely to compensate the
plaintiff for damage to the land. That action also serves
the purpose of
vindicating the plaintiff’s right to the exclusive use and occupation of
[their] land.143
3.84 Where no damage results, the tree owner may be awarded a small (nominal)
amount of damages.144
3.85 Exemplary or aggravated damages may be awarded where significant
disrespect is shown for the tree owner’s rights—for
example, by
cutting down a neighbour’s tree when
they are absent from their land, without informing them or allowing them a
chance to have their say about what should happen to their
tree—and the
court considers that punishment is warranted.145
Other laws affecting tree management
3.86 In Victoria, the management and removal of trees on private land can
be affected by other legislation. These laws may stipulate
circumstances and in accordance with what process works may be carried out on
specified trees or on specified private land
in Victoria.
3.87 Private tree disputes may intersect with the following legislation:
Planning and Environment Act 1987
• local laws made pursuant to the
Local Government Act 1989
Heritage Act 2017
Aboriginal Heritage Act 2006
Fences Act 1968
Catchment and Land Protection Act 1994
Environmental Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act
138 Consent can be express or implied. Common examples of implied consent are
entering a driveway and knocking on a neighbour’s
door to speak to them:
Kit Barker, Peter Cane, Mark Lunney and Francis Trindade,
The Law of Torts in
(Oxford University Press, 5th ed, 2012) [4.4.2].
139 Thomson Reuters,
The Laws of Australia
(at 1 June 2016) 33 Torts,
‘8 Trespass and Intentional Torts’ [33.8.330], [33.8.470].
Limitation of Actions Act 1958
141 For example, this may occur when a person remains on the land after entry
and refuses to leave, places objects on the land and
refuses to remove them, or
builds a wall on the land: Kit Barker, Peter Cane, Mark Lunney and Francis
The Law of Torts in Australia
(Oxford University Press, 5th ed,
2012) [4.2.5.3]
142 Ibid [4.5.1].
Plenty v Dillon
(1991) 171 CLR 635
144 Kit Barker, Peter Cane, Mark Lunney and Francis Trindade,
Torts in Australia
(Oxford University Press, 5th ed, 2012) [4.5.1].
Gazzard v Hutchesson
(1995) Aust Torts Reports 81–337,
62,360: ‘contumelious disrespect for the rights of the enjoyment by the
[tree owner]’;
see also Kit Barker, Peter Cane, Mark Lunney and Francis
The Law of Torts in Australia
(Oxford University Press, 5th ed,
2012) [4.5.1].
3.88 Other Acts also relate to the management of
vegetation for fire prevention; to minimise interference with powerlines; and to
protect public health and wellbeing, and the environment.146 See Chapter 10.
Community responses—the current law
3.89 Only a small number of people reporting a tree dispute to the Commission
stated that they had been able to resolve it.147
3.90 The most common ways that neighbours tried to resolve their tree dispute
were by exercising the self-help right to abatement
or by attempting
neighbour-led dispute resolution.148 A smaller number of people reported that
they contacted DSCV for varying degrees
of assistance.149
3.91 The three main reasons given by community members for why neighbours may
not be successful in resolving their tree dispute were:
• a lack of clarity about the law and information sources
• an inadequate balance between the rights of the tree owner and the
affected neighbour
• the limited avenues of recourse available.
Lack of clarity
3.92 Many community responses identified that the law lacks clarity,
particularly in terms of making it easy for neighbours to apply
legal rules to
their tree dispute.150
3.93 The Commission has been told that the available common law causes of
action are hard to navigate and are complex, and the rights
of neighbours at
common law are unclear.151 This means that neighbours are unable to point to any
clear legal duty to encourage the
resolution of a dispute or even encourage
their neighbour to engage with them early on. This is exacerbated when the
neighbour is
uncooperative or hostile.152
3.94 The Law Institute of Victoria stated:
Disputes about trees are governed by the common law torts of negligence and
nuisance, which are inherently complex. Parties may view
the current law as
complex, and may not have a clear understanding of their rights and duties under
the common law.153
3.95 DSCV suggested that there are a range of reasons for the lower rates of
dispute resolution outcomes for tree matters. Some of
those relate to a lack of
clarity in the law. It suggested that many people who contact the centre
incorrectly expect a local council
or government agency to enforce an outcome
that is inconsistent with case law.154 Other reasons relate to unclear rights
and obligations.
DSCV suggested that:
[DSCV staff find it] difficult to explain exactly what customers can and
can’t do without going to Court to have a Magistrate
decide. For instance,
for a customer whose property
Country Fire Authority Act 1958
Metropolitan Fire
Brigades Act 1958
Electrical Safety Act 1998
and Fauna Guarantee Act 1988
Public Health and Wellbeing Act 2008
Road Management Act 2004
Rail Management Act 1996
Victorian Conservation Trust Act 1972
Conservation,
Forests and Lands Act 1987
147 Only 22.86% of survey respondents reported that they were able to resolve
their tree dispute successfully: Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Neighbourhood Tree Disputes Survey
(2018). However, the Commission
acknowledges that people who have been unsuccessful in resolving their tree
dispute are more likely
to contribute to this inquiry.
148 Submissions 1 (Ian Collier), 5 (Name withheld), 6 (Name withheld), 19
(Name withheld), 22 (Name withheld), 36 (Monique Onezime);
38 (L. Barry Wollmer); Consultation 1 (Aldo Taranto). 51.67% of survey
respondents reported that they trimmed back the tree/plant
to the boundary line
to remedy the issue (abatement): Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Neighbourhood Tree Disputes Survey
149 Submissions 5 (Name withheld), 6 (Name withheld), 23 (Name withheld), 38
(L. Barry Wollmer); Survey Respondents 60, 82, 117.
150 Submissions 7 (Ben Kenyon), 9 (Dr Karen Smith), 25 (City of Boorondara),
28 (HVP Plantations), 30 (Law Institute of Victoria),
34 (Allan Day);
Consultations 3 (HVP Plantations), 4 (Participants in facilitated discussion at
VTIO ArborCamp2018), 6 (Ben Kenyon);
Survey Respondents 3, 43, 57, 82, 88.
151 Submission 30 (Law Institute of Victoria); Consultation 3 (HVP
Plantations); Survey Respondent 117.
152 Submissions 6 (Name withheld), 36 (Monique Onezime), 38 (L. Barry
Wollmer); Consultation 1 (Aldo Taranto); Survey Respondent 60.
153 Submission 30 (Law Institute of Victoria).
154 Information provided by DSCV as part of a data request from the
Commission, August 2017.
is threatened or damaged by tree roots, it is
difficult to actually do anything from a practical stand-point; they can cut the
the tree, which could in turn destabilise it and leave
them liable for property
3.96 Whilst it is not a function of DSCV to provide legal advice to its
clients, DSCV also observes that many tree issues that people
decide to contact
DSCV about ‘would not meet the standard for private nuisance’. It
suggested that for these low level
dispute matters there is no clear pathway for
resolution and without this ‘clients may become disillusioned and withdraw
3.97 HVP Plantations stated that it is difficult to know how to interpret
and apply the current law to a tree dispute without a
determination by a
court.157 It observed that the common law with respect to tree disputes has not
been as extensively developed
as other matters that involve nuisance, negligence
or trespass.
3.98 HVP Plantations further noted available case law focuses mainly on urban
trees in close settings, which cannot be easily applied
to rural settings:
the current state of the law can only be estimated by extrapolation from
cases that have considered boundary trees in urban settings.
These cases tend
not to provide a useful consideration of the issues in a rural setting.158
3.99 Arborist Ben Kenyon further identified that the law lacks additional
clarity in situations where neighbours experience allergies
due to neighbouring
Other laws add complexity
3.100 It was also identified that the additional layers of planning, local
laws and other statutes add complexity and confusion to
the resolution of these
disputes.160 Arborist Dr Karen Smith stated that even if the law was
considered to be satisfactory, it
may be confusing to navigate because
‘there are so many different laws relevant to tree disputes, and also
different codes
of practices. And they are all in different
places.’161
3.101 As one survey respondent noted, ‘It is not always obvious to
neighbours when a tree enjoys “extra” protective
status, such as
heritage status as deemed by council or other such bodies.’162 It was
further suggested:
It is not easy to understand the ‘rights’ of both parties. Also
the law or laws governing this area are spread over what
seems to be a number of
acts ... understanding the implications of such laws then becomes quite
cumbersome.163
Existing remedies are
limited in value
3.102 An overwhelming majority of responses suggested that people had not
been successful in resolving their tree dispute regardless
of what form of
informal resolution they attempted.164 Despite this, the majority of people
reported that they did not take legal
action, even after exhausting all other
options.165
155 Information provided by DSCV as part of a data request from the
Commission, August 2017.
157 Consultation 3 (HVP Plantations).
158 Submission 28 (HVP Plantations).
159 Consultation 6 (Ben Kenyon).
160 Submission 9 (Dr Karen Smith); Survey Respondents 3, 19, 57, 83, 88,
161 Submission 9 (Dr Karen Smith).
162 Survey Respondent 57.
164 Submissions 1 (Ian Collier), 5 (Name withheld), 6 (Name withheld), 19
(Name withheld), 22 (Name withheld), 36 (Monique Onezime),
38 (L. Barry
Wollmer); Consultation 1 (Aldo Taranto). Only 22.86% of survey respondents
reported that they were able to successfully
resolve the dispute themselves:
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Neighbourhood Tree Disputes Survey
165 Submissions 2 (Name withheld), 5 (Name withheld), 6 (Name withheld), 19
(Name withheld), 38 (L. Barry Wollmer); Consultation 1
(Aldo Taranto). 93.62% of
survey respondents reported that they did not take legal action: Victorian Law
Reform Commission,
Neighbourhood Tree Disputes Survey
3.103 Some stated that they had only achieved partial resolution,166 such as
when a tree owner agreed to remove the tree but refused
to pay the cost of
repairs. Others explained that although their tree dispute had been resolved,
this had not occurred because of
existing law and process. Instead, the dispute
had ended because they moved away and were no longer affected or the risk they
(for example, a falling branch or tree) had eventuated, ending the
immediate tension.167
3.104 A large number of responses reported that existing remedies were
limited in their application and often inaccessible.168 For
example, one
submission noted in relation to insurance that ‘not everybody has
insurance cover’ and some people, for
pensioners, ‘are unable to afford insurance’...’I am a
pensioner and while I can manage to scrape together enough
to pay an insurance
premium, I cannot possibly afford the risky business of mounting a legal
Abatement is sometimes impractical or inappropriate
3.105 The legal requirement to return abated branches to the tree owner was
identified as a confusing and unfair aspect of the law.170
For example, one
person expressed frustration that their neighbours had ‘dumped the pruned
branches’ onto their land
‘without notice or prior
discussion’.171 Some suggested that this requirement in and of itself may
have the potential
to cause or exacerbate a dispute with their neighbour about
who is responsible for disposing of the branches.172
3.106 Some submissions raised concerns that the affected neighbour is
entirely responsible for abating. As a result they may incur
a substantial debt
(for example, arborist’s fees) with no physical assistance or monetary
contribution required at law from
the tree owner.173 This may be particularly
problematic for people who cannot physically or financially afford to carry
or arrange tree works.174
3.107 Another criticism is that abatement is not always practical such as
where the encroaching tree is very large or where overhanging
branches are many
metres above the ground, possibly requiring a cherry picker.175 Similarly,
abatement may be inappropriate to use
in confined spaces and narrow side
streets.176
3.108 The cutting of encroaching roots or pruning of overhanging branches may
also require the expertise of an arborist, which can
be a significant cost that
the affected neighbour may be unable to fund and has no right to recoup from the
tree owner.177
3.109 Some arborists noted that when they are engaged by an affected
neighbour to perform an assessment of a neighbouring tree, they
are often unable
to complete a thorough assessment because they are prevented from viewing the
tree from all angles without permission
to enter the tree owner’s
166 30% of survey respondents reported that they achieved a partial
resolution: Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Neighbourhood Tree Disputes
167 Consultation 1 (Aldo Taranto); Survey Respondents 17, 31, 61, 74,
168 Submissions 2 (Name withheld), 4 (Name withheld), 5 (Name withheld), 6
(Name withheld), 9 (Dr Karen Smith), 21 (Pointon Partner
Lawyers), 22 (Name
withheld), 23 (Name withheld), 24 (Name withheld), 27 (Name withheld), 30 (Law
Institute of Victoria), 31 (Barwon
Community Legal Service), 34 (Allan Day), 36
(Monique Onezime), 38 (L. Barry Wollmer); Consultations 1 (Aldo Taranto), 3 (HVP
Plantations),
4 (Participants in facilitated discussion at VTIO ArborCamp2018);
Survey Respondent 99.
169 Submission 38 (L. Barry Wollmer).
170 Submission 7 (Ben Kenyon); Survey Respondents 44, 95, 96, 103.
171 Survey Respondent 95.
172 Submission 10 (Professor Phillip Hamilton); Survey Respondents 7, 44.
173 Submissions 19 (Name withheld), 36 (Monique Onezime).
174 Submissions 6 (Name withheld), 31 (Barwon Community Legal Service), 36
(Monique Onezime); Consultations 7 (Dispute Settlement
Centre of Victoria), 14
(Robert Mineo); Survey Respondents 6, 82, 114.
175 Submission 19 (Name withheld); Survey Respondents 24, 114.
176 Submission 23 (Name withheld).
177 Submission 24 (Name withheld).
178 Consultations 1 (Aldo Taranto), 4 (Participants in facilitated discussion
at VTIO ArborCamp2018), 14 (Robert Mineo).
Disconnect with arboricultural standards
3.110 Some arborists also identified that the common law governing the
resolution of tree disputes is sometimes at odds with arboricultural
science and
the professional standards that arborists are trained to follow.179
3.111 Dr Gregory Moore OAM noted:
Matters that arise can be many and varied and the system that deals with
disputes seems to be very complex and often appears to display
knowledge of the biology and arboriculture of urban trees.180
3.112 An example commonly provided by arborists was the misalignment between
the common law right to abate and the two main Australian
Standards that
arborists are trained to follow when pruning branches and cutting roots.181
These two standards are the
4373-2007—Pruning of Amenity Trees
4970-2009—Protection of Trees on Development Sites
3.113 An arborist applying
AS 4373-2007—Pruning of Amenity Trees
(the Australian Standard) may determine that, in order to maintain the
tree’s health and structural integrity, the branches
should be pruned to
the trunk of the tree, which could be located across boundary lines. If done
without the consent of the tree
owner, this would likely constitute a
trespass.182
3.114 Alternatively, an arborist may determine that applying the Australian
Standard would require that overhanging branches should
only be lightly pruned
to maintain the health and structural integrity of the tree. Some arborists
reported that clients may prefer
their arborist to perform tree works up to the
boundary line regardless of what the Australian Standard may dictate in their
situation.183
Dr Gregory Moore OAM also stated that some arborists with less
training and experience may be more likely to agree to their client’s
3.115 Arborists reported feeling concerned about the legal repercussions of
causing damage to a tree by not following the Australian
Standard and expressed
confusion about balancing their obligations in this regard.185
Limitations of alternative dispute resolution
3.116 Data provided by DSCV and responses from the community suggest that
mediation will not always be effective in tree disputes.
From December 2011 to
May 2017 DSCV reports that in 11.3 per cent of tree-related enquiries, it
invited parties to participate
in mediation. However, mediation was only
conducted in 1.2 per cent of these matters. DSCV suggests that 5.3 per cent of
tree related
enquiries resulted in a dispute resolution outcome – either
through mediation or where DSCV facilitated an outcome for parties
directly, or
provided advice to enable parties to resolve their matter. DSCV has advised
that this rate differs from the average
dispute resolution outcome rate
for other matters which is much higher at 15–16 per cent. This
information indicates that
tree enquiries are less likely than other matters to
progress to a dispute resolution outcome.186
3.117 Ben Kenyon also noted that ‘[m]ost situations rarely end with
mediation’ and that if they remain unresolved then
the disputes are likely
to ‘head straight through to court’.187
179 Submission 7 (Ben Kenyon); Consultations 4 (Participants in facilitated
discussion at VTIO ArborCamp2018), 6 (Ben Kenyon).
180 Submission 12 (Dr Gregory Moore OAM).
181 Submission 7 (Ben Kenyon); Consultations 4 (Participants in facilitated
discussion at VTIO ArborCamp2018), 6 (Ben Kenyon).
182 Submission 23 (Name withheld).
183 Consultation 4 (Participants in facilitated discussion at VTIO
ArborCamp2018). 184 Consultation 2 (Dr Gregory Moore OAM).
185 Consultation 4 (Participants in facilitated discussion at VTIO
ArborCamp2018).
186 Information provided by DSCV as part of a data request from the
Commission, August 2017.
187 Submission 7 (Ben Kenyon).
3.118 Mediation is a voluntary process. Nearly all community members who told
the Commission that they contacted DSCV for help with
their tree dispute
reported that mediation could not be arranged because the other party was
unresponsive or unwilling.188 One
person explained:
I was hoping to initiate mediation through the [Dispute Settlement Centre of
Victoria], so I provided them with my neighbours’
details (name and
address). The Centre sent correspondence to my neighbour, but my neighbour
refused to attend and therefore we did
not have a meeting to negotiate an
outcome. The [Dispute Settlement Centre of Victoria] told me that attendance is
purely on a voluntary
basis and they could not force my neighbour to attend if
[they] didn’t want.189
3.119 A further limitation may arise when a neighbour seeking to mediate
cannot locate the tree owner or obtain their contact details.
This can happen
where a holiday home is occupied only periodically.190
3.120 The Law Institute of Victoria noted that even if neighbours participate
in mediation and agree on a form of resolution, the
outcomes or agreements
reached may not be easily enforceable if the neighbour later changes their mind
or otherwise fails to comply
with the agreement.191
3.121 Private mediation is also available for neighbours willing to
participate in this process but the cost of private mediation
may be prohibitive
for many community members. One person suggested that the total cost of using
private mediation to resolve their
tree dispute was almost $10,000 for one day,
and that this excluded the cost of preparation.
The mediation session did not result in a successful outcome because the
other party was unwilling to come to an agreement.192
3.122 DSCV has suggested that the low resolution rates for tree disputes can
be attributed to factors, including:
• low awareness in the community of rights/obligations
• incorrect assumptions or expectations at point of contact
• lack of a defined process for resolving disputes
• unclear rights and obligations
• more frequent low-level disputes
• minimal scope for negotiation
• considerable barriers to resolving the dispute through court.193
3.123 DSCV observed that, unlike fencing disputes involving shared property,
in a tree dispute the primary cost associated with a
tree typically falls to one
party.194 In tree disputes ‘neighbours are not explicitly required to
negotiate by legislation
or case law and thus many self-select out of the DSCV
mediation process.’ 195
188 Submissions 5 (Name withheld), 6 (Name withheld), 38 (L. Barry Wollmer);
Consultation 7 (Dispute Settlement Centre of Victoria);
Survey Respondents 60,
82, 104, 117.
189 Submission 5 (Name withheld).
190 Consultation 7 (Dispute Settlement Centre of Victoria).
191 Submission 30 (Law Institute of Victoria).
192 Submission 17 (Name withheld).
193 Information provided by DSCV as part of a data request from the
Commission, August 2017. 194 Ibid.
Litigation is difficult
3.124 Nearly all people involved in tree disputes who made submissions or
consulted with the Commission reported that they had not
taken legal action.196
Over 90 per cent of survey respondents also indicated that they had not taken
legal action.197 Only one person
had commenced legal action and taken their
matter to court regarding damage caused to a tree that they owned.198 This
person stated
that ‘after substantial costs were incurred and multiple
delay tactics by the neighbours, an agreement was negotiated, largely
relation to the damaged fence’. They had received legal advice that
‘no action could be taken in relation to the
damage caused to the tree
because it had not been killed’.199
3.125 Community responses suggest that legal action is very rarely pursued
for a number of reasons, the most significant of which
is the prohibitive
cost.200 Pointon Partners explained:
Occasionally, matters do proceed to litigation in either the
Magistrates’ Court or sometimes the County Court. However, in my
experience a great number of matters are abandoned, unresolved, because parties
do not have the resources to proceed to Court.201
3.126 Pointon Partners suggested that ‘Simple matters can cost in the
order of $30,000 to bring to trial. More complicated matters
can, and do, cost
in excess of $100,000.’ Costs may
be incurred during the course of obtaining legal advice, paying court filing
fees and the additional cost of retaining legal counsel
in higher courts.202
These costs were described as ‘a significant impediment to parties wishing
to litigate’.203 One
person suggested that, as a pensioner, he could not
afford to go to court and stated that ‘most pensioners
cannot’.204
3.127 Community Legal Centres, which offer free legal assistance to community
members, may be limited in the legal assistance they
can provide for tree
dispute matters. As Barwon Community Legal Service noted:
Refusal to participate or unsuccessful mediation with neighbours, in the
current legal framework leaves clients with only one option,
initiating Court
proceedings. Our service does not have capacity to assist clients taking these
matters to Court. As a result, our
service is left to refer clients to
potentially expensive litigation lawyers to engage in a lengthy Court action for
nuisance while
the health of their trees continues to deteriorate or further
damage is caused to adjoining fences or other structures.205
3.128 The LIV also noted that the ‘time consuming nature of litigation
may discourage parties from seeking formal resolution’.206
DSCV noted that
Magistrates’ Court action is not generally considered by parties because
‘the process takes a long time
and can be costly, particularly in relation
to the amounts that are typically in dispute. As such many clients simply
up” and decide not to bother taking the matter further.’
3.129 Some people reported that another reason why they did not pursue legal
action was because they did not want to put further strain
on their relationship
with their neighbour.208
196 Submissions 6 (Name withheld), 11 (Name withheld), 13 (Mandy Collins), 19
(Name withheld), 23 (Name withheld), 33 (Annette Neville),
36 (Monique
Onezime), 38 (L. Barry Wollmer); Consultation 1 (Aldo Taranto).
197 Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Neighbourhood Tree Disputes Survey
(2018). 198 Submission 17 (Name withheld).
200 Submissions 6 (Name withheld), 21 (Pointon Partners Lawyers), 30 (Law
Institute of Victoria), 38 (L. Barry Wollmer); information
provided by DSCV as
part of a data request from the Commission, August 2017.
201 Submission 21 (Pointon Partners Lawyers).
202 Submissions 21 (Pointon Partners Lawyers), 30 (Law Institute of
203 Submission 21 (Pointon Partners Lawyers).
204 Submission 38 (L. Barry Wollmer).
205 Submission 31 (Barwon Community Legal Service).
206 Submission 30 (Law Institute of Victoria).
207 Information provided by DSCV as part of a data request from the
Commission, August 2017.
208 Submission 22 (Name withheld); Survey Respondent 123.
3.130 It was also lamented that the option of
taking legal action is only available after damage or harm has
209 Where an affected neighbour is fearful or
anxious about a large tree falling on their house, they may not be able to prove
or negligence without any actual interference or damage having
occurred.210 In this sense, the law was described as reactionary.211
The laws are not very responsive to immediate or significant hazards. The
system requires a lengthy and tedious process to get results
at the affected
person’s expense both financially/emotionally.212
3.131 The City of Boroondara stated in summary, ‘The current regime in
Victoria is complicated, costly and overly legalistic.’213
Low awareness and lack of information
3.132 Community members may not know where to find the law, how to interpret
it and who to ask for assistance.214 DSCV observed that
many people contact the
centre ‘purely to enquire about their rights and obligations with regards
to tree issues’. It
observed that there is a low level of awareness in the
community about rights and obligations. 215
3.133 Community responses suggest that people seeking information and
assistance with their tree dispute are often referred to multiple
agencies and
find not getting clear advice frustrating. 216 People sometimes find themselves
caught in a cycle of referrals.217
3.134 Responses lamented a lack of a central resource. Arborist Dr Karen
Smith stated that:
[there] needs to be a centralised place for people to go for information
regarding trees and the law before they get into disputes
... As well as a place
to access information about their rights218
environmental and amenity benefits. It may also
suggest other ways to resolve the matter (for example, moving a sandpit instead
removing the branch that overhangs it).223
The City of Port Phillip also stated that it may advise residents to seek
independent arboricultural advice. Port Phillip stated it
may become more
involved in a tree dispute where damage is caused by a third party to a
resident’s tree (for example, a plumber
who may be damaging the roots of a
DSCV reported that in some instances, they may need to refer clients back to
the referring local council when it is discovered that
the tree subject to the
dispute is protected by
a local law or planning scheme.225 Moreover, although DSCV reported that it
received referrals from private arborists from time to
time, an overwhelming
majority of private arborists at ArborCamp2018 advised they had not heard of
People seeking information and assistance may also contact private
arborists227 and community legal centres.228 A small number of
people also
reported that they contacted real estate agents229 or property managers230 (in
the case of tenants) or water utility
companies (in the case of roots blocking
drains and sewerage),231 insurance companies,232 and even the Environmental
Agency.233 These people reported that they
were advised that they could not be assisted with this type of dispute or
were referred elsewhere. People also contacted private lawyers
for legal advice
but this was less common, most likely due to expense.234
One affected neighbour recounted their experience of trying to get help with
their tree dispute and being referred to a number of
organisations. This person
was concerned about overhanging gum trees and the noise of gumnuts falling on
their garage roof. They
advised them that it could not help and referred them to DSCV. DSCV advised
the tree owner would need to participate in mediation voluntarily, which the
affected neighbour determined was not practicable
because of a hostile
relationship. The affected neighbour also contacted the Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA). The EPA advised
them that noise complaints fell within the remit
of local council and referred them back to their local council. The local
reiterated that it was unable to assist with private tree disputes and
referred the person to DSCV a second time.235
The balance of competing rights
Few responsibilities for tree owners
Many people viewed the law as ‘unfair’ or
‘one-sided’236 because they perceive an inadequate balance between
the right of a tree owner to use and enjoy their land in any lawful manner and
the affected neighbour’s right to use and enjoy
their land without
unreasonable interference.237
223 Consultation 10 (Baw Baw Shire Council).
224 Consultation 12 (City of Port Phillip).
225 Consultation 7 (Dispute Settlement Centre of Victoria).
226 Consultation 4 (Participants in facilitated discussion at VTIO
ArborCamp2018). Approximately 35–40 arborists from
Victoria were present during this consultation. The majority were private
contractors.
227 Consultations 2 (Dr Gregory Moore OAM), 4 (Participants in facilitated
discussion at VTIO ArborCamp2018), 6 (Ben Kenyon).
228 Submissions 31 (Barwon Community Legal Service), 34 (Allan Day);
Consultation 1 (Aldo Taranto).
229 Survey Respondents 20, 113.
230 Survey Respondent 95.
231 Survey Respondent 114
232 Submission 34 (Allan Day).
233 Information provided by a community member to the Commission, 1 March
234 Submissions 17 (Name withheld), 21 (Pointon Partners Lawyers).
235 Information provided by a community member to the Commission,1 March
236 Submissions 6 (Name withheld), 34 (Allan Day); Survey Respondent 72.
237 Submissions 5 (Name withheld), 6 (Name withheld), 34 (Allan Day), 36
(Monique Onezime); Survey Respondents 18, 72, 93, 99, 106,
111, 112, 114.
A common theme in community responses was that even though the tree is the
property of the owner of the land on which is grows,
the affected neighbour is
left with the responsibility of managing the growth and effects of that tree as
it encroaches over the
Many affected neighbours were concerned that the law appears to favour the
tree owner because it does not put any obligations on the
owner to maintain
their tree. In doing so, it appears to allow the owner to ignore or refuse even
reasonable requests or genuine
efforts to resolve the dispute by their
neighbour.239 In addition, concern was expressed that an affected neighbour
cannot recoup
any costs associated with abatement, such as the cost of engaging
an arborist to prune branches.240
Community responses noted:
Your tree, your responsibility. 241
The law currently allows me to cut back overhanging tree branches and return
them to my neighbour. This is an expensive ongoing
issue that is hard work
for me as I do not hire professional companies to do the job for me. I
undertake the work to try and
reduce the cost ... I do not own the trees
therefore why should I have to take responsibility
to maintain them. Trees grow and spread, it should be the owner’s
responsibility to maintain them.242
... [the law is] totally in favour of the person who owns the tree and they
are the ones causing the trouble it is very unfair, I
have done nothing to
cause the situation but its left all to me to deal with the situation, as the
laws are ridiculous. The current
laws are not fair it should be the person who
owns the tree or is in their property to take care of them when they are
onto someone else’s property. ... [T]he system as it is
does not work at all and treats the [affected neighbour] as though
they are the
ones at fault and leaves it up to them which is unfair, people have illnesses
and financial hardships they should
not be expected to clear their neighbours
The current law is very unfair. It is one-sided It will cost over $2,000
dollars to have it cut back to the fence line which
resolve the issues. It is their tree it should be their responsibility to
keep it within their property. We
would not be able to build a 4 story property
on any part of our land but they can have a tree that high and also with
branches and
roots coming onto our property and we have no say about it.244
It is hard to comprehend that we have no rights other than requesting
empathy from the neighbour who unfortunately shows no willingness
the trees that will have foreseeable negative impact on our agricultural
business ... It is bordering on ridiculousness
that currently the affected
neighbour has to carry the costs for someone else’s encroaching trees and
even return the branches
to the neighbour!245
There are no real sanctions—the rights of tree owners are paramount and
the rights of those who suffer from neighbour’s
trees are almost
non-existent. The onus and huge cost of removing overhanging branches and
unwanted roots is on the victim, and not
the tree owning perpetrator.246
238 Submissions 6 (Name withheld), 24 (Name withheld), 34 (Allan Day).
239 Submissions 5 (Name withheld), 17 (Name withheld), 22 (Name withheld), 33
(Annette Neville), 34 (Allan Day); Consultation 1 (Aldo
Taranto); Survey
Respondent 60.
240 Submissions 5 (Name withheld), 6 (Name withheld), 19 (Name withheld), 23
(Name withheld).
241 Submission 38 (L. Barry Wollmer).
242 Submission 5 (Name withheld).
243 Submission 6 (Name withheld).
244 Survey Respondent 72.
245 Survey Respondent 99.
246 Submission 19 (Name withheld).
The benefits of trees
In Chapter 2 the Commission identified that the community is becoming
increasingly aware of the importance of vegetation and the need
to retain it.
Disputes also arise in the community about the removal of vegetation from
neighbouring land. In some local government
areas it was suggested that these
enquiries equate to half of the enquiries received about trees on private
One arborist also expressed the view that it was unfair that new owners have
full authority over any tree on their land, especially
where the tree is
decades-or centuries-old and could be considered to be a community
ENSPEC noted that ‘any reform needs to provide a balance between
genuine harm, or risk thereof, and the unreasonable expectations
of some in the
community, such as often occurs with complaints about falling leaves, or the
propensity to attribute causation to
trees without proof for phenomena [such as]
soil subsidence and blocked pipes’.249
In addition and as outlined above, the main remedies for tree disputes are
court orders for an injunction and/or damages. These
tortious remedies
‘aim to rectify specific personal losses, but do not address the interests
of the public at large in the
aesthetic, historical, cultural or environmental
values associated with trees’.250 This may be considered at odds with an
increasing awareness about and emphasis on the importance of vegetation, the
need to retain the urban forest and to improve the
liveability of urban
Rural and urban contexts
HVP Plantations identified that common law principles in nuisance and
negligence are not easily applied to tree issues in rural areas
where there may
be many trees on extensive boundaries. It was suggested that it is difficult in
practice for rural landowners to
inspect trees to protect neighbours from harm
in the context of negligence: ‘Regular inspection of such trees is mostly
impractical
and a tree which is “defective” is also likely to be a
tree with significant habitat value which is valued by the
community.’251
HVP also identified that nuisance arising from damage to property by falling
trees or branches is almost inevitable in rural areas.
Abating large and
numerous trees to address this issue would ‘not be a desirable
outcome’. It was suggested that ‘most
people would prefer that the
objective of total safety from falling trees and branches be compromised
to maintain the environmental and amenity value of trees in the
landscape’.252 A distinction was drawn where there is a threat
people caused by a particular tree and action is therefore
required.253
The Commission’s conclusion
The Commission is of the view that there is currently no clear process that
the community can easily follow to resolve tree disputes.
It is hard to find
definitive legal statements about the rights of parties to disputes and
navigating the current law is difficult.
There is also a lack of centrally
available community information about how to resolve these disputes.
Court proceedings are prohibitively expensive and remedies provide only
limited recourse. Some remedies are reactive only and do not
allow much scope
for a person to take action to prevent damage or harm, while others do not take
into account the broader benefits
that trees provide to the community. Some
remedies are outdated and can further inflame disputes—for example, the
requirement
to return abated branches to the tree owner.
247 Consultations 9 (Nillumbik Shire Council), 10 (Baw Baw Shire Council), 12
(City of Port Phillip).
248 Consultations 4 (Participants in facilitated discussion at VTIO
ArborCamp2018), 6 (Ben Kenyon).
249 Submission 18 (ENSPEC).
250 Margaret Davies and Kynan Rogers, ‘Tale of a Tree’ (2014) 16
Flinders Law Journal
251 Submission 28 (HVP Plantations).
neighbourhood tree disputes
52 Approaches to tree disputes in other
54 Community responses on options for
56 The Commission’s conclusions
60 Policy themes that should underpin the new
The need for a new Act
to resolve neighbourhood tree disputes
Introduction
4.1 Chapter 3 examined some limitations with how the current law helps people
to resolve tree disputes. This chapter explores the
need for change in more
detail. It briefly considers the interstate Acts that have been introduced to
resolve tree disputes, and
community responses to the possible direction of
reforms in Victoria. It recommends the introduction of a Neighbourhood Tree
Act in Victoria and identifies the policy themes that should underpin
this new Act.
Approaches to tree disputes in other
4.2 Some Australian jurisdictions have enacted legislative regimes to govern
the resolution of tree disputes while others have retained
the common law.
4.3 In the Australian Capital Territory, the Northern Territory, South
Australia and Western Australia, tree disputes are governed
by common law, as
in Victoria. The overall process in each of these states and territories is
similar to the Victorian process
discussed in Chapter 3.
4.4 As in Victoria, each of the states and territories has its own provider
of free mediation services.1 Tree disputes are heard in
courts or tribunals:
• In South Australia and Western Australia, smaller claims are heard in
magistrates’ courts.2
• In the Northern Territory, smaller claims can be heard in the
Northern Territory Civil and Administrative Tribunal or the
Local Court.3
• In the Australian Capital Territory, an affected neighbour can bring
legal action for nuisance in the ACT Civil and Administrative
Tribunal instead
of going to court, provided their claim is for $25,000 or less.4 Claims
exceeding this amount must be brought in
the ACT Magistrates Court.5
1 These include the Conflict Resolution Service in
the ACT (Conflict Resolution Centre,
Resolving Conflict in Canberra
www.crs.org.au/
>); the Community
Justice Centre (NT),
Resolving Disputes without Going to Court
<https://nt.gov.au/law/processes/resolving-disputes-without-going-to-court>);
the Uniting Communities Mediation Service in South
Australia (Uniting
Communities,
(Web Page, 2019) <
www.unitingcommunities.org/services/financial-legal-services/mediation-
services/>), and the Citizens Advice Bureau in Western Australia (Citizens
Advice Bureau (WA),
Mediation Service
(Web Page, 2019)
http://www.cabwa.com.au/mediation-service
2 Individual jurisdictional limits of each state and territory’s courts
may require larger claims to be brought in higher courts.
3 The Northern Territory Civil and Administrative Tribunal has original
Small Claims Act 2016
(NT). A ‘small claim’ is $25 000 or less:
Small Claims Act
Section 13A
Local Court Act 2015
confers limited
concurrent jurisdiction on the Local Court in relation to these claims.
ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2008
(ACT) s 18(2)(a).
5 The jurisdictional limit of the ACT Magistrates Court is $250,000:
Magistrates Court Act 1930
Tree dispute Acts in
other states
4.5 Specific Acts have been introduced in New South Wales, Queensland and
Tasmania to help neighbours on private land resolve their
tree disputes.6 The
key features of these Acts are discussed throughout this report.
4.6 These Acts were introduced following reviews by law reform bodies and
government agencies7 that recommended new legislation to
‘simple, inexpensive and accessible process for resolving tree
disputes’.8
4.7 These Acts identify:
• the rights and responsibilities of parties
• the specific causes of action that can be relied upon to bring legal
• the decision-making principles that will guide the decision maker
• the types of orders that can be made.
4.8 Cases under the interstate Acts are heard in either in a tribunal or in a
specialised court, which each focusing on quick, cheap
and efficient dispute
resolution.9 In New South Wales, cases are heard by specialist Commissioners
with arboricultural experience
and hearings are generally conducted on site.10
In Queensland the Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal (QCAT) is
by Tribunal appointed independent tree assessors who provide expert
advice to the Tribunal.11
4.9 In addition to legal action through a court or tribunal, the Queensland
and Tasmanian Acts introduce formal procedures that help
people resolve their
disputes out of court.12
4.10 Both NSW and Queensland handle a relatively low number of applications
each year. The Land and Environment Court of New South
Wales (NSWLEC) has
heard approximately 1000 cases since the NSW scheme commenced. It now hears 120
to 156 cases per year.13
Approximately 200 tree dispute applications are filed
in QCAT each year.14 The Tasmanian Act came into operation in December 2017,
with 13 applications filed in 2018 and three filed as at the end of April
4.11 The introduction of these Acts appears to have had positive outcomes.
Reviews of the Acts have found that the policy objectives
of simplicity,
affordability and accessibility have been met by the procedure established in
New South Wales; 16 and that the Queensland
scheme provides effective resolution
of tree disputes.17
6 See generally,
Trees (Disputes Between Neighbours) Act 2006
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants Act 2017
7 For Queensland see Explanatory Notes,
Neighbourhood Disputes Resolution
(Qld) 2, 9; Department of Justice an
Attorney- General (Qld),
Review of Neighbourly Relations: Trees
(Discussion Paper, July 2008); Department of Justice and Attorney-General
Review of Neighbourly Relations: Resolving Neighbourhood Disputes
(Discussion Paper, July 2008); Queensland Law Reform Commission,
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
No 72, 2015) 1; For Tasmania see Tasmania, Parliamentary Debates, Legislative
Council, 22 June 2017, 1 (Leonie Hiscuitt);
Tasmanian Law Reform Institute,
Problem Trees and Hedges: Access to Sunlight and Views
(Report No 21,
January 2016) 35 (Recommendation 3); For New South Wales see New South Wales Law
Reform Commission,
Neighbour and Neighbour Relations
(Report No 88,
8 For New South Wales see Law Reform Commission,
Neighbour and Neighbour
(Report No 88, 1998) [Recommendation 5]. As Commissioner Fakes
explains, the
Trees (Disputes Between Neighbours) Act 2006
‘was enacted to provide a relatively simple means of dealing with
disputes between neighbours as a result of trees...These
are civil matters that
prior to the [statutory scheme] would have required someone to take an action in
nuisance or negligence ...
an expensive and time consuming process, and a
process more limited in scope than that of the current [statutory
Ghazal v Vella
[2011] NSWLEC 1340.
9 Tree disputes are heard in the Land and Environment Court of NSW, the
Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal and the Resource
Management and
Planning Appeal Tribunal.
10 Land and Environment Court of New South Wales,
Practice Note Class 2:
Tree Disputes
, 1 December 2018 [23], [42].
11 Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
QCAT Practice Direction
No 7 of 2013: Arrangements for Applications for Orders to Resolve Other Issues
3 April 2014 [5]-[7].
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants Act 2017
parts of the Acts provide for a formal branch removal notice process. This
process is discussed in Ch 6.
13 Consultation 11 (Land and Environment Court of New South Wales).
14 Consultation 15 (Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal).
15 Information provided by the Resource Management and Planning Appeal
Tribunal to the Commission, April 2019. The data provided dates
to 26 April
16 Department of Justice and Attorney-General (NSW),
Review of the
(Disputes Between Neighbours) Act 2006
(NSW) (Report, 2009) 10, 15-16.
17 Consultation 15 (Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal).
4.12 These schemes provide a good guide for a
legislative regime in Victoria.
International jurisdictions
4.13 Some international jurisdictions have also developed laws and processes
to help neighbo
urs to resolve their tree disputes.
They include New Zealand, Singapore, Canada and the United States. Some of these
international
schemes have informed the development of recommendations in this
Community responses—options for
4.14 In the consultation paper, the Commission sought community responses on
three main options for reform:
• Option 1: Retain the existing system but with specific
improvements
• Option 2: Introduce a new statutory scheme (an Act) for resolving
tree disputes in Victoria
• Option 3: Alternative options for reform.
4.15 Community responses overwhelmingly supported the introduction of a new
Act in Victoria.
Option 1: Retain the existing system
4.16 Only a small number of people considered the current law and process in
Victoria satisfactory.18 Most community members who addressed
this question
suggested that the current law is not satisfactory.19 One submission noted:
the existing system should not be retained ... Anything that resolves or
unifies the multitude of legal considerations surrounding
tree dispute laws and
processes that we have at present should be a great improvement.20
4.17 Another commented, ‘the law in Victoria relating to tree disputes
is totally unsatisfactory
... in reality [it] offers no protection to persons and property that may be
impacted and or inconvenienced by a neighbour’s
4.18 Some community members provided suggestions for specific
improvements:
• modifications to abatement22
• accessible and centralised information about available options and
rights and best practice for pruning (for example, information
relevant Australian Standards)23
• compelling tree owners to manage or remedy trees in specific
situations (such as where the tree hosts pests or is diseased,
or where an
affected neighbour makes specific requests for works) with enforcement by local
18 Only 15.31 per cent of survey responses to Question 12 ‘Do you
think the current law and process for resolving tree disputes
in Victoria is
satisfactory as it is?’ said ‘yes’: Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Neighbourhood Tree Disputes Survey
(2018); Submissions 9 (Dr
Karen Smith) ‘I think they probably are. However, there are so many
different laws relevant to tree
disputes, and also different codes of practices.
And they are all in different places’; 21 (Pointon Partners Lawyers)
law is satisfactory, however the process for resolving neighbourhood
tree disputes is simply not available to those who cannot afford
to go to Court.
Therefore, the enactment of an Expert Tribunal to resolve simple dispute between
neighbours relating to tree would
make justice accessible to all
Victorians’
19 Submissions 2 (Name withheld), 4 (Name withheld), 5 (Name withheld), 6
(Name withheld), 7 (Ben Kenyon), 11 (Name withheld), 13
(Mandy Collins), 17
(Name withheld), 19 (Name withheld), 22 (Name withheld), 23 (Name withheld), 24
(Name withheld),
25 (City of Boroondara), 27 (Name withheld), 30 (Law Institute of Victoria),
31 (Barwon Community Legal Service), 33 (Annette Neville),
34 (Allan Day), 36
(Monique Onezime), 38 (L. Barry Wollmer); Consultations 3 (HVP Plantations), 4
(Participants in facilitated discussion
at VTIO ArborCamp2018), 6 (Ben
20 Confidential submission.
21 Submission 38 (L. Barry Wollmer).
22 Submission 23 (Name withheld).
23 Submissions 7 (Ben Kenyon), 9 (Dr Karen Smith), 11 (Name withheld), 23
(Name withheld). See, eg, Standards Australia,
Pruning of Amenity Trees
(AS 4373-2007) (Sydney, NSW: Standards Australia, 2007).
24 Submission 4 (Name withheld).
• preventing people from planting trees close
to common boundaries, and giving affected neighbours an automatic right to cut
down trees to the height of the dividing fence25
• compelling an unwilling party to participate in mediation.26
Option 2: Introduce a new tree disputes
4.19 The majority of community members supported the adoption of a specific
statutory scheme in Victoria and noted it would be a significant
improvement.27
4.20 One community member stated ‘there should be a single, clear Act
that sets out neighbours’ rights and duties, and
explains where to go for
information and support’.28 Arborist Dr Karen Smith stated ‘It would
seem that this has merit
since self-help and mediation is not proving
satisfactory to many.’29 Another community member pointed out that:
A statutory scheme for resolving tree disputes has the primary function of
providing a level of certainty for disputants who are seeking
the resolution of
a seemingly intractable conflict by way [of] accessible legislation and
adjudication.30
4.21 Many community members viewed the scheme in New South Wales favourably
and considered a similar Victorian statutory scheme appropriate31:
Other states in Australia have much more rigorous laws and also specialised
courts to deal with these problems ... We need a new
act of parliament. Other
states have useful legislation, why not Victoria?32
4.22 As one survey respondent succinctly explained: ‘The law requires
immediate reform. It is currently unfair. The NSW
tree law is a good example
to use for reforming the laws in relation to trees in Victoria.’33
4.23 Dr Gregory Moore OAM stated that the statutory schemes in New South
Wales, Queensland and Tasmania appear to be sensible.34
4.24 QCAT reported that the Queensland scheme appears to be working well to
resolve tree disputes.35 Acting Commissioner David Galwey
of the NSWLEC and a
tree disputes consultant working in both New South Wales and Victoria submitted
that the New South Wales scheme
provides a good example of effective legislation
for resolving tree disputes.36
4.25 Some commented that a clear statutory scheme, such as the
(Vic) for fence disputes, should be replicated for tree disputes.37
4.26 Although no one objected to the idea of a new Act, there were
reservations about the potential for any new scheme to lead to
an increase in
disputes and have a greater impact on vegetation.38
25 Submission 33 (Annette Neville).
26 Submission 10 (Professor Phillip Hamilton); Survey respondents 72,
27 Submissions 2 (Name withheld), 4 (Name withheld), 6 (Name withheld), 7
(Ben Kenyon), 9 (Dr Karen Smith), 11 (Name withheld), 13
(Mandy Collins), 19
(Name withheld), 20 (Name withheld), 23 (Name withheld), 25 (City of
Boorondara), 27 (Name withheld),
28 (HVP Plantations), 31 (Barwon Community Legal Service), 33 (Annette
Neville); Consultations 1 (Aldo Taranto), 3 (HVP Plantations).
28 Consultation 1 (Aldo Taranto).
29 Submission 9 (Dr Karen Smith).
30 Submission 20 (Name withheld).
31 Submissions 7 (Ben Kenyon), 9 (Dr Karen Smith), 20 (Name withheld), 31
(Barwon Community Legal Service); Consultation 1 (Aldo Taranto).
32 Submission 19 (Name withheld).
33 Survey respondent 99.
34 Consultation 2 (Dr Gregory Moore OAM).
35 Consultation 15 (Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal).
36 Submissions 20 (Name withheld), 29 (David Galwey).
37 See, eg, Consultation 3 (HVP Plantations).
38 Submissions 18 (ENSPEC), 28 (HVP Plantations); Consultation 4
(Participants in facilitated discussion at VTIO ArborCamp2018).
4.27 An arborist expressed concern that a statutory
scheme will increase the removal of trees, thus reducing the urban forest and
benefits to the community.39 ENSPEC, an arboricultural consulting firm,
supported reforms to clarify and simplify the resolution
of tree disputes but
we harbour some strong reservations about the form this might take and the
potential for an increase in disputes as a result ... Is
the current number of
enquiries unexpected or unreasonable given the millions of trees in our
Could the number of enquiries/disputes be reduced through public education
Would providing an easily accessible system actually increase the overall
workload in the system and burden on the community by facilitating
unreasonable ‘disputes’ going further than an enquiry to DSCV
[Dispute Settlement Centre of Victoria]?40
4.28 HVP Plantations cautioned against placing unreasonable burdens on
rural landowners to manage trees. It submitted that ‘there
is a case for
statutory intervention to provide guidance to rural landowners in treed
environments, and to draw a contemporary compromise
between the benefits and
risks that trees bring to neighbours’.41
Option 3: Alternative options
4.29 The community was also asked to submit proposals for alternative options
for reform. Some of these ideas are discussed in Chapter
13 because they are
beyond the scope of this Community Law Reform Inquiry.
4.30 Dr Gregory Moore OAM suggested establishing an office of the State
Arborist. This person would have significant arboricultural
experience and
would provide independent and impartial advice in disputes. Parties could pay a
fee which would fund the office.42
4.31 Some responses proposed a role for local councils to inspect trees, put
tree owners on notice, and fine those who do not comply.43
The Commission’s conclusions—options
4.32 Tree issues arise frequently in the community (whether or not they
become disputes handled by DSCV) and those issues would usefully
be ameliorated
by more clarity in the law.
4.33 For most people, the current law and process are unclear and provide
limited recourse. Because courts are inaccessible to most
people, the community
must rely on the informal dispute resolution framework. Without clear guidance
from the law, this approach
has limitations.
The limitations of only focusing on informal
4.34 Informal neighbour-led negotiation may not be possible when a tree owner
ignores an affected neighbour’s concerns or refuses
to negotiate. There is
currently little incentive for a tree owner to negotiate with an affected
neighbour because the law is hard
to identify and there is no clear resolution
39 Consultation 4 (Participants in facilitated discussion at VTIO
ArborCamp2018).
40 Submission 18 (ENSPEC).
41 Submission 28 (HVP Plantations).
42 Consultation 2 (Dr Gregory Moore OAM).
43 Submissions 5 (Name withheld), 6 (Name withheld).
4.35 It may be inadvisable to approach a tree owner where the relationship
between neighbours is acrimonious. The close proximity
of neighbours increases
the chances of conflict. Tree disputes can escalate into trespass, vandalism or
criminal matters.44
4.36 Abatement is a ‘self-help’ remedy and so does not require
any contribution or cooperation from the tree owner, but
it may be of limited
use for affected neighbours who are physically or financially unable to do
it. Abatement may not be practicable
in situations involving large trees or
confined spaces. Further, the requirement at law to return abated branches to
the tree owner
was identified as unfair and could make things worse.
4.37 Mediation via DSCV is voluntary, so if one party refuses to participate
an affected neighbour is left without any recourse. Moreover,
any agreement
reached is not legally binding and the affected neighbour has no right of
enforcement unless the agreement is converted
into a formal written contract by
an external legal practitioner.45 These limits were also recognised in the
context of fence disputes
by the Parliamentary Law Reform Committee during its
1998 review
Fences Act 1968
4.38 Mediation will not be appropriate if either party has expressed fear of
the other or has been harmed or threatened with violence
by the other
4.39 The Commission agrees with the conclusions of the Tasmania Law Reform
Institute’s 2016 review,
Problem Trees and Hedges: Access to Sunlight
. The review recognised that the current Victorian system for
resolving tree disputes is focused on alternative dispute resolution
(ADR).48 It
The Institute is not persuaded that ADR should be used as a stand-alone
alternative to other, more formal processes in the resolution
of neighbour
disputes about trees or hedges. This is due to potential difficulties with
compelling a neighbour to participate
in ADR processes—particularly where there is a level of animosity
between neighbours that would make voluntary attendance or
unrealistic or undesirable—and the (potentially) non-binding nature of
agreements reached through ADR, making
the enforcement of agreements unworkable
in some cases. Further, if ADR fails to resolve the dispute recourse would be
common law, a situation that is unlikely to provide a satisfactory
resolution to the dispute.49
4.40 The Tasmanian review recommended that the Victorian model not be
implemented in Tasmania.50
44 See, eg,
Miles v Barca
(2003) VSC 376
; Gregory Moore, ‘Acts
of Arborial Violence: Tree Vandals Deprive Us All’,
The Conversation
(online, 2 June 2015,
http://theconversation.com/acts-of-arborial-violence-tree-vandals-deprive-us-all-41342
Lynda Cheshire and Robin Fitzgerald, ‘From Private Nuisance to Criminal
Behaviour: Neighbour Problems and Neighbourhood
Context in an Australian
City’ (2015) 30(3)
Housing Studies
100, 101, 115–6; Victoria
Disputes With Neighbours
(Web Page, 25 March 2019)
www.legalaid.vic.gov.au/find-legal-answers/disputes-with-neighbours
45 DSCV staff do not have any investigative or enforcement powers.
Accordingly, DSCV does not provide any location/site assessment
services and
they cannot tell the person you are in dispute with to do anything: Dispute
Settlement Centre of Victoria, DSCV
FAQS (Web Page, 3 June 2019) <
https://www.disputes.vic.gov.au/information-and-advice/dscv-faqs
Parties are informed by DSCV that their written mediation agreements may be
drawn up into a formal written contract by an external
legal practitioner:
Information provided by the Dispute Settlement Centre of Victoria to the
Commission, 16 October 2017.
46 Law Reform Committee, Parliament of Victoria,
Review of the
(Report, 1998) [2.17] –[2.20].
47 DSCV considers a number of factors when determining whether a
matter is appropriate for mediation. Considerations
include: whether both
parties genuinely want to resolve the dispute; whether the parties are
able to understand and
participate in the mediation process; the level
of vulnerability of either party (eg, mental health issues); whether either
has expressed fear of the other party, or has been harmed or
threatened with violence by the other party; any previous failed
attempts at
mediation; whether the issue is substantial enough to mediate:
Dispute Settlement Centre of Victoria,
(Web Page, 3 June
2019) <https://
www.disputes.vic.gov.au/about-us/
mediation-0>.
48 Tasmania Law Reform Institute,
Problem Trees and Hedge: Access to
Sunlight and Views
(Report No 21, 2016) [5.3.1]. 49 Ibid [5.3.8].
50 Ibid 35, Recommendation 3.
The limitations of going
4.41 High costs mean that many people do not take matters to court. Even if
neighbours choose to pursue legal action, the outcomes
can be difficult to
predict. Common law rules in nuisance, negligence and trespass are often
complex and it is difficult to identify
clear statements of rights and
responsibilities for tree owners and affected neighbours. The torts and their
remedies do not address
all the unique circumstances and issues involved in tree
disputes, and the wider benefits and importance of trees do not have to
considered. It is also difficult to obtain a pre-emptive remedy.
4.42 The Commission agrees generally with the comments in interstate reviews
on the complexity and limitations of the common law.
The New South Wales Law
Reform Commission’s 1998 review,
Neighbour and Neighbour Relations
found that:
The law of nuisance is only likely to provide a remedy where a tree actually
causes physical damage. Common law nuisance rights
in relation to the less
tangible impact of trees on the enjoyment of property are so unclear and
uncertain that few people are
likely to pursue them in a court. People are
also unlikely to be able to resolve a dispute between themselves on the basis of
laws ... The common law of nuisance is of very little use to a neighbour
trying to prevent a tree from causing damage. This means
that a minor
dispute that could be resolved by the inexpensive removal of a small tree is
likely to become a major dispute
in which property damage has occurred and will
continue to occur unless huge amounts are spent to remove what has become a very
4.43 The Explanatory Notes to the
Neighbourhood Disputes Resolution Bill 2010
(which became the Queensland Act) explain that ‘the application of the
common law of nuisance to a neighbourhood dispute about
trees did not provide a
realistic solution for neighbours’.52
A new Tree Disputes Act is needed
4.44 The Commission recommends that a new Act is introduced to govern the
resolution of tree disputes between neighbours on private
land in Victoria. This
approach received considerable support from the community.
4.45 A new Act is needed because amending existing laws would not address all
the elements that arise in tree disputes. A standalone
Act would be easier for
the community to find, navigate and understand.
4.46 Certain aspects of the current legal process should be retained to allow
neighbours different options. The existing pathways
of abatement, neighbour-led
negotiation and mediation via DSCV may successfully resolve some tree
4.47 The Commission supports retaining these options and encouraging
neighbours to use them as a first step. Specific suggestions
for improving
them are outlined in subsequent chapters.53 This is consistent with other
Australian and international jurisdictions
that have enacted legislation for
tree disputes but have also encouraged the options of negotiation, mediation and
abatement. See
4.48 Neighbours who wish to take legal action should not have to rely on the
common law tort of nuisance for tree disputes that fall
within the scope of the
new Act. Instead, neighbours should be able to bring a claim within the new Act.
Retaining the common law
right to nuisance may be helpful for matters that would
fall outside the new Act— for example, a claimant who wishes to bring
application alleging interference, which is excluded from the ambit of the new
Act (see Chapter 5). Neither the Tasmanian nor
51 New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Neighbour and Neighbour
(Report No 88, 1998) [2.20]-[2.21].
52 Explanatory Notes,
Neighbourhood Disputes Resolution Bill 2010
53 Possible modifications to abatement, and the remedies of neighbour-led
informal negotiation and mediation are discussed in Chapter
6. Possible
community resources for better information about the law and processes are
discussed in Chapter 12.
Queensland Acts limit the operation of the common
law rights to nuisance,54 although they do modify the right to abatement (see
4.49 Also, negligence and trespass offer unique and relevant remedies in
certain circumstances (for example, personal injury or trespass
to land). The
new Act should not limit a neighbour’s ability to sue for negligence or
trespass occurring as a result of
a tree dispute. This is consistent with the
New South Wales Act, where neighbours may still wish to bring an action for
or trespass at common law.55 The Tasmanian and Queensland
Acts do not limit the right to negligence or trespass.
4.50 The Commission acknowledges concerns expressed by ENSPEC that a new Act
could increase the level of disputation in the community
or result in more
‘unreasonable disputes going further than an enquiry to DSCV’.56
Others expressed concern that a new
Act may lead to increased vegetation
4.51 The Commission’s recommendations, including mandatory
decision-making principles and a requirement for expert evidence,
aim to ensure
that the matters initiated in VCAT are disputes of real substance and that a
range of different considerations are
balanced transparently in the
decision-making process.
4.52 The Commission is encouraged by the positive findings of the statutory
reviews of the tree dispute Acts in New South Wales and
Queensland,58 and by its
own discussions in the course of this review.59 The Commission also understands
that the statutory scheme
for resolving fence disputes under the
(Vic) is working well and providing clarity about rights and dispute
resolution.
4.53 Rather than tackle current inadequacies in the law solely through
education and community resources,60 these resources should
complement the
introduction of a new Act. Supporting material should explain in an accessible
way how the new Act works and provide
information about the broader tools
available to help the community resolve their disputes and manage vegetation
Other reform ideas
4.54 Proposals for a resolution and enforcement process through local
councils61 are not supported because this is contrary to the
primary role of
local councils. An independent review body, such as an office of a State
Arborist,62 a review panel or a process
through approved expert contractors,
could provide neighbours with an independent decision about the tree and how
best to manage
it. 63 However, an existing decision-making forum within the
legal system would respond better to the civil and arboricultural elements
tree dispute.
54 See generally
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2017
(Tas). In contrast the
Trees (Disputes Between Neighbours) Act 2006
(NSW) does limit the right to nuisance:
55 See, eg,
Robson v Leischke
[2008] NSWLEC 152
(2008) 72 NSWLR 98
[218]–[219].
56 Submission 18 (ENSPEC).
57 Submission 28 (HVP Plantations); Consultation 4 (Participants in
facilitated discussion at VTIO ArborCamp2018).
58 Department of Justice and Attorney-General (NSW),
Review of the
(Disputes Between Neighbours) Act 2006
(Report, 2009) 3; Queensland Law
Reform Commission,
Review of the
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and
Trees) Act 2011
(Report No 72, 2015). The recently introduced Tasmanian
scheme has not yet undergone any form of review.
59 Consultations 11 (Land and Environment Court of New South Wales); 15
(Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal).
60 See Submission 18 (ENSPEC).
61 Submissions 5 (Name withheld), 6 (Name withheld).
62 Consultation 2 (Dr Gregory Moore OAM).
63 Confidential submission.
Policy themes that should underpin the new
4.56 The Commission has identified policy themes to underpin the new Act. The
new tree disputes Act should:
• provide a clear dispute resolution pathway that encourages people to
resolve their disputes informally between themselves
• enable disputes to be resolved efficiently and inexpensively
• establish clear decision-making principles to guide the community
• provide practical and effective remedies
• balance competing rights and interests fairly and transparently
• use evidence-based decision making
• interact simply with other laws.
4.57 The new Act should also be accessible and supported by information that
is clear and easy to find. These policy themes are discussed
in the following
paragraphs.
Provide a clear dispute resolution pathway
4.58 It is important that neighbours try to work out ways of solving tree
problems between themselves to preserve their ongoing relationship.
4.59 The new Act should clearly define the circumstances in which a case can
be brought and the range of the orders available. It
should encourage people to
resolve disputes informally and provide greater certainty for those who take
legal action.
Resolve disputes efficiently and
inexpensively
4.60 Not all disputes can be resolved informally. Where disputes proceed to
formal adjudication, they should be resolved in an inexpensive,
accessible and
transparent way to provide the best chance of preserving future relations. The
Commission considers that tree disputes
would be most appropriately adjudicated
in VCAT for the following reasons:
• Application costs are kept to a minimum in VCAT proceedings and
parties generally bear their own costs.
• The use of alternative dispute resolution (ADR) is encouraged and
VCAT has established ADR programs.
• Tribunal decision makers have relevant experience in planning,
environmental and small civil claims matters.
• The Tribunal has considerable flexibility in how it conducts
hearings. It is designed for parties without legal representation
and is less
formal than a court.
4.61 Tree disputes are essentially small party–party disputes and so
are well suited to Tribunal resolution. They are generally
between two
neighbours and often involve factual interpretation rather than complex legal
interpretation. They can often be solved
practical and relatively low-cost solutions.
4.62 The Commission is impressed by the success of the NSW scheme. While the
NSWLEC is a superior court, it manages tree disputes
in much the same way as a
tribunal—quickly,
efficiently and flexibly. Many of the key features of the NSW scheme could be
adapted to work well in the tribunal system in Victoria.
See Chapter 7.
Establish clear decision-making principles
4.63 The new Act should establish clear decision-making principles to guide
the community about what factors may be considered by
VCAT if a matter
progresses to a Tribunal hearing. These principles will guide the community
the community to resolve disputes
themselves.
Provide practical and effective remedies
4.64 There is a need for clear practical solutions to tree problems to be
incorporated in the new laws. The Act should provide
VCAT with a wide
discretion to make a range of orders to remedy, restrain or prevent or
address damage to property or injury
to a person. See Chapter 5.
4.65 The requirements of the common law remedy of abatement may sometimes
make disputes worse. For example, tree owners voiced concerns
being dumped back over the fence after abatement, and affected neighbours
expressed concern about having to carry
out tree maintenance work that was not
of their making.64
4.66 There is a need to modernise the law to reflect the realities of urban
life today. Abatement should be modified so that an affected
neighbour is no
longer required to return tree branches. This remedy would also be enhanced by
improved awareness of and access to
qualified, trained arborists. See Chapters 8
4.67 Arborists have noted a disconnect between the common law and the
Australian standards that arborists are trained to follow.65
In Chapter 9 the
Commission recommends that works conducted pursuant to orders comply with the
relevant Australian standards.
4.68 Expert arboricultural input into the process will help VCAT provide
remedies that are robust and practical. There should
be scope to vary or
revoke orders where necessary. See Chapter 9.
Balance competing rights and interests
The risk of damage or injury
4.69 Primary importance should be given to identifying any risks posed by the
tree in an accurate and timely way. This principle was
echoed in a number of
submissions and consultations.66 The new Act should aim to prevent harm and
damage caused by trees. The new
Act should recognise that trees are dynamic
living organisms and should enable VCAT to make swift decisions.
The importance of trees to the community
4.70 Protecting and encouraging more vegetation in our urban spaces is
increasingly important to our community. Viewing tree disputes
strictly as
party–party disputes overlooks some of the broader considerations. These
• the historical, cultural, social or scientific value of trees
64 Submissions 5 (Name withheld), 19 (Name withheld), 34 (Allan Day), 36
(Monique Onezime); Survey respondents 44, 72, 95, 99, 103.
65 Consultations 4 (Participants in facilitated discussion at VTIO
ArborCamp2018), 6 (Ben Kenyon); see, eg, Standards Australia,
Amenity Trees
(AS 4373-2007) (Sydney, NSW: Standards Australia, 2007) [4].
The objective of the standard is to ‘provide arborists, tree workers,
government departments, property owners, and contractors with a guide defining
uniform tree pruning procedures and practices in
order to minimize the adverse
or negative impact of pruning on trees’.
66 Submissions 9 (Dr Karen Smith), 19 (Name withheld), 22 (Name withheld), 24
(Name Withheld), 38 (L. Barry Wollmer); Consultations
3 (HVP Plantations), 10
(Baw Baw Shire Council).
• the contribution trees make to local ecosystems and biodiversity
• the way they contribute to the natural landscape and local
4.71 Trees are increasingly viewed as community assets.67 One community
member commented that ‘maintaining canopy tree cover
in the urban settings
is now critically urgent’.68 Councils are increasingly recognising the
value of trees in urban forest
policies, tree management plans and exceptional
tree registers.69
4.72 The new Act should seek to balance the tension between property
owners’ rights and the benefits to the community of living
environment. This should be done on a case-by-case basis through nonexhaustive
decision-making criteria in the new Act
recognise the broader intrinsic benefits of trees (for example, that trees
provide shade and natural cooling).70
4.73 More minor interference such as leaf litter and the dropping of fruit
should not be actionable. Such issues should be an assumed
natural consequence
of living in
neighbourhoods with trees. This is the approach taken by various local
councils71 and the approach interstate.72 Tree disputes relating
interference should be resolved
informally and should only require remedial action via a formal dispute
resolution pathway if they meet the damage or harm requirements
under the new
Act. See Chapter 5.
Use expert decision makers and expert
4.74 VCAT hearings should be informed by arboricultural evidence that
explains whether the tree is the real cause of the damage
or harm. The
Commission recommends the use of members with arboricultural experience to
adjudicate tree dispute hearings at VCAT.
This is the approach taken by
the NSWLEC. Alternatively, an arboricultural expert qualified to at least
AQF Level 5 or equivalent
should be appointed by VCAT as a joint expert, with
the cost of that shared equally by the parties. This is the approach taken
QCAT. The Commission also recommends the use of on-site hearings or onsite
inspections by Tribunal members to check the parties’
concerns and
positions in the context of the physical realities of the tree.
4.75 Arborists who provide evidence to VCAT should meet minimum qualification
standards. Minimum qualification standards will help
to ensure that trees are
properly assessed in accordance with industry approved risk assessment methods.
Additional recommendations
outline requirements for report writing. Formal
evidentiary requirements will reduce the likelihood of people bringing claims
are trivial or without merit to the Tribunal and ensure that remedies are
robust and practical. See Chapters 7 and 8.
Interact simply with other laws
4.76 Many existing Acts, local laws and policies regulate trees on private
land and could intersect with the new Act. These laws
and regulations are
complex and varied. Decisions made pursuant to some of these laws are subject
to review in VCAT. The operation
of these laws increases confusion and adds to
the difficulties people experience trying to resolve their tree disputes.
67 Submissions 18 (ENSPEC), 19 (Name withheld), 25 (City of Boroondara), 28
(HVP Plantations), 29 (David Galwey); Consultations 2
(Dr Gregory Moore), 4
(Participants in facilitated discussion at VTIO ArborCamp2018), 6 (Ben Kenyon),
8 (City of Boroondara), 10
(Baw Baw Shire Council), 11 (Land and Environment
Court of New South Wales), 14 (Robert Mineo); Survey respondents 2, 13; 115.
68 Submission 37 (Ian Hundley).
69 See, eg, City of Greater Bendigo,
Urban Tree Management Policy
August 2017) 4;
City of Melbourne, Urban Forest Strategy— Making a
Great City Greener 2012-2032
(Report, 2012); City of Stonnington,
Forest Strategy
2017–2022 (June 2017) 4; City of Ballarat,
‘Exceptional Tree Register’,
Tree Management
(Web Page, 2019)
http://www.ballarat.vic.gov.au/city/parks-and-outdoors/
tree-management>; South Gippsland Shire Council,
Tree Management Plan
(26 July 2017) 4. The importance of retaining urban tree
canopy has been recognised by the establishment of the inaugural
School of Urban Forestry at the University of Melbourne in partnership with the
City of Melbourne, dedicated to understanding
and protecting urban forests:
see City of Melbourne,
Australia’s First Urban Forestry School
(Web Page, 6 September 2018) <https://
www.melbourne.vic.gov.au/news-and-media/pages/australias-
first-urban-forestry-school-announced.aspx>. This issue is discussed in Ch
70 Consultation 2 (Dr Gregory Moore OAM).
71 Consultations 8 (City of Boroondara), 9 (Nillumbik Shire Council), 10 (Baw
Baw Shire Council), 12 (City of Port Phillip); See also
City of Greater Bendigo,
Urban Tree Management Policy
(16 August 2017) 7.
72 See, eg,
Barker v Kryiakides
[2007] NSWLEC 292
; Explanatory Notes,
Neighbourhood Disputes Resolution Bill 2010
(Qld) cl 61.
4.77 Adding to the complex web of vegetation management legislation in
Victoria is not desirable. The new Act should not restrict
or alter the
operation of existing laws and established policies in areas of law outside tree
disputes. However, the Commission
seeks to ensure that people visit VCAT
only once to resolve their tree dispute. Where necessary, it recommends that
the new Act
constrain some existing laws in limited circumstances and with
appropriate safeguards.
Notify purchasers and new owners of land about
existing disputes or Orders
4.78 The Commission identifies a need for potential purchasers and new
landowners to be put on notice of obligations that may apply
to them under the
new Act if they purchase land. This is needed to provide certainty about the
resolution of a dispute and to prevent
tree disputes arising in the future.
Provide accessible laws, information and
4.79 The language and structure of the new Act needs to be clear and simple
to ensure it is widely accessible to the community.
4.80 Extensive, accessible community information should also be provided
• how the Act works in practice and what to expect if a matter proceeds
• agencies and experts that can help parties resolve their disputes
• how to manage vegetation better.
4.81 Resources should be developed to improve the community’s
understanding of trees, for example their rate of growth, and
how to best manage
issues with trees on neighbouring land. See Chapter 12.
Resolve disputes with professional
4.82 A failure to obtain expert assistance at the appropriate time may mean
that incorrect assumptions about the causes of damage
or harm are not addressed
and advice about practical solutions is not obtained. The timely use of expert
assistance would resolve
both informal and formal disputes more efficiently and
effectively. See Chapter 12.
DSCV mediation
4.83 DSCV provides helpful dispute resolution services and information to all
Victorian’s free of charge. These services are
provided throughout
Victoria including in regional areas. The Commission anticipates that clearer
law will further assist DSCV to
respond to community enquiries and help it to
resolve disputes. The Commission has learnt that the services offered by DSCV
widely known to some councils,73 arborists or community members.74 It
will therefore be important that the free mediation services
of DSCV are
promoted, particularly among arborists. See Chapter 6.
Appropriately qualified arborists (tree professionals)
4.84 The community has a poor understanding of the role and qualifications of
arborists. Minimum qualification requirements for expert
evidence could also act
as a reference point for people wishing to obtain their own arboricultural
advice independently of VCAT.
It is also important for community information to
provide guidance on when and how to engage appropriately qualified arborists.
73 Consultation 7 (Dispute Settlement Centre of Victoria).
74 Consultations 4 (Participants in facilitated discussion at VTIO
ArborCamp2018), 6 (Ben Kenyon).
Applying the new
Act to neighbourhood tree disputes
66 Introduction
66 Trees, land and proximity
90 Parties to a tree dispute
95 What problems are within the scope of the
103 Who should be notified of an
105 Application requirements
Applying the new Act to neighbourhood tree
Introduction
5.1 This chapter explains how the new Act should be applied to tree
5.2 The consultation paper asked the community a series of questions about
these matters.
This chapter examines the community’s responses. It then describes key
features of the statutory schemes to resolve tree disputes
in New South Wales,
Queensland and Tasmania.1 The Commission’s recommendations about what
should be included in the
new Act in Victoria are explained. The key features to be addressed by the
new Act are:
• Trees, land and proximity
• Who can be a party to a tree dispute
• What problems are within the scope of the new Act
• Who should be notified of an action
• Application requirements.
Trees, land and proximity
Definition of ‘tree’
5.3 The consultation paper invited community responses on the types of tree
(or vegetation) that should be included in the new Act.
5.4 The word ‘tree’ in this report denotes all vegetation that
may cause a dispute between neighbours. Disputes can arise
over a wide variety
of vegetation, including trees, grasses, bushes, creepers and vines, and even
dead trees.2
5.5 The Mac
quarie Dictionary defines a tree as
‘a perennial plant having a permanent woody, self-supporting main stem or
trunk, usually
growing to a considerable height, and usually developing branches
at some distance from the ground’.3 It defines ‘vegetation’
‘plants collectively; the plant life of a particular region considered as
5.6 There are very few definitions of ‘tree’ in Victorian
legislation. Some existing definitions are:
Forests Act 1958
(Vic) provides that a ‘tree or
trees’ includes ‘trees shrubs bushes seedlings saplings and reshoots
whether alive
1 See generally,
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act
Trees (Disputes Between Neighbours) Act 2006
Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants Act 2017
2 See, eg, Submissions 17 (Name Withheld), 19 (Name Withheld), 34 (Allan
3 Susan Butler (ed),
Macquarie Dictionary
(Macquarie Dictionary
Publishers, 6th ed, 2013) ‘tree’.
4 Ibid ‘vegetation’.
Forests Act 1958
(definition of ‘tree’ or
Country Fire Authority Act 1958
(Vic) defines ‘scrub
or vegetation’ to include ‘trees bushes plants and undergrowth of
all kinds and sizes whether
living or dead and whether standing or not standing,
and also includes any part of any such trees bushes plants or undergrowth
severed or not severed’.6
5.7 At the lo
cal government level, trees are
defined in different ways. The Melbourne City Council’s definition
includes ‘the trunk,
branches, canopy and root system of [a] tree’.7
Nillumbik Shire Council defines a tree as a ‘long lived woody perennial
plant greater than (or usually greater than) 3 metres in height with one or
relatively few main stems
or trunks’.8
Other jurisdictions—definition of ‘tree’
5.8 New South Wales and Queensland have similar definitions in their tree
dispute Acts. The NSW Act defines a tree as ‘any woody
perennial plant,
any plant resembling a tree in form and size, and any other plant prescribed by
the regulations’.9 Additional
problematic vegetation has since been
prescribed in regulation.
5.9 Bamboo, technically a type of grass,10 was originally excluded from the
definition of ‘tree’ under the NSW Act but
since 2007 has been
prescribed under the NSW Regulations.11
5.10 Vines12 were also originally excluded from the definition of
‘tree’ in the NSW Act.13 However, following statutory
review of the
Act by the New South Wales Government in 2009, it was decided that vines can
cause damage to, for example, ‘the
paintwork on the outside of a house, or
caus[e] water damage by blocking a downpipe or drain’, or pose ‘a
risk of personal
injury’.14 The review concluded that there was no reason
disputes relating to vines should have to be resolved by ‘the more
complicated procedure in nuisance’15 and recommended
that vines be
declared a prescribed plant under the NSW Regulations.16 The NSW Regulations now
prescribe ‘any type of vine’.17
5.11 The Queensland Act defines a tree as ‘any woody perennial
plant’ or ‘any plant resembling a tree in form and
as ‘bamboo, banana plant, palm and cactus’.18 A tree also includes a
bare trunk, a stump rooted in the
land and a dead tree.19
5.12 In its statutory review of the Queensland Act, the Queensland Law Reform
Commission (QLRC) found that ‘tree’ is currently
‘widely and
clearly’ defined. However, the QLRC recommended that the definition should
be amended to include ‘root
or the roots of any living or dead tree’
because roots are an integral part of the tree and can cause disputes. This
recommendation
has not been implemented.20
Country Fire Authority Act 1958
(definition of
‘scrub’ or ‘vegetation’).
Activities Local Law 2009 (
Melbourne City Council) cl 1.11
(Definitions).
8 Nillumbik Shire Council,
Nillumbik Tree Management Guidelines
(September 2015) 7 <https://
www.nillumbik.vic.gov.au/Council/Council-
publications/Strategies-policies-and-legislation>.
Trees (Disputes Between Neighbours) Act 2006
10 See, eg,
Robson v Leischke
[2008] NSWLEC 152
(2008) 72 NSWLR 98
Trees (Disputes Between Neighbours) Regulation 2014
12 A vine can also be referred to as a creeper or climber. It is defined as
‘any of various plants, especially the grapevine,
having long flexible
stems that creep along the ground or climb by clinging to a support by means of
tendrils, leafstalks etc.: Patrick
Collins Dictionary of the English
(Collins, 2001).
13 For example, in
Buckingham v Ryder
[2007] NSWLEC 458
between neighbours over a pink trumpet vine was dismissed because it was
determined that vines generally do not
meet the definition of a
‘tree’ under the Act because vines do not display the
self-supporting characteristics of trees
and instead require a surface to grow
along [28]—[32].
14 Department of Justice and Attorney General (NSW),
Review of the
(Disputes Between Neighbours) Act 2006
(NSW) (Report, 2009) 19.
16 Ibid Recommendation 3.
Trees (Disputes Between Neighbours) Regulation 2014
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
20 See generally, Ibid
5.13 In the Tasmanian Act, the term ‘plant’ is preferred over
‘tree’. A plant is defined as ‘any plant
or part of a
plant’21 and includes:
• a hedge or group of plants
• fruits, seeds, leaves or flowers, of a plant
• a bare trunk
• a stump rooted in the land
• any root of a plant
• a dead plant.22
Community responses—definition of ‘tree’
5.14 The Commission was told that it is important to provide a clear
definition of ‘tree’ in any new Act.23
5.15 Most community members were in favour of broadly defining
‘tree’ under a new Act so that it includes any vegetation.24
people pointed to existing definitions of trees as suitable starting
points—for example, definitions commonly found in
general dictionaries,25
Australian Standard AS 4373-2007—Pruning of Amenity Trees,
arboricultural and gardening textbooks such as
The Oxford Companion to
Australian Gardens.
5.16 The Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal (VCAT) preferred
‘vegetation’ to ‘tree’ because it is
broader.28 A tree
disputes consultant in New South Wales stated that defining ‘tree’
too broadly may be confusing and
add complexity.29
5.17 A small number of people preferred a narrower definition.30 One
submission stated that only significant trees should be included,
such as those
considered ‘culturally, historically, botanically’31 significant.
Another stated that the new Act should
cover trees that exceed the height of
dividing fences on common boundaries.32
5.18 Some community members stated that noxious weeds should be excluded from
the ambit of a new Act.33 However, most community members
believed that the new
Act should not discriminate between species and should include any type of
vegetation, including those classified
as a weed.34 One person stated that
vegetation that forms part of ‘farm forestry’ should also be
excluded.35
Vegetation that is known to cause disputes
5.19 Many cautioned that commonly recognised definitions of
‘tree’ may exclude other types of vegetation known to cause
disputes.36
Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants Act 2017
23 Submission 20 (Name withheld); Consultation 10 (Baw Baw Shire Council);
Submission 20 (Name withheld).
24 Submissions 6 (Name withheld), 7 (Ben Kenyon), 9 (Dr Karen Smith), 21
(Pointon Partners Lawyers), 23 (Name withheld), 38 (L. Barry
Consultations 10 (Baw Baw Shire Council),14 (Robert Mineo), 8 (City of
Boroondara), 12 (City of Port Phillip).
25 Consultation 14 (Robert Mineo).
26 Submission 9 (Dr Karen Smith). This Australian Standard defines a tree as
a ‘Long lived woody perennial plant greater than
(or usually greater
than) 3 m in height with one or relatively few main stems or trunks’:
Standards Australia,
Pruning of Amenity Trees
(AS 4373-2007) (Sydney,
NSW: Standards Australia, 2007) [3.45].
27 Submission 12 (Dr Gregory Moore OAM); See Richard Aitken and Michael
Looker (eds),
The Oxford Companion to Australian Gardens
(Oxford University Press, 2002) 602.
28 Consultation 5 (Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal).
29 Submission 20 (Name withheld).
30 Submissions 2 (Name withheld), 5 (Name withheld).
31 Submission 2 (Name withheld).
32 Submission 33 (Annette Neville).
33 Submissions 2 (Name withheld), 27 (Name withheld).
34 Submissions 6 (Name withheld), 7 (Ben Kenyon), 9 (Dr Karen Smith), 23
(Name withheld), 21 (Pointon Partners Lawyers); Consultations
Boroondara), 10 (Baw Baw Shire Council), 14 (Robert Mineo). Noxious weeds are
discussed in Ch 10.
35 Confidential submission.
36 Submissions 9 (Dr Karen Smith), 10 (Professor Phillip Hamilton), 11 (Name
withheld), 12 (Dr Gregory Moore OAM); Consultations 2
(Dr Gregory Moore OAM), 9
(Nillumbik Shire Council), 12 (City of Port Phillip), 14 (Robert Mineo).
5.20 Arborist Robert Mineo, explained that bamboo, a type of grass, and
palms, a type of grasstree, would not meet the typical definition
‘tree’ but could affect neighbouring land.37 The City of Port
Phillip stated that palms should be covered by a new
Act because they can give
rise to problems.38 Nillumbik Shire Council stated that cootamundra wattle, pine
trees and Burgen are all
examples of vegetation that can be problematic. 39
5.21 A tree disputes consultant in New South Wales explained:
Plants, woody vines, palms and bamboo all have the potential to cause damage
to property and feature in a range of cases heard by
the Land and Environment
Court of New South Wales. The inclusion of this vegetation may add an extra
layer of complexity to the scheme,
however, it will benefit those disputants who
are dealing with tree disputes arising from woody vines, palms, bamboo or
‘plants’.40
5.22 Dr Gregory Moore OAM added that the common dictionary term
‘woody’, used to describe secondary growth that is characteristic
trees, excludes palms, cycads, tree ferns and grass trees.41 Dr Moore noted that
most people would consider these types of vegetation
to be trees even though
they are technically categorised as pachycauls.42 He stated: ‘Given this
wide public perception, it
might be wise to include pachycauls in
legislation’.43
5.23 Dr Moore also noted that common definitions referring to a single stem
or trunk do not take into account multi-stemmed types
of tree species unique to
Australia, such as mallee,44 eucalypts and acacias. Dr Moore suggested that a
more suitable description
can be found in the Oxford Companion to Australian
Gardening, which describes trees as ‘long-lived woody perennial plants
than three metres in height, with one or relatively few stems or
5.24 One submission stated that shrubs that are large can cause disputes and
so should be included.46 Professor Phillip Hamilton suggested
that height may be
a relevant descriptor under a new Act to allow for vegetation that is not
technically classified as a tree (for
example, vines or plants used in hedges)
but that can grow to a significant size.47
5.25 Baw Baw Shire Council observed that ideas about what constitutes
significant size may be subjective—for example, trees
considered large in
metropolitan areas may be considered small in regional areas that have more
vegetated space.48
5.26 Overall, most community members who favoured a broad approach suggested
that the new Act should include shrubs, hedges, vines,
cacti, palms and bamboo
in addition to trees.49
37 Consultation 14 (Robert Mineo).
38 Consultation 12 (City of Port Phillip);
Local Law No.1
Amenity) 2013 (City of Port Phillip) defines a significant tree or palm as
‘a tree or palm on private
land: with a trunk circumference of
150 centimetres or greater measured 1 metre from its base; or a multi-stemmed
tree on private
land where the circumference of its exterior stems equals or is
or greater than 1.5 metres when measured 1 metre from its
bases; or if
the tree has been removed a trunk circumference or at 150 centimetres or greater
measured at its base’: cl 6.
39 Consultation 9 (Nillumbik Shire Council).
40 Submission 20 (Name withheld).
41 Submission 12 (Dr Gregory Moore OAM).
42 A pachycaul is a succulent plant with capacity for secondary growth.
Pachycauls ‘display a strongly swollen woody stem with
often highly
reduced branches: Howard Griffiths and Jamie Males, ‘Succulent
Plants’ (11 September 2017) 27(17)
Current Biology
43 Submission 12 (Dr Gregory Moore OAM).
44 Instead of just a single trunk, mallees have many stems that rise from a
large bulbous woody structure called a lignotuber, or
mallee root: Australian
National Botanic Gardens, Australian Government,
Mallee Plant—Surviving
Harsh Conditions
(Information Resource, 2004) 2.
45 Submission 12 (Dr Gregory Moore OAM); See Richard Aitken and Michael
Looker (eds),
The Oxford Companion to Australian Gardens
(Oxford University Press, 2002) 602.
46 Confidential submission.
47 Submission 10 (Professor Phillip Hamilton).
48 Consultation 10 (Baw Baw Shire Council).
49 Submissions 9 (Dr Karen Smith), 10 (Professor Phillip Hamilton), 11 (Name
withheld); Consultations 9 (Nillumbik Shire Council),
12 (City of Port Phillip),
14 (Robert Mineo).
Dead trees, parts of trees and roots
5.27 Arborist Dr Karen Smith stated that dead trees should be included, as
well as ‘fruit, seeds, pollen, leaves and flowers
of a plant ... Roots
should be included, as should suckers.’50
5.28 A tree disputes consultant in New South Wales stated that the new Act
should include a tree that has been wholly removed by the
time legal action has
commenced.51 Before the tree was removed it may have damaged neighbouring
property, and the affected neighbour
may seek to be reimbursed for the cost of
repairs from the tree owner.
5.29 The Land and Environment Court of New South Wales (NSWLEC) stated that
the broad definition of ‘tree’ under the NSW
Act, with the option to
add further species through accompanying Regulations, has been working well. The
NSWLEC also explained that
the broad definition implies the inclusion of tree
roots and dead trees.52
5.30 A tree disputes consultant in New South Wales noted the usefulness of
the phrase ‘any plant resembling a tree in form
and size’. They
considered this ‘a helpful, yet non-specific definition’ which
allows a small amount of interpretation
and flexibility.53
The Commission’s conclusions—definition
5.31 It is important for reasons of clarity to define the type of vegetation
covered in the new statutory scheme as broadly as possible
so that it is fair
and inclusive. However, too broad a definition may lack clarity and require
too much interpretation.
5.32 The word ‘tree’ rather than ‘vegetation’ is
preferred because it is more specific and excludes smaller,
short-lived types of
vegetation that are unlikely to significantly impact people’s property or
safety, or result in significant
environmental or cultural loss.
5.33 Existing definitions of ‘tree’ in legislation and other
instruments are typically a synthesis of common meanings
found in general
dictionaries and technical literature.
5.34 The Commission notes the comments of the NSWLEC and the QLRC that the
New South Wales and Queensland schemes are adequate and
working well to capture
most genuine disputes. The Commission supports a similar approach for the new
Act in Victoria.
5.35 ‘Tree’ should be defined by its common meaning of a
‘woody perennial plant’. Height or age (for example,
‘long-lived’) descriptors are not recommended because these
characteristics vary throughout existing definitions and
literature. Whether a
tree is considered large or old is also subjective and will vary too greatly
depending on the vegetation that
is commonly found in the area. Any height or
age requirements may
unfairly exclude people from seeking legal relief. Additionally, the vitality
of a tree should not matter because trees that are
dying or dead may still
impact on people’s land and safety. These trees may also hold important
cultural, heritage and environmental
5.36 ‘Tree’ should explicitly include vines, cacti, palms and
bamboo. The term ‘pachycaul’ is not widely understood
community and a more suitable approach would be to list further particular
species in regulations for clarity.
5.37 For reasons of fairness and flexibility, any other vegetation that
‘resembles a tree in form and size’54 should be
included. This takes
into account mallee trees that do not meet any technical requirements of a
singular tree trunk, certain species
of shrubs known to grow quite large, and
also allows the decision maker discretion. This would also encompass a
‘pachycaul’.
50 Submission 9 (Dr Karen Smith).
51 Submission 20 (Name withheld).
52 Consultation 11 (Land and Environment Court of New South Wales);
Trees (Disputes Between Neighbours) Act 2006
(NSW) will also apply to a tree
that is removed following damage or injury that gave rise to an application if
the tree was situated
wholly or principally on the land immediately before the
damage or injury occurred:
53 Submission 20 (Name withheld).
54 See, eg,
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
s 45(1)(b).
5.38 Hedges should not be included, as this
represents a style of planting, rather than a species of vegetation.55 Any
plants or vegetation
in the form of a hedge will be included irrespective of how
they are styled if they meet the definition.
5.39 In addition, vegetation classified as a noxious weed should be captured
under the new Act if it otherwise meets the definition
of ‘tree’ for
example, ‘any plant that resembles a tree in form and size’.
5.40 The definition of ‘tree’ should include all parts of a tree,
whether joined to a main structure or separate. This
would include roots and
bare trunks. In addition, trees that have been partially or wholly removed
should be included. An affected
neighbour may still wish to seek orders for
payment of the cost of repairs to their property even if the tree has been
wholly removed.
5.41 Finally, there should be scope to include any other specific vegetation
in the definition of tree by way of Regulations accompanying
the new Act.
To which land should the Act apply?
5.42 When considering which types of land should fall within the scope of the
new Act, the Commission sought to strike a balance between
providing a remedy to
affected neighbours and ensuring that the application of the Act is not overly
broad or burdensome to owners
or occupiers of land.
5.43 The consultation paper asked the community whether the new Act should be
limited to land in particular zones.
55 A hedge can be defined as ‘a row of bushes or small trees planted
close together, especially when forming a fence or boundary:
Susan Butler
Macquarie Dictionary
(Macquarie Dictionary Publishers, 6th ed,
Standard Victorian zones
5.44 Land in Victoria is zoned to outline the purpose of land use and any
permitted or prohibited developments. There are six categories:
• residential
• commercial
• industrial
• special purpose.56
5.45 The Commission is not considering disputes about trees located on public
land, for example street trees, trees in parks and trees
on regulatory easements
held by a council or service authority, as these are excluded from the terms of
this inquiry.57 Public land
is also excluded from the operation of interstate
Residential zones
5.46 Tree disputes are reportedly more common in residential zones than other
land use zones.59 There are six residential zones that
permit residential use to
varying degrees in cities and towns, including small rural townships.60
Commercial zones
5.47 There are three commercial zones. Residential land uses are limited in a
commercial zone and must not undermine the zone’s
primary focus on
employment and economic development.61
Industrial zones
5.48 There are three industrial zones. Accommodation is generally prohibited
in these zones to provide for and promote manufacturing,
storage and
distribution of goods and associated uses.62 One industrial zone acts as a
buffer between the first two types of industrial
zone and local communities,
‘which allows for industries and associated uses compatible with the
nearby community’.63
Rural zones
5.49 Rural zones64 include six distinct categories:
• The Farming Zone is the most common rural zone and is strongly
focused on protecting and promoting farming and agriculture.65
• Two types of Green Wedge Zones protect and conserve green wedge land
(Green Wedge and Green Wedge A).66 There are 12 designated
green wedges in
56 Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
Planning Provisions
(11 April 2019) cl 30-37
http://planningschemes. dpcd.vic.gov.au/schemes/vpps
57 These include the Public Park and Recreation Zone; the Public Conservation
and Resource Zone and the Road Zone.
58 This is discussed in chapter 13.
59 Consultations 9 (Nillumbik Shire Council), 10 (Baw Baw Shire Council), 12
(City of Port Phillip).
60 These include the Low Density Residential Zone; the Mixed Use Zone; the
Township Zone; the Residential Growth Zone; the General
Residential Zone; and
the Neighbourhood Residential Zone: See Department of Environment, Land, Water
and Planning (Vic),
Victoria Planning Provisions
(11 April 2019) cl
32.03-32.05, 32.07-32.09; see also Stephen Rowley,
The Victorian Planning
System: Practice, Problems and Prospects
(The Federation Press, 2017)
61 Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
Planning Provisions
(11 April 2019) cl 34.
62 Ibid cl 33.
63 Ibid cl 33.03; see also Stephen Rowley,
The Victorian Planning System:
Practice, Problems and Prospects
(The Federation Press, 2017) 28.
64 Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
Planning Provisions
(11 April 2019) cl 35.
65 Ibid cl 35.07; Agriculture Victoria,
Rural Zones Explained
Page, 8 May 2017)
http://agriculture.vic.gov.au/agriculture/farm- management/business-management/planning-applications-in-rural-areas/rural-zones-explained
Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
Practice Note No 42: Applying the Rural Zones,
June 2015 <https://
www.planning.vic.gov.au/resource-
library/planning-practice-notes>.
66 Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
Planning Provisions
(11 April 2019) cl 35.04-05.
urban areas forming a ring around metropolitan Melbourne.67 These areas
land are recognised and protected for a variety of purposes, including
agricultural, environmental, historic, landscape or recreational
mineral and stone resources.68 Green wedge zones can be used to support rural
living. One of the purposes a Green Wedge
A Zone is to ‘recognise and
protect the amenity of existing rural living areas’.69
• The Rural Activity Zone provides for the use of land for agriculture,
such as the primary production of plant or animal produce,
and for uses of land
development compatible with agricultural uses.70 While a dwelling may be
for accommodation purposes, this use must be compatible with agriculture and
the environmental and landscape characteristics of the
• The Rural Conservation Zone protects and enhances the natural
resources and biodiversity of the area and imposes limits on
other uses of land,
such as residential dwellings.72 One of its purposes is to provide for
agricultural uses of land compatible with
the conservation of the environment
and the landscape values of the area.73 The zone allows land to be used for a
dwelling provided
the lot is at least two hectares in size.74 A permit is
required to use dwellings on land lots smaller than two hectares.
• The Rural Living Zone provides for residential uses of land in rural
areas. Although agricultural activities are permitted
within the zone, emphasis
is given to the protection of residential amenity.75
Special purpose zones
5.50 Special Purpose Zones include nine distinct categories. The Special Use
Zone is essentially a catch-all zone if no other zoning
is appropriate.76 It can
also be considered where the site adjoins more than one zone and the new use of
land is not known.77
5.51 The Capital City Zone, Docklands Zone, Activity Centre Zone, Priority
Development Zone, and the Comprehensive Development Zone
all permit residential
land use within urban areas.78 The purpose of the Urban Growth Zone is to manage
the transition of nonurban
land into urban land, with a significant portion of
this land to be rezoned for residential use.79
Planning and Environment Act 1987
; Department of
Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
Planning Practice Note No
62: Green Wedge Planning Provisions,
June 2015 <https://
www.planning.vic.gov.au/resource-library/planning-practice-notes
Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
Green Wedges
(Web Page, 2018) <https://
www.planning.vic.gov.au/policy-
and-strategy/green-wedges>. The landscape ranges from the Mornington
Peninsula coastline, to the open basalt plains of the west,
to the highly scenic
countryside of the Yarra Valley.
68 Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
Practice Note No 62: Green Wedge Planning Provisions,
www.planning.vic.gov.au/resource-library/planning-practice-notes
69 Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
Planning Provisions
(11 April 2019) cl 35.04-2, 35.05, 35.05-2; Department
of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
Planning Practice Note No 42:
Applying the Rural Zones,
www.planning.vic.gov.au/resource-library/planning-practice-notes
see, eg, City of Boroondara,
Boroondara Planning Scheme
(21 February 2019) cl 11.01; Nillumbik Shire Council,
Nillumbik Planning
(30 May 2019) cl 22.03.
70 Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
Planning Provisions
(11 April 2019) cl 35.08; see also, Stephen Rowley,
The Victorian Planning System: Practice, Problems and Prospects
Federation Press, 2017) 29.
71 Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
Practice Note No 42: Applying the Rural Zones
, June 2015, 4
www.planning.vic.gov.au/resource-library/planning-practice-notes
72 Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
Planning Provisions
(11 April 2019) cl 35.06; see also Stephen Rowley,
The Victorian Planning System: Practice, Problems and Prospects
Federation Press, 2017) 29.
73 Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
Planning Provisions
(11 April 2019) cl 35.06. 74 Ibid cl 35.03-1.
75 Ibid cl 35.03; see also Stephen Rowley,
The Victorian Planning System:
Practice, Problems and Prospects
(The Federation Press, 2017) 29.
76 Stephen Rowley,
The Victorian Planning System: Practice, Problems and
(The Federation Press, 2017) 29.
77 Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
Practice Note No 3: Applying the Special Use Zone,
www.planning.vic.gov.au/resource-library/planning-practice-notes
78 Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
Victoria’s Planning System Guide
(Guide, 28 May 2015)
www.planning.vic.gov.au/guide-home/using-victorias-planning-system
The Commission notes that recent planning scheme amendments have prevented
future use of the priority development zone:
see, eg, Department of Environment,
Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
Amendment VC148—Planning Advisory Note
(July 2018) 10 <https://
www.planning.vic.gov.au/schemes-and-amendments/
Amendment-VC148-reforms>.
79 Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
Overarching
Report—Residential Zones State Of Play
(Report, 29 January 2016)
www.planning.vic.gov.au/panels-and-committees/previous-panels-and-committees/managing-residential-development-
advisory-committee/residential-zones-state-of-play-reports>.
5.52 The Urban Floodway Zone applies to urban land where the primary function
of the land is to carry or store floodwater.80 Land
use is restricted to uses
such as recreation or agriculture.81 The Port Zone covers Victoria’s
commercial trading ports and
provides for
shipping, road and railway access. It provides for the use and development of
commercial trading ports within Victoria pursuant to
Port Management Act
Other jurisdictions—to which land should the Act apply? New South
5.53 The application of the NSW Act was initially restricted to urban areas
only.83 Upon review,
it was expanded to include land zoned as rural–residential.84
Rural–residential land had been initially excluded because
of concerns
that the NSW Act might interfere with existing legislation, for example, laws
relating to land clearing and native vegetation.85
This meant that a person with
a tree dispute in a rural–residential area was not able to seek a remedy
under the NSW Act.
5.54 The NSW Department of Justice and Attorney General concluded that
extending the NSW Act to rural–residential zones would
overlap, but not
interfere, with the
Native Vegetation Act 2003
(NSW).86 The
Vegetation Act
contained various exceptions relating to the clearance of
vegetation to remove or reduce personal injury or damage to property, which
the problem that the NSW Act sought to address.87 Amendment of the NSW Act
5.55 At present, the NSW Act applies to land zoned residential,
rural–residential, village, township, industrial or business.88
addition, land outside the listed zones may fall within the ambit of the
NSW Act if the zone has the substantial character
of one of the listed zones.89
The NSW Act does not appear to apply to land that is used for primary
production purposes, for example extensive agricultural uses, or land use
that is permitted under the
Forestry Act 2012
5.56 The NSWLEC informed the Commission that most tree disputes originate
from residential zones, with few applications being made
beyond this zone.91
5.57 Similarly, the Queensland Act applies to urban areas and
rural–residential land.92 The Act does not apply to trees situated
rural land or to land that is more than four hectares.93 The Act also does not
apply to trees planted or maintained for commercial
purposes.94
80 Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
Victoria’s Planning System
(Guide, 28 May 2015)
www.planning.vic.gov.au/guide-home/using-victorias-planning-system
81 Melbourne Water,
Overlays Explained
(Web Page, 26 September 2017)
www.melbournewater.com.au/planning-and-building/
flooding-information-and-advice/overlays-explained>.
82 Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
Planning Provisions
(11 April 2019) cl 37.09.
83 Department of Justice and Attorney-General (NSW),
Review of the
(Disputes Between Neighbours) Act 2006
(Report, 2009) 40. This included land
zoned as residential, township or industrial.
Trees (Disputes Between Neighbours) Act 2006
85 Department of Justice and Attorney General (NSW),
Review of the
(Disputes Between Neighbours) Act 2006
(NSW) (Report, 2009) 40.
Native Vegetation Act 2003
(NSW) was repealed on 25 August
2017. Current legislation governing the clearing of native vegetation is
Local Land Services Act 2013
Biodiversity Conservation Act
: Office of Environment and Heritage (NSW),
Native Vegetation Act
(Web Page, 17 August 2018) <https://
www.environment.nsw.gov.au/vegetation/nvact.htm
87 Department of Justice and Attorney General (NSW),
Review of the
(Disputes Between Neighbours) Act 2006
(NSW) (Report, 2009)
40. There are various exemptions built into the Act and therefore the Acts
would overlap but not interfere with each other.
Trees (Disputes Between Neighbours) Act 2006
89 Ibid; see, eg,
Aaron v Haynes
[2007] NSWLEC 294.
90 This includes plantations on an area of Crown-timber land (other than a
flora reserve), or an area of land owned by the Corporation,
on which the
predominant number of trees forming, or expected to form, the canopy are trees
that have been planted (whether by sowing
seed or otherwise): (a) for the
purpose of timber production:
Forestry Act 2012
Standard Instrument—Principle Local Environmental 2006
91 Consultation 11 (Land and Environment Court of New South Wales).
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
s 42(4)(a).
5.58 In its review of the operation of the Queensland Act, the QLRC
recommended the inclusion of land greater than four hectares in
size to address
the inequity of a neighbour on a smaller lot of land not being able to take
action against a neighbour on a larger
lot but the neighbour on a larger lot
being able to commence action against the neighbour on the smaller lot.95 This
recommendation
has not been implemented at the time of writing.
5.59 The Tasmanian Law Reform Institute (TLRI) recommended that a new
Tasmanian Act apply to all land zones, ‘but that the zoning
of the land on
which the tree or hedge is situated be a factor that must be considered by the
decision-maker’.96 This was in
line with community feedback which
supported no restriction on the application of a new Act to particular
5.60 The Tasmanian Act excludes council-owned or managed land, rail network
land, reserves and certain forestry land.98 Plants that
are planted or
maintained for a purpose that is necessary or desirable for the management or
operation of a farm are also excluded,
as are plants that are planted or maintained to be sold.99 The Tasmanian
Government indicated it did not want the Act to interfere
with the rights of
primary producers. It noted that ‘the statutory scheme should not impose
an unreasonable burden on people
who are trying to make a living’.100 The
Second Reading Speech for the Tasmanian Bill explains:
these excluded categories are more likely to capture large parcels of land
that are located in rural or remote locations—the
land is often
unoccupied, or it may have high conservation value or serve some other kind of
public purpose or be of benefit to the
broader community.101
Community responses—to which land should the Act apply?
5.61 More than half of those who responded to the issue of land zoning were
in favour of the new Act applying to all types of land
Victoria.102
5.62 Arborist Dr Karen Smith explained that the application of the new Act
should not be limited to particular zones because many
urban dwellings can be
located next to public, agricultural, industrial and commercial land.103
5.63 Consultations with local councils revealed that most tree disputes
between neighbours occur in urban and residential areas.104
Nillumbik Shire
Council reported that most complaints about trees on private land are from
residents living in urban areas.105 It
was suggested that this is because people
on smaller parcels of land live in closer proximity to one another.106 One
community member
noted that ‘a large proportion of all trees on private
residential properties are located close to property boundaries. This
fruitful, and growing, source of disputation between neighbours’.107
95 Queensland Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Neighbourhood Disputes
(Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
(Report No 72, 2015) 70-71.
96 Tasmania Law Reform Institute,
Problem Trees and Hedge: Access to
Sunlight and Views
(Report No 21, 2016) 56, recommendation 12.
97 Ibid 56.
Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants Act 2017
100 Tasmania,
Parliamentary Debates
, House of Assembly, 4 April 2017,
3 (Rene Hidding); Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants Bill 2017 (Tas).
102 Submissions 2 (Name withheld), 4 (Name withheld), 5 (Name withheld), 6
(Name withheld), 7 (Ben Kenyon), 9 (Dr Karen Smith), 19
(Name Withheld), 20
(Name withheld), 21 (Pointon Partners Lawyers), 27 (Name withheld);
Consultations 3 (HVP Plantations), 14 (Robert
103 Submission 9 (Dr Karen Smith).
104 Consultations 8 (City of Boroondara); 9 (Nillumbik Shire Council); 10
(Baw Baw Shire Council); 12 (City of Port Phillip).
105 Consultation 9 (Nillumbik Shire Council).
107 Submission 37 (Ian Hundley).
5.64 From December 2011 to May 2017 DSCV received
18,727 tree-related enquiries from the community.108 Of these, 13,301 (71 per
were from metropolitan areas within Victoria,109 while 3000 were located
in regional Victoria (16 per cent).110
5.65 While these figures indicate that the vast majority of tree-related
enquiries arise in metropolitan areas, there are many tree
disputes in
regional Victoria. The Commission was told that in regional Victoria tree
disputes most often occur in population
centres such as towns rather than
rural areas. In these locations the subject matter of the disputes is often
similar to metropolitan
tree disputes.111 Baw Baw Shire Council proposed
that zoning under a new Act should be limited to residential zones or areas
resemble residential areas.112
5.66 One submission described a dispute in a rural agricultural area
concerning a line of trees planted close to a shared
fence.113 This
submission suggested that the trees on the
neighbouring property had the potential to cause damage or harm to the
boundary fence and to crops through contamination. The submission
frustration at the limited resolution options available for tree disputes in
rural areas.114
5.67 HVP Plantations have suggested that tree disputes ‘occur
state-wide and are not limited to suburban areas’ and
that it has been
involved in disputes with both residential
and farming neighbours. HVP Plantations told the Commission that it is
involved in approximately 10 tree disputes a year in rural
5.68 Owners or occupiers of rural land may also be concerned about the risk
of a bushfire posed by vegetation on neighbouring land.116
The Commission’s conclusions—to which
land should the Act apply?
5.69 The new Act should apply to land zones in urban areas or to land that
provides for residential living (including some rural areas),
while giving
discretion to the decision- making body to consider land that has the
substantial character of one of these zones.
A new Act would therefore apply
• the six residential zones
• the three commercial zones
• the three industrial zones
• the two green wedge zones (as they support rural living and are
located on the urban fringe)
• the rural living zone
• the rural conservation zone
• special purpose zones excluding the special use zone, the urban
floodway zone and the port zone
• any other land prescribed in regulation
5.70 The Commission has recommended including all commercial and industrial
zones as this is the approach taken by all interstate
statutory schemes. Some of
these zones are likely to interface with residential uses of land, and so it is
more straightforward to
include them all rather than omit certain categories of
commercial and industrial land uses.
108 Information provided by DSCV as part of a data request from the
Commission, August 2017 and clarification of data provided in
109 DSCV data categorises metropolitan disputes as originating in the CBD,
North (metro), South East (metro) and the West (metro):
Information provided by
DSCV as part of a data request from the Commission, August 2017.
110 Information provided by DSCV as part of a data request from the
Commission, August 2017 and November 2018 and clarification of
data provided in
May 2019. For the purposes of DSCV data regional Victoria includes: Barwon,
Gippsland, Grampians, Hume and Loddon
111 Consultation 10 (Baw Baw Shire Council).
113 Survey respondent 99.
115 Consultation 3 (HVP Plantations).
116 Consultation 10 (Baw Baw Shire Council).
5.71 The new Act will also apply to land that has the substantial
character of one of the zones designated in the Act. This
is the approach in
NSW. For example, in exercising its discretion in relation to land that may have
the substantial character of
a residential zone the NSWLEC has considered the
‘settlement pattern in the vicinity of the two properties
involved’ and the ‘streetscape of the road in which they are
located’ to determine that the zoning was analogous
to a residential
5.72 Land that is used for commercial timber plantations should also be
excluded from the ambit of the new Act.118 This is consistent
with interstate
Acts119 and recognises the unique nature and needs of these commercial
operations as identified by HVP Plantations
in its submission.120 The Commission
notes that plantations must be managed according to various statutory
requirements, including
the Code of Practice for Timber Production 2014.121
Government may also determine that other types of land should be excluded from
the ambit of the Act as occurs interstate.122
5.73 There was considerable support for including all zones in a new Act. The
Commission acknowledges that tree disputes can arise
on land that is primarily
used for farming and agricultural production.123 The application of the new Act
will extend to land in
most zones in Victoria. However, it will not extend to
the farming and rural activity zones. These types of zones are also excluded
the interstate Acts.124 The recommended approach provides a remedy for many
intractable neighbourhood tree disputes, while not
interfering with land
primarily used for farming and agricultural purposes.
5.74 The Commission acknowledges HVP Plantations’ suggestion that that
there is a ‘case for statutory intervention to
provide guidance to rural
landowners in treed environments, and to draw a contemporary compromise between
the benefits and the risks
that trees bring to neighbours’.125 The
Commission accepts that tree disputes in rural settings often involve different
considerations
and it is important that the new Act reflect this. The decision-
making principles recommended in Chapter 8 will help VCAT to balance
rights and interests fairly and transparently. Those principles require VCAT to
consider a broad range of matters including
the broader benefits of trees and
the relevant zoning and the related purpose of the land. These principles will
also help people
to resolve their own disputes outside a formal VCAT hearing or
in mediation.
Exclusion of Farming and Rural Activity Zones
5.75 While amenity and property damage may prove problematic for neighbours
close to each other in urban areas, land predominantly
used for farming and
agricultural purposes tends to raise different kinds of issues. Land holders
in rural areas may ‘want
trees on their farms to shelter farm
stock and crops; control soil erosion and dryland salinity; enhance their
property values;
and, if at all possible, generate alternative sources of
income’.126
Baw Baw Shire Council noted that:
117 In this case the Court held ‘we are satisfied that the zoning,
although not using the word residential, is, in fact, a zone
of a residential
character and thus, in that regard, the Court does have jurisdiction to deal
with this application’: see
Aaron v Haynes
[2007] NSWLEC 294
118 For, eg, land that is held under a licence issued pursuant to the
Victorian Plantations Corporation Act 1993
Trees (Disputes Between Neighbours) Act 2006
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants Act 2017
120 Submission 28 (HVP Plantations).
121 The Code is made by the Minister for Environment and Climate Change under
Conservation Forests and Lands Act 1987
(Vic). The Code
applies to the planning and conducting of all commercial timber production and
timber harvesting operations on both
public and private land in Victoria.
Trees (Disputes Between Neighbours) Act 2006
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants Act 2017
123 Confidential submission, Submission 28 (HVP Plantations).
124 These Acts are often broader in their exclusions than is contemplated for
the Victorian Act.
125 Submission 28 (HVP Plantations).
126 Otway Agroforestry Network,
Agroforestry: Multi-Purpose Tree Growing
http://www.oan.org.au/
. The Otway
Agroforestry Network (OAN) is a not-for-profit community organisation consisting
of over 200 local farming families.
The Network is aimed at exploring ‘how
growing trees can make farming more environmentally sustainable and economically
rewarding’.
The Network does this through advocacy, education and
information-sharing through its network of members: Otway Agroforestry Network,
Who are OAN? (Web Page)
http://www.oan.org.au/Main.asp?_=About%20Us
Farmers have different motivations to urban land users. A person in a
metropolitan area may have great concern over the removal of
a 500 year old red
gum. For a farmer those concerns may be overridden by practical considerations
and the need to use the land for
agricultural purposes.127
5.76 The purpose of the Farming Zone is to ensure that non-agricultural uses,
particularly dwellings, do not adversely affect the
use of land for
agriculture.128 The Farming Zone is the most flexible zone in terms of
agricultural uses and many agricultural
uses do not require a permit.129 This
zone is explicitly focused on preserving productive agricultural
land and ‘farming uses are encouraged to establish and expand with as
little restriction as possible’.130 Agriculture
Victoria provides tips to
would-be purchasers of rural land on its website, and advises:
There are not many formal requirements for farmers to minimise the normal
impacts arising from the legitimate agricultural enterprises
they may run, and
there are few requirements for them to formally notify you of what they intend
to do ... Living together in rural
Victoria comes down to having reasonable
expectations of how the land in your neighbourhood is used, and exercising a
little give
and take.131
5.77 Similarly, the main feature of the Rural Activity Zone is the
‘flexibility that it provides for farming and other land
co-exist’.132 The growth of farming practices is supported but a wide
range of non-farming commercial and retail uses
are also encouraged.133 The
Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning advises:
The zone should not be mistaken for a quasi-rural residential zone. Housing
is only one of a number of uses that may be considered
in the zone, and, in some
circumstances, it may be incompatible with the particular mix of uses that the
planning authority is seeking
to achieve.134
5.78 Vegetation can serve a wide range of purposes in rural areas. For
example, fallen timber and ground litter provide hiding, basking
and nesting
places, and a source of food for animals and birds.135 Agriculture Victoria
notes that fallen timber ‘can provide
important stepping stones for safe
passage of wildlife across the landscape’ and ‘messy branches
touching the ground
are important avenues of access for animals such as goannas
and snakes’.136 Moreover, single paddock trees provide shade and
for domestic stock and valuable habitats for insects, birds and bats.
Agriculture Victoria state that ‘the loss of
paddock trees can soon result
in the loss of these endangered species’.137
5.79 Existing legislative provisions that protect vegetation on private
land in rural areas do not always extend to rural
activity and farming
zones, in order to facilitate agricultural production. The Native Vegetation
Particular Provisions do not extend
to some land uses in the rural activity
and farming zones.138
127 Consultation 10 (Baw Baw Shire Council).
128 Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
Planning Provisions
(11 April 2019) cl 35.07.
129 Ibid cl 35.071.
130 Department of Environment, Water, Land and Planning (Vic),
Practice Note No 42: Applying the Rural Zones
(Practice Document, June 2015)
6 <https://
www.planning.vic.gov.au/resource-library/planning-practice-notes
131 Agriculture Victoria,
Tips Before Purchasing Rural Land
3 August 2017)
http://agriculture.vic.gov.au/agriculture/farm- management/business-management/new-landholders/tips-before-purchasing-rural-land
Agriculture Victoria is a government entity supported by the Department of Jobs,
Precincts and Regions. Its website states
that it has ‘been created to
give greater visibility to the agriculture activities of the department, giving
a clear identity
to agricultural services and initiatives with the
department’: Agriculture Victoria,
(Web Page, 23 January
http://agriculture.vic.gov.au/about-us
132 Department of Environment, Water, Land and Planning (Vic),
Practice Note No 42: Applying the Rural Zones,
June 2015, 7
www.planning.vic.gov.au/resource-library/planning-practice-notes
135 Agriculture Victoria,
Property Management and the Environment
Page, 3 August 2017)
http://agriculture.vic.gov.au/agriculture/ farm-management/business-management/new-landholders/property-management-and-the-environment
138 Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
Planning Provisions
(11 April 2019) cl 52.17-7 ‘Table of
exemptions’.
5.80 HVP Plantations is Victoria’s largest plantation owner. It
owns native bushland, forest and managed plantations,
operating as a
‘tree farmer’ that grows and harvests trees for sale to timber
customers.139 HVP Plantations noted differences
between urban and rural parcels
of land. In the urban environment:
The number of trees managed by any one landowner is generally few, and a
landowner may reasonably be expected to keep an eye on the
state of the trees in
their garden, but in a rural environment, large numbers of trees over
significant lengths of boundary can be
involved. Regular inspection of such
trees is mostly impractical, and a tree which is “defective” is also
likely to be
a tree with significant habitat value which is valued by the
community.140
5.81 HVP Plantations has 240,000 hectares of land and around 920 kilometres
of direct boundaries to other private land holders.141
In some cases a farmer
may also have multiple neighbours where subdivision has occurred on a
neighbouring property.142 HVP noted
that ‘it is unjust if a neighbour
can subdivide their land and make a large sum of money from so doing, but in so
doing impose
a significant and ongoing cost of tree inspection and management on
their neighbour’.143 It suggested that sometimes neighbours
notified of the hazards of neighbouring trees through Section 173 Agreements
(discussed in Chapter 10) but this does not occur
5.82 HVP suggested that it resolves tree disputes informally and internally
because the common law cannot be easily applied in the
rural setting.145 Baw Baw
Shire also reported anecdotally that farmers tend to resolve disputes about
vegetation informally with
each other, rather than going through processes they
see as too burdensome or bureaucratic.146 Agriculture Victoria provides case
studies of how alternative dispute resolution has assisted parties living in
rural Victoria to come to agreement.147
5.83 The exclusion of farming and rural activity zones means that the Act
will not apply to a dispute involving neighbours on farming
land or to a dispute
between a tree owner on farming land and an affected neighbour on adjoining
residential land. In these situations,
the affected neighbour would need to
establish that the land has the substantial character of one of the listed zones
or is prescribed
in regulation to obtain a remedy in VCAT.
5.84 The recommendation to exclude certain zones from the application of the
Act should be revisited when it has been operating for
five years, to find out
whether the exclusion has detrimentally affected many people with genuine
disputes who have no other simple
way of resolving them. Because unique
considerations arise in relation to the management
of trees on rural-agricultural land it would be sensible to first ascertain
how well the Act helps resolve disputes in rural zones
that the Commission
recommends fall within the scope of the Act, for example, the rural
conservation zone. This approach of
adding zones after a period of operation has
also occurred in NSW.148
139 Consultation 3 (HVP Plantations).
140 Submission 28 (HVP Plantations).
142 Consultation 3 (HVP Plantations).
143 Submission 28 (HVP Plantations).
144 Consultation 3 (HVP Plantations).
145 Ibid. This was discussed in Ch 3.
146 Consultation 10 (Baw Baw Shire Council).
147 Agriculture Victoria,
Resolving Disputes
(Web Page, 8 May 2017)
http://agriculture.vic.gov.au/agriculture/farm-management/business- management/new-landholders/resolving-disputes
148 Department of Justice and Attorney General (NSW),
Review of the
(Disputes Between Neighbours) Act 2006
(NSW) (Report, 2009)
‘Recommendation 10(a)’; see
Trees Disputes Between Neighbours Act
(NSW) s 4(1)(a).
Review of the Act
5.85 At review, regulation could specify that the Act apply to additional
zones. Alternatively, regulation could also exclude some
zones if it was
determined that the application of the Act as initially implemented was too
broad and hindered the purpose of any
of those zones. At review Government
should consult with farming and agricultural users of land to obtain specific
rural communities about the application of the Act.149
5.86 Review could also determine if any other types of land should be
excluded from the ambit of the Act.
5.87 This review recommendation is discussed further in Chapter 13.
Proximity to affected neighbour’s
5.88 The consultation paper asked whether there should be a requirement in
the new Act for the affected neighbour’s land to
adjoin the land on which
the tree is situated (for example, to share a common boundary) and, if so, how
the relevant degree of proximity
should be defined.
Other jurisdictions—proximity of the tree
5.89 In New South Wales the tree subject to legal action under the Act must
be on ‘adjoining land’.150 This is not defined
under the NSW Act.
However, case law has determined this to mean properties that abut each other as
well as those that are not touching,
for example where they are separated by
land but there is a ‘relevant connection’.151
5.90 A relevant connection will exist if the tree is capable of causing
damage to the other property or harming people on it.152 The
NSWLEC also gave
the example of a common corner post that was held to provide a relevant
connection indicating that the neighbours’
land was adjoining under the
NSW Act.153 The NSWLEC has found that properties with
149 The Commission sought responses from rural and regional areas. A
consultation was conducted with HVP Plantations and Baw Baw
Shire Council.
Several submissions and survey responses were received from rural and regional
areas: Submissions 8 (Victoria Thieberger),
13 (Mandy Collins), 28 (HVP Plantations), 31 (Barwon Community Legal
Service), 34 (Allan Day); Survey respondent 99.
Trees (Disputes Between Neighbours) Act 2006
Robson v Leischke
[2008] NSWLEC 152
(2008) 72 NSWLR 98
[157]; Land and Environment
Court of New South Wales,
Annotated Trees Act January 2013
(1 September 2016) 8.
153 Consultation 11 (Land and Environment Court of New South Wales); see, eg,
Cavalier v Young
[2011] NSWLEC 1080
intervening ‘gaps’ are ‘adjoining’ for the purposes
of the New South Wales Act where those gaps comprise uninhabited
land such as
roadways, laneways and battle-axe driveways.154
5.91 In Queensland an affected neighbour’s land must adjoin the land on
which the tree is situated, or would adjoin the land
if it were not separated by
a road.155 This has been interpreted narrowly and requires proof of physical
connection between neighbouring
5.92 In Tasmania an affected neighbour’s land does not need to adjoin
the land on which the tree is situated.157 Instead, an
neighbour’s land needs to be within 25 metres of the base of the
neighbouring tree’s trunk or where the stem
of a tree connects to a root
system.158 The Tasmanian Act’s broader approach ‘recognises that in
some cases tree roots
can extend horizontally to a distance of up to 25
metres’.159
Community responses—proximity of the tree
nity responses were mixed. Some people
favoured limiting legal action to neighbours with adjoining parcels of land (for
example, with
shared common
boundaries)160 while others favoured a broader approach where the tree and
the affected neighbour’s land need not be adjoining
at all, or were
connected in some other way.161
Trees can impact at considerable distance from the trunk
5.94 The Commission was told that a tree’s roots can extend far beyond
its canopy, which can cause them to have an impact on
properties several doors
down from where the tree is situated.162
5.95 The NSWLEC stated that where the issue arises of non-adjoining
neighbours being affected by a tree, it may occur in inner urban
small properties. The most likely scenario would be a large canopy that
overhangs multiple narrow properties. This issue
has arisen only once in the
NSWLEC and similar issues have not been presented in relation to roots.163
5.96 Some submissions cautioned that the usefulness of a broad approach such
as Tasmania’s may be limited.164 It may be difficult
to determine which
tree the roots originate from if there are multiple trees in the area, without
extensive investigation such
as lab testing, root radar reports or hydro
excavation reports.165 Another submission suggested that the impact is likely to
less severe the greater distance it is away from the tree and more easily
resolved through abatement (for example, by cutting
away roots) with no
significant impact on the tree’s health or structural integrity.166
5.97 The NSWLEC suggested that problems may arise where multiple
properties are affected by encroaching roots. It may be difficult
to determine
the best place to sever roots when they travel across multiple properties. For
example, where each property’s
sewer connects to a common main, and an
application is made over roots entering old pipes on one property, this may
require intervention
that involves cutting into new, re-sleeved pipes of other
properties and excavating unaffected land.167
154 Information provided by NSWLEC to the Commission, 4 December 2018.
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
156 Consultation 15 (Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal).
Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants Act 2017
159 Parliament of Tasmania,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative
Council, 22 June 2017, 5 (Leonie Hiscuitt).
160 Submissions 2 (Name withheld), 6 (Name withheld), 11 (Name withheld), 33
(Annette Neville); Consultation 8 (City of Boroondara).
161 Submissions 6 (Name withheld), 10 (Professor Phillip Hamilton), 21
(Pointon Partners Lawyers), 23 (Name withheld); 27 (Name withheld),
38 (L. Barry
Wollmer); Consultation 14 (Robert Mineo).
162 Submissions 12 (Dr Gregory Moore OAM), 29 (David Galwey); Consultation 14
(Robert Mineo).
163 Information provided by NSWLEC to the Commission, 4 December 2018.
164 Consultation 14 (Robert Mineo).
165 Consultation 14 (Robert Mineo).
166 Confidential submission.
167 Information provided by NSWLEC to the Commission, 4 December 2018.
5.98 The City of Boroondara favoured limiting legal action to neighbours with
adjoining land. It considered that the Tasmanian approach
may be too broad and
that it would be hard to ascertain the direct impact of the tree. There may be
situations where a tree may affect
neighbouring land without physically
encroaching on it in any way, such as in the context of soil hydrology, where a
tree may remove
water from neighbouring soil, which can compromise the
foundations of a dwelling. In these situations, it would become increasingly
difficult to prove the alleged impact of a tree at greater distances,
particularly in leafy areas where it is difficult or impossible
to identify
which tree is the source of the problem.168
5.99 The NSWLEC cautioned that a 25-metre rule may raise procedural issues.
It would increase the number of interested parties and
properties likely to be
affected by any orders made. The NSWLEC noted that intervening landowners may
need to be made parties to
the application where their land is affected in terms
of amenity or access to their land is required to carry out works.169 It
that although well intentioned, selecting a meterage as the
contexts—for example, a tree 40 metres tall may impact beyond 25
A broader approach
5.100 Some of those in favour of a broader approach suggested that the only
relevant threshold should be whether a person’s
use and enjoyment of their
land is being affected by a tree in the neighbourhood.171 Others stated that
whether or not sufficient
proximity exists between the tree and the affected
neighbour’s land should be determined by the local council in the area.172
Pointon Partners stated that the determination of whether or not sufficient
proximity exists is a task best left to the relevant
decision-making
5.101 An arborist stated:
It may be a very unlikely situation where a non-neighbour is an affected
party but they should not be excluded because their property
does not share a
boundary with the property on which the tree is located.174
Tree Protection Zone
neighbouring land but are outside the tree’s
TPZ should be considered ‘a natural risk of living near
The Commission’s conclusions—proximity
to affected neighbour’s land
Neighbours’ land should be adjoining
Allowing any person in the neighbourhood to take legal action against a tree
owner would be too broad. It would go beyond the goal
of resolving tree disputes
between neighbours and reach into the broader community. Disputes about trees
that affect the neighbourhood
more broadly may be better dealt with through
local laws, public health and safety laws, or public nuisance.180
As the new Act aims to provide for the resolution of tree disputes between
neighbours, a certain degree of proximity between neighbouring
necessary and sensible. The
Commission is of the view that a proximity requirement of adjoining land
will be easier for the community to understand and apply
than a broader causal
link or specified meterage that might require a land survey to accurately
measure distances. It will also
The most straightforward degree of proximity is adjoining parcels of land
that share a common boundary. For these purposes a tree
may be recognised as
being on adjoining land even where there are multiple properties and the
relevant boundary between
the tree owner’s property and the affected neighbour’s land is
short or is a point of convergence of multiple properties.
To prevent people from being arbitrarily and unfairly excluded from the
scheme due to neighbouring public infrastructure or landscapes
the Commission
proposes that the
affected neighbour’s land should be deemed to adjoin the tree
owner’s land where it is separated by a:
• public road
• pedestrian path
• bridge, or
This approach reflects the Queensland Act and cases determined under the NSW
The Commission’s conclusion is influenced by arguments put forward by
some arborists. Generally, the further away a tree is
from an affected
neighbour’s land, the less significant the impact will be on the land or
A number of other practical obstacles will make it harder for neighbours at
greater distances to mount a successful case, and so cases
are less likely to be
brought. These obstacles include the jurisdictional requirements under the
proposed Act; the need for claims
to be supported by expert evidence from
qualified arborists; and the difficulty of identifying the subject tree in leafy
179 Confidential submission.
180 A public nuisance is an unlawful act, the effect of which is to endanger
the life, health, property, morals, or comfort of the
R v Clifford
[1980] 1 NSWLR 314:
Peter Butt (ed)
, Butterworths’ Concise
Australian Legal Dictionary
(LexisNexis Butterworths, 3rd ed, 2004).
The recommended definition of adjoining land may leave some neighbours
without recourse even if they can prove, for example, that
a very tall tree of
compromised health would affect a non-adjoining neighbour’s land if it
were to fall or drop a large branch.181
In this situation, the affected
neighbour’s only options may be to commence legal action for nuisance and
182 injunction or pursue an action for negligence if
damage or harm has already occurred.183
If the tree has caused damage to multiple properties on adjoining land, then
separate applications for each affected property would
be required. This is
consistent with the approach in New South Wales.184
Irregular blocks and public easements
Some neighbouring land may be diagonally offset or separated by very short
distances of public land, including where there is an easement.185
It would be
unfair to exclude these neighbours from the scope of the new Act if they were
genuinely affected by a neighbouring tree.
Non-standard issues relating to the threshold of ‘adjoining’
arise very rarely. The NSWLEC has heard approximately 1000
tree disputes since
the commencement of the NSW Act, and in only a few cases have unusual issues
arisen about the relevant connection
Further consultation with councils and Land Use Victoria187 may be prudent to
ascertain if there are many irregular parcels of land
where this is likely to be
a significant issue in Victoria. If necessary, the definition of adjoining land
could be expanded when
the Act is reviewed (discussed in Chapter 13). Such an
expansion could take in neighbours who do not share a common boundary but
separated by no more than two metres of public land, or separated by an easement
on public land. This distance allows some flexibility
while being narrow enough
to capture only immediate neighbours.
Private easements should be excluded
Tree disputes concerning private easements or easements in gross188 on
private land should not be included in the new Act, even if
the easement adjoins
the land of the affected neighbour or tree owner. Disputes about trees that
interfere with an easement (both
private and in gross) to the detriment of the
dominant owner or local authority should be resolved in the usual ways easement
are resolved (for example, abatement or legal action in nuisance). This
reflects the current approach in New South Wales and the
conclusions of the
Queensland Law Reform Commission.189
181 This has occurred interstate. See, eg:
[2017] NSWLEC
in which an affected neighbour’s application about a Sydney
blue gum, which had previously dropped branches and caused
damage, was
dismissed by the Court because his land was ‘separated ... by
another residential allotment’ and
was, more specifically, ‘two
properties to the east’ of the tree owner’s land. The affected
neighbour’s application
was therefore beyond the jurisdiction of the
Court, and the potentially hazardous nature of the tree could not be considered
that application. This decision was upheld on appeal in
[2017] NSWLEC 153
Bell v Griffiths
[2013] QCAT 655.
182 Latin meaning ‘because he or she fears’: Peter Butt (ed)
Butterworths’ Concise Australian Legal Dictionary
(Lexis Nexis, 3rd
‘quia timet’.
Public Health and Wellbeing Act 2008
(Vic) also applies to
nuisances which are dangerous to health or offensive. It is therefore possible
for a tree to form a nuisance
and therefore for this Act to be used in the
management of tree disputes on private land. This Act is discussed in Ch 10.
law actions in nuisance and negligence are discussed in Ch 3.
184 Land and Environment Court of New South Wales,
Annotated Trees Act
January 2013
(1 September 2016) 8.
185 An Easement is a property right to make a limited use of land by someone
other than an owner. It cannot give exclusive possession
and must be for the
benefit of other land (Dominant land). An Easement in Gross is an easement for
the benefit of the holder of
the easement (usually a service provider) which is
not attached to dominant land. It is not recognised at common law and can exist
only under legislation: Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Easements and
(Final Report No 22, 2010) 6.
186 Information provided by the NSWLEC to the Commission, 4 December
187 Land Use Victoria is the Victorian Government’s key agency for land
administration and property information: Department
of Environment, Land, Water
and Planning (Vic),
Property and Land Titles
(Web Page, 2019)
www.propertyandlandtitles.vic.gov.au/home
188 An Easement is a property right to make a limited use of land by someone
other than an owner. It cannot give exclusive possession,
and must be for the
benefit of other land (Dominant land). An Easement in Gross is an easement for
the benefit of the holder of
the easement (usually a service provider) which is
not attached to dominant land. It is not recognised at common law and can exist
only under legislation: Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Easements and
(Final Report No 22, 2010) 6.
189 See, eg,
McCormack v Spencer
[2008] NSWLEC 1285
Liu v Morris
[2012] NSWLEC 1345
, as cited in the Land and Environment Court of New
South Wales,
Annotated Trees Act January 2013
(1 September 2016) 11; see
also Queensland Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Neighbourhood Disputes
(Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
(Report No 72, 2015) 93-94.
Although the Commission appreciates the intent of
Tasmania’s broader approach to proximity, it considers that it would not
a significant benefit to neighbours involved in tree disputes.
Trees on boundaries
The consultation paper asked how trees on boundaries (or trees only partially
on one parcel of land) should be dealt with under a
statutory scheme.
Ownership of a tree on private land is usually determined by reference to
the location of its trunk.190 A tree is considered a ‘fixture’
the land—a tangible item of personal property that is attached to and
forms part of the land.191
Vegetation that forms a ‘hedge or similar vegetative barrier’ in
the form of a dividing fence is covered by the
Fences Act 1968
, neighbours must contribute to the erection or repair of a
fence in equal proportions.193
The Commission is unaware of any cases determined under the common law or any
Victorian legislation that set out how liability is
to be determined when a tree
that is not part of a fence straddles the boundary of two or more
properties.194
Other jurisdictions—trees on boundaries
Under the NSW Act an affected neighbour must establish that the tree
affecting them is ‘wholly or principally’ situated
neighbour’s land.
195 The location of the base
of the trunk at ground level is used to determine where the tree is situated.
The canopy and root system
are not a relevant consideration. Where a tree
straddles a boundary, the tree will be considered to be
‘principally’
on a person’s land if at least 50 per cent or
more of the trunk at ground level is on their side of the boundary.196
Robson v Leischke
[2008] NSWLEC 152
(2008) 72 NSWLR 98
[151] citing
(1827) M. & M. 112;
173 ER 1099
Lemmon v Webb
191 Margaret Davies and Kynan Rogers, ‘Tale of a Tree’ (2014) 16
Flinders Law Journal
Permanent Trustee Australia v Shand
(1992) 27 NSWLR 426
Clos Farming Estates v Easton
(2002) 11 BPR 20,
605. By contrast, a tree that becomes severed from the land is considered a
chattel, as it can be moved.
Fences Act 1968
(definition of ‘fence’).
194 Cf. cases concerning dwellings and sheds straddling boundary lines. These
are called ‘building encroachments’. In
Victoria, building
encroachments are resolved on the basis of trespass or adverse possession:
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Property Law Act 1958
(Final Report No 20, 2010) 54.
195 Submission 20 (Name withheld);
Trees (Disputes Between Neighbours) Act
(NSW) s 43(3); Land and Environment Court of New South Wales,
Annotated Trees Act January 2013
(1 September 2016) 5.
196 See, eg,
Drolz v Sinclair
[2008] NSWLEC 34
Brown v Weaver
[2007] NSWLEC 738.
Where a dividing fence does not correctly reflect legal boundary lines or
where the location of the base of the trunk is unclear,
the NSWLEC may require a
land survey to be undertaken.197 A survey or any other investigation for
determining the position of the
trunk usually occurs during the early stages of
the hearing process, such as at the time of lodgement in the Court’s
or at a preliminary hearing.198 The survey must
accurately show the configuration of the base of the tree and its location
with respect to the boundary.199
A tree disputes consultant in New South Wales explained that using the
location of the trunk at ground level ‘gives a level
of certainty to
disputants, requiring upfront research (if self-represented) and preparation,
before undertaking Court action’.200
The NSWLEC may make orders reflecting the proportions of the straddle tree on
each parcel of land. For example, in the case of
Dallas v Watson,
survey found that two-thirds of the straddle tree was situated on the
respondent’s land. As a result, the respondent was
ordered to pay
two-thirds of the total cost of tree removal.202
If the location of the tree remains unclear and cannot be established by the
affected neighbour, such as where the tree has already
been removed, then the
matter may be dismissed because the tree has not been proven to be
‘principally’ on the tree owner’s
Under the Queensland Act, the base of the trunk must be ‘wholly or
mainly’ on neighbouring land.204 It does not matter
if the tree has been
removed by the time the application is heard. It is enough for the tree to have
once been wholly or mainly on
the land. QCAT has not determined any cases
concerning ambiguity about whether or not a straddle tree is
‘mainly’ on
a tree owner’s land.205
In Tasmania, a tree is ‘situated on land’ if the base of the
trunk, or the place at which the stem of the plant connects
with the roots of
the plant, is in whole or in part on the land.206 For the purposes of bringing
an action under the Tasmanian Act,
the tree will be treated as if it lies wholly
on the neighbouring land even if it straddles the boundary of
adjoining properties. That is, either neighbour, although both are
technically tree owners, can issue proceedings if the tree is affecting
the ways covered by the Tasmanian Act. In determining the extent to which the
tree is affecting a neighbour, the proportion
of the tree situated on each area
of land will be taken into account.207 The Resource Management and Planning
Appeal Tribunal (RMPAT)
has discretion to make orders against both owners as if
they were joint owners or either owner.208
International jurisdictions—trees on boundaries
The consultation paper detailed the approaches to trees that straddle
boundaries in some Canadian provinces and the United States.
Laws in these
countries take a more collective approach to the ownership of straddle trees by
requiring the cost of works to straddle
trees to be shared and permission
obtained from all owners before works can start.
In Ontario, Canada, under the
Forestry Act
‘Every tree whose
trunk is growing on the boundary between adjoining lands is the common property
of the owners of the
adjoining lands’ irrespective of who planted the tree.209 Any action
taken in relation to the
197 Submission 20 (Name withheld); Consultation 11 (Land and Environment
Court of New South Wales).
198 Submission 20 (Name withheld); Consultation 11 (Land and Environment
Court of New South Wales); See also Land and Environment
Court of New South
Annotated Trees Act January 2013
(1 September 2016) 5.
199 Land and Environment Court of New South Wales,
Annotated Trees Act
January 2013
(1 September 2016) 5.
200 Submission 20 (Name withheld).
[2009] NSWLEC 1056.
Dallas v Watson
[2009] NSWLEC 1056
203 See, eg,
Drolz v Sinclair
[2008] NSWLEC 34.
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
205 Consultation 15 (Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal).
Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants Act 2017
Forestry Act
, RSO 1990, c F26,
Hartley v Cunningham
(2013) ONSC 2929
(17 May 2013) (Ontario Superior Court of Justice).
straddle tree without the consent of neighbours will amount to an offence.210
A ‘trunk’ has been interpreted by the Ontario
Superior Court of
Justice to mean ‘the entire trunk from its point of growth away from its
roots up to its top where it branches
out to limbs and foliage’.211 All
owners of boundary trees are liable for the costs of maintenance or works. The
each owner’s liability will depend on the facts of the
In Saskatchewan, Canada, ‘a straddle tree planted with the agreement of
adjoining owners is owned in common and each has a proprietary
interest in the
whole of the tree that may be protected by registration of a caveat. Where it is
not determinable which owner planted
the tree, ownership in common will not be
implied.’213 In such a case, the tree remains the property of the owner of
on which the tree was planted even when the trunk, roots and branches
extend into neighbouring property.214
In some states of the United States, where a tree stands on the boundary line
with its trunk on both properties, the neighbours own
the tree as tenants in
if an ‘intention, acquiescence, or agreement’215 as to its joint
ownership can be demonstrated.216 While neighbours may
abate up to boundary
lines in the usual manner, any significant work that crosses boundary lines or
is concerned with the removal
of the tree must be done with the agreement of the
Community responses—trees on boundaries
Community responses fell into three distinct categories: proportional
ownership, shared ownership in equal parts and other suggestions.
One person related their unresolved dispute about a straddle tree. This
person was unable to remove the tree as they wished because
the neighbour would
not allow them to access their land to carry out the works.218
Proportional ownership
Most responses preferred proportional ownership—that is, the neighbour
with the greater portion of the tree on their property
should be deemed to own
the tree and be fully responsible for it.219 A range of methods were put forward
for assessing ownership.
As one arborist explained:
A system of determining the extent of ownership should apply. Does this look
solely at the location of the centre of the trunk, the
extent of the trunk on
each parcel of land, the extent of canopy over each parcel and/or the extent of
root system in each
parcel? How does one define ownership of a tree? Is proportional liability a
reasonable application for attributing liability?220
One person suggested that in ambiguous circumstances, such as where the tree
straddles boundaries in equal proportions, the tree should
be deemed to be owned
by the neighbour whose property is significantly affected by the tree.221
Arborist Ben Kenyon stated that the neighbour with the majority of the
tree’s Tree Protection Zone (TPZ) on their land should
be deemed to own
the tree.222
Forestry Act
, RSO 1990, c F26,
Hartley v Cunningham
(2013) ONSC 2929
[14]. Upheld by the Court of
Appeal for Ontario:
Hartley v. Cunningham
(2013) ONCA 759
Jessica Laciak v City of Toronto
(2014) ONSC 1206
Koenig v Goebel
[1998] 6 WWR 56 (Court of Queen’s Bench for
Saskatchewan).
215 See, eg,
Holmberg v Bergin,
172 NW 2d 739 (Minn, 1969).
216 Clark Boardman Callaghan,
Nichols Cyclopedia of Legal Forms Annotated,
vol 1 (at November 2016) 6.4 Joint ownership of trees on dividing line,
‘Chapter 6 Adjoining or Abutting Owners’.
217 See, eg, Cal Civil Code § 833-834; Illinois Legal Aid Online,
Owns the Tree on Both My and My Neighbour’s Property?
(Web Page, 2019)
www.illinoislegalaid.org/legal-information/who-owns-tree-both-my-and-my-neighbors-property
218 Consultation 1 (Aldo Taranto).
219 Submissions 4 (Name withheld), 7 (Ben Kenyon), 12 (Dr Gregory Moore
220 Submission 27 (Name withheld).
221 Submission 4 (Name withheld).
222 Submission 7 (Ben Kenyon).
Shared ownership
A smaller number of people suggested that neighbours should be considered to
jointly own a straddle tree in proportion to the cross-sectional
area of the
trunk at ground level223 or in proportion to the buttress roots224 on each
property.225
One submission endorsed the Ontario approach to straddle trees where the tree
is jointly owned by neighbours who need to consent to
any proposed works or
actions.226 Dr Gregory Moore OAM stated:
I have seen [joint ownership] work very well when both parties have a joint
sense of ownership and responsibility—in a sense
it forces people to work
together to achieve a mutually agreed outcome.227
Some people also stated that straddle trees should be jointly owned in equal
shares regardless of the actual portions of the tree
on each property.228
Other suggestions
Some submissions suggested that ownership of a boundary tree should be
determined by an arborist229 or the local council.230
Some arborists cautioned against determining ownership based on who planted
the tree or on which property the tree originated, because
determining the
origin of the tree can be a difficult task with possibly inconclusive
outcomes.231
Arborist Dr Karen Smith noted that the type of tree may be relevant in any
assessments of location along boundary lines, such as
whether there is an
‘individual tree, suckers, or vines or bamboo’.232
The Commission’s conclusions—trees on
In addition, it would be unfair to hold neighbours who share a straddle tree
automatically liable in equal portions for work specified
in orders. This is
the approach in the
Fences Act 1968
(Vic) for neighbours who share a
dividing fence. Trees are more complex and dynamic structures than fences.
Accordingly, joint responsibility
in equal shares without regard for actual
portions of the tree may be unfair and may unreasonably burden the person who
has a smaller
portion of the tree on their land.
A fairer approach would be for the decision maker to consider the proportions
of ownership together with any other relevant factors
when making orders. For
example, if an order specified tree works totalling $1000, the neighbour with
60 per cent of the tree
on their land would be liable to contribute $600; the
neighbour with 40 per cent,
$400. If the tree is located on properties in equal proportions, the costs
would be shared equally.
Proportional ownership of the tree should be assessed by reference to the
proportions of ownership of the base of the trunk (or stem)
at ground level.
This reflects the approach in New South Wales, Tasmania and Queensland and also
mirrors the common law approach
which determines ownership based on the location
of the trunk of a tree.235 It is easier
to determine the base of the trunk at ground level than the TPZ, root system
or canopy, which may be difficult to identify without
engaging an arborist.
Similarly, any method of determining proportions based on the origin of the tree
is likely to be too difficult.
Where the boundary lines or proportions are ambiguous due to the nature of
the tree or the location of the boundary, the Tribunal
could direct parties to
have their land surveyed by a licensed surveyor or the tree assessed by an
arborist. If this did not provide
conclusive results, a sensible approach would
be to apportion liability equally.
Where a tree straddles the boundary of more than two properties, an affected
neighbour should name all owners in the application and
provide evidence about
proportional ownership by reference to the tree trunk. It will then be a matter
for the Tribunal to consider
who orders should be made against and the
proportion of liability.237
Robson v Leischke
[2008] NSWLEC 152
(2008) 72 NSWLR 98
[151] citing
(1827) M. & M. 112;
173 ER 1099
Lemmon v Webb
[1893] UKLawRpAC 55
[1894] AC 1.
236 Consultation 11 (Land and Environment Court of New South Wales).
237 This approach is contained in the
Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants
Parties to a tree
The next part of this chapter examines the legal concepts of standing and
liability in the new Act. The question of which neighbours
can make an
application (that is, who has ‘standing’) and who can be held liable
is usually determined based on the person’s
relationship to the land that
is the subject of the dispute.238
Who can commence an action?
The consultation paper asked who should be able to commence legal action if a
new Act was introduced.
In order to have standing to bring an action in nuisance at common law, the
affected neighbour must be in possession of the land affected
by the tree.
Standing extends to an owner, tenant or licensee with exclusive possession of
the land.239
When fencing disputes occur between neighbours, the
Fences Act 1968
(Vic) provides that only an owner of land may take action to resolve
disputes about fences located on the common boundary of adjoining
Long-term tenants with five or more years remaining on their lease may be liable
to contribute to the costs of fencing disputes.241
Other jurisdictions—who can commence an action
Robson v Leischke
242 the NSWLEC held that applications in New South
Wales are firstly limited to an owner of adjoining land and, by extension, the
occupier of adjoining land.243 An occupier must be in physical possession of the
land. If the affected property has multiple owners,
any one of the owners can
apply.244 If multiple properties are affected by the subject tree, the NSWLEC
requires separate applications
from the owner or occupier of each affected
property.245
Queensland takes a slightly different approach. QCAT will only accept an
application by an occupier of land if the registered owner
of the land has
refused to make the
application.246 QCAT also requires separate applications if multiple
properties are affected by the subject tree. Joint liability
will apply if the
land on which the tree is situated has multiple owners.247 It is rare for
occupiers of land to make an application
to the Tribunal. However, this may
arise where a landlord is overseas or cannot be located.248
The Tasmanian Act operates in a similar way to the Queensland Act. While an
owner or occupier of land can apply for an order under
the Tasmanian Act, a
person who is not an owner of the land can only apply if:
• the person has, in writing to the owner, requested the owner of the
land to make an application, and
• the owner has refused to comply with the request within 42
238 See, eg,
Australian Conservation Foundation Inc v Commonwealth
(1980) 146 CLR 493;
Onus v Alcoa of Australia Ltd (
[1981] HCA 50
1981) 149 CLR
239 LexisNexis,
Halsbury’s The Laws of Australia
(at 21 March
2018) 415 Tort, ‘Title to Sue’ [415-640]; See also
Stockwell v
State of Victoria
[2001] VSC 497
[241]. Mere licensees or occupiers
do not have title to sue in private nuisance, unless there are particular
circumstances
which alter that status.
Fences Act 1968
This includes the owner’s
corporation if the land is common property.
This allows the owner to give the tenant a fencing notice and
for the tenant to contribute 50 per cent of the cost the owner is
pay (if the tenant has an unexpired lease of 5 or more years but less than 10
years) and 100 per cent of the cost the
owner is liable to pay (if the tenant
has an unexpired lease of 10 or more years). This does not apply to retail
leases or residential
[2008] NSWLEC 152
(2008) 72 NSWLR 98.
[2008] NSWLEC 152
(2008) 72 NSWLR 98
[158]-[160]; see
Trees (Disputes Between
Neighbours) Act 2006
. 244 See, eg,
Treeves v Hedge
[2010] NSWLEC 1344.
245 See, eg,
Po & Dossan v Warham
[2008] NSWLEC 1238.
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
248 Consultation 15 (Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal).
Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants Act 2017
Community responses—who can commence an
Community responses overwhelmingly supported any person affected by the tree
being able to commence legal proceedings under a new
Act.250 Some submissions
suggested that standing should not depend on demonstrating a certain interest in
land.251 As discussed,
only owners of land can take legal action to resolve
fencing disputes.
The Commission’s conclusions—who can
commence an action
Owners of land affected by a tree on neighbouring land should be able to
commence legal proceedings under a new Act to resolve their
It would also be appropriate to enable occupiers of land to take legal action
where the occupier has asked the owner to commence legal
proceedings but the
refused to act. This accords with most community responses and reflects the
approach in Queensland and Tasmania.
This approach puts landowners on notice of the dispute. Ultimately, it is in
the interests of the landowner to be involved in proceedings
because they may
end up responsible for any costs.252 In normal leasing arrangements landlords
are responsible for major tree pruning,
cutting back overhanging branches (such
as those near powerlines) and
maintaining fire breaks.253 Tenants are generally responsible for garden
maintenance such as mowing lawns, weeding and minor pruning.254
Therefore, it is
likely to be landowners who assume responsibility for carrying out orders under
the new Act.
By allowing occupiers to take action in the absence of the owner, there is a
greater chance that unsafe trees and branches may be
addressed before they cause
damage or harm.
Who can be found liable?
The consultation paper asked the related question of who should be found
liable for harm or damage caused by trees under a new Act.
Under a common law action in nuisance, anyone who created the nuisance can be
found liable. There is no need for the defendant to
have any interest in the
land.255 Generally speaking, however, ‘most private nuisances are created
by private landowners’.256
250 Submissions 5 (Name withheld), 7 (Ben Kenyon), 10 (Professor Phillip
Hamilton), 23 (Name withheld), 27 (Name withheld).
251 Submissions 20 (Name withheld), 23 (Name withheld).
252 See, eg, Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
Submission to
the Department of Justice and Community Safety, Residential Tenancies Act Review
4 <https://engage.vic.gov.au/fairersaferhousing>. The Tribunal
interprets the tenant’s duty to keep the rented premises
‘reasonably clean condition’ to include any obligation by the tenant
to mow the lawn and maintain garden beds so
that they are neat. The Tribunal
interprets the landlord’s duty to maintain the premises in good repair to
include cleaning
gutters and pruning larger trees.
255 Kit Barker, Peter Cane, Mark Lunney and Francis Trindade,
Torts in Australia
(Oxford University Press, 5th ed, 2012) [5.1.5]; See also
LexisNexis, Halsbury’s The Laws of Australia
(at 21 March 2018) 415
Tort, ‘Strict Liability of Creator’ [415-715].
256 Kit Barker, Peter Cane, Mark Lunney and Francis Trindade,
Torts in Australia
(Oxford University Press, 5th ed, 2012) [5.1.5].
end, a tree owner will be found liable for an action in nuisance under common
law where they:
• created the nuisance
• permitted the nuisance to arise by failing to exercise reasonable
• continued or adopted the nuisance, or
• negligently failed to remedy or abate the nuisance.257
Under a common law action in negligence, liability may be imposed on owners
or occupiers of neighbouring properties because the common
law ‘imposes a
duty of care on each neighbour in relation to the other neighbour.’258
Liability will attach to neighbouring
owners or occupiers of land in negligence
where they failed to exercise reasonable care in relation to their tree,
resulting in harm
or loss to a neighbour.259
For legal action arising out of fencing disputes, both owners are liable to
contribute in equal proportions.260 In some circumstances,
long-term tenants
(excluding residential tenants) may have to contribute to the costs. This
applies to tenants with at least five
years remaining on their lease.261 This
is to ensure ‘that the fence to be constructed will meet the needs of
present usage’
and this extends to being sufficient for the purposes
of both occupiers.262 It also covers situations in which the tenant wishes
have a fence installed that costs more than one which the landlord is
required to contribute under the Fences Act.263 Residential
tenants are
excluded because the ‘erection or replacement of a fence is an
improvement to the land and should not be distinguished
from other improvements
for which a landlord is generally responsible’.264
Other jurisdictions—who can be found liable?
Under the NSW Act, owners or occupiers of land on which the subject tree is
located can be found liable.265
In Queensland, liability attaches to a ‘tree-keeper’ (tree
owner). This accords with the responsibilities placed on a
tree-keeper to remove
branches that overhang a neighbour’s land and to ensure trees on their
land do not cause injury or
damage or interfere with a person’s use and
enjoyment of land.266 A tree-keeper is generally defined as the registered owner
of land or a lessee or licensee of Crown land under the
Land Act 1994
The Queensland Act is careful not to extend liability to residential
tenants.268 It provides for joint liability where there are multiple
257 LexisNexis,
Halsbury’s The Laws of Australia
(at 21 March
2018) 415 Tort, ‘Liability’ [415-710]; See also
[2008] NSWLEC 152
(2008) 72 NSWLR 98
258 See, eg,
Robson v Leischke
[2008] NSWLEC 152
(2008) 72 NSWLR 98
[96] citing
v Wyong Shire Council
[2005] HCA 62
(2005) 223 CLR 422
, 432 [27], 443 [63].
259 See, eg, Prue Vines, ‘Negligence: Introduction’ in Carolyn
Sappideen and Prue Vines (eds),
Fleming’s The Law of Torts
Co., 10th ed, 2011) 119, 122; See also,
Wrongs Act 1958
‘Negligence means failure to exercise reasonable care’.
Fences Act 1968
262 Law Reform Committee, Parliament of Victoria,
Review of the
(Report, 1998) 45.
263 Ibid 46.
264 Ibid 48; see also
Fences Act 1968
s 10(4)(a).
A tenant under
a retail premises lease to which the
Retail Leases Act 2003
also excluded.
Trees (Disputes Between Neighbours) Act 2006
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
This also includes the grantee for an occupation permit or a
stock grazing permit under the
Forestry Act 1959
(Qld); the grantee for a
stock grazing permit under the
Nature Conservation Act 1992
body corporate for the community title scheme under the
Body Corporate and
Community Management Act 1997
(Qld); the body corporate for the plan under
Building Units and Group Titles Act 1980
(Qld) ; and the trustee of
the reserve, other than a reserve for community purposes, under the
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
In Tasmania liability attaches to owners of land on which the tree is
situated. An owner of land is generally defined to include
owners of freehold
estates, bodies corporate, life tenants and licensees and lessees of Crown
land.270 The Tasmanian Act also provides
for joint liability where there are
multiple owners of land.271 This mirrors the Queensland approach.
The Tasmanian Act places responsibilities on landowners to remove branches
that overhang a neighbour’s land and to ensure trees
on their land do not
cause injury or damage or interfere with a person’s use and enjoyment of
land.272 The Second Reading Speech
to the Tasmanian Act makes it clear that
residential tenants will not have responsibility or liability for plants under
the Act.273
All interstate schemes take into account a broad range of considerations
before determining remedies. In this way, any acts or
omissions by the affected
neighbour or the owner of the land on which the tree is situated may affect
the outcome of the dispute.
The NSW Act requires the NSWLEC to consider:
anything, other than the tree, that has contributed, or is contributing, to
any such injury or damage or likelihood of injury or damage,
any act or omission by the applicant and the impact of any other trees
(including trees owned by the applicant); and
any steps taken by the applicant or the owner of the land on which the tree
is situated to prevent or rectify any such damage.274
In several cases the NSWLEC has ordered the affected neighbour rather than
the owner to pay the cost of removing a dying tree likely
to cause future
damage.275 In these cases the Court determined that the tree had been poisoned
by the affected neighbour and that
this action led to the tree being classified
as dangerous.276 See Chapter 8 for a discussion of decision-making principles in
Community responses—who can be found liable?
Many responses strongly supported liability attaching to owners of the land
on which the tree is situated.277 One submission stated,
‘Putting the onus
on tree owners supports the concept of prevention, which is always the very best
option, especially when
we are talking about potential threats to people’s
One submission noted that mere ownership of the land on which the tree is
located should not by itself provide enough justification
for liability to be
imposed.279 Rather, it was suggested that an element of negligence should also
be required.280
Arborist Dr Karen Smith stated that ‘a tenant should not bear
responsibility for tree damage’.281
Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants Act 2017
273 Tasmania,
Parliamentary Debates
, House of Assembly, 4 April 2017,
3 (Rene Hidding); Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants Bill 2017 (Tas).
274 This is considered in more detail in Ch 8.
275 See, eg,
Horn v Latter
[2007] NSWLEC 744
Joaquim v Adamson
[2009] NSWLEC 1312
Joaquim v Adamson (No 2)
[2009] NSWLEC 1367.
276 See, eg,
Horn v Latter
[2007] NSWLEC 744.
277 Submissions 5 (Name withheld), 6 (Name withheld), 7 (Ben Kenyon), 9 (Dr
Karen Smith), 10 (Professor Phillip Hamilton), 19 (Name
withheld), 22 (Name
withheld), 23 (Name withheld), 28 (HVP Plantations).
278 Submission 22 (Name withheld).
279 Submission 27 (Name withheld).
281 Submission 9 (Dr Karen Smith).
The Commission’s
conclusions—who can be found liable?
Liability should attach to the owner of land on which the tree is situated
(the tree owner). This should apply to an owner’s
corporation if the land
is common property. Joint liability should apply to multiple owners of land.
An owner of land could be
defined in the new Act as it is in the
(Vic) with respect to private interests in land, as:
• the Registered Proprietor of the fee simple in the land under the
Transfer of Land Act
(Vic) (not in an identified folio), or a person
empowered under an Act to execute a transfer of the land, or
• an owner of land in an identified folio under the
Transfer of Land
• a person who has an estate in fee simple in the land (except a
mortgagee), or who is empowered to convey an estate in fee
simple in the land,
• the owner’s corporation if the land is common property.
The Commission notes that liability under the NSW Act may extend to occupiers
of land,282 but in accordance with submissions and consultations,
the Commission
considers that liability should be limited to the owner of the land.
While some long-term tenants may be found liable to contribute to the costs
of fencing works under the Fences Act,283 the Commission
does not consider that
this is appropriate for the new Act. The rationale for interventions and
the outcomes sought for
fencing and tree disputes are different. Action may
still be taken against a tenant in nuisance at common law. See Chapter 3.
Liability should not extend to residential tenants. This is consistent with
the approach under the
. The interests of a landowner in relation to a
tree are different to those of a tenant or occupier of land. Moreover, trees can
significant value to land.284 Further, landlords (owners) are generally
responsible for vegetation maintenance pursuant to lease
arrangements and will
therefore be responsible for the costs associated with orders made under the new
Act.285 It would be unreasonable
for liability to attach to a tenant who may not
have planted the tree and may only be at the premises for a short time. The
statutory schemes in Queensland and Tasmania do not extend liability
to residential tenants.
The Commission is comfortable with the new Act diverging from the approach
to liability at common law in negligence and nuisance.
At common law it
would be necessary to demonstrate that the owner of land created, adopted or
continued a nuisance, or was negligent
for failing to exercise reasonable
care.286 Different considerations will apply under the new Act. The focus of
Act is primarily about preventing future damage and harm. It recognises
that trees are dynamic, living organisms and the risks
they may pose to
individuals on adjoining land will not necessary arise from acts or omissions of
the landowner.
282 The term ‘owner of land’ is defined to also include
“the occupier of the land”:
Trees (Disputes Between
Neighbours) Act 2006
Fences Act 1968
284 See, eg, Gregory Moore, ‘Economic Value of Trees’,
Sustainable Gardening Australia
(Web Page) <https://
www.sgaonline.org.au/economic-
value-of-trees/>; see also Kelsey Munro, ‘Houses on Leafier Streets In
Three Sydney Suburbs Worth $50,000 More: Analysis’
The Sydney Morning
(online, 27 April 2017) <https://
www.smh.com.au/national/nsw/houses-on-leafier-streets-in-three-sydney-suburbs-worth-
50000-more-analysis-20170427-gvtkex.html>; Ram Pandit et al ‘The Effect
of Street Trees on Property Value in Perth, Western
Australia’ (2013) 110
Landscape and Urban Planning
285 See, eg, Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
Submission to
the Department of Justice and Community Safety, Residential Tenancies Act Review
2 <https://engage.vic.gov.au/fairersaferhousing>. The Tribunal
interprets the tenant’s duty to keep the rented premises
‘reasonably clean condition’ to include any obligation by the tenant
to mow the lawn and maintain garden beds so
that they are neat. The Tribunal
interprets the landlord’s duty to maintain the premises in good repair to
include cleaning
gutters and pruning larger trees.
286 Paula Giliker, ‘Nuisance’ in Carolyn Sappideen and Prue Vines
Fleming’s The Law of Torts
(Lawbook Co., 10th ed, 2011)
[21.160]; Kit Barker, Peter Cane, Mark Lunney and Francis Trindade,
of Torts in Australia
(Oxford University Press, 5th ed, 2012) [5.1.5];
Wrongs Act 1958
However, in determining the extent of liability,
VCAT will be guided by the decision- making principles recommended in Chapter 8,
which include consideration of acts or omissions by the affected neighbour or
anything, other than the tree, that has
contributed, or is contributing, to any harm or damage or likelihood of harm
What problems are within the scope of the new
The consultation paper sought responses about the types of tree problem that
should be addressed by the new Act. In particular, two
main issues that are a
cause of common problems were considered:
• damage or interference
• harm (or injury).
Damage claims relate to property on neighbouring land (such as a house, a
garden shed or a car) or also the land itself (such as a
garden). Sometimes
damage caused by the tree may be preceded by some level of ongoing interference,
which in turn causes annoyance
or discomfort to the affected neighbour but does
not amount to property damage.
Harm in this report refers to harm to people—causing injury or
otherwise affecting their health or safety. Under the NSW, Queensland
Tasmanian Acts, harm is called ‘injury’.287 Future harm is harm that
is expected to occur.
The Commission has not considered a compensation scheme for harm suffered
(also referred to as ‘personal injury’). The
remedies available
under the new Act focus on practical remedies related to tree management.
Other jurisdictions—problems within
New South Wales
The NSWLEC may make such orders as it thinks fit to remedy, restrain or
prevent damage to property, or to prevent injury to any person,
as a consequence
of the tree to which the Act applies that is situated on adjoining land.288
In New South Wales any sort of damage, regardless of degree, can be claimed.
However, minor or insignificant damage is not covered
by the Act.289 Actual
damage or physical damage to the land or other structures on the land is
actionable as well as to moveable
objects located on property.290 The NSWLEC has
determined that garden plants, fences, animals outdoor furniture and motor
are ‘property on the land’.291 ‘Property
on the land’ need not be above ground, as shown by cases concerning
sewer pipes.292 However, ‘damage to the surface of
the land such as
raising a mound of earth or drying
the soil without consequential damage to other property’ is not
covered.293 Future damage is considered by the NSWLEC if it
is satisfied that
it is likely to occur within the next 12 months.294
Annoyance or discomfort caused by a neighbouring tree is not actionable.295
The dropping of leaves or fruit by urban trees would not
ordinarily provide the
basis for court intervention.296 This reasoning is the subject of a ‘tree
dispute principle’ that
is used by the Court to guide its decision making.
These are discussed in more detail in Chapter
8. Although tree dispute principles are not legally binding, the NSWLEC
informed the Commission that the Court ‘has not felt
the need to depart
from existing tree dispute principles’.297
Injury is not defined in the NSW Act but case law suggests that injury
encompasses allergic reactions or other medical conditions.298
Applicants are
required to provide properly qualified medical or scientific evidence of a
link between the injury and the trees
subject to the application.299 For
example, ‘medical or arboricultural evidence and any supporting medical or
peer-reviewed
literature’ that supports their claim that the tree is
the cause of the injury.300
Claims can be brought to prevent future harm that is likely to occur within
12 months.301 The NSWLEC has made it clear that it will
not entertain claims for
compensation for personal injury.302
Queensland and Tasmania
In Queensland, QCAT has jurisdiction to make orders in relation to a tree to
prevent serious injury to any person or to remedy, restrain
or prevent:
• serious damage to the neighbour’s land or any property on the
neighbour’s land, or
• substantial, ongoing and unreasonable interference with the use and
enjoyment of the neighbour’s land.303
An example of ‘substantial, ongoing and unreasonable
interference’ may include a build- up of leaves blocking the
spoiling the tank water for drinking purposes.304 Another might be where
leaf litter is so continuous and extensive
it causes an internal roof leak.305
However, in most cases leaf litter is unlikely to satisfy the interference
threshold. The
Explanatory Notes to the Queensland Act state that leaf litter is
generally considered ‘to be expected in urban or suburban
trees’ and it is reasonable to expect that residents ‘will perform
some level of regular maintenance, including
cleaning gutters and leaf
litter’.306
Robson v Leischke
[2008] NSWLEC 152
(2008) 72 NSWLR 98
Ardagh v Ellston
[2012] NSWLEC 1235
Yang v Scerri
[2007] NSWLEC 592.
Robson v Leischke
[2008] NSWLEC 152
(2008) 72 NSWLR 98.
Barker v Kyriakides
[2007] NSWLEC 292
297 Consultation 11 (Land and Environment Court of New South Wales).
eg, Tuft v Piddington
[2008] NSWLEC 1249.
299 Land and Environment Court of New South Wales,
Practice Note: Class 2
Tree Applications
, 1 December 2018, [15].
300 Ibid, [15] sch B; Land and Environment Court of New South Wales,
Annotated Trees Act January 2013
(1 September 2016) 10. Without
this evidence, injury as a consequence of the tree concerned will not be
successfully made out.
Hurditch v Staines
[2008] NSWLEC 1351
Oakey v Owners Corporation Strata Plan 5723
[2009] NSWLEC 1108
v O’Donnell
[2009] NSWLEC 1349.
Yang v Scerri
[2007] NSWLEC 592.
Konn v Wisbey
[2007] NSWLEC 799.
In this case the applicant sought
compensation for ‘damages for personal stress’ and the NSWLEC
held that ‘the
orders for damage to people but merely encompasses orders for damage
property. The Court therefore is not able to consider this element of the
applicant’s claim’ at [3].
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act
304 Consultation 15 (Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal);
Explanatory Notes,
Neighbourhood Disputes Resolution Bill 2010
(Qld) cl 61.
305 Consultation 15 (Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal); see also
Cacopardo v Woolcock
[2017] QCAT 214
[2013] QCATA 304
Hewitt v Brisbane CC
[2018] QCAT 282
306 Queensland Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Neighbourhood Disputes
(Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
(Report No 72, 2015) 156; see also
Thomsen v White
[2012] QCAT 381.
The Queensland Law Reform Commission considered
whether QCAT’s jurisdiction should be broadened ‘to include a power
make an order to cut or remove any overhanging branch ...’.307 However
the QLRC concluded that it was ‘concerned that
such a reform might
significantly increase QCAT’s workload by the addition of less serious
The QLRC further notes that ‘In many cases, overhanging branch issues
are addressed by neighbours by informal agreement or by
a neighbour exercising
the right of abatement’.309
Future damage is actionable if QCAT is satisfied the damage is likely to
occur within 12 months. Under the Queensland Act injury to
persons must be
serious, such as a severe allergic reaction.310 Serious injury must be likely
within 12 months.
The Tasmanian Act generally mirrors the Queensland approach by providing
RMPAT with jurisdiction to make orders in relation to land
affected by a plant.
This means that it can make orders if a plant has caused, is causing, or is
likely within the next 12 months
• serious injury to a person on the affected land311 or
• serious damage to the affected land or any property on the affected
• substantial, ongoing and unreasonable interference with the use and
enjoyment by a person of the affected land.312
Unlike the Queensland Act, the Tasmanian Act also includes a specific power
for RMPAT to make an order where branches of a plant overhang
affected land.313
This is unique
to the Tasmanian scheme and no orders under this provision have been made by
the Tribunal.
Community responses—problems within
Responses were sought from the community about the degree of damage (the
seriousness of damage) and the kind of damage (that is, to
land or property)
that should be covered by a new Act; and whether future damage should be
actionable.
Some submissions suggested placing a monetary value on the amount of damage
that should give rise to an action.314 One suggested that
damage amounting to
over $4000 should be sufficient to bring an action.315 Another thought damage
greater than $500 should be actionable.316
Most responses indicated that damage should be both observable and proven.317
For example, one respondent suggested ‘visible
damage that can be proven
and seen, and has altered from the original condition’.318 Arborist Robert
Mineo stated that ‘any
damage under a new scheme would have to be serious
or significant’.319
Most submissions considered that both damage to the land itself, and to
property on the land, for example a motor vehicle, should
be actionable.320
307 Queensland Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Neighbourhood Disputes
(Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
(Report No 72, 2015)
[3.455]–[3.456].
309 Ibid [3.354].
Leonardi v Watson
[2015] QCATA 192.
311 The orders RMPAT may make in relation to serious injury are to
‘prevent, or reduce the likelihood of, serious injury being
caused to a
person by a plant’:
Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants Act 2017
s 33(2)(b).
313 See Ibid
314 See, eg, Submission 4 (Name withheld).
315 Confidential submission.
316 Submission 4 (Name withheld).
317 Submissions 5 (Name withheld), 20 (Name Withheld), 25 (City of
Boroondara); Consultation 14 (Robert Mineo).
318 Submission 5 (Name withheld).
319 Consultation 14 (Robert Mineo).
320 Submissions 5 (Name withheld), 7 (Ben Kenyon), 9 (Dr Karen Smith), 19
(Name withheld), 20 (Name withheld), 23 (Name withheld).
Community feedback generally supported the inclusion of future damage within
the scope of a new Act. One submission noted that ‘future
damage is an
important concern and must be included’.321 Others suggested timeframes
and risk assessment methodologies as safeguards.322
Arborist Dr Karen Smith
stated that future damage
would be appropriate if assessed within a timeframe of 12 months and
‘when assessed according to the Australian Standard for
Management’.323 Dr Smith noted that damage that may be caused at some
unknown time would not be sufficient.324
Dr Gregory Moore OAM explained that ‘it can be difficult to predict a
tree’s future’.325 He identified two risk
assessment tools that are
used to assess the future risk of trees:
• Tree Risk Assessment Qualification
• Quantified Tree Risk Assessment.326
The City of Boroondara uses an industry-recognised risk assessment
methodology and AQF Level 5 arborists who have practical experience
in assessing
risks posed by trees.327 Boroondara advised that:
Any claims relating to future damage or harm need to be based on evidence,
not the perceptions of neighbours, and must be assessed
by a qualified arborist
using an industry recognised risk assessment methodology ... risk assessments
that extend
beyond 12 months can provide inaccurate results that do not accurately
represent tree risk and appropriate management options.328
Heritage Victoria suggested that a 12-month time period may be too long for
an arborists’ assessment.329 It would be difficult
for an arborist to
assess risk that far into the future.
The Commission accepts that it is difficult to assess the likelihood of
trees failing in the future. However, the use of expert
evidence can assist.
Expert evidence will help to prevent unnecessary interference with trees
assessed as healthy. Expert evidence
is discussed in Chapter 8.
Harm to individuals
Some community responses suggested that the primary function of the new Act
should be to prevent harm caused by trees. Baw Baw Shire
Council emphasised that
the key issue to be addressed by reform is ‘the minimisation of risk to
the community’.330 One
submission stated, ‘It is my belief that
there should be a determined effort to prevent injury and/or death of people and
damage of property.’331 Another emphatically expressed the view that
‘people’s safety should always be the priority’.332
Plantations noted that human health and safety is key.333
There was general agreement that medical evidence should be required where an
affected neighbour is seeking a remedy for harm such
as the removal of a
321 Submission 38 (L. Barry Wollmer).
322 Submissions 5 (Name withheld), 6 (Name withheld), 9 (Dr Karen Smith), 20
(Name withheld), 21 (Pointon Partners Lawyers); Consultations
Taranto), 2 (Dr Gregory Moore OAM), 8 (City of Boroondara), 14 (Robert
323 Submission 9 (Dr Karen Smith).
325 Consultation 2 (Dr Gregory Moore OAM).
326 Ibid; the City of Boroondara informed the Commission that council uses
TRAQ when assessing tree risk: Consultation 8 (City of
Boroondara). Risk
assessment tools are considered in Ch 8.
327 Consultation 8 (City of Boroondara).
329 Consultation 16 (Heritage Victoria).
330 Consultation 10 (Baw Baw Shire Council).
331 Submission 38 (L. Barry Wollmer).
332 Submission 24 (Name withheld).
333 Consultation 3 (HVP Plantations)
334 Submissions 7 (Ben Kenyon), 9 (Dr Karen Smith); Consultation 8 (City of
Boroondara), 11 (Land and Environment Court of New South
Wales), 12 (City of
Port Phillip).
Arborist Dr Karen Smith noted ‘whilst special medical conditions do
exist, they are rare. So for medical conditions a medical
certificate should
be provided stating the tree is the cause of the medical condition. Many trees
thought to be allergenic are actually
not, and claims need to be evidence
Dr Gregory Moore OAM supported this position, stating that some councils now
rely on expert allergy testing rather than a report from
practitioner.336 The City of Port Phillip noted that ‘if a pollen allergy
is cited as the reason for requesting removal
of the tree or palm, then this
will generally need to be supported by specialist medical
evidence’.337
Members of the community felt that harm should include harm to anyone at all,
including occupiers and others on the land.338 One submission
‘it will usually be occupiers that are affected’.339
The NSWLEC informed the Commission that ‘the Court is able to consider
the risk of injury “to any person”. This
includes not only residents
of the affected land, but anyone who is present on the land or visits the
land.’340 In relation
to the issue of future harm, on balance, the
community was in favour of it being actionable.341 The City of Port Phillip
stated that claims of future harm generally require evidence that the tree is
dying or other evidence of decay.342
Interference (not causing actual damage)
In the consultation paper the community was asked ‘Should interference
(not causing damage) be actionable under a new scheme?
If so, what degree of
interference?’
Interference has been described by the NSWLEC as annoyance or discomfort
without causing actual damage.343 This may include the dropping
of leaf litter
on neighbouring land.344
Community feedback was evenly divided between those who supported the
inclusion of interference,345 and those who did not.346 Some
expressed concern
concerned about ‘excessive leaf
or bark drop’.348 A number of
submissions reflected some misunderstanding about the question asked and the
definition of interference.
One person supported an action in interference in cases where ongoing
maintenance costs may be incurred.349 Another cautioned against
the inclusion of
less serious matters:
Interference (not causing damage) creates a level of complexity that may be
difficult to assess ... Moreover, making interference
actionable may dilute the
gravitas of the
proposed statutory scheme and burden the Court with undue applications. A
statutory scheme should be an effective, last resort for
tree disputes or for
those neighbours who find themselves within intractable conflict seeking
adjudication.350
335 Submission 9 (Dr Karen Smith).
336 Consultation 2 (Gregory Moore OAM).
337 Consultation 12 (City of Port Phillip).
338 Submissions 4 (Name withheld), 5 (Name withheld), 7 (Ben Kenyon), 9 (Dr
Karen Smith);
339 Submission 6 (Name withheld).
340 Consultation 11 (Land and Environment Court of New South Wales).
341 Submissions 4 (Name withheld), 9 (Dr Karen Smith), 21 (Pointon Partners
Lawyers), 29 (David Galwey), 27 (Name withheld); Consultations
Taranto), 2 (Gregory Moore OAM), 8 (City of Boroondara), 12 (City of Port
342 Consultation 12 (City of Port Phillip).
Robson v Leischke
[2008] NSWLEC 152
(2008) 72 NSWLR 98
[168]-[173].
Barker v Kyriakides
[2007] NSWLEC 292
[2010] NSWLEC 1302.
345 Submissions 4 (Name withheld), 6 (Name withheld), 9 (Dr Karen Smith), 11
(Name withheld), 23 (Name withheld) and Confidential
submission.
346 Submissions 2 (Name withheld), 20 (Name withheld), 25 (City of
Borondarra), 27 (Name withheld) and two Confidential submissions.
347 Submissions 5 (Name withheld), 6 (Name withheld).
348 Submission 9 (Dr Karen Smith).
349 Submission 11 (Name withheld).
350 Submission 20 (Name withheld).
Other submissions noted:
• maintenance issues caused by overhanging branches should ‘never
be grounds on which to bring action’;351
• ‘you should not be able to take someone to court for something
frivolous like leaf litter’;352 and
• ‘it would be a waste of resources for proceedings to be held
that may cause the tree owner to act in a manner the complainant
has available
to them at the time’ (that is, the reasonable action of
self-abatement).353
A number of local councils spoke with the Commission about how they respond
to enquiries from residents about interference on private
land. These councils
were all in agreement that interference should not be actionable under a new
Act.354 Councils respond to enquiries
by encouraging landowners to maintain the
vegetation on their land so it does not unreasonably interfere with adjoining
lots of land.355
Nillumbik Shire Council explained that leaf litter (including in a swimming
pool) and other normal maintenance issues associated with
living in a leafy
neighbourhood have not been sufficient to justify the removal of a tree
protected under the Nillumbik Planning
Scheme and ‘should not be
actionable under a new scheme’.356
The City of Greater Bendigo adopts the following policy for tree management
in the region:
As trees are living organisms there will be some degree of leaf and other
plant litter as these are shed as part of their natural
life cycle. It is not
unreasonable to expect
residents to undertake home maintenance activities as part of having trees in
the urban environment.357
The Commission’s conclusions—problems
within scope—damage and harm
In Chapter 4 it was identified that the primary consideration of the new Act
should be the prevention of damage and harm caused by
neighbouring trees. People
often have different perceptions about the benefits or disadvantages of trees.
Some people are annoyed
a minor amount of leaf litter whereas others may choose to move to leafy
suburbs to maximise the advantages that they see flowing
from a green
neighbourhood. The new Act needs to strike a balance between competing rights
and interests fairly and transparently.
An underlying policy focus is to prevent
damage and harm caused by trees and to balance this with their benefits.
Future damage should be included as a cause of action but limited to damage
that is likely within 12 months. This is consistent with
interstate statutory
schemes and recommended by practising arborists.358
Because the likelihood of a tree causing future damage is difficult to
assess, it is recommended that risk assessments should be undertaken
suitably qualified arborist (AQF Level 5 or above) with training in
industry-recognised risk assessment methods and at least
two years of practical
experience. See Chapter 8.
Harm to individuals
The new Act should allow claims to be made to address existing harm and harm
that is likely to occur within the next 12 months. This
is consistent with
community responses that called for the new Act to provide a mechanism to
respond to the risk of harm posed by
some trees, and is consistent with the
approach in interstate Acts.
Where appropriate, claims of harm should be evidenced by both medical experts
and arborists. For example, claims of allergies should
be supported by medical
testing and not simply a letter from a general practitioner.359 For claims
relating to psychological distress,
the NSWLEC approach is appropriate. The
NSWLEC does not make orders in relation to the tree where there is no
arboricultural basis
or evidence to support fears about a tree falling or
dropping a branch.360
The potential for future harm should extend to owners and occupiers of the
affected land, and could include visitors. This mirrors
the interstate
approach.361 The 12-month limit on future harm is in keeping with submissions
from arborists who stated that risk
assessments that extend beyond 12 months do
not accurately represent the risk posed by the tree and appropriate management
options.362
The new Act is concerned with the prevention of harm. It is not intended to
provide a compensation scheme for personal injury. While
the orders recommended
in Chapter 9 extend to compensating applicants for damage caused to their
property or land, a similar order
is not recommended for harm caused to people.
This is consistent with interstate schemes. These schemes are also preventative
nature. For example, in
Robson v Leischke
363 Chief Justice Preston
distinguished the causes of action under the NSW Act from breaches of a duty
imposed on a person under tort
law, explaining that:
The necessary nexus is between the ‘tree’ and ... likely injury
to any person; it is not between some act, or omission
to act where there was a
duty to act, of the owner or occupier of the land on which the tree is situated
... and likely injury to
any person.364
The focus is on action that can be taken in relation to the tree to address
harm that is occurring and to prevent harm from occurring
in the future. Harm
that has already been caused may be an evidentiary factor that VCAT will
consider in determining the likelihood
of future harm and the appropriate
A person who commences an action under the new Act to prevent damage or harm
is not precluded from bringing an action in negligence
(Vic).365 An applicant may still choose to pursue a matter in the
Magistrates’ Court for nuisance or
negligence and seek compensation for personal injury that way if they wish.
See Chapter 4.366
358 Submission 9 (Dr Karen Smith); Consultation 8 (City of Boroondara).
359 See, eg,
Turner v O’Donnell
[2009] NSWLEC 1349
360 Consultation 11 (Land and Environment Court of New South Wales).
Trees (Disputes Between Neighbours) Act 2006
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
(‘a person on the land’);
Neighbourhood
Disputes About Plants Act 2017
s 7(1)(b)(i).
362 Submission 9 (Dr Karen Smith); Consultation 8 (City of Boroondara).
[2008] NSWLEC 152
(2008) 72 NSWLR 98
[181]-[184].
Robson v Leischke
[2008] NSWLEC 152
(2008) 72 NSWLR 98
‘Personal Injury Damages’.
366 Where VCAT cannot determine a matter due to the issue of diversity
the new Act
in the Supreme Court. VCAT has the power to refer a matter to the Supreme Court.
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
Diversity jurisdiction is discussed in Ch 7.
Interference (not causing actual damage)
On balance the Commission found the submissions against the inclusion of
interference persuasive. A tree that interferes with a neighbours
enjoyment of their land
in the form of annoyance or discomfort should not fall within the scope of
the Act. This approach is consistent with the approach
in New South Wales. It
also reflects the underlying policy position that whilst leaf litter can
create mess on neighbouring land
and property, it is an ordinary part of
community life in urban environments. If the interference is such that it
causes damage
to the land or property of the affected neighbour, the Act will
provide a remedy.
Whilst the Queensland and Tasmanian Acts extend liability for interference it
must be ‘substantial, ongoing and unreasonable’.
This is similar to
the approach to nuisance claims at common law. To meet this threshold
interference is likely to involve some sort
of property damage or harm. As noted
earlier it was not envisaged that the Queensland Act provide a remedy for leaf
litter that is
an ordinary part of suburban life and that residents can be
expected to perform some level of regular associated maintenance.
The Commission is concerned that the inclusion of interference, may result in
trivial or vexatious claims and may discourage neighbours
from resolving
disputes on a more informal basis. The Nillumbik Shire Council suggested that a
new scheme should not provide scope
for vindictive neighbours to bring claims
without merit against neighbours on adjoining land.367 Disputes about
interference that
do not cause damage are more appropriate for alternative forms
of dispute resolution. See Chapter 6.
Excluding interference claims from the Act will mean that an affected
neighbour will not be able to obtain a remedy for a tree branch
that overhangs
the boundary but does not cause damage or pose a risk of harm. In a similar way
to leaf litter, an overhanging branch
is unlikely to meet the common law
requirement for a ‘substantial and unreasonable’ interference unless
some sort of
special damage can also be established.368 The NSWLEC case of
Robson v Leischke
369 set out examples of cases where overhanging branches
have been held to constitute an actionable private nuisance:
• Branches of a yew tree poisoned stock on adjoining land;370
• Branches of a tree interfered with the growth of fruit trees on the
neighbour’s land;371
367 Consultation 9 (Nillumbik Shire Council).
Robson v Leischke
[2008] NSWLEC 152
(2008) 72 NSWLR 98
[56] citing
(1985) 3 BPR 9592, 9594. 369
[2008] NSWLEC 152
(2008) 72 NSWLR 98
Crowhurst v Amersham Burial Board
[1878] UKLawRpExch 39
(1878) 4 ExD 5.
[1904] UKLawRpKQB 134
[1904] 2 KB 448
• Branches of trees projected to such an
extent over the neighbour’s land that they brushed against their house and
leaves blocked the downpipe causing two rooms to be flooded;372
• Branches of a row of pine trees overhung the neighbour’s
property and deposited pine needles and rubbish which poisoned
the soil.373
Where an affected neighbour is unable to establish that the overhanging
branch is causing damage or posing a risk of harm under the
new Act, a remedy
may still be available at common law through nuisance.
Because overhanging branches are a common problem in Victoria, the Commission
recommends that Government consider the usefulness of
a statutory branch removal
process when the Act is reviewed after 5 years of operation. This recommendation
is discussed in Chapters
Who should be notified of an action?
This part examines who should receive notice of an application under the new
Act. Trees on private land may be protected by local
laws, planning scheme
mechanisms or other laws.374 This means that councils and other authorities may
be affected by VCAT orders
under the new Act and may need to be notified.
Further, the owner of affected land would need to be notified of any action
by an occupier of that land in relation to a problem tree.
Other jurisdictions—who should be
The NSW Act requires an applicant to provide an application and any orders
sought at least 21 days before the date of the first hearing
• the tree owner
• any relevant authority that would be entitled to appear in
proceedings in relation to the tree (council or heritage officers)
• any other person that the applicant has reason to believe will be
affected by the order (this may include a person other than
the tree owner who
might be liable to be ordered to pay compensation or undertake remedial
The NSWLEC may waive the notice requirements if it thinks it appropriate to
do so.376 This has occurred in a number of cases because
of the risk of injury
if a tree were to fall.377
Queensland mirrors the approach taken in New South Wales by requiring the
applicant to give copies of the application to the tree-keeper,
the relevant
government authority and any other person.378 This requirement may be waived or
varied if QCAT considers it appropriate
to do so, for example if the tree poses
an imminent threat of serious injury to a person or of damage to the
neighbour’s land
or property.379
Similar notice provisions apply under the Tasmanian Act.380 The Practice
Direction for applications under the Tasmanian Act states
that RMPAT will
‘also advertise the existence of the application in the Public Notices
section of the regional newspaper
circulating in the area in
question’.381 In this way, individuals are invited to make an application
Rose v Equity Boot Co Ltd
(1913) 32 NZLR 677.
Mandeno v Brown
[1952] NZGazLawRp 46
[1952] NZLR 447
Woodnorth v Holdgate
[1955] NZLR 552
374 See, eg, Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
Victoria Planning Provisions
(11 April 2019) cl 52.17. The interaction of
these existing laws with the new Act is discussed in Ch 10.
Trees (Disputes Between Neighbours) Act 2006
Land and Environment Court of New South Wales,
Annotated Trees Act January
(1 September 2016) 12.
Trees (Disputes Between Neighbours) Act 2006
377 See, eg, Land and Environment Court of New South Wales,
Trees Act January 2013
(1 September 2016) 13.
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants Act 2017
381 Resource Management and Planning and Appeal Tribunal,
Direction No 18 – Applications under the
Neighbourhood Disputes About
Plants Act 2017
(19 November 2018) 18.3.1.
and attend the Preliminary Conference if they
believe their interests may be affected by an order related to a plant.382
Community responses—who should be
Pointon Partners commented that all persons affected by the application
should be notified, including the local council.383 This would
enable council to
provide the decision- making body with any relevant information concerning the
Baw Baw Shire Council explained that it ‘needed to be involved in
decision-making where it currently plays a
Nillumbik Shire
Council informed the Commission that it would be open to having some level of
involvement during the hearing process.385
In contrast the City of Boroondara noted that ‘any requirement for
Council to appear in a tree dispute matter may be problematic,
particularly if
it is perceived by community members that Council is “taking a side”
where both parties are ratepayers’.386
The Commission’s conclusions—who should
be notified?
An approach similar to the interstate schemes should be taken by requiring
an applicant to provide notice of an application and
of the remedies sought to
people who may be affected by the tree dispute hearing. Notified parties could
then decide on their level
of involvement in the matter.
Councils may choose to participate in hearings in a limited way, for example
in matters concerning significant trees protected under
local laws, but not in
hearings that concern other trees on private land within their municipality.
This requirement should be waived at the discretion of the decision-making
body in cases where the tree poses an imminent risk of
damage or harm.
Parties requiring notice would be:
• the tree owner/s
• the owner of the affected land if the action is commenced by an
occupier of that land
• any relevant authority who would otherwise be required to provide
any authorisation in relation to the carrying out of works
on the tree
• any other person that the applicant thinks may be affected by the
order, as occurs in the NSWLEC.
VCAT could also utilise its existing powers to direct that any other person
be given notice of the hearing. 387
Applications under new laws should not be required to be publicly advertised
as occurs in Tasmania. This requirement is unique to
the Tasmanian scheme and
could add unnecessary complexity to the new Act. Under Victorian planning
legislation,388 public notification
of permit applications is generally not
required for proposed tree works such
as pruning or tree removal of a single tree.389 The Commission considers that
these are the types of order that are most likely to
be made under a new
383 Submission 21 (Pointon Partners Lawyers).
384 Consultation 10 (Baw Baw Shire Council).
385 Consultation 9 (Nillumbik Shire Council).
386 Consultation 8 (City of Boroondara).
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
Planning and Environment Act 1987
389 The removal, destruction or lopping of one tree generally triggers a
fast-track permit assessment process, known as VicSmart.
VicSmart applications
are exempt from the notice requirements under
Planning and
Environment Act 1987
(Vic). This means that they are not required to be
publicly advertised. See Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning
VicSmart – A Simpler Planning Permit Process’,
Permits and Applications
(Web Page, 20 March 2019) <
https://www.planning.vic.gov.au/permits-and-
applications/vicsmart
>. This is discussed in Ch 10.
Application requirements
The application form for tree disputes should elicit information from the
parties that is targeted at narrowing the issues in dispute,
determine whether Alternative Dispute Resolution is appropriate and assisting it
to resolve the dispute efficiently.
Other jurisdictions—application
requirements
All of the dedicated interstate tree dispute Acts390 require applicants to
provide very detailed information about their dispute in
the application form,
• the applicant’s name, address and contact details
• information about the property on which the tree is located
(including the relevant local council, the land use zone of the
property, and
the name of the property owner/s)
• the orders (or remedies) sought by the applicant
• whether the applicant has made any attempts to resolve the dispute
with the respondent
• whether any consent or authorisation from a government authority is
required to carry out work on the tree.391
In addition, the NSW and Queensland Acts require applicants to describe:
• whether anything other than the tree has contributed, or is
contributing, to the injury or damage
• whether the applicant has taken any steps to prevent or rectify any
damage or injury
• whether any trees on the applicant’s land may have contributed
to the injury or damage.
390 See generally,
Trees (Disputes Between Neighbours) Act 2006
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants Act 2017
391 See, eg, Land and Environment Court of New South Wales,
Form C: Tree
Dispute Application
(Version 3); Land and Environment Court of New South
Wales, Form H: Tree Dispute Claim Details (Damage to Property or Injury to a
Person) (Version 1)
http://www.lec.justice.nsw. gov.au/Pages/types_of_disputes/class_2/Trees-hedge-disputes-process/treedisputes_how.aspx
Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
Form 51: Application for Tree
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
www.qcat.qld.
gov.au/matter-types/tree-disputes/tree-dispute-application>; Resource
Management and Planning Appeal Tribunal, Application under
Neighbourhood
Disputes About Plants Act 2017
(Web Page) <https://
www.rmpat.tas.gov.au/forms#application
Applicants are also asked to respond broadly to list of decision-making
factors the decision maker will take into account before making
New South Wales
The NSW Act is supported by extensive resources that help applicants to
complete application forms and initiate proceedings in the
step-by-step Plain English guide informs applicants of the requirements and what
happens at each stage of the dispute process.392
See Chapter 12.
The Court has an eight-page application form393 that is supported by a
16-page Tree Dispute Claim Details Form.394 The latter requires
the applicant to
draw a diagram of their property and the adjoining property where the tree is
located showing:
a) the location of the tree that is subject to the application
b) the location of the applicant’s dwelling and the location of each
part of the dwelling that has been, is being or is likely
to be damaged by a
c) the location of each place on the applicant’s property where the
tree is likely to cause injury to a person
d) the boundary between the applicant’s property and the property where
the tree is located
e) the location of anything, other than the tree that is the subject of the
application, that has caused, is causing or is likely
to cause damage to the
applicant’s dwelling
f) the location of anything, other than the tree that is the subject of the
application, that has contributed, or is contributing,
to the likelihood of
The applicant is also required to provide the Court with additional
information including:
• the species of tree
• a detailed description of the damage the applicant has claimed has
occurred, is occurring or is likely or the injury that
• details of statements from other people, such as an arborist or
engineer concerning the damage or likelihood of injury
• the amount of compensation claimed for property damage and the basis
for this amount
• the basis for seeking an order for rectification works to the
applicant’s property
• whether the applicant is seeking any orders pursuant to the
Dividing Fences Act 1991
(NSW) concerning any portion of the fence that has not been damaged by the
The respondent to the application is required to file with the Court any
statements, reports, photographs or other documents that
the respondent plans to
rely on at the hearing. This includes any orders proposed by the respondent as
an alternative to or in addition
to the orders sought by the applicant. If the
respondent wishes to retain the tree, the NSWLEC requests that the reply to
proposed order include ‘any solution to prevent the tree causing
damage to the applicant’s property, including any engineering
construction solution, which would enable the tree to be retained’.395
392 Consultation 11 (Land and Environment Court of New South Wales); see Land
and Environment Court of New South Wales,
Tree Disputes: Understanding the
Law (Fact Sheet)
http://www.lec.justice.nsw.gov.au/Pages/types_of_disputes/class_2/Trees-hedge-disputes-process/ Treedisputes-helpfulmaterials/treedisputes_helpfulmaterial.aspx#Information_material
393 Land and Environment Court of New South Wales,
Form C: Tree Dispute
Application
(Version 3)
http://www.lec.justice.nsw.gov.au/Pages/ types_of_disputes/class_2/Trees-hedge-disputes-process/treedisputes_how.aspx
394 Land and Environment Court of New South Wales,
Form H: Tree Dispute
Claim Details
(Damage to Property or Injury to a Person) (Version
http://www.lec.justice.nsw.gov.au/Pages/types_of_disputes/class_2/Trees-hedge-disputes-process/treedisputes_how.aspx
395 Land and Environment Court of New South Wales,
Practice Note Class 2:
Tree Applications,
1 December 2018, sch A, cl 10.
In Queensland applicants are required to complete a checklist to assess
whether their application falls within QCAT’s jurisdiction
and to ensure
the application has been completed and lodged correctly.396 The checklist asks
whether the tree/s is located in a park
owned by the local government or council
or on a community reserve. If the answer is yes, the applicant is informed that
is not within QCAT’s jurisdiction and to contact the relevant
local council.397
In addition, QCAT requires applicants to provide information about:
• the applicant’s connection with the land that is affected by
the tree (for example, whether the applicant is an owner
or occupier of
• if the applicant is an occupier, the details of the owner; whether
the applicant has asked the owner to make an application
whether the owner refused
• whether the applicant has attempted to resolve the dispute
• whether, if the dispute is about overhanging branches, the branches
extend over the applicant’s property 50 metres or
more from the common
boundary and whether the branches are more than 2.5 metres above the
If the applicant is seeking an order that involves destroying the tree, the
applicant is required to inform QCAT:
• how long they have known about the injury or damage
• whether the tree owner has taken any steps to prevent further injury
• whether the applicant has taken any steps to prevent further injury
Because the Queensland Act includes substantial, ongoing and unreasonable
interference as a cause of action, the applicant is asked
additional questions
The applicant is also asked whether the tree forms part of the dividing fence
between their land and the respondent’s land,
and other questions relevant
to fencing issues, such as whether the tree has damaged the dividing fence and
whether the respondent
has been given a notice to contribute for fencing
The application form to initiate proceedings in RMPAT is relatively
straightforward and asks for similar information to the NSWLEC
application forms.399 The form contains a helpful checklist for applicants to
‘tick off’ as they complete each
step of the application
process.400
The applicant is required to provide evidence of attempts made to resolve
the dispute before lodging an application, such as correspondence
between the
parties or a statutory declaration or affidavit.401
396 Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
Application Checklist:
Tree Dispute Resolution
(Form, version 3, 3 March 2017)
www.qcat.qld.gov.au/matter-types/tree-disputes
398 Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
Form 51: Application for
Tree Dispute—
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
www.qcat.qld.gov.au/matter-types/tree-disputes/tree-dispute-application
399 Resource Management and Planning Appeal Tribunal,
Application under
Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants Act 2017
www.rmpat.tas.gov.au/forms#application
The applicant also needs to notify RMPAT if they
are aware of any other person whose interests may be affected by the
application.402
The Tribunal asks applicants to outline any interim order
sought, and to provide evidence that is the basis of the request, such
evidence of an imminent threat or injury to person or property.
Once an application is filed, RMPAT will review the application and determine
whether it requires the parties to provide any additional
information.403
The Commission’s
conclusions—application requirements
Application forms for a range of different civil and administrative cases are
currently available on VCAT’s website.404 VCAT
should consider developing
a detailed application form that is modelled on the application forms for
initiating tree disputes
in the NSWLEC and QCAT.
There should be a single application form to simplify and streamline the
application process. Applicants should supported with explanatory
material. See
Chapter 12.
The Commission was informed that the detailed application form in New South
Wales can assist the Court by requiring an applicant to
‘respond to all
although some applicants may
not provide complete information, others pay a lot
of attention to the form and complete it with detailed responses.406
The Commission supports the approach taken in application forms interstate.
Key information sought from the applicant should include:
• a detailed description of the damage the applicant claims has
occurred, is occurring or is likely to occur
• a detailed description of the harm the applicant claims is occurring
or is likely to occur
• the location of the properties involved in the dispute
• any attempt the applicant has made to resolve the dispute
• the species of tree and whether it is a recognised weed
• any planning scheme requirements or requirements under other laws
that apply to the tree
• whether the remedies sought would require the consent or
authorisation of another government body (for example, whether a
permit would
normally be required to interfere with the tree)
• whether the matter relates to a fence
• details of statements from experts concerning the damage or
likelihood of harm, such as an arborist’s report or structural
engineering
• the amount of compensation claimed for property damage and the basis
for this amount
• whether the applicant is an owner or occupier of the land affected by
the tree. If the applicant is an occupier of the land,
they will need to satisfy
the decision maker that they have asked the owner of the land to make an
application about the tree and
the owner has refused.
402 As per the Practice Direction for applications under the Tasmanian Act,
RMPAT will ‘also advertise the existence of the
application in the
Public Notices section of the regional newspaper circulating in the area in
question’. In this way,
individuals are invited to make an application to
join and attend the Preliminary Conference if they believe their interests may
be affected by an order related to a plant: Resource Management and Planning
Appeal Tribunal,
Practice Direction No 18: Applications under the
Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants Act 2017
(19 November 2018) 18.3.1.
403 Resource Management and Planning Appeal Tribunal,
Practice Direction
No 18: Applications under the
Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants Act 2017
(19 November 2018) [18.2.5]; See
Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants Act
404 Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
Application Forms
(Web Page) <https://
www.vcat.vic.gov.au/resources/application-forms
405 Consultation 11 (Land and Environment Court of New South Wales).
• a detailed diagram and/or photographic evidence clearly showing the
location of the tree. This should identify the common
boundary between the
neighbours’ properties, where the dwellings are located and any part of
the dwelling that has been, is
being, or is likely to be damaged by the tree. If
relief for future harm is claimed, the applicant should point out each place on
their property where the tree is likely to cause harm to a person.
• whether any party has entered into a contract for the sale of land,
to ensure that VCAT is aware of all relevant parties to
the dispute (Chapter
• where a tree straddles the boundary of more than two properties, the
names of all owners and information about proportional
ownership by reference to
the tree trunk.
The Victorian context
Some information sought in the application form will be particular to the
Victorian context and the recommendations made in this report,
specifically identified in the recommendation below. For example, specific
information should be sought about whether there
are other relevant laws which
would help VCAT identify broader principles that may need to be considered in
decision making; and
invited to participate in a hearing. The zoning of the land should be
identified. In Chapter 10 it is recommended that the new Act
provide VCAT with
the power to make orders under the
Fences Act 1968
(Vic). Information should be
sought for these types of claims at the start of the VCAT process.
The application form should require the applicant to provide information
not taken, to prevent
harm or damage or the likelihood of it. This is required in application forms
prescribed under the New South
Wales and Queensland schemes.
The application form should require applicants to turn their mind to the
decision-making factors recommended in Chapter 8. This requirement
will help the
parties to better understand the decision-making process and may make resolution
through an alternative dispute resolution
process more likely if VCAT decides it
should direct the parties to participate in ADR. Asking the parties to address
decision-making
principles early will also help VCAT to resolve the matter
efficiently.
A checklist should accompany the application form to ensure that the
tree dispute meets the jurisdictional requirements under
the new Act and can be
heard in VCAT. This will help to remove vexatious applications or applications
that may be better suited
litigation through the court process such as personal injury compensation
claims, trespass or criminal damage claims.
Recommendation
The Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal should consider
developing a detailed application form that is modelled on the application
for initiating a tree dispute in the Land and Environment Court of New South
Wales and the Queensland Civil and Administrative
Tribunal. Additional
information should be sought in the application form about:
(a) the species of the tree and whether it is a recognised weed
(b) the steps the parties may have already taken to resolve their dispute
(c) how the decision-making principles in the Act are addressed
(d) the zone of the land the tree is situated on and any applicable planning
scheme, overlay or other requirement affecting the management
of the tree that
the applicant is aware of under the
Planning and Environment Act 1987
(Vic) or any other Act or law
(e) whether any remedies are sought under the
Fences Act 1968
rectify damage to a fence caused by a tree or to prevent damage or harm from a
tree that forms part of a fence
(f) any assessments or quotes that may have already been obtained from
(g) whether the applicant is the owner or occupier of the land. If the
applicant is an occupier of land, evidence that the owner has
refused to make an
application
(h) whether any party has entered into a contract for the sale of land to
ensure that the Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal
is aware of all
relevant parties to the dispute.
(i) the names of other parties and information about proportional ownership
if a tree trunk straddles a boundary.
Informal resolution
Introduction
The approach to informal resolution in other
Community responses—resolving disputes
The Commission’s
conclusions—resolving disputes informally
Informal resolution of neighbourhood tree
Introduction
6.1 Informal resolution refers to negotiating an outcome without going to
court or a tribunal. It can involve legal tools such
as mediation or it might
simply involve neighbours talking to each other. Because neighbours live
close together and have ongoing
relationships, solving a tree problem
informally will often provide a better result.
6.2 In Victoria, neighbours can resolve their dispute without initiating
legal proceedings through neighbour-led resolution, abatement
community-based alternative dispute resolution (ADR).1 This chapter discusses
how these informal resolution approaches in Victoria
should fit within the
framework of a new tree disputes Act. The approach to informal resolution in
other states is considered as
well as the views of the community on these
matters. The chapter concludes with recommendations that emphasise the ongoing
of informal resolution when a new Act is introduced.
6.3 The approaches considered in this chapter are:
• neighbour negotiation and community-based mediation
• abatement
• a formal requirement in legislation for ‘reasonable attempts to
reach negotiation’
• the inclusion of tree owner responsibilities in legislation
• the inclusion of branch removal notices in legislation
• the inclusion of a written notice process in legislation
Other jurisdictions—resolving disputes
Neighbour-led negotiation and community-based
6.4 The Queensland Government encourages neighbours to discuss the issue and
resolve the matter between themselves: ‘taking
time to talk the problem
through could save you time and money’.2 The website provides information
on the most effective ways
to begin this process.3 Similarly, the New South
Wales Government’s Community Justice Centres (CJCs) encourage neighbours
talk to one another when the tree dispute arises. Their website states,
‘Talking to your neighbour as soon as possible may
avoid or resolve any
problems. It will also help maintain a positive relationship, making it easier
to deal with
1 The Dispute Settlement Centre of Victoria (DSCV) provides free dispute
resolution services across Victoria. See Ch 3 for more information.
2 Queensland Government,
Step-by-step Guide to Resolving Tree and Fence
(Web Page, 14 July 2017) <https://
www.qld.gov.
au/law/housing-and-neighbours/disputes-about-fences-trees-and-buildings/resolving-tree-and-fence-disputes/step-by-step-guide-to-
resolving-tree-and-fence-disputes>.
3 Queensland Government,
Ways to Approach Your Neighbour
(Web Page, 17
January 2018) <https://
www.qld.gov.au/law/housing-and-
neighbours/disputes-about-fences-trees-and-buildings/ways-to-approach-your-neighbour>.
other issues in the future.’4 It states that
taking a matter to court ‘should always be the last resort’ and that
‘knowing your legal rights and obligations may also help you resolve your
neighbour dispute’.5
6.5 Neighbours may need to enlist the help of an independent third party to
facilitate negotiation where neighbour led negotiation
fails. Free mediation
services are available to the community in Queensland for neighbourhood disputes
through Dispute Resolution
Centres. 6 CJCs in New South Wales provide free
mediation services.7 In New South Wales disputes between neighbours are the most
frequent type of dispute received by CJCs, and when neighbours agree to
mediation, most disputes are resolved—81 per cent
in 2017–18.8
However, the NSWLEC noted that approximately half the applicants provide the
Court with a letter from the CJC
stating that the neighbour refused to
participate in voluntary mediation.9
6.6 In Tasmania, private and government organisations provide mediation
services.10 However, there is a lack of free alternative
dispute resolution
(ADR) services for general disputes in Tasmania.11
6.7 The common law self-help remedy of abatement allows an affected neighbour
to remove parts of a tree that encroach onto their land
up to their boundary
6.8 The remedy of abatement has not been modified under the NSW Act.12 An
affected neighbour is entitled to trim overhanging branches
up to boundary lines
or install root barriers on boundary lines. Any trimmed branches must be
returned to the tree owner. The neighbour
does not have to provide notice before
carrying out abatement. An affected neighbour’s right to abate may be
environmental planning policies13 or Tree Preservation Orders in
New South Wales.14 If these protections apply, council authorisation
required to carry out works to the tree.15
6.9 The Queensland Act modifies the common law right to abatement to the
extent that the affected neighbour can now choose whether
or not to return
abated parts of the tree to the tree owner, including fruit.16 This modification
only applies to situations that
fall within the jurisdiction of the Queensland
Act.17 The right to abatement may also
be limited by Vegetation Protection Orders and other orders imposed by local
and state government to protect trees in Queensland.18
6.10 The Tasmanian Act modifies the common law right to abatement in a
similar way to the Queensland Act.19
4 Community Justice Centres, Government of New
South Wales,
(Web Page, 5 July 2018)
http://www.cjc.justice.nsw.gov.au/ Pages/cjc_whatis_mediation/cjc_common_disputes/com_justice_neighbours.aspx
6 Queensland Government
, Neighbourhood Mediation
(Web Page, 2019)
www.qld.gov.au/law/legal-mediation-and-justice-of-the-
peace/settling-disputes-out-of-court/neighbourhood-mediation>.
7 Community Justice Centres, Government of New South Wales,
(Web Page, 5 July 2018)
http://www.cjc.justice.nsw.gov.au/ Pages/cjc_whatis_mediation/cjc_common_disputes/com_justice_neighbours.aspx
8 Community Justice Centres, Government of New South Wales,
Page, 13 March 2019)
http://www.cjc.justice.nsw.gov.au/ Pages/com_justice_aboutus/com_justice_aboutus.aspx
9 Consultation 11 (Land and Environment Court of New South Wales).
10 Legal Aid Commission of Tasmania (Online Directory, 2019) <https://
www.legalaid.tas.gov.au/referral-list
11 Tasmania Law Reform Institute,
Neighbours’ Hedges as Barriers to
Sunlight and a View
(Issues Paper No 19, 2014) [4.4.9].
Trees (Disputes Between Neighbours) Act 2006
; Department
of Justice and Attorney General (NSW),
Review of the
Trees (Disputes Between
Neighbours) Act 2006
(Report, 2009) 42–3.
Environmental Planning and Assessment Act 1979
establishes the framework for the planning system in New South Wales.
Environmental planning instruments sit under the EPA Act
to introduce controls
and requirements for specific issues in local government areas. These
instruments include both the State Environment
Planning Policies and Local
Environmental Plans. Development Control Plans (DCPs) provide more detailed
planning requirements. For
more information see Ch 10.
14 The Commission understands that Tree Preservation Orders (TPOs)
previously made under clauses 5.9 and 5.9AA of the Standard
(Local Environmental Plans) have largely been replaced by the State
Environment Planning Policy (Vegetation
in Non-Rural areas) but that
existing TPOs will continue to have effect: Office of Environment and Heritage
Local Government Information and Resources
(Web Page, 23 November
2018) <https://
www.environment.nsw.gov.au/biodiversity/localgovernment.htm
See also Ch 10.
15 For more information see Ch 10.
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
; Queensland Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
(Report No 72,
2015) [3.221].
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants Act 2017
does not apply to trees that are not covered by the Act: s 5.
Informal resolution in the interstate
6.11 The statutory schemes in New South Wales, Queensland and Tasmania
encourage people involved in tree disputes to resolve them
informally. There are
subtle differences in how the schemes accommodate informal resolution.
6.12 The Queensland and Tasmanian Acts contain overarching provisions that
encourage the use of informal resolution. These provisions
are not binding. They
operate in conjunction with other legislative mechanisms.
6.13 The Tasmanian Act includes a provision that enables an affected
neighbour to request a tree owner to take action to ensure
that land is no
longer affected by the tree either verbally or in writing. Both parties are
required to make reasonable attempts
prevent the land being affected by the plant or to minimise the degree to
which land is affected.20
6.14 The Queensland Act encourages informal resolution and makes it clear to
neighbours that they have the option to resolve their
dispute through
neighbour-led negotiation, as well as the formal rights and processes available
under the Queensland Act.21 The
QLRC recently recommended that the Queensland Act should include a
‘non-exhaustive list of examples of steps that could be taken
by a person
to attempt to resolve an issue informally’.22 The QLRC observed
‘that users of the legislation are often
unsure what is intended by the
references to ‘informal’ resolution. This has the potential to
undermine the aim of the
provisions, and the wider objectives of the Act, to
encourage and assist neighbours to resolve issues themselves’.23
Specifically,
the QLRC suggested:
• approaching the other person, directly or in writing, to notify them
of the issues and offering to discuss them;
• providing information to the other person to help them understand the
issues and how they might be resolved, such as a quotation
for any proposed work
or a letter from a tree expert about the danger posed by the tree;
• inviting the other person to take part in a form of assisted dispute
resolution, such as negotiation or mediation;
• taking steps to follow any local council process for resolving
nuisance trees24
• other informal resolution processes provided under the Queensland Act
rather than legal action.25
6.15 The QLR
C also recommended that the Queensland
Act should refer to mediation provided by a Dispute Resolution Centre as an
example of how
neighbours may attempt to resolve their dispute informally.26
Neither of these recommendations have been implemented at the time
6.16 Additional informal resolution mechanisms and pre-conditions to orders
are also included in the interstate Acts and are discussed
Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants Act 2017
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
22 Queensland Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Neighbourhood Disputes
(Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
(Report No 72, 2015) Recommendations
4-3, 4-5, 4-10.
23 Ibid [4.51].
24 Ibid Recommendation 4-3.
25 Ibid Recommendation 4-4.
26 Ibid Recommendation 4-6.
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
A formal requirement in
the interstate Acts for ‘reasonable attempts to reach
6.17 The Land and Environment Court of New South Wales (NSWLEC) must not make
an order under the
Trees (Disputes Between Neighbours) Act 2006
(NSW Act) unless it is satisfied that the applicant has made a reasonable effort
to reach agreement with the owner of the land
on which the tree is situated.28
The intention is that legal action should be a last resort.29
6.18 This reasonable effort does not have to be made before the filing of an
application (though this is desirable) but it must be
made before the Court
makes any orders.30 Writing to the tree owner, serving them with an application,
or engaging in Alternative
Dispute Resolution would qualify as a reasonable
effort.31 Even the presence of parties at a hearing may demonstrate a reasonable
6.19 Chief Justice Preston has explained that this requirement is ‘less
demanding than the language used in provisions of other
statutory enactments
which require parties to make reasonable attempts to reach agreement’33
and that exhaustive negotiation
is not required.34
6.20 Similar provisions apply in Queensland and Tasmania. The Queensland
Civil and Administrative Tribunal (QCAT) may make an
order pursuant to the
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
it is satisfied that the neighbour has made a reasonable effort to reach
agreement with the tree owner. This provision
is substantially the same as in
the NSW Act, and the criteria are the same.35 The requirement can be fulfilled
by requesting the
tree owner to fix the issue,36 engaging in mediation,37
or a Tribunal-ordered ADR process.38
6.21 Tasmania has a slightly different approach. Before hearing an
application, the Resource Management and Planning Appeal Tribunal
(RMPAT) must
consider whether the parties have made reasonable attempts to resolve the
matter. If not satisfied, it may direct parties
to attempt to resolve the
matter.39 In deciding this point RMPAT may take into account:
• requests made verbally or in writing, in a Branch Removal Notice or
in a Written Notice40
• whether the tree owner has refused to carry out work because they
reasonably believe the health or structural stability of
the tree will be
affected or that safety will be compromised.41
Trees (Disputes Between Neighbours) Act 2006
s 10(1)(a).
29 Department of Justice and Attorney General (NSW),
Review of the
(Disputes Between Neighbours) Act 2006
(Report, 2009) 7.
Robson v Leischke
[2008] NSWLEC 152
(2008) 72 NSWLR 98
[194]; Land and Environment
Court of New South Wales,
Annotated Trees Act January 2013
(1 September 2016) 19–20.
31 Consultation 11 (Land and Environment Court of New South Wales); see, eg,
Aarons v MacDonell as Executor to the Estate of the late Ronald Ayres
[2015] NSWLEC 1058
Aarons v MacDonell as Executor to the Estate of the late Ronald Ayres
[2015] NSWLEC 1058
Robson v Leischke
[2008] NSWLEC 152
(2008) 72 NSWLR 98
Aarons v MacDonell as Executor to the Estate of the late Ronald Ayres
[2015] NSWLEC 1058
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
36 See, eg,
Collins v McNeil
[2013] QCAT 429
[49], n 22.
37 Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
Tree Dispute Resolution
(Fact Sheet, version 4, March 2017) 1; see, eg,
Collins v McNeil
[2013] QCAT 429
[49], n 22.
Moreno v Parer
[2017] QCAT 223
Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants Act 2017
s 26(2)(b)(i)
Tree owner responsibilities in the interstate
6.22 Unlike the NSW Act, the Queensland Act includes tree-keeper (tree owner)
responsibilities.42 During parliamentary debate the
Attorney-General
The proposed bill provides clear direction about a tree-keeper’s
responsibilities and reflects the strong community view that
a tree owner, known
as the ‘tree-keeper’ in the Bill, should be responsible for the
proper care and maintenance of a
tree growing on their land in the
neighbourhood.43
6.23 The Queensland Act states that the tree owner is responsible for cutting
and removing any branches of the tree that overhang
a neighbour’s land,
and ensuring that the tree does not cause serious injury to a person or damage
to property or substantial,
ongoing and unreasonable interference with a
person’s use and enjoyment of their land.44 The Act clearly states that a
cause of action is not created for a breach of any of these
responsibilities.45
6.24 The Tasmanian Act also includes responsibilities for tree owners. The
responsibilities under the Tasmanian Act essentially mirror
those under the
Queensland Act and do not create a separate cause of action for a breach of any
of the responsibilities.46
Branch removal notices in the interstate
6.25 The Que
ensland and Tasmanian Acts incorporate
a notice process for the removal of certain overhanging branches. These
provisions provide
an affected neighbour with a mechanism for requesting the
tree owner to trim overhanging branches. Failure to do so entitles the
neighbour to carry out the work themselves and recoup the associated costs. This
process was introduced in Queensland to
were unable to prune or remove overhanding branches themselves.47
Branches need to be a particular size
6.26 The overhanging branch must be a maximum of 2.5 metres above ground
level and extend over the affected neighbour’s land
at least 50
centimetres from the common boundary.48
6.27 The maximum height and minimum length requirements aim to capture the
spaces that are frequently encroached upon by overhanging
branches. The QLRC
explained that ‘overhanging branches that are 2.5 metres or less above the
ground may impede the passage
of a person or vehicle. It is also a lower and
safer height range to carry out the work of cutting and removing the
branches’.49
A length of at least 50 centimetres beyond the common
boundary provides a ‘reasonable balance between the right of a
neighbour to have uninterrupted use of their property, and the burden that a
tree-keeper may experience as a result of the ongoing
need to trim or cut back
trees close to the boundary’.50 The QLRC acknowledged that that there is
‘scope for a range
of differing views about the appropriate
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
43 Queensland,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Assembly, 25
November 2010, 4372 (CR Dick, Attorney-General and Minister for Industrial
Relations).
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants Act 2017
47 Queensland,
Parliamentary Debates, Legislative Assembly, 2 August 2011,
(Paul Lucas, Deputy Premier and Attorney-General, Minister for Local
Government and Special Minister of State).
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
49 Queensland Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Neighbourhood Disputes
(Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
(Report No 72, December 2015)
50 Ibid [3.299].
51 Ibid [3.296].
The effect of the notice
6.28 If the branch meets the height and length requirements, the affected
neighbour can choose to give the tree owner a written notice
for branch removal.
52 The notice must:
• state a time for pruning or removal that is at least 30 days
• request the tree owner to respond in writing, at least one day before
the works are scheduled, with information about who
will be doing the work and
• give permission to the tree-keeper (owner) or their contractor to
enter the affected neighbour’s land to remove the
branch between 8am and
• have attached at least one quote of the cost56
• be accompanied by a copy of the relevant section of the Queensland
6.29 Substantial compliance58 with the notice requirements is considered
adequate.59
6.30 The neighbour may download and use
Form 3: Notice for Removal of
Particular Overhanging Branches
from the Queensland Government’s
website.60 However this form is not compulsory. The QLRC recommended the use of
a compulsory
form for consistency and clarity but this has not been
implemented.61
6.31 A tree owner acting on the notice can obtain an independent quote, do
the work themselves, or hire a contractor.62
6.32 It is the affected neighbour’s responsibility to consider public
liability insurance before giving a person permission
to enter their land. It is
the tree owner’s responsibility to consider a contractor’s
insurance.63
Failure to act on the notice
6.33 If the tree owner does not respond to the notice within 30 days, the
affected neighbour can arrange for the overhanging branches
to be pruned or
removed up to the boundary line.64 They can do this themselves or engage an
arborist. The affected neighbour may
return the cut branches to the tree owner,
but this is not required.65
6.34 The affected neighbour can then recoup from the tree owner up to $300
for reasonable expenses. The affected neighbour cannot
recover the costs of
their own labour in removing the branches themselves.66 The $300 contribution is
a ‘limited right’
recoup some of the total cost.67 The QLRC recommended increasing the amount
to a maximum of $500 or any greater amount prescribed
by legislation, however
this has not been implemented. The QLRC explained that the current maximum $300
liability was
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
s 57(3)(a).
s 57(3)(b)(i)
s 57(3)(c).
s 57(3)(d)(i).
s 57(3)(d)(ii).
58 This is to ‘ensure that unjust results do not flow from minor errors
or omissions in a completed form of notice’: Queensland
Commission,
Review of the
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees)
(Report No 72, December 2015) [2.1.6.2]; see also
Neighbourhood
Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
; Queensland Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Neighbourhood Disputes
(Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
(Report No 72, December 2015)
60 Queensland Government ,
What to Do if a Neighbour’s Tree is
Affecting You
(Web Page, 8 January 2019) <https://
www.qld.gov.au/law/
housing-and-neighbours/disputes-about-fences-trees-and-buildings/resolving-tree-and-fence-disputes/what-to-do-if-a-neighbours-tree-is-
affecting-you>.
61 Queensland Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Neighbourhood Disputes
(Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
(Report 72, December 2015),
Recommendation 3.9.
62 Explanatory Notes,
Neighbourhood Disputes Resolution Bill 2010
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
64 The affected neighbour cannot enter the tree owner’s land without
permission as this would amount to trespass, discussed
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
66 Form 3 states ‘this does not include the cost of my/our
labour’: Department of Justice and Attorney-General (Qld),
Notice For Removal of Particular Overhanging Branches
(Version 3, 29 October
67 Queensland Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Neighbourhood Disputes
(Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
(Report No 72, December 2015)
‘insufficient to meet the costs to the neighbour of having work done to
cut and remove overhanging branches 2.5 metres or less
above the ground in all
6.35 If the tree owner does not pay, the affected neighbour can pursue the
debt in QCAT as a minor civil claim.69
6.36 Where the costs are significant and substantially exceed the $300 cap,
then an affected neighbour would not be able to recover
those costs using this
process. Instead, they may choose to commence legal action in QCAT if the
the Queensland Act are met.70
6.37 This process does not override any requirements to obtain authorisation
or permits under any other law or local law.71
6.38 An affec
ted neighbour cannot use this notice
if they have issued a notice for
within the previous 12
months.72 The QLRC considered this a fair balance between the affected
neighbour’s use and enjoyment
of their land and the tree owner’s
liability. The QLRC further explained that the common law remedy of abatement
was available
to an affected neighbour who needed further intervention73 or for
other branches or parts of the tree that are not captured by this
process. In
addition, an affected neighbour can exercise their right to abate or commence
legal action in QCAT.74
The Tasmanian approach
6.39 The Tasmanian ‘Branch Removal Notice’ procedure in Part 3 of
the Act is modelled on the Queensland Act and is substantially
the same. The
Tasmanian Department of Justice has developed a template notice form which it
recommends people use.75
6.40 The Tasmanian Act provides that a ‘prescribed maximum
amount’ of $500 can be recouped from the affected neighbour.76
6.41 Similar safeguards apply under the Tasmanian and Queensland Acts.
However, in Tasmania an affected neighbour cannot use the notice
procedure if
they have issued a notice within the previous 12 months for the same tree to the
tree owner (unless there is a new tree
owner).77 In Queensland the safeguard
prohibits issuing of a notice if a notice has been issued for
within the previous 12 months.78
6.42 In Tasmania, the affected neighbour can pursue money owed in the
Magistrates’ Court.79 If the tree owner disagrees
may apply to the Magistrates’ Court for a determination of a
‘fair and reasonable’
amount, which they are then liable to
68 Queensland Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Neighbourhood Disputes
(Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
, (Report No 72, December (2015)
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and
Trees) Act 2011
70 Queensland Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Neighbourhood Disputes
(Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
(Discussion Paper No 72, June 2015)
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
73 Queensland Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Neighbourhood Disputes
(Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
(Report No 72, December 2015)
74 Ibid [3.449]. The QLRC explains that ‘in effect, QCAT may make an
order about an overhanging branch or branches only if the
affected by a tree” under
section 46(a)(ii)
and the cognate threshold
requirements under sections 65 and 66 of the Act are met’.
75 Department of Justice (Tas),
Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants
(Web Page) <https://
www.justice.tas.gov.au/mediation_and_dispute_
resolution/neighbourhood-disputes-about-plants>.
Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants Act 2017
Department of Justice (Tas),
Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants
Page) <https://
www.justice.tas.gov.au/mediation_and_dispute_resolution/neighbourhood-disputes-about-plants
Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants Act 2017
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants Act 2017
General notice process in
the Tasmanian Act
6.43 Under the Tasmanian Act an affected neighbour can also issue a written
notice to the tree owner that:
• states the grounds on which the tree is affecting their land81
• states the action the affected neighbour considers the tree owner
should take to remedy the issue82
• requests a written response from the tree owner within a period of
not less than 14 days.83
6.44 The Tasmanian Department of Justice has developed a template notice form
which it recommends people use.84 This process is likely
to be of benefit where
an affected neighbour seeks to resolve the tree dispute informally but the tree
or tree parts are not captured
by the branch removal process or are unable to be
abated. This written notice appears to have been developed as a means of
facilitating
clear communication between neighbours. It does not set out any
monetary amounts able to be recovered or what happens if the tree
owner ignores
the notice.
Community responses—resolving disputes
6.45 Responses from the community suggest that informal resolution is the
primary way people currently try to resolve their tree
disputes.85 Most people
explained that they did not take legal action86 because it was too costly,87
would damage neighbourly
relations88 or because the issues raised were
unlikely to meet the requirements of a legal claim.89
6.46 The City of Boroondara stated that informal negotiation between
neighbours is useful and has helped to resolve many disputes.90
However, many
affected neighbours who responded to the Commission reported that when they
attempted to negotiate, the tree owner
was uncooperative,91 ignored them92 or
was hostile.93 Some community members reported that lawyers were engaged because
their neighbour
refused to communicate informally.94
6.47 The Commission observes that members of the community who were most
likely to respond to the inquiry were those who had a poor
experience trying to
resolve their disputes informally. Therefore, the views and experiences of those
who were successful in resolving
their dispute informally may not have been
captured to the same extent.
Community responses—Community-based
alternative dispute resolution
6.48 The most accessible form of ADR in Victoria is through the free
mediation services by DSCV.
6.49 DSCV provided the Commission with examples of successful mediations in
relation to neighbourhood tree disputes:
Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants Act 2017
s 22(2)(a).
s 22(2)(b).
s 22(2)(c).
84 Department of Justice (Tas),
Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants
(Web Page) <https://
www.justice.tas.gov.au/mediation_and_dispute_
resolution/neighbourhood-disputes-about-plants>.
85 Over 90% of survey respondents reported that they did not take legal
action: Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Neighbourhood Tree Disputes Survey
(2018). This is also discussed in Ch 3.
86 Submissions 6 (Name withheld), 11 (Name withheld), 13 (Mandy Collins), 19
(Name withheld), 23 (Name withheld), 33 (Annette Neville).
87 Submissions 6 (Name withheld) 21 (Pointon Partners Lawyers), 30 (Law
Institute of Victoria).
88 Submission 22 (Name withheld); Survey Respondent 123.
89 For example, one survey respondent explained, ‘we were advised that
as the tree had not previously caused damage, the owner
could argue [they] did
not know it might cause damage and therefore would not be liable’: Survey
Respondent 42.
90 Consultation 8 (City of Boroondara).
91 Submissions 5 (Name withheld) 22 (Name withheld), 33 (Annette Neville), 34
(Allan Day), 38 (L. Barry Wollmer).
92 See, eg, Submission 36 (Monique Onezime); Survey Respondent 60.
93 Confidential submission; Consultation 1 (Aldo Taranto).
94 Submission 17 (Name withheld); Consultation 1 (Aldo Taranto).
Issue 1: Party A is tired of cleaning leaf litter from their gutter and pool.
Party A has approached Party B on a number of occasions
requesting that they
trim their tree. Party B advises that Party A has the right of abatement and can
trim them himself up to the
fence line at his own cost.
Outcome: Party A seeks a contribution from Party B towards the trimming of
the trees on an annual basis. Party B agrees in principle
pending the provision
of a number of quotes.
Issue 2: Party A, without notice, elected to trim encroaching branches up to
the fence line. Party B forms the view that the trimming
was too aggressive and
has harmed the tree and/or encroached on their boundary.
Outcome: the parties agreed to a maintenance schedule for the trees and a
communication plan where either party elects to trim the
6.50 Many people were keen to try to mediate a resolution to their disputes
but were unable to engage in mediation because their neighbour
would not agree
to participate.96 Other concerns were expressed about the non-binding nature of
mediated resolution,97 and an inability
to locate a neighbour to organise
mediation where, for example, the home is only occupied periodically.98
6.51 In Chapter 3 it was identified that DSCV data from December 2011 to May
2017 suggests that tree enquiries are less likely than
other matters to progress
to a dispute resolution outcome including through mediation.99 The factors to
which DSCV attributed the
low resolution rates for these disputes were noted.
Some of the reasons include that:
• rights and obligations under the law are unclear, making it hard to
identify what parties can or cannot do without having
to go to court to have a
magistrate decide
• neighbours are not explicitly required to negotiate by legislation or
case law and many therefore choose to opt out of the
mediation process.100
6.52 Anecdotally DSCV suggests that the disputes that are most likely to
settle are disputes between an affected neighbour and a landlord.
DSCV may be
have been unsuccessful. DSCV suggests that
disputes about roots are generally
the hardest to resolve because they
are more complex than overhanging branches. DSCV also observes that the
parties’ personalities and attitudes will also influence
the likelihood of
success at mediation.101
6.53 Surprisingly, a large number of private arborists at ArborCamp2018
advised they were unaware of the free mediation services provided
Although private arborists frequently become involved in tree disputes, they
rarely refer neighbours to DSCV.102 Ben Kenyon
suggested that DSCV’s
services should be more widely publicised.103
95 Information provided by DSCV as part of a data request from the
Commission, November 2018 and clarification of data provided in
96 Submissions 5 (Name withheld), 6 (Name withheld), 24 (Name withheld), 31
(Barwon Community Legal Service), 38 (L. Barry Wollmer);
Survey Respondent
97 Submission 30 (Law Institute of Victoria).
98 Consultation 7 (Dispute Settlement Centre of Victoria).
99 Information provided by DSCV as part of a data request from the
Commission, August 2017. 100 Ibid. See Ch 3.
101 Information provided by DSCV as part of a data request from the
Commission, November 2018.
102 Consultation 4 (Participants in facilitated discussion at VTIO
ArborCamp2018). Approximately 35–40 arborists from across
Victoria were
present during this consultation. The majority were private contractors.
103 Consultation 6 (Ben Kenyon).
6.54 Some people suggested or indicated that mediation services should be
able to compel or force the other party to the tree dispute
to participate in
mediation.104
Community responses—Abatement
6.55 Most responses to the consultation paper agreed that abatement should
continue to be available under any new Act.105 As one community
member noted,
‘in many cases and with reasonable neighbours, it is enough to solve the
day-to-day issues with overhanging branches’.106
Modifying the right to abate
6.56 Nearly all community members who responded to this issue supported
modifying the right to abatement and made specific suggestions
should be done.107 One submission stated that ‘the right of abatement
should remain, but a greater responsibility
ought to be placed on tree owners to
ensure that their tree/s do not threaten, cause annoyance or harm to
neighbours’.108
6.57 Changing the remedy so that the affected neighbour was not required to
return pruned material such as branches, roots or other
tree parts to the tree
owner, was broadly supported.109 Responses indicated that there is confusion in
the community about this.110
Some people stated that the return of abated tree
parts, particularly without
any notice, may actually cause a tree dispute.111 One survey respondent noted
that ‘wilfully throwing branches over to your
neighbour’s
property’ could result in ‘potentially damaging plants or
endangering others or hurting animals’.112
6.58 Another community member, who identified as a volunteer at Victoria
State Emergency Service (SES), explained how there can be
confusion about who to
return branches or other tree parts to during emergency operations:
Often I and my fellow volunteers are called to trees that have fallen or
partially fallen where the limbs come from a neighbouring
property. Sometimes
the occupant complains to us about the tree being a nuisance. While we as
members of the SES cannot and do not
provide advice about tree disputes, we can
only clear the elements of trees that block emergency access. Once the tree
material has
been cleared, it is unclear who is responsible for the disposal of
that material. Sometimes we throw it back over the fence. Sometimes
to the nature strip. And sometimes we leave it where it lies. I believe there
should be guidelines for who is responsible
for this material ...113
6.59 Arborist Robert Mineo noted that in some situations a neighbour may want
fruit or branches (for firewood) to be returned.114
6.60 Another change commonly suggested was modifying the law so that the tree
owner could not object to or hinder any tree works undertaken
by the affected
neighbour in the course of abating.115 Some people suggested introducing a
process whereby the affected neighbour
gives notice to the tree owner, similar
to a Fencing Notice under
Fences Act 1968
(Vic).116 A
Notice to Fence is a formal notice that a person can give
104 Submissions 10 (Professor Phillip Hamilton), 38 (L. Barry Wollmer);
Survey Respondents 72, 117.
105 Submissions 5 (Name withheld), 9 (Dr Karen Smith), 11 (Name withheld), 19
(Name withheld), 21 (Pointon Partners Lawyers), 23 (Name
withheld), 38 (L. Barry
Wollmer); Consultation 4 (Participants in facilitated discussion at VTIO
ArborCamp2018).
106 Confidential submission.
107 Submissions 5 (Name withheld), 6 (Name withheld), 10 (Professor Phillip
Hamilton), 19 (Name withheld), 23 (Name withheld), 38
(L. Barry Wollmer);
Consultations 4 (Participants in facilitated discussion at VTIO ArborCamp2018),
10 (Baw Baw Shire Council).
108 Submission 38 (L. Barry Wollmer).
109 Submission 10 (Professor Phillip Hamilton); Consultations 4 (Participants
in facilitated discussion at VTIO ArborCamp2018), 10
(Baw Baw Shire
110 Submissions 7 (Ben Kenyon); Survey Respondents 44, 95, 96.
111 Submission 10 (Professor Phillip Hamilton); Consultation 14 (Robert
Mineo); Survey Respondents 7, 44.
112 Survey Respondent 44.
113 Survey Respondent 103.
114 Consultation 14 (Robert Mineo).
115 Submissions 5 (Name withheld), 6 (Name withheld), 23 (Name withheld).
116 Submission 23 (Name withheld); Consultation 4 (Participants in
facilitated discussion at VTIO ArborCamp2018).
to their neighbour, which outlines proposed construction or repairs to a
dividing fence.117 The notice contains details such as the
location of where the
works are to be carried out; the type of works required who will carry out the
works (the contractor); a cost
estimate and how much each neighbour should
contribute.118 The neighbour has 30 days to respond.119
6.61 Some community members suggested that the tree owner should be
responsible for paying the cost of tree works or other maintenance
incurred by
the affected neighbour in the course of abating the nuisance.120 One community
member explained:
At present the [affected neighbour] bears all of the expense and
inconvenience of cutting back their neighbours trees. This is utterly
outrageous. We have spent an horrendous amount of money abating the nuisance. We
have now reached the point where it is no longer
even possible for an arborist
to trim our neighbours tree—the branches are too high for chainsaws on the
end of long poles
and cherry pickers cannot [get] into the narrow area along our
6.62 Another response favoured the approach taken in New Zealand. In New
Zealand an affected neighbour may seek an order in the District
Court for any
costs incurred as a result of abating branches or roots causing damage to
property.122 It was suggested
that if tree owners are responsible for paying for the costs of tree works
then affected neighbours could more easily carry out works
that would resolve
the issue, such as installing a root barrier and annual tree pruning. The
submission also noted that putting
responsibility on the tree owner for the cost
of tree works would be likely to make them more willing to listen to an affected
neighbour’s
concerns.123
6.63 Pointon Partners suggested that the current scope and application of the
remedy did not need to change.124
Interaction with Australian standards
6.64 A number of arborists identified the matter of the interaction between
abatement and the relevant Australian Standards on pruning
and other tree works
that arborists are trained to follow.125 The City of Boroondara advises its
residents about the importance of
conducting tree works in accordance with the
Australian Standards to ensure the health and structural integrity of the tree.
stated that the best way for community members to adhere to the
Australian Standards is to engage a suitably qualified arborist.126
6.65 One person suggested that abatement should be expanded to allow affected
neighbours to prune beyond property lines without committing
trespass. It was
suggested that this should be allowed where a ‘genuine need arises’,
such as where the tree owner refuses
to cooperate with reasonable requests for
tree works, or for practical reasons where it may be necessary to cross
boundaries due
to narrow or confined areas, or for reasons of maintaining the
health and structure of the tree.127
117 Dispute Settlement Centre of Victoria,
Notice to Fence
12 April 2019) <https://
www.disputes.vic.gov.au/information-and-
advice/fencing/notice-to-fence>.
Fences Act 1968
; Dispute Settlement Centre of
Notice to Fence
(Web Page, 12 April 2019)
www.disputes.vic.gov.au/information-and-advice/fencing/notice-to-fence
Fences Act 1968
; Department of Justice and
Community Safety (Vic),
Fencing Law in Victoria
(Web Page, 31 January
www.justice.vic.gov.au/justice-system/laws-and-regulation/civil-law/fencing-law-in-victoria
120 Submissions 19 (Name withheld); Confidential submission.
121 Submission 19 (Name withheld).
122 Community Law (NZ),
Trees—Overview
(Web Page, 2019)
http://communitylaw.org.nz/community-law-manual/ chapter-25-neighbourhood-life/trees/
see also AFN v ZUI
[2012] NZDT 187
123 Confidential submission.
124 Submission 21 (Pointon Partners Lawyers).
125 Submission 7 (Ben Kenyon); Consultations 4 (Participants in facilitated
discussion at VTIO ArborCamp2018), 6 (Ben Kenyon). See
Standards Australia,
Pruning of Amenity Trees
(AS 4373-2007) (Sydney, NSW: Standards
Australia, 2007); Standards Australia,
Protection of Trees on Development
(AS 4970-2009) (Sydney, NSW: Standards Australia, 2009);
126 Consultation 8 (City of Boroondara).
127 Submission 23 (Name withheld).
6.66 Another response favoured only allowing abatement by a qualified
arborist in accordance with the
Australian Standards AS
4373-2007—Pruning of Amenity Trees and AS 4970- 2009—Protection of
Trees on Development Sites
. It was argued ‘this would protect both
parties by avoiding excessive, unqualified canopy or root pruning that
effectively
destroys someone else’s property and increases tree hazard,
and that further complicates dispute situations’.128
6.67 Some arborists favoured incorporating the Australian Standards into the
new Act to improve the resolution of tree disputes more
generally.129 Dr Gregory
Moore OAM explained,
These standards if properly applied could significantly reduce tree disputes
between neighbours and also reduce the likelihood of
tree damage and the costs
of damage to trees and litigation ... It is also worth noting that these
[standards] can be useful beyond
their defined purposes.130
Community responses—a formal requirement in
the new Act for ‘reasonable attempts to reach agreement’
6.68 The con
sultation paper asked whether parties
should be required to satisfy any preconditions before orders could be made
under a new Act.
A number of people supported the requirement that neighbours
attempt to resolve their tree dispute informally before commencing legal
action,131 either by way of neighbour-led negotiation, mediation or
abatement.132
6.69 A tree disputes consultant in New South Wales cautioned that such a
precondition could limit parties’ ability to seek legal
especially where the relationship has broken down and parties refuse to
communicate. As a compromise, it was suggested
that there should be a low
threshold for meeting the requirement, for example, simply showing that a letter
was sent to the neighbour
such a precondition is the assurance that the legal scheme is used as a last
6.70 The Vict
orian Civil and Administrative
Tribunal (VCAT) did not support any precondition being included in the new
Act.134 VCAT stated that
it should not matter what the parties did or did not do
before legal action and that a ‘come as you are’ approach would
fairer. This may reduce the chance of a ‘strikeout’ on a
technicality,135 especially where parties are in a hostile
situation. It would
also prevent VCAT from being ‘caught up in administrative analysis of
papers’.136
Community responses—Tree owner
responsibilities
6.72 A number of affected neighbours told the Commission that the tree owner
can choose to ignore the issue or refuse to assist because
responsibility for
managing a tree falls entirely on the neighbour who is being affected by it.
This may present a significant
burden in terms of cost and effort.140 As
one survey respondent said, ‘The current law is very unfair. It is
It will cost over $2,000 dollars to have it cut back to the fence
line which won’t even resolve the issues. It is their tree
it should be
their responsibility to keep it within their property.’141
6.73 QCAT stated that tree owner responsibilities under the Queensland Act
are helpful because they provide clarity about the tree
obligations. However, the Tribunal cannot ascertain whether these
responsibilities prevent a tree dispute from reaching
the Tribunal.142 QCAT
explained that tree owner responsibilities overlap with the branch removal
notice under the QCAT Act.143
Further, QCAT noted that these tree owner
responsibilities are linked to and mirrored in the factors QCAT takes into
account when
making decisions and orders.144
Community responses—Branch removal
6.74 The con
sultation paper asked whether other
mechanisms should be available to assist people to resolve their disputes, such
as a branch removal
notice process as exists in the Queensland and Tasmanian
Acts. There was some support for such a process.145
6.75 Many people were in favour of shifting the responsibility for arranging
and funding tree works from the affected neighbour to
the tree owner.146 One
community member
favoured a process similar to issuing neighbours with a ‘Notice to
Fence under the
Fences Act 1968
(Vic) for seeking agreement about fencing
6.76 Most loc
al councils that were consulted did
not raise any major concerns with implementing a similar process in Victoria.
Baw Baw Shire Council
and the City of Port Phillip stated that such a process
would provide clarity and assurance for neighbours.148 Nillumbik Shire Council,
however, was concerned that this process may exacerbate a tree dispute. It was
also concerned that a vindictive neighbour could issue
a notice to recoup costs
for unnecessary works.149
6.77 Nillumbi
k suggested that care needed to be
taken about the type of branches the notice could apply to. Nillumbik proposed
that if a branch
removal process was introduced there should be a safeguard
trigger such as a maximum applicable thickness of a branch at the point
connects with the trunk or main stem. Without this safeguard, neighbours could
remove large, significant branches that may destabilise
6.78 Arborist
Robert Mineo did not support the
introduction of a branch removal process. He noted the potential for a branch
removal process to
encourage and enable neighbours to cut away branches without
arborist assessment, which could in turn adversely affect the tree.151
140 Submissions 5 (Name withheld), 6 (Name withheld), 17 (Name withheld), 19
(Name withheld), 22 (Name withheld), 23 (Name withheld),
33 (Annette Neville), 34 (Allan Day); Consultation 1 (Aldo Taranto); Survey
Respondent 60.
141 Survey Respondent 72.
142 Consultation 15 (Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal).
145 Submission 23 (Name withheld); Consultations 4 (Participants in
facilitated discussion at VTIO ArborCamp2018), 10 (Baw Baw Shire
Council), 12
(City of Port Phillip).
146 Submissions 5 (Name withheld), 6 (Name withheld), 19 (Name withheld), 23
(Name withheld). In Ch 3 the Commission outlined community
an unequal balance of rights.
147 Submission 23 (Name withheld). See
Fences Act 1968
148 Consultations 10 (Baw Baw Shire Council), 12 (City of Port Phillip).
149 Consultation 9 (Nillumbik Shire Council).
151 Consultation 14 (Robert Mineo).
The Commission’s
conclusions—resolving disputes informally
6.79 Informal resolution is cost-effective, allows neighbours to come up with
creative solutions to their problems,152 and may help
to preserve neighbourly
relations. Not all disputes will be suitable for informal negotiation. In many
tree disputes relations between
neighbours are so poor that resolution in VCAT
is the best option. However, the more disputes that can be settled outside the
system, the better.
Encouraging informal resolution in the new
6.80 The new Act should clearly state that nothing in the Act prevents
parties from resolving their tree dispute informally between
themselves.
6.81 The new Act should also include a non-exhaustive list of examples of the
use to resolve their
disputes to help them understand their options better. The list recommended by
the QLRC noted earlier is helpful.153
Community resources
6.82 The new Act should be supported by extensive community resources in
order to make the law more accessible and more widely understood.
information should incorporate the examples of informal resolution tools
referred to in the new Act—for example,
neighbour-led resolution,
mediation through DSCV and abatement—and explain how these mechanisms work
as well as tips about
good negotiating strategies.
6.83 A samp
le standard letter would also be a
useful community resource to facilitate communication and negotiation. The
community should also
be better informed about the role of arborists. Obtaining
independent professional advice in the early stages may assist parties
agreement out of the tribunal process. See Chapter 12.
Community-based alternative dispute
6.84 The Commission acknowledges the small number of tree disputes
currently resolved through DSCV-led mediation. Low resolution
rates for tree
disputes can be attributed to a number of factors including unclear rights and
responsibilities.
6.85 Mediation is a useful tool to resolve some tree disputes quickly and
cost-effectively as illustrated by DSCV examples of mediated
outcomes noted
above. There are clear
advantages of resolving a tree dispute through ADR, such as more flexible
processes and greater scope to come up with creative solutions
that both parties
agree to. Mediation
is also confidential. Any agreement that is reached can also be kept
confidential by agreement between the parties. The NSWLEC identified
agreement via ADR, unlike court orders resulting from legal action, produces no
‘winner’ or ‘loser’,
which is helpful for preserving
relations between neighbours. It was suggested that legal action which results
in court orders may
have less scope to resolve underlying interpersonal issues
between neighbours.154
6.86 Clearer laws will improve the resolution rates for community-based
mediation. The introduction of the new Act will guide the
community about how
the law applies and address some of the concerns raised by DSCV. A new Act will
to DSCV and assist DSCV to resolve disputes
that progress through its mediation service. The new Act will ensure that
parties participating
in mediation outside the VCAT process have a greater
understanding of the way a matter would be resolved within VCAT and the range
likely orders. This will encourage parties to persevere with informal
resolution.
152 Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Civil Justice Review (Report No 14,
153 Queensland Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Neighbourhood Disputes
(Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
(Report No 72, December 2015)
Recommendation 4-4.
154 Consultation 11 (Land and Environment Court of New South Wales).
6.87 The rate of ADR outside the VCAT process may also be improved if the
supporting information for the new Act clearly states that
engaging in mediation
through DSCV is one of the ways that neighbours may choose to informally
resolve their tree dispute.
This would lift the public profile of the role of DSCV. Supporting
information should also outline VCAT’s powers to refer parties
the formal tribunal process. This may also discourage parties from choosing to
opt out of the informal mediation process.
6.88 DSCV should work with professional arboricultural associations to raise
awareness about DSCV’s services so that arborists
can inform neighbours
and refer them to DSCV. See Chapter 12.
6.89 The new Act should not compel neighbours to participate in
DSCV-facilitated mediation outside the tribunal process. Community-based
mediation is voluntary.155 Any change compelling people to take part in
mediation, other than as part of ADR ordered by a court or
tribunal, would
change the nature of informal community-based mediation.
6.90 In many situations, community-based mediation may not be helpful. In
Queensland anecdotal evidence suggests that a reasonably
high number of
applicants in QCAT have attempted to resolve their matter through free mediation
before proceeding to QCAT.156 Of
these, a considerable number of people report
that their neighbour ignored any agreement reached. The NSWLEC also noted that
applicants had unsuccessfully attempted mediation through CJCs.157
6.91 Even so, a partially successful community-based mediation may help
parties to narrow the issues in dispute for a subsequent VCAT
hearing. The
Commission is of the view that formal tribunal-ordered mediation may still be
appropriate and successful even where
community-based mediation was not. See
Chapter 7 for a discussion on Tribunal ordered ADR.
155 Justice Bergin states: ‘In the vast majority of cases in Australia
mediation is voluntary. Although there may be a mandatory
requirement to
attend mediation, the outcome is always voluntary. The parties alone determine
whether they will settle their
dispute and the terms upon which they will
settle their dispute, albeit that they are assisted in this regard by the
[footnotes omitted].’ Justice P A Bergin, ‘The Objectives,
Scope and Focus of Mediation Legislation in Australia’
(Paper presented at
Mediate First, 11 May 2012) [7].
156 Consultation 15 (Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal).
157 Consultation 11 (Land and Environment Court of New South Wales).
Modification of
6.92 The Commission agrees with the majority of community responses which
support the continued availability of abatement as a remedy.
Abatement is an
effective tool for resolving many tree disputes and may prevent them from
escalating.
6.93 In keeping with interstate reforms, the common law abatement remedy
should be modified by the new Act to the extent that an affected
should no longer be required to return abated tree parts, including
6.94 The Commission is persuaded by the QLRC report and community feedback
that the return of abated tree parts may cause a tree dispute
or make it worse.
neighbours should not be prevented from coming to their own agreement about
how abated material is to be dealt with.
6.95 This modification should apply only to trees in zones captured under the
proposed statutory scheme as recommended in Chapter
5. For example, in the
farming context, it may be important to return tree parts such as branches
containing important produce or
feed for animals.
6.96 It should not be necessary to require an affected neighbour to give
notice to a tree owner, whether verbally or in writing,
before abating. This
would limit the operation of a self-help remedy that is quick, simple and
6.97 Abatement should remain subject to permit requirements under local
planning schemes or other laws that seek to protect vegetation.
This would act
as an adequate safeguard against indiscriminate and potentially harmful pruning
or cutting of environmentally and
culturally significant trees.
Abatement costs
6.98 Many affected neighbours find the limited scope to recoup the costs of
abatement unfair. The affected neighbour is generally
wholly responsible for the
cost. The tree owner is not required to reimburse the affected neighbour or
contribute to the cost.159
However, the Commission does not support the
modification of abatement so that affected neighbours can recoup from the tree
any costs incurred.
6.99 Abatement was developed under the common law for any type of private
nuisance.160 Allowing an affected neighbour to recoup the
costs of abatement in
the context of tree disputes would substantially displace the established
common law, which only allows
the costs to be recovered in limited
circumstances where an affected neighbour has an obligation to mitigate damage
that is already
occurring.161 It would also alter the ‘self-
by the cooperation or contribution of another party.
6.100 Finally, it may place an unfair cost burden on the tree owner for
the simple fact of having a tree on their land. Neighbours
who are concerned
with the tree owner, engage in
mediation or take legal action under the new
Act if the overhanging branch has caused damage or is likely to cause
or harm. In the discussion below, the Commission also proposes that
further consideration is given to a formal branch removal process
Act which would provide scope to recover limited costs associated with some
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
; Queensland Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Neighbourhood
Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
(Report No 72, December 2015)
[3.261]–[3.262].
Young v Wheeler
(1987) Aust Torts Reports 80–126, 68,972;
City of Richmond v Scantelbury
[1991] VicRp 44
[1991] 2 VR 38
Lemmon v Webb
[1895] AC 1;
Young v Wheeler
[1987] Aust
Torts Reports
Proprietors of Strata Plan No 14198 v Cowell
(1989) 24 NSWLR 478
Entry onto the tree owner’s land
6.101 Access to the tree owner’s land may be necessary in some
situations for practical reasons, such as where a branch needs
to be cut at the
juncture of the trunk or main stem, or in very small spaces. However, it would
not be appropriate to remove liability
for trespass as it applies to abatement.
To do so would result in substantial intrusions on people’s land. Such a
create a range of other issues including the removal of significant
amounts of vegetation, disputes about the illegal destruction
of vegetation and
also potential physical altercations when neighbours disagree.162
6.102 The law only allows a defence of ‘necessity’ in cases of
trespass where it is necessary to ‘preserve life
or protect property from
real and imminent harm’.163 The majority of ordinary tree encroachments
are unlikely to satisfy this
threshold. Allowing an affected neighbour to enter
the tree owner’s land without any independent assessment of the need would
significantly erode a landowner’s exclusive possession of and control over
their property.164
6.103 The current limitation of abating within boundary lines appropriately
balances competing interests. If a neighbour is concerned
or harm and does not think that abatement will remedy the situation he or she
may commence a matter in VCAT
and seek an appropriate remedy. The orders
recommended in Chapter 9 include entry to land to carry out tree works and to
quote for works to a tree that is subject to the order. If the matter
is urgent it would be triaged by the Tribunal.
Australian Standards
6.104 The Commission accepts the importance of the Australian Standards for
tree works. However, it would not be reasonable or practicable
to restrict a
person’s right to abate so that it can only be exercised by a qualified
arborist in accordance with the Australian
Standards. This would significantly
limit the usefulness of the remedy, particularly for minor encroachments or
where parties cannot
afford an arborist.
6.105 Community members who undertake abatement without an arborist should
not be required to comply with the Australian Standards
on pruning. The
Australian Standards are highly technical and difficult for the community to
interpret and apply. Additionally, they
are not easily accessible and are only
accessible through purchase.165
6.106 The Commission concludes that the scope of abatement and the Australian
Standards cannot be reconciled. The Australian Standards
are intended to be used
as guides and are not statutory instruments.
6.107 The only way for community members to comply with the Australian
Standards is to engage a qualified arborist. Professional arboriculture
associations and local councils should consider raising community awareness
recommendations are contained in Chapter 12. In addition, recommendations are
made in Chapter 9 that VCAT orders be made in
accordance with the Australian
Standards and that VCAT may further specify that works must be carried out by a
suitably qualified
162 See eg,
R v Stenberg
[2013] NSWSC 1858
; Order of Magistrate J
Lesser (Magistrates Court of Victoria, H13012408, 14 February 2018); see also
Mel Buttigieg, ‘Neighbourhood
tree-son! Family’s CCTV catches man
next door cutting down their tree’,
Yahoo7 News
(online, 11 May
<https://au.news.yahoo.com/geelong-man-catches-neighbour-on-cctv-hacking-trees-with-chainsaw-35448374.html>.
163 Kit Barker, Peter Cane, Mark Lunney and Francis Trindade,
Torts in Australia
(Oxford University Press, 5th ed, 2012) [4.4.1]. The
situation which the affected neighbour believes compels them to act to preserve
life and property must be ‘an urgent situation of imminent peril’
that ‘existed actually, and not merely in the
belief of the [affected
neighbour]’:
Southwark London Borough Council v Williams
Cope v Sharpe
[1912] UKLawRpKQB 215
[1912] 1 KB 496
164 ‘There are two requirements for possession in law: the actual
physical control of property
(factum possidendi)
and the intention to
exercise dominium over it (animus possidendi). In sum, the legal conception of
“possession” encapsulates
the complete and unshakeable physical
control with full awareness or knowledge of the property coupled with an
obstinate will to
exclude all others from it.’: Thomson Reuters Westlaw,
The Laws of Australia
(at 1 January 2015) 28 Real Property, ‘2
Possession’ [28.16.160].
165 The cost of Australian Standard 4970-2009
Protection of Trees
on Development Sites
is $128.19. The cost
of Australian Standard 4373-2007
Pruning of Amenity Trees
is $112.64. See generally SAI Global,
Page, 2019)
<https://infostore.saiglobal.com/>.
Not recommended: a formal requirement in the Act
for ‘reasonable attempts to reach agreement’
6.108 The Commission is not persuaded that the new Act should include a
requirement that an applicant must have made reasonable attempts
to resolve the
issue before an order can be made by VCAT. Such a requirement is included in the
NSW and Queensland Acts.
6.109 Community feedback suggests that many neighbours do not necessarily
want to take legal action against their neighbour, due
to the stress and costs
involved and the possibility of damaging their relationship.166 As a result,
legal action is generally only
likely to be initiated as a last resort. It is
reasonable to assume that when a neighbour commences legal action, the dispute
escalated to a point where resolution may no longer be possible without VCAT
involvement. The Commission also notes VCAT’s
concern that any formal
pre-condition may also lead to VCAT being ‘caught up in
administrative analysis of papers’ on the issue of the extent of
informal negotiation.167 Further, because the threshold for
meeting this
statutory requirement is very low in New South Wales and Queensland, its
practical effect may be limited.
6.110 However, these interstate provisions perform an important role in
reinforcing to the community that legal action should be a
last resort. The VCAT
Act provides the Tribunal with the power to refer parties to ADR, such as
compulsory conference or mediation.168
Parties may be referred to a compulsory
conference before the hearing, while a referral to mediation may occur at any
point in proceedings
where the Tribunal deems it appropriate.169 The Commission
is of the view that VCAT should be encouraged to use those existing powers
the context of tree disputes.
6.111 Any information that the Tribunal member can glean from previous
informal discussions may also act to narrow the issues in dispute
subsequent hearing. This is discussed further in Chapter 7. It was also
recommended in Chapter 5 that the application form for
initiating proceedings in
VCAT require parties to detail what steps they have taken to resolve the dispute
informally.
6.112 To reinforce the importance of attempting to negotiate informally where
possible, information provided by VCAT about the operation
of the new Act should
specifically inform parties that VCAT can order them to participate in ADR. See
Chapter 12.
Not recommended: tree
owner responsibilities in the Act
6.113 The new Act should not contain non-actionable tree owner
responsibilities, such as those included in the Queensland and Tasmanian
The Commission favours the legislative approach in the NSW Act because it is
simpler and more straightforward. The inclusion
of tree owner responsibilities
that are non-binding, together with a civil cause of action for damage or harm,
may create confusion
in the community. The Commission
166 See the discussion in Ch 2.
167 Supplementary Consultation 1 (Victorian Civil and Administrative
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
is persuaded by the comments of the NSWLEC that
tree owner responsibilities may intensify tree disputes and may have the
of diminishing the urban forest if tree owners feel obliged to prune or
remove their trees to meet their responsibilities.170 While
tree dispute issues
affect many people, it would be a disproportionate response to create
responsibilities in the new Act that extend
to all tree owners on private land,
even if they are nonbinding.
6.114 Clear decision-making principles under the new Act together with clear
community information will provide guidance to the community
application of the law to their own disputes. See Chapter 8. Ultimately, the
ability of an affected neighbour to initiate
a matter in VCAT and to obtain a
quick remedy may motivate a tree owner to manage their tree in mutually
beneficial ways.
For future consideration: branch removal
6.115 The introduction of a branch removal notice in the new Act received
some community support.171 However, some responses cautioned
that care needs to
be taken in determining which branches such a process would apply to, and how
branches are pruned so as to avoid
damaging trees.172
6.116 The QLRC found that the branch removal notice is ‘working
well’ in Queensland and is ‘a valuable means by
which many disputes
can be adequately addressed’.173
6.117 A branch removal notice would address one of the most common causes of
tree disputes in Victoria—overhanging branches.174
The Commission
acknowledges that unless an overhanging branch issue raises concerns about
damage or harm, it would not fit within
the ambit of the new Act (see Chapter
5). In this situation the affected neighbour would need to pursue an informal
remedy such as
alternative dispute resolution175 or abatement or bring an action
in nuisance or negligence176 at common law.
6.118 A formal branch removal notice process would facilitate communication
between parties by setting out clear procedural steps
that neighbours are
required to follow to address concerns. It would also put the tree owner on
notice and may assist in breaking
a negotiation stalemate, especially where a
tree owner is uncooperative. During the parliamentary debates for the
Neighbourhood Disputes Resolution Bill 2010
Attorney-General of Queensland noted that a branch removal process may be
particularly beneficial to people who cannot exercise their
right to abate for
physical or financial reasons.177
6.119 A branch removal notice would also address community concerns about the
imbalance of rights between the tree owner and affected
neighbour. The notice
would formally shift responsibility for pruning or removing overhanging
branches from the affected neighbour
to the tree owner, subject to the
limitation that the scheme would only apply to particular branches in
‘high traffic’
areas. Where the tree owner does not comply, a
limited right
to recoup the costs of tree works arranged by the affected neighbour up to a
statutory limit, as occurs in Queensland, may help reduce
a proportion of the
financial burden on affected neighbours. It may also provide a financial
incentive to a tree owner to address
their neighbour’s concerns.
170 Consultation 11 (Land and Environment Court of New South Wales).
171 Submission 23 (Name withheld); Consultations 4 (Participants in
facilitated discussion at VTIO ArborCamp2018), 10 (Baw Baw Shire
Council), 12
(City of Port Phillip).
172 Consultations 9 (Nillumbik Shire Council), 14 (Robert Mineo).
173 Queensland Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Neighbourhood Disputes
(Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
(Report No 72, December 2015) [3.353],
174 As discussed in Ch 2.
175 As noted earlier, DSCV provided an example of a dispute over leaf litter
being successfully mediated.
176 For personal injury or property damage as discussed in Ch 3. See, eg,
Marshall v Berndt
[2011] VCC 384
Owners Corporation SP020030 v
[2016] VCC 1656
Robson v Leischke
[2008] NSWLEC 152
(2008) 72 NSWLR 98
177 Queensland,
Parliamentary Debates,
Legislative Assembly, 2 August
2011, 2306 (Paul Lucas, Deputy Premier and Attorney-General, Minister for Local
Government and Special
Minister of State).
6.120 The Commission does not recommend that the new Act include a branch
removal notice process from the outset. Instead, if necessary,
the Act could be
broadened to include this process when it is reviewed after five years of
operation (see Chapter 13). At that time,
it will be clearer if there is a
genuine need for a formal branch removal process.
6.121 Further consultation should occur with the Queensland and Tasmanian
Governments, as well as dispute resolution centres and community
legal centres
and whether it is effective in reducing
the number of matters that proceed to a
hearing in QCAT or RMPAT. Consultation should also consider any disadvantages of
such a process
and how well it fits with the underlying policy of the new Act.
Further consultation is needed because this process would complicate
operation of the new Act. The branch removal notice
processes in the Queensland and Tasmanian schemes work in conjunction with
legislated tree owner responsibilities which the Commission
is not recommending
for the new Act. Therefore, consultation should also ascertain whether a
statutory notice process would work
effectively in a scheme that does not
include tree owner responsibilities.
6.122 QCAT told the Commission that because QCAT does not receive
applications for the types of disputes captured by this process,
QCAT cannot
comment definitively on the effectiveness of this mechanism.178 The Tasmanian
scheme has only recently commenced, and
it may take some time before its
effectiveness can be assessed. The Commission also observes that NSWLEC and QCAT
manage a similar
number of tree disputes even though New South Wales does not
have a branch removal notice process.179
6.123 If a branch removal notice process is introduced the Commission’s
preliminary view is that:
• It should be accompanied by a compulsory form that puts the tree
owner on notice and includes details about the overhanging
branches and each
neighbours’ rights and include a response form.
• It should incorporate safeguards similar to those contained in the
Queensland and Tasmanian Acts.
• The number of notices that can be issued for any tree in a calendar
year should be limited to prevent the notice being used
vexatiously and to
prevent the unnecessary removal of vegetation.
• It should include a maximum statutory amount that can be recovered
and that the cost of the affected neighbour’s own
labour should be
excluded. Consultation should be undertaken about what would be an appropriate
statutory cap noting that the QLRC
recommended that the amount be increased from
$300 to $500 and that the cap is $500 in Tasmania.180
• A third safeguard trigger (such as the thickness of the branch)
should not be included as this would be difficult for community
measure, especially where they do not have access to the tree owner’s
6.124 Importantly, a branch removal notice should supplement the options
available to people to resolve their disputes before initiating
application in VCAT. Branches covered by this process would continue to be
able to be removed by the common law remedy
of abatement and the affected
neighbour would still be able to take legal action in VCAT if they are seeking
particular repairs
or to recoup costs over and above the statutory cap.
178 Consultation 15 (Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal).
179 The NSWLEC handles approximately 10–13 tree dispute cases per month
and QCAT handles approximately 200 tree dispute cases
per year (an average of
approximately 16 cases a month): Consultations 11 (Land and Environment Court of
New South Wales), 15 (Queensland
Civil and Administrative Tribunal).
180 Queensland Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Neighbourhood Disputes
(Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
(Report No 72, December 2015) [3.313];
Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants Act 2017
; Department of
Justice (Tas),
Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants
www.justice.tas.gov.au/mediation_and_dispute_resolution/neighbourhood-disputes-about-
Not recommended: a general notice
6.125 The Commission does not recommend that the new Act incorporate a
process allowing an affected neighbour to issue a formal notice
requiring the
tree owner to take action, as occurs in Tasmania. It would add a layer of
complexity and bureaucracy that the community
may find hard to navigate. The
Commission recommends a standard sample letter as a separate community resource
that neighbours may
choose to use to communicate and negotiate with their
neighbour. See Chapter 12.
neighbourhood tree disputes in VCAT
Introduction
In which forum should disputes be
The approach in other jurisdictions
International jurisdictions
Community responses—where should tree
disputes be resolved?
Community responses—important
characteristics of a tree dispute forum
The Commission’s conclusions
Resolving neighbourhood tree disputes in
Introduction
7.1 Court and tribunal proceedings are described as ‘formal’
because they are conducted before a judicial officer (judge
or magistrate) or
tribunal member, in accordance with court or tribunal processes and with notice
given to affected parties.1 Unlike
informal resolution, legal proceedings
produce binding and enforceable legal outcomes.
7.2 The consultation paper asked the community which court/s or tribunal
should have jurisdiction to hear formal tree disputes if
a new Act was
introduced. This chapter explores community responses and examines how tree
disputes are currently decided in Victoria,
interstate and overseas. It
concludes by recommending that the Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal
(VCAT) be given jurisdiction
to decide matters under the new Act and examines
some of VCAT’s processes for managing those disputes.
In which forum should disputes be
7.3 In Victoria, tree disputes can currently be heard in three places:
• most often in the Magistrates’ Court2
• larger claims in the County Court3
• more rarely cases involving very large or complex claims in the
Supreme Court.4
7.4 The operation of each of these jurisdictions was examined in the
consultation paper in detail.
7.5 The Magistrates’ Court and VCAT are the jurisdictions that are most
suitably placed to hear tree disputes under the new
Act. Whether or not tree
disputes should continue to be heard in the Magistrates’ Court or
in VCAT is a key consideration
in the design of a new Act.
7.6 The differences between them are discussed in the following section.
1 Although proceedings in a tribunal are considered less formal than court
proceedings: Department of Justice and Community Safety
(Web Page, 9 August 2018) <https://
www.justice.vic.gov.au/justice-system/courts-and-tribunals
Victoria Legal Aid, Victoria’s Courts and Tribunals
Page, 31 December 2018) <https://
www.legalaid.vic.gov.au/find-legal-answers/courts-and-
legal-system/victorias-courts-and-tribunals>.
2 The Magistrates’ Court has jurisdiction to hear civil matters where
claims for works or damages are no more than $100,000:
Magistrates’
Court Act 1989
(‘jurisdictional limit’);
3 The County Court has unlimited jurisdiction to hear all applications,
claims, disputes and civil proceedings regardless of the type
of relief sought
or the subject matter that are not by this or any other Act excluded from its
County Court Act 1958
Court of Victoria, Fees and Costs for Civil Proceedings
(Web Page, 2019)
www.countycourt.vic.gov.au/forms-and-fees/
fees-and-costs-civil-proceedings>.
4 Claims for $200,000 and above in civil proceedings are heard in the Supreme
Court of Victoria: Victoria Legal Aid,
Victoria’s Courts and Tribunals
(Web Page, 13 December 2018) <https://
www.legalaid.vic.gov.au/find-legal-answers/courts-and-legal-system/victorias-courts-
and-tribunals>; see, eg, the Major Torts List which is ‘designed to
facilitate and expedite the passage of large or otherwise
significant tortious
claims to trial’: Supreme Court of Victoria Common Law Division,
Practice Note SC CL No 4: Major Torts List,
October 2018, 1
www.supremecourt.vic.gov.au/law-and-practice/practice-notes
see also Supreme Court of Victoria,
How the Court Works
(Web Page, 2019)
www.supremecourt.vic.gov.au/about-the-court/how-the-court-works
Magistrates’ Court
of Victoria
7.7 The Magistrates’ Court has jurisdiction to hear civil matters such
as tree disputes up to the value of $100,000.5 As a court
of law and equity it
can provide a wide range of remedies. It can order people to do certain things
or to stop doing something where
the payment of money may not be
sufficient.6
Fees—the Magistrates’ Court
7.8 Bringing a case before the Magistrates’ Court can be costly. In
addition to the cost of legal representation, there are
court fees.7 The Court
application/filing fee ranges from
$147.40 (for claims under $500), to $702.30 (for claims over $70,000). Other
fees may apply, for example for serving documents on
the other party ($73).8
These are generally applied on a sliding scale by reference to the value claimed
for works or damages..9
The Magistrates’ Court may grant a fee waiver to
persons experiencing financial hardship.10
Alternative dispute resolution—the Magistrates’ Court
7.9 The Magistrates’ Court has a specific arbitration process for
smaller claims, such as neighbourhood disputes, designed to
keep costs down,
encourage early resolution and divert simpler cases away from full hearings.11
Parties seeking relief under $10,000
are generally referred for compulsory
arbitration.12 Parties may also mutually agree to
undertake arbitration, or one party will apply and the other will be required
to participate. The arbitration process is less formal
and simpler than a
hearing.13 The parties’ cases are heard by an independent arbitrator,
who is empowered to make a binding
decision about the case.14
7.10 Other mechanisms to support early resolution of disputes include
prehearing conferences, mediation and early neutral evaluation.15
Pre-hearing
conferences, if directed by the Court, are compulsory for the parties and their
lawyers and are generally heard before
an experienced registrar. The registrar identifies and explores the issues
and promotes settlement.16 If no resolution is reached,
the registrar may make
directions for the dispute to proceed to a hearing.17
7.11 Referral to mediation can occur with or without the parties’
consent.18 It is usually conducted by a registrar, a judicial
registrar or an
external mediator.19 Mediation before a registrar costs $261.50, and $453.70
before a judicial registrar.20
Magistrates’ Court Act 1989
(definition of
‘jurisdictional limit’).
6 The jurisdictional limit for claims for equitable relief is also $100,000:
Magistrates’ Court Act 1989
Supreme Court Act 1986
gives the Magistrates’ Court power
(subject to its jurisdictional limit) to grant such general equitable remedies
Supreme Court has power to grant in like cases. The most common form of
equitable relief sought is injunctive relief: Judicial College
of Victoria,
Magistrates Court Bench Book
(at 31 January 2012) 1.6 ‘Equitable
7 Current values are set out in the Magistrates’ Court of Victoria,
Fees and Costs Ready Reckoner
(effective 1 January 2019).
Magistrates’ Court Act 1989
11 For the purpose of the
Magistrates’ Court Act 1989
arbitration is a simplified procedure of hearing a claim for monetary relief
$10,000 or less:
12 Unless the Court determines otherwise or approves the parties’
application to have the matter heard without arbitration:
Magistrates’
Court Act 1989
–(3). On its website, the
Magistrates’ Court states that ‘Defended civil matters for car
accidents and claims less
than $1000 are referred straight to
arbitration’: Magistrates’ Court of Victoria,
Resolving A Dispute
(Web Page, 13 December 2018)
www.mcv.vic.gov.au/civil-matters/resolving-dispute
Magistrates’ Court Act 1989
15 Submission 16 (Magistrates’ Court of Victoria). See also
Magistrates’ Court Act 1989
Magistrates’
Court General Civil Procedure Rules 2010
(Vic) Ord 50; Magistrates’
Court of Victoria,
(Web Page, 14 January 2019) <https://
www.mcv.vic.gov.au/civil-
matters/resolving-dispute/mediation>.
Magistrates’ Court Act 1989
Magistrates’ Court of Victoria,
Pre-Hearing Conferences
13 December 2018)
www.mcv.vic.gov.au/civil-matters/resolving-dispute/pre-hearing-conferences
Magistrates’ Court Act 1989
Magistrates’ Court of Victoria,
Pre-Hearing Conferences
13 December 2018) <https://
www.mcv.vic.gov.au/civil-matters/resolving-dispute/pre-hearing-conferences
Magistrates’ Court Act 1989
19 An external mediator can be selected from the Magistrates’ Court
Single List of External Mediators: Magistrates’
Court of Victoria,
(Web Page, 14 January 2019) <https://
www.magistratescourt.vic.gov.au/jurisdictions/civil/procedural-information/mediation-
process-2011-single-list-external-mediators>.
20 Magistrates’ Court of Victoria,
Fees and Costs Ready Reckoner
(effective 1 January 2019).
7.12 The Dispute Settlement centre of Victoria (DSCV) operates a Civil
Claims Program for defended civil claims in the Magistrates
Court for claims
under $40,000.21 This ‘is a quick and inexpensive way for the parties to
resolve their civil claim without
court hearing’.22 The program operates in a number of
Magistrates’ Court locations in metropolitan and regional areas.23
Mediations by DSCV are free.24
7.13 The Court may direct any matter to proceed to early neutral
evaluation.25 This involves a magistrate, in the presence of
the parties and
their legal representatives, hearing a statement of the relevant evidence and
principles of law from each party,
facilitating discussion and presenting a
non-binding opinion on the likely outcome.26 If the parties do not reach a
resolution,
their matter can proceed to a hearing.27
Subject-matter expertise—the Magistrates’ Court
7.14 The Magistrates’ Court currently hears fence disputes under the
Fences Act 1968
(Vic). These disputes include matters about building and
repairing fences, such as who pays, what type of fence is built and where.28
Magistrates’ Court has power to make a broad range of orders about fencing
disputes.29
Flexibility and support—the Magistrates’ Court
7.15 The Magistrates’ Court ‘has the largest suburban and
regional reach of any adjudicative body in Victoria’.30
It sits at 51
metropolitan and regional locations in Victoria31 and also operates through
specialist court models that are comparatively
informal and flexible.32 For
example, the Neighbourhood Justice Division of the Magistrates’ Court sits
at the Neighbourhood
Justice Centre in the City of Yarra and has jurisdiction to
hear a range of matters including fence disputes pursuant to the
7.16 Of all the Victorian courts, self-represented litigants appear most
frequently in the Magistrates’ Court.34 The Magistrates’
has processes in place to make sure that it is accessible for the people
who need it. It monitors its information,
forms and processes to ensure that
cases are resolved efficiently and is easy to use.35
21 ‘Except at the Melbourne Magistrates’ Court, defended civil
claims in the Magistrates’ Court of less than $40,000
value are referred
to mediation conducted by the Dispute Settlement Centre of Victoria.’:
Magistrates’ Court of Victoria,
(Web Page, 14 January
www.mcv.vic.gov.au/civil-matters/resolving-dispute/mediation
22 Dispute Settlement Centre of Victoria,
Civil Claims Program
Page, 22 May 2019) <https://
www.disputes.vic.gov.au/about-us/civil-
claims-program>.
24 Dispute Settlement Centre of Victoria,
(Web Page, 3 June
2019) <https://
www.disputes.vic.gov.au/information-and-advice/
dscv-faqs>.
25 Early neutral evaluation is ‘a process for parties to try and
resolve a dispute by presenting their arguments to a magistrate.
A magistrate
will make an evaluation and indicate a possible court outcome’. Any
dispute may be referred to early neutral
evaluation but mainly disputes where
the amount of the claim is $50 000 or more or issues raise complex legal
arguments or factual
disputes: Magistrates’ Court of
Early Neutral Evaluation
(Web Page, 3 December 2018)
www.mcv.vic.gov.au/civil-matters/resolving-dispute/early-neutral-
evaluation>.
27 Early neutral evaluation does not prejudice parties’ chances in any
future hearing, as the magistrate who presides over the
process will not
determine the case at hearing: Magistrates’ Court of Victoria,
Neutral Evaluation
(Web Page, 3 December 2018) <https://www.mcv.
vic.gov.au/civil-matters/resolving-dispute/early-neutral-evaluation>.
28 Magistrates’ Court of Victoria,
Information Guide: Fencing
(9 January 2019) <https://
www.mcv.vic.gov.au/news-and-resources/
publications>.
Fences Act 1968
; see also Department of Justice and
Community Safety (Vic),
Fencing Law in Victoria
(Web Page, 31 January
2019) <https://
www.justice.vic.gov.au/justice-system/laws-and-regulation/civil-law/fencing-law-in-victoria
30 Submission 16 (Magistrates’ Court of Victoria).
31 Magistrates’ Court of Victoria,
The Court System
(Web Page, 4
December 2018) <https://
www.mcv.vic.gov.au/court-system
32 See, eg, Magistrates’ Court of Victoria,
Annual Report
(2016) 47–71.
Magistrates’ Court Act 1989
Magistrates’ Court (Miscellaneous
Civil Proceedings) Rules 2010
(Vic) r 11.02(a).
34 Department of Justice and Regulation (Vic),
Access to Justice Review
Background Paper—Self-Represented Litigants
(Report, 2015) 2.
35 Magistrates’ Court of Victoria,
Annual Report 2015–2016
Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal (VCAT)
7.17 VCAT hears and decides civil and administrative cases in Victoria.36 It
was established under the
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act
.37 VCAT is a ‘modern, accessible, efficient, cost-effective, and
independent judicially-governed tribunal’.38
7.18 VCAT does not currently have jurisdiction to hear private tree disputes
between neighbours at common law because VCAT only derives
its jurisdiction from
Acts of parliament.39
7.19 VCAT comprises four main divisions: the Administrative Division, the
Civil Division, the Human Rights Division and the Residential
Division.40 Claims before VCAT can be monetary and nonmonetary in
7.20 The Civil Division deals largely with monetary claims. It hears disputes
over matters such as consumer issues, domestic building
works, owners’
corporations matters, retail tenancies, sale and
hip of property, and use or flow of water
between properties.41 Although VCAT is known for handling smaller civil
claims,42 there
limit on the amount that can be claimed in the Civil Division43—VCAT
may hear complex and high-value claims.
7.21 Fees are significantly lower than in the courts. An example of an
application fee in VCAT is $63.70 for an owners’ corporation,
goods and services dispute.44 This is waived if the applicant holds a health
care card and the claim is $15,000 or less.
Fees increase as the value of the
dispute increases.45 If the claim is for over $15,000, then hearing fees may
apply for the second
and subsequent hearing days.46
7.22 VCAT has a fee relief program for people experiencing financial
hardship.47 VCAT states on its website that ‘financial
hardship means that
paying the VCAT fee would make the person unable to provide the following for
themselves, their family or other
dependents: food, accommodation, clothing,
medical treatment, education, other basic necessities’.48 Parties may also
to have their fees waived on the grounds of financial hardship or if they
are represented by a community legal centre. 49
36 Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
VCAT Annual Report
(Report, 2018) 2.
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
38 Department of Justice and Regulation (Vic),
Access to Justice Review
Report and Recommendations
(2016) vol 1, 245.
39 VCAT has original jurisdiction and review jurisdiction. See
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
enactment’), 42–44, 67, 69.
40 See, eg, Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
VCAT Annual
Report 2017–2018
(Report, 2018) 9.
41 See, eg, Ibid 11. In other divisions such as the Residential Tenancies
Division and Human Rights Division, claims are more likely
to be non- monetary,
and deal with issues such as anti-discrimination, tenancy or guardianship:
Department of Justice and Regulation
Access to Justice Review Report
and Recommendations
(2016) vol 1, 245. These lists are not exhaustive.
42 Generally considered to be claims not exceeding $10,000. ‘This is
consistent with the definition of a ‘small claim’
in part 2AB of
schedule 1 of the
Victorian Civil and Administrative Act 1998
which applies to proceedings under the
Australian Consumer Law and Fair
ing Act 2012
Magistrates’ Court Act 1989
(Vic)’: Department of Justice and
Regulation (Vic),
Access to Justice Review Background Paper —VCAT Small
Civil Claims
<https://engage.vic.gov.au/accesstojustice>.
43 Department of Justice and Regulation (Vic),
Access to Justice Review
Background Paper—VCAT Small Civil Claims
<https://engage.vic.gov.au/accesstojustice>.
44 Fees are generally applied on a sliding scale depending on the amount in
dispute. Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
Owners Corporations
(Web Page, 1 July 2018) <https://
www.vcat.vic.gov.au/resources/owners-corporations-fees
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal, Renting a Home Fees
Page, 1 July 2018) <https://
www.vcat.vic.gov.au/resources/renting-a-home-fees
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal, Goods and Services Fees
Page, 1 July 2018) <https://
www.vcat.vic.gov.au/resources/
goods-and-services-fees>.
45 Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
Owners Corporations Fees
(Web Page, 1 July 2018) <https://
www.vcat.vic.gov.au/resources/
owners-corporations-fees>;
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
Renting a Home Fees (
Web Page, 1 July 2018) <https://www.vcat.
vic.gov.au/resources/renting-a-home-fees>;
Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal, Goods and Services Fees
(Web Page, 1 July 2018)
www.vcat.vic.gov.au/resources/goods-and-services-fees
46 Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
Fee Categories
Page, 9 May 2017) <https://
www.vcat.vic.gov.au/resources/fee-
categories>.
47 Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
www.vcat.vic.gov.au/steps-to-resolve-your-case/
fees-at-vcat/fee-relief>.
7.23 VCAT revised its fees in July 2016, making it more affordable.50 The
Access to Justice Review found that this ‘new fee
structure adequately
meets concerns about the affordability of commencing applications for small
civil claims’.51
Subject-matter expertise—VCAT
7.24 VCAT has substantial review jurisdiction52 in a number of areas that
intersect with tree disputes, including planning, environment,
heritage and land
management.53
7.25 VCAT is headed by a President, who is a judge of the Supreme Court of
Victoria.54 VCAT also has 14 Vice Presidents, who are
judges of the County
Court of Victoria.55 The
President and Vice-Presidents are responsible for the management and
administration of VCAT.56
7.26 Claims in VCAT’s specialist divisions and lists are determined by
members who ‘have specialist knowledge and qualifications’;
whom also have a legal background.57 Similar requirements apply to commissioners
of bodies that resolve tree disputes in
New South Wales, Queensland and
The jurisdiction of VCAT and the Magistrates’ Court
7.27 VCAT’s j
urisdiction to hear civil claims
aligns with (and extends beyond) the Magistrates’ Courts jurisdiction to
hear similar claims,
particularly in relation to ‘debts, damages for
breach of contract, other contractual disputes, and claims under the Australian
Consumer Law’.58
7.28 However, VCAT does not have the same powers as the Magistrates’
Court. VCAT typically cannot make an award for legal costs59
unless it is fair
to do so,60 whereas the Magistrates’ Court has a broader discretion to
award legal costs.61 In VCAT hearings,
parties generally bear their own
Flexibility and support—VCAT
7.29 VCAT’s is the busiest tribunal of its kind in Australia,
finalising 83,424 cases in 2017–18.63 VCAT’s primary
location is in
Melbourne but it also hears cases in various Magistrates’ Court locations
and local council customer service
offices across the suburbs and regional
Victoria,64 and sits at the Neighbourhood Justice Centre in the City of
50 See, eg, Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
Annual Report
(Report, 2017) 2, 29.
51 Department of Justice and Regulation (Vic),
Access to Justice Review
Report and Recommendations
(2016) vol 1, 284.
52 ‘Review juris
diction’ means VCAT
has the power to review decisions made by an original decision maker such as a
government agency, a statutory
authority or other Administrative decision maker:
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
Application for Review of a
(Web Page) <https://
www.vcat.vic.gov.au/get-started/review-and-regulation/application-for-review-of-a-decision
53 See, eg,
Aboriginal Heritage Act 2006
Heritage Act
Planning and Environment Act 1987
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
–(2); see also
Victorian Civil and Administrative
Tribunal, List Of VCAT Members
(Web Page, 1 February 2019)
www.vcat.vic.gov.au/about-us/list-of-vcat-members
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal, Our Leadership
www.vcat.vic.gov.au/about-us/our-leadership
57 Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
Annual Report
(Report, 2018) 10; see also
Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal, Who We Are
(Web Page) <
www.vcat.vic.gov.au/about-us/who-we-are
58 Department of Justice and Regulation (Vic),
Access to Justice Review
Background Paper—VCAT Small Civil Claims
<https://engage.vic.gov.au/accesstojustice>.
59 An order of a court or tribunal stipulating that legal costs be paid by
one party to another. Also known as ‘party–party’
costs. These
costs are ‘either the amounts lawyers charge their clients for
providing legal services or amounts recoverable
by the successful party for the
work done by their lawyers in legal proceedings. Legal costs include charges for
the lawyers’
services and disbursements, including barristers’
fees, doctors’ reports and the reasonable costs of court recordings
transcripts.’ Parties can also agree that one party will pay the other
parties’ costs to settle their dispute: see
Supreme Court of Victoria,
Costs Court
(Web Page, 2019) <https://
www.supremecourt.vic.gov.au/
law-and-practice/areas-of-the-court/costs-court>.
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
Magistrates’ Court Act 1989
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
63 Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
www.vcat.vic.gov.au/about-vcat
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal, Annual Report 2017–18
(Report, 2018) 7.
64 Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
Annual Report
(Report, 2018) 87; see also
Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal, Contact Us (Web Page) <
www.vcat.vic.gov.au/contact-us
65 Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
Annual Report
(Report, 2018) 87; see also Neighbourhood Justice Centre,
What Happens at VCAT
(Web Pag, 22 June 2018) <https://
www.neighbourhoodjustice.vic.gov.au/attend-court/going-to-vcat/what-happens-at-
7.30 VCAT’s decision makers and processes
differ from a court’
It is less formal than a court. VCAT is bound by
the rules of natural justice,67 but not by the complex rules of evidence,68 or
procedures of the courts.69 Hearings must be conducted
with ‘as little formality and technicality’ and ‘as much
speed’ as the law and a proper consideration of the
matter allow.70
Parties may only appear with lawyers in limited circumstances or with
VCAT’s permission.71 Unlike most courts,
VCAT may conduct hearings in a
‘quasi-inquisitorial’ manner, taking an active role in determining
the facts of a matter,
such as by asking the parties questions.72
7.31 VCAT’s website provides parties with informative material to help
guide them through VCAT’s processes including videos
and a YouTube clip.73
Further information is also available through the registries and the Litigant in
Person Co-ordinator.
7.32 The Access to Justice Review noted that VCAT’s active case
management systems are helpful. It provides an example of active
case management
in VCAT’s Human Rights List:
Once a person has filed their matter, VCAT will serve the documents on the
respondent and, in some cases, contact the parties to discuss
proceeding direct to a compulsory conference or mediation. Alternatively, the
case will be listed for a directions hearing
where VCAT’s processes are
explained and discussed with the parties.74
7.33 VCAT’s website aims to assist people who speak languages other
than English, by providing information in eight languages75
and free access to
interpreters and translators.76
7.34 VCAT has also improved the website’s accessibility for people with
disabilities.77 VCAT’s Accessibility Action Plan
2018–2022 sets
out how VCAT ‘will assist people with disability to gain better access
to the tribunal’.78
Alternative dispute resolution—VCAT
7.35 VCAT uses a range of alternative dispute resolution (ADR) processes to
They are conducted
by ‘members, staff, and external mediators from a panel who are engaged on
a sessional basis’.80
66 Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
Annual Report
(Report, 2018) 10; Victorian Civil and Administrative
Tribunal, Submission No 34 to Victorian Government,
Access to Justice Review
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
Natural justice means ‘the right to be given a fair hearing
and the opportunity to present one’s case, the right
to have a decision
made by an unbiased ... decision maker, and the right to have that decision
based on logically probative
evidence per
Salemi v MacKellar
(1977) 137 CLR 396
’: Peter Butt (ed),
Butterworths Concise
Australian Legal Dictionary
(LexisNexis/Butterworths, 3rd ed, 2004).
68 ‘... except to the extent that it adopts those rules
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
s 98(1)(b).
The body of law regulating the ascertainment of facts
in litigation. Evidence law operated to apply rules of proof as a constraint
upon the adduction of facts in civil and criminal trials: Peter Butt
Butterworths’ Concise Australian Legal Dictionary
(LexisNexis/Butterworths, 3rd ed, 2004) ‘evidence’.
69 ‘... except to the extent that it adopts those rules, practices or
procedures’:
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
s 98(1)(b).
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
71 Ibid (Vic)
; see also Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
Annual Report 2017–18
(Report, 2018) 10; Department of Justice and
Regulation (Vic),
Access to Justice Review Background
Paper—Self-Represented Litigants
<https://engage.vic.gov.au/ accesstojustice>.
72 Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal (VCAT),
VCAT Practice Note
PNVCAT3: Fair Hearing Obligation,
1 January 2013, [13]–[14].
73 Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
(January 2019)
https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCc73nMfBWIiAc0w_Gb4vAEw
74 Department of Justice and Regulation (Vic),
Access to Justice Review
Background Paper—Self-Represented Litigants
<https://engage.vic.gov.au/accesstojustice>.
75 Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
Other Languages
Page) <https://
www.vcat.vic.gov.au/other-languages
76 Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
Practice Note—
PNVCAT3 Fair Hearing Obligation
, 1 January 2013 [10].
77 Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
Annual Report
(Report, 2018) 18.
78 Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
VCAT Accessibility Action
Plan 2018–2022
(Report, November 2017) 3; see also Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal,
Annual Report 2017–18
(Report, 2018)
79 See Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
Practice Note PNVCAT4:
Alternative Dispute Resolution
(ADR), 19 December 2018.
80 Department of Justice and Regulation (Vic),
Access to Justice Review
Report and Recommendations
(2016) vol 1, 204.
Compulsory conference
7.36 Any claim may be referred to a compulsory conference before a hearing by
a Tribunal member (or principal registrar) or parties
may refer themselves.81
Compulsory conferences are conducted by a Tribunal member or the principal
registrar.82
7.37 Compulsory conferences are private and confidential. They allow the
Tribunal member to take an active role in helping the parties
to resolve the
dispute. The Tribunal member will assist parties in identifying issues of fact
and law, encourage settlement, and
offer opinions as to the strengths and
weaknesses of each party’s case.83
7.38 If resolution cannot be achieved through the compulsory conference, then
the Tribunal member can issue orders and directions
for the final hearing at a
later date. Parties do not incur additional costs for compulsory conferencing.84
Conversations during
compulsory conferences are generally confidential and
cannot be used in hearings.85
7.39 Any claim may be referred to mediation and is conducted pursuant to
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
(Vic). This can occur with or without the consent of the parties.
7.40 Mediation is conducted by a person nominated by the Tribunal or
principal registrar.86 Key issues are identified and settlement
is encouraged.
Mediation may target all the issues or a subset of them. Conversations are
confidential and cannot be used in hearings.87
7.41 The mediator or Tribunal member’s role is less active than in
compulsory conferencing, as they cannot ‘give advice
prospects of success’ or ‘put forward options for settlement of the
proceeding’.88
Fast track mediation and hearing program
7.42 For some Civil Division claims for goods and services between $500 and
$10,000 parties may participate in VCAT’s fast track
mediation and hearing
7.43 The fast track program is administered by the Dispute Settlement
Centre of Victoria (DSCV). It began operating in
VCAT’s main
location in Melbourne and then in Geelong.90 The program leverages
DSCV’s existing presence in
regional areas.91 Parties engage in the
program approximately six weeks after an application has been lodged. The
typical process
• an initial telephone conversation with DSCV mediators to explore
options for resolution
• the parties are scheduled for mediation and provided with information
• mediation (up to 90 minutes).92
7.44 If mediation does not result in an agreement, the matter will generally
proceed to a VCAT
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
See Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
Practice Note PNVCAT4:
Alternative Dispute Resolution
(ADR), 19 December 2018, 5. See also
Justice Legislation Amendment (Access to Justice) Act 2018
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
83 Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
Practice Note PNVCAT4:
Alternative Dispute Resolution
(ADR), 19 December 2018, 4–5; see also
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
Compulsory Conferences
www.vcat.vic.gov.au/steps-to-resolve-your-case/resolve-a-
case-by-agreement/compulsory-conferences>.
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
Practice Note PNVCAT4:
Alternative Dispute Resolution
(ADR), 19 December 2018, 6. See also
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
Compulsory Conferences
www.vcat.vic.gov.au/steps-to-resolve-your-case/resolve-a-case-by-agreement/compulsory-conferences
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
86 Ibid (Vic)
; Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
Practice Note
PNVCAT4: Alternative Dispute Resolution
(ADR), 19 December 2018, 3.
88 Department of Justice and Regulation (Vic),
Access to Justice Review
Report and Recommendations
(2016) vol 1, 204–5;
Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
; Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal,
(Web Page) <https://
www.vcat.vic.gov.au/
steps-to-resolve-your-case/resolve-a-case-by-agreement/mediations>.
89 Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
Fast Track Mediation and
(Web Page) <https://
www.vcat.vic.gov.au/resources/fast-track-
mediation-and-hearing>.
90 The FTMH program is a staged program, starting in Geelong and Warrnambool:
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
VCAT Annual Report 2017–18
(Report, 2018) 25.
91 Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
VCAT Annual Report
(Report, 2018) 25. Further regional expansion is planned.
92 Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
VCAT Annual Report
(Report, 2018) 25.
hearing on the same day for a legally binding
decision.93 VCAT can review agreements reached in mediation and issue consent
Even if no settlement is reached during mediation, ‘parties
enter the final hearing with a better understanding of each other’s
of view’.95 Engaging in mediation before a hearing may also shorten the
typical timeframe for VCAT hearings.96
VCAT and the 1998 Fences Review
7.45 The possibility of conferring jurisdiction on VCAT to hear fence
disputes was previously explored by the then Parliamentary Law
Committee97 in its 1998 review of the Fences Act:98
VCAT could perform a larger role in providing an efficient and cost effective
forum for the resolution of a wider range of neighbour
disputes. Consequently,
the Committee recommends the creation of a ‘Neighbour Disputes’
Division of the Tribunal with
the jurisdiction under the proposed Boundaries and
Dividing Fences Act
at its core.99
7.46 This recommendation was not, however, implemented. The
Government’s 2001 response to this recommendation provides some
The Government ... notes that there are complex issues to be considered in
the relocation of any jurisdiction. In particular, the
Government is concerned
that regional and rural Victoria remain serviced in the comprehensive manner in
which they are currently
serviced by local Magistrates’ courts. It
proposes to consider further the necessity of an entirely new Division at the
and whether broader disputes would be better resolved in another
7.47 Currently, fencing disputes are heard in the Magistrates’
The approach in other jurisdictions
7.48 As mentioned earlier in this report, neighbourhood tree disputes are
heard in the Land and Environment Court of New South Wales
(NSWLEC), the
Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal (QCAT), and the Resource Management
and Planning Appeal Tribunal (RMPAT)
in Tasmania.
New South Wales
7.49 The NSWLEC adjudicates tree disputes under the NSW Act. The NSWLEC is a
superior court, with equal status to the NSW Supreme
93 Supplementary Consultation 1 (Victorian Civil and Administrative
Tribunal); Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
VCAT Annual Report
(Report, 2018) 25.
94 Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
Practice Direction
PNVCAT1: Common Procedures,
14 December 2018, cl 34. A consent order
is a legal document issued by VCAT to confirm an agreement between parties:
Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
Consent Orders
www.vcat.vic.gov.au/steps-to-resolve-your-case/resolve-a-case-by-agreement/consent-orders
95 Consultation 7 (Dispute Settlement Centre of Victoria).
97 A bipartisan committee of the Victorian Parliament which can inquire into
and report on legal, constitutional or parliamentary
reform, the
administration of justice, and law reform. The Parliamentary Law Reform
Committee is a former Joint Investigatory
Committee of the Parliament of
Victoria. On 1 August 2013 it merged with the Drugs
and Crime Prevention Committee and became the Law Reform, Drugs and Crime
Committee: see Parliament of Victoria, ‘Law Reform’,
(Web Page) <https://
www.parliament.vic.gov.
au/57th-parliament/lawreform>.
98 Law Reform Committee, Parliament of Victoria,
Review of the
(Report, 1998). 99 Ibid 2.32.
100 Victorian Government,
Government Response to the Victorian Law Reform
Committee Review of the
Fences Act 1968
(Report, 2001) 1–2.
Land and Environment Court Act 1979
; see also Land
and Environment Court of New South Wales,
(Web Page, 29 April
http://www.lec.justice.nsw.gov.au/Pages/about/about.aspx
Decision-making expertise
7.50 The NSWLEC is a specialist jurisdiction.102 Its decision makers are
judges and commissioners, led by a chief judge.103
7.51 Tree disputes are usually heard by ‘at least one Commissioner
with specialist knowledge in arboriculture who is an
arborist’.104 This
provides the parties with some flexibility in relation to the need for expert
7.52 Judges of the NSWLEC may also hear and determine tree disputes. However,
these hearings are conducted in Court rather than on-site.105
Judges contribute
to the development of jurisprudence in this area and Tree Dispute
Principles.106
Case management and preliminary directions
7.53 There is a high level of self-representation among litigants in the
NSWLEC for tree dispute matters. The NSWLEC’s assistant
registrar helps
triage matters when they are filed, keeps parties on track and assists them to
comply with procedural requirements.107
7.54 Once it is determined that the tree dispute falls within the scope of
the NSWLEC’s jurisdiction, a preliminary hearing
is held.108 A final
hearing date is set for a time that is usually no more than six weeks after the
preliminary hearing.109
Alternative dispute resolution
7.55 The NSWLEC encourages the use of ADR to resolve disputes.110 However,
the Commission was informed that parties are rarely referred
to ADR once a
hearing has commenced.111 The NSWLEC informed the Commission that only one
legally complex tree dispute has been referred
7.56 The Commission was told that informal negotiations have generally
reached a stalemate by the time an application to the Court
is made. However,
the Court advised that if it appears that the parties may be open to negotiating
a resolution, the Court may offer
to adjourn the matter, and make consent orders
if parties reach an agreement, for example, through mediation.113
Final on-site hearing
7.57 Nearly all tree disputes are heard and determined on site on the same
day.114 Commissioners will travel to the site of the tree
dispute, including all
regional areas.115
7.58 The hearing begins on neutral territory to the parties, such as a
footpath or alleyway. The Commissioner and the parties visit
owner’s site and the affected neighbour’s site to view and assess
the tree. Decisions are normally made at the
conclusion of the on-site hearing
in the presence of the parties.116
Land and Environment Court Act 1979
104 Land and Environment Court of New South Wales,
Practice Note No 2:
Class 2 Tree Disputes,
1 December 2018, [42].
105 Consultation 11 (Land and Environment Court of New South Wales).
106 The Court will set out tree dispute principles, from time to time,
when appropriate cases arise, to provide an understanding
Court has approached a particular aspect of such disputes. While tree dispute
principles are stated in general terms,
they may be applied to particular cases
to promote consistency. Tree dispute principles are not legally binding’.
of the Court’s Tree Dispute Principles, see Land and
Environment Court of New South Wales,
Tree Dispute Principles
25 September 2017)
http://www.lec.justice.nsw. gov.au/Pages/practice_procedure/principles/tree_principles.aspx
107 Consultation 11 (Land and Environment Court of New South Wales).
108 Land and Environment Court of New South Wales,
Practice Note Class 2:
Tree Disputes
, 1 December 2018, [14].
109 Ibid [16].
110 Land and Environment Court of New South Wales,
Annual Review
(Report, 2017) 18.
111 Consultation 11 (Land and Environment Court of New South Wales).
112 This occurred under
Civil Procedure Act 2005
(NSW). This matter was resolved in mediation: Consultation 11 (Land and
Environment Court of New South Wales).
113 Consultation 11 (Land and Environment Court of New South Wales).
114 Only matters involving large sums of money or complex legal or structural
engineering issues may be too complex to be determined
on site, although an
on-site hearing would be conducted before the matter is decided in Court:
Consultation 11 (Land and Environment
Court of New South Wales).
115 Consultation 11 (Land and Environment Court of New South Wales).
7.59 Although hearings are conducted on site, the usual formalities of the
NSWLEC still apply, such as giving exhibit numbers to documents.
7.60 A hearing generally occurs three months after the application is filed.
This is shorter than matters in other lists of the Court.118
If a matter is
urgent, it is heard in less than three months and may be heard in Court, however
urgent matters of this kind are
generally rare.119
7.61 QCAT is a tribunal established under the
Queensland Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 2009
(Qld) to determine and review disputes and
administrative decisions.120
7.62 QCAT is also a ‘court of record’121 (or a ‘court of
the State’)122 ‘capable of being invested with
the judicial power of
the Commonwealth’.123 In
Amos v Fett,
124 QCAT explained that:
although the tribunal has the formal status of a court of record with summary
characterised and
distinguished by greater procedural flexibility and evidentiary freedom than a
regular court; offering wider remedial
options including making ‘fair and
equitable orders’ in resolving minor civil disputes, awarding compensation
rental losses caused by wrongful termination and granting relief from
excessive hardship.125 [Footnotes omitted]
Queensland Building & Construction Commission v
126 QCAT further explained that although it is a court of record, it
is an ‘inferior court of record’ and that it:
has no jurisdiction other than as granted by the QCAT Act or other enabling
legislation. It has no inherent power to make decisions
appropriate to
redress perceived or discovered wrongs in a matter before it as might be
presumed to be the case in a matter before
the Supreme Court.127
7.64 QCAT is unusual because it also has an internal Appeal Tribunal. A
person can appeal the decision of a QCAT member on a question
of law, fact or
combination of law and fact in certain circumstances with leave of the Appeal
Tribunal.128 See Chapter 9.
Decision-making expertise
7.66 QCAT may appoint an independent tree assessor, a senior arborist with a
qualification equivalent to an AQF Level 5 with five
years of experience,132 to
provide the Tribunal with expert evidence.133 The cost of a tree assessor is
capped at $1000.134 QCAT
will start from the general proposition that the
parties are to share the costs of the tree assessor.135
7.67 QCAT may appoint a tree assessor where it is obvious that parties cannot
come to an agreement or where QCAT is unable to make
a decision without expert
arboricultural opinion (for example, in a complex matter with a large number of
trees).136 Tree assessors
travel throughout Queensland to conduct
inspections.137 Even if a tree dispute is not heard on site, QCAT has the
benefit of the
tree assessor’s expertise where one is appointed. A QCAT
tree assessor provides similar arboriculture expertise to that which
Commissioner of the NSWLEC would bring to a case.
Case management and preliminary directions
7.68 A directions hearing is conducted before a final hearing. At a
directions hearing QCAT will triage the matter by identifying
the nature of the
dispute and the issues in dispute. Parties may be referred to ADR (mediation or
compulsory conference) or advised
to negotiate with one another. A tree assessor
may also be appointed.138
Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act
(Qld) requires the Tribunal to ensure that parties understand the
practices and procedures of QCAT as well as the nature of
the claims being
brought and the power of the Tribunal in
relation to the claims. Accordingly, QCAT will ensure that parties are
educated about the
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act
and QCAT processes and powers.
7.70 Parties are also informed about the different implications of resolving
their matter through ADR with an agreement versus resolution
via court orders.
At directions hearings parties are encouraged to talk to each other. The member
can pause proceedings to allow
parties to leave the hearing room to
negotiate.139
Alternative dispute resolution
7.71 There is a significant focus on alternative dispute resolution (ADR)
within the tree disputes jurisdicti
on of QCAT. Only a
small number of tree disputes proceed to a final hearing— most are
resolved through ADR.140 A referral to
a compulsory conference is more common
than mediation.141
7.72 Compuls
ory conferences have a high rate of
resolution, with 207 out of 216 matters referred from 2013 to October 2018
having been resolved
through this method.142 A compulsory conference is chaired
by a Tribunal member, who may meet privately with each party to discuss
issue confidentially. All discussions at a compulsory conference are
confidential.143
132 Consultation 15 (Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal).
133 Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
Practice Direction No 7
of 2013: Arrangements for Applications for Orders to Resolve Other Issues about
3 April 2014 [4]–[5].
134 Ibid [6].
135 Ibid [7].
136 Consultation 15 (Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal).
137 See generally Ibid [5].
138 Consultation 15 (Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal).
Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2009
Consultation 15
(Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal). QCAT
explained that members prefer to conduct compulsory conferences as a means of
meeting the obligations set out in
sections 28
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2009
‘Conducting proceedings generally’ and
‘Ensuring proper understanding and regard’.
142 Consultation 15 (Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal).
Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2009
Consultation 15
(Queensland Civil and Administrative
7.73 If the compulsory conference results in an agreement, the member will
produce a written record to be signed by all parties
and the member. The
majority of tree disputes referred to a compulsory conference are resolved in
this way. If the compulsory
conference does not result in an agreement, the
member will make directions or orders aimed at reducing the issues to be
at the hearing.144
7.74 A similar process is applied for mediations.145 Mediation also has a
high resolution rate; with 59 out of 61 matters referred
to mediation from 2013
to October 2018 having been resolved through this method.146 If the parties
reach an agreement, the mediator
may record the terms of the agreement in
writing and each party will then sign the agreement and receive a copy.147 If
the parties
are not able to resolve the matter at mediation, the issues in
dispute will be identified and provided to the Tribunal.148 The matter
set down for a subsequent hearing.149
7.75 QCAT may conduct ADR on site, usually on the tree owner’s land.150
However, on-site ADR is usually reserved for applications
relating to an
obstruction of a view.151
Final hearing
7.76 Matters are generally heard in QCAT’s main location in Brisbane or
at regional Magistrates’ Court locations. QCAT
members can travel to the
nearest Magistrates’ Court in the area to hear these matters.152
7.77 Final hearings in regional areas can be conducted via telephone
conference.153 The Tribunal member coordinates the telephone
conference from
Brisbane and parties join by phone.154
7.78 The average time for a matter to be resolved, from the lodgment of the
application to the making of orders, is 16 weeks.155 QCAT
noted that it very
rarely needs to expedite matters. Where needed, it has power to order interim
injunctive relief.156
7.79 RMPAT is an independent tribunal that hears appeals relating to the
management of natural and physical resources and planning
and tree disputes
Neighbourhood Disputes About Trees Act 2017
Tasmanian Act).157
Decision makers
Case management and preliminary directions
7.81 Once an application is filed, the Tribunal will review the application
and determine if any additional information is required
from the parties.161
RMPAT explained ‘an intake assessment of an application is made to ensure
that information required by
legislation and the Tribunal has been filed. Requests for the provision of
information may be issued before the application may
proceed for service upon
respondents or listing
for hearing may occur’. In 4 of the 16 applications filed under the
Tasmanian Act, the Tribunal has requested additional information
applicant before acceptance of the application.162
7.82 If the Tribunal is satisfied the application has met all the necessary
requirements, it will set a preliminary conference within
approximately 14 to 21
days.163 At the preliminary conference the Tribunal will consider a number of
matters, such as the preparation
of evidence and material, and whether ADR may
be appropriate to assist the parties to resolve the dispute.164
Alternative dispute resolution
7.83 At the preliminary conference RMPAT must consider whether the matter
could be settled through ADR such as mediation, conciliation
or neutral expert
evaluation.165 The Tribunal notes that ‘virtually all disputes ... will be
referred’ to ADR before
‘proceeding to a full hearing’.166
7.84 Mediation is the most common form of ADR used by RMPAT.167 The Tasmanian
Act requires RMPAT to consider the following factors
when determining whether or
not to direct parties to resolve their tree dispute, including by making
mediation or conference directions
under sections 16A or 17 of the RMPAT
• any threats of violence made by one of parties;
• any court orders restraining the behaviour of the parties; and
• whether the parties have already participated in any form of
7.85 Mediation can occur before a hearing or during a hearing following an
order to stay proceedings. Matters discussed in mediation
confidential.169
7.86 RMPAT advised that a ‘significant proportion of applications are
withdrawn before proceeding to hearing’. It was
suggested that in the
majority of these cases the parties had engaged in negotiations themselves or
through formal mediation.170
7.87 Parties who reach an agreement through ADR can submit their agreement to
the chairperson for consideration as consent orders
of the Tribunal. Consent
orders will be issued if the chairperson is satisfied the orders are appropriate
and within the Tribunal’s
161 Resource Management and Planning Appeal Tribunal,
Practice Direction
No 18: Applications under the
Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants Act 2017
19 November 2018 [18.2.5].
162 Information provided by RMPAT to the Commission, April 2019.
163 Resource Management and Planning Appeal Tribunal,
Practice Direction
No 18: Applications under the
Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants Act 2017
19 November 2018 [18.3.1].
164 Ibid [18.3.3], [18.3.5].
Resource Management and Planning Appeal Tribunal Act 1993
16a; see also Resource Management and Planning Appeal Tribunal
Direction No 5: Alternative Dispute Resolution
(Practice Document, 19
November 2018) [5.1].
166 Resource Management and Planning Appeal Tribunal
, Practice Direction
No 5: Alternative Dispute Resolution
, 19 November 2018 [5.2]. 167 Ibid
Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants Act 2017
169 Ibid s 16A.
170 Information provided by RMPAT to the Commission, April 2019.
171 Resource Management and Planning Appeal Tribunal,
Practice Direction
18: Applications under the
Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants Act 2017
November 2018 [18.3.4]
Final hearing
7.88 If the parties cannot resolve their dispute through ADR, then the matter
will proceed to a hearing in Hobart.172
7.89 Site inspections are conducted as part of the hearing process, usually
without parties or their representatives present. However,
parties wish to specifically ensure that
the Tribunal members have regard to certain matters on the subject
site’, then they may arrange such a site inspection and notify
other parties.173
7.90 RMPAT must deliver its decision in writing. A decision is usually made
‘14 to 21 days from the conclusion of the hearing’,
depending on the
complexity of the matter.174
International jurisdictions
7.91 Neighbourhood disputes, including those about trees, are heard in
tribunals in some international jurisdictions.
7.92 In New Zealand, tree disputes can be resolved in the Disputes Tribunal
or the District Court depending on the type of claim.
For claims in tort over
destruction or damage to property and generally less than $15,000 (NZD),175
parties may take legal action
in the Disputes Tribunal.176
7.93 Legal action under the
Property Law Act 2007
(NZ) is taken in the
District Court.177
Property Law Act 2007
(NZ) sets out a statutory scheme for
resolving tree disputes separately to actions in tort and allows an affected
neighbour to seek
orders in the District Court for the trimming or removal of a
tree on the basis that it causes actual or potential risk to their
life, health
or property.178
7.94 In Singapore, neighbour disputes are resolved in specialised Community
Disputes Resolution Tribunals (CDRTs) under the
Community Disputes Resolution
.179 CDRTs operate under a division of state courts and deal
exclusively with neighbour disputes. Matters are heard by tribunal judges
are appointed district judges of the State Courts.180
7.95 The Act was implemented ‘to hear cases involving intractable
disputes between neighbours, after all efforts including community
have been exhausted’181 and aims to ‘facilitate the resolution of
community disputes by providing for a statutory
tort for community disputes and for the establishment of Community Disputes
Resolution Tribunals to deal with such disputes’.182
172 Resource Management and Planning Appeal Tribunal
, Practice Direction
7: Hearing Process
, 19 November 2018 [7.3]. 173 Ibid [7.12].
Resource Management and Planning Appeal Tribunal Act 1993
24; Resource Management and Planning Appeal Tribunal,
Practice Direction 7:
Hearing Process,
19 November 2018 [7.13].
175 Or, if everyone agrees, up to NZ$20,000 (NZD): Disputes Tribunal of New
What the Tribunal Can Help With
(Web Page, 29 June 2016)
www.disputestribunal.govt.nz/can-help-with/
Disputes Tribunal Act 1988
(NZ) s 10(1)(c). The Disputes Tribunal
is less formal than a court; it encourages parties to come to an agreement and
makes a decision
on the dispute if the parties cannot reach agreement: Disputes
Tribunal of New Zealand,
‘About the Tribunal’
(Web Page, 2
April 2019) <https://
www.disputestribunal.govt.nz/about-2/
If the amount claimed exceeds $15,000, an affected neighbour will usually need
to make their claim in the District Court, which
forms the base of New
Zealand’s court hierarchy: Disputes Tribunal of New Zealand,
Tribunal Can Help With
(Web Page, 29 June 2016) <
https://www.disputestribunal.govt.nz/can-help-with/
Courts of New Zealand,
(Web Page) <
https://www.courtsofnz.govt.nz/about-the-judiciary/structure-of-the-court-system
Disputes Tribunal Act 1988
(NZ) does not list the
(NZ) as an enactment that confers jurisdiction to on it: see sch 1,
178 It also allows an affected neighbour to seek orders on the basis that a
tree unduly obstructs a view, and causes undue interference
use and enjoyment of the applicant’s land due to leaf litter, overhanging
branches or by blocking sunlight:
Property Law Act 2007
ss 334–5. However, these matters are beyond the scope of this
179 A full list of actionable neighbour disputes is listed in section 4 of
Community Disputes Resolution Act
(Singapore, 2015 rev ed).
Although tree disputes are not explicitly mentioned in this list, the Act states
that this list is not
exhaustive, Ibid s 4(2).
180 Ibid s 14.
181 Ministry of Culture, Community and Youth (Singapore),
Dispute Management Framework
(Web Page, 15 February 2019) MCCY
www.mccy.gov.sg/sector/initiatives/community-dispute-management-framework
Community Disputes Resolution Act
(Singapore, 2015 rev ed).
Community responses—where should tree
disputes be resolved?
7.96 The consultation paper asked which decision-making forum should have
7.97 Community members and stakeholders were invited to take into account the
following factors in their responses:
• formality
• the capacity of parties to participate in proceedings and represent
• expertise of the decision makers
• powers of the decision makers
• resources of the court/tribunal
• location of the court/tribunal.
Community support for VCAT
7.98 Most responses on this issue were in favour of VCAT hearing tree
disputes.183
7.99 Some community members explained that they considered VCAT to be less
formal than a court and that it had the advantages of easier
processes to
navigate, and faster decision making.184 Arborist Ben Kenyon described VCAT as
having a ‘round table feel’.185
One person noted that VCAT was less
7.100 The City of Port Phillip explained that VCAT regularly makes decisions
concerning vegetation in its Planning and Environment
List. Port Phillip noted
that vegetation and other environmental matters form an integral part of permit
applications for development,
and it would make sense for tree disputes
concerning similar matters to be heard by the same decision-making body.187 On
hand, Dr Gregory Moore OAM stated that VCAT’s current processes
and procedures in matters involving vegetation can result in
outcomes that
disregard or overlook the merits of the tree.188
7.101 VCAT proposed that it would be the most suitable jurisdiction to
administer the new Act. It suggested that tree disputes
should be resolved at
the lowest judicial level possible, involve informal processes189 and low
costs. VCAT highlighted its flexible
processes and willingness to be more
experimental than the courts. For example, directions hearings can be held
over the phone
and parties can be sent documents without the need to respond
unless they object. VCAT is also reluctant to make parties attend the
more than necessary because of the associated costs, such as loss of
7.102 VCAT indicated that tree disputes may be best determined in the Civil
Division. In that list members already deal with civil
disputes between parties
and, if needed, can be supported by the expertise of planning and environment
members. VCAT also stated
that tree disputes involving damage to property could
be heard in the Building and Property List.191
183 Submissions 7 (Ben Kenyon), 11 (Name withheld), 23 (Name withheld), 27
(Name withheld); Consultations 3 (HVP Plantations), 6 (Ben
Kenyon), 12 (City of
Port Phillip); Survey Respondents 42, 121.
184 Submission 27 (Name withheld); Consultations 3 (HVP Plantations), 6 (Ben
185 Consultation 6 (Ben Kenyon).
186 Submission 27 (Name withheld).
187 Consultation 12 (City of Port Phillip).
188 Consultation 2 (Dr Gregory Moore OAM).
189 VCAT contrasted its informal processes to the more formal process of the
court, such as pleadings: Consultation 5 (Victorian Civil
and Administrative
Tribunal). Pleadings are ‘written or printed statements that alternate
between the parties to a dispute
and define the issues to be decided
in an action:
Chadwick v Bridge
[1951] HCA 11
(1951) 83 CLR 314
[1877] UKLawRpCh 112
(1877) 5 Ch D 695:
Peter Butt (ed),
Butterworths’
Concise Australian Legal Dictionary
(LexisNexis/Butterworths, 3rd ed,
190 Consultation 5 (Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal).
191 Ibid. The Civil Division has three Lists: Civil Claims, Building and
Property and Owners Corporations.
7.103 VCAT expressed support for carrying out on-site inspections of the tree
and properties in appropriate circumstances. VCAT explained
that inspections
might be helpful for obvious cases of damage but may not be appropriate for more
complex issues which may require
the attendance of experts and other witnesses.
On-site inspections often occur in the Planning and Environment List in the form
a visit by a VCAT member accompanied by parties or unaccompanied, before,
during or after the hearing.. Section 129 of the VCAT Act
provides for the power
of entry and inspection. 192
7.104 VCAT’s preferred approach is for an on-site inspection to occur
after a hearing has taken place when the evidence has
been heard.193 Parties
who are present during an inspection cannot argue their case but they can answer
the member’s questions
are conducted is at the discretion of VCAT and may vary between VCAT
7.105 VCAT also emphasised its ‘strong ADR culture’ and explained
that in all of its Lists, parties have the opportunity
to resolve their own
disputes. VCAT is currently expanding its ADR program following recommendations
of the Access to Justice Review.195
Community support for the Magistrates’ Court
7.106 A number of people suggested that the Magistrates’ Court should
have jurisdiction to hear tree disputes under the new
7.107 The Magistrates’ Court submission advised that it is well
placed to hear and determine tree disputes and that a
statutory scheme
‘would readily work in conjunction with the suite of powers the
[Magistrates’ Court] already possesses
as a court of law’.197 The
Magistrates’ Court highlighted that it has the ‘largest suburban and
regional reach
of any adjudicative body in Victoria’. Other advantages
noted were that it has:
• equitable jurisdiction, allowing it to grant an injunction compelling
a person to do or restrain from doing certain things
and to provide a remedy
where proceedings have not yet been commenced and damage has not yet occurred
but is imminent
• a substantial video-hearing capacity
• the power to transfer a matter to a higher jurisdiction if needed
• power that may be exercised under the
Civil Procedure Act 2010
(Vic) which provides for extensive case management of matters to ensure the
‘just, efficient, timely and cost effective resolution
of the real issues
in dispute’
• a suite of ADR mechanisms
7.108 The Court stated that it has successfully implemented other statutory
schemes in its jurisdiction, such as the
Fences Act 1968
7.109 Pointon Partners expressed the view that the Magistrates’ Court
should have jurisdiction because it already determines
fence disputes.199 It
noted that where a dispute involves both fence and tree matters, then ‘the
same court should be permitted
to make orders in relation to both fences and
192 Supplementary Consultation 1 (Victorian Civil and Administrative
Tribunal); see also
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act
193 Supplementary Consultation 1 (Victorian Civil and Administrative
Tribunal). 194 Ibid.
195 Consultation 5 (Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal).
196 Submissions 4 (Name withheld), 10 (Professor Phillip Hamilton), 21
(Pointon Partners Lawyers).
197 Submission 16 (Magistrates’ Court of Victoria). 198 Ibid.
199 Submissions 21 (Pointon Partners Lawyers).
Community support for other options
7.110 A small number of people made suggestions for alternative
decision-making forums.201 The City of Port Phillip and one community
supported the introduction of a land and environment court or a land court in
Victoria, to exclusively decide land and environmental
matters202 including
disputes between neighbours about trees on private land
7.111 Pointon Partners and one community member suggested the introduction of
a specialist tribunal for tree disputes:203
constituted by one or more members with specialist knowledge of the key
issues that are likely to arise (potentially lawyers, arborists,
town planners,
environmental consultants, etc). They might also include conciliators from
DSCV, who would have significant experience
in this area.204
7.112 Pointon Partners further stated that where a party is unsatisfied with
the outcome, they should be:
entitled to seek a review in the Magistrates’ Court, and that this
right of appeal operate as a hearing
205In this way, parties
wishing to have complicated matters determined by the courts are not shut out
from doing so. However, parties
with simpler disputes (which are the
overwhelming majority of disputes), would be entitled to have their dispute
resolved in an informal,
yet effective manner.206
7.113 Dr Gregory Moore OAM suggested there may be a case for establishing an
Office of the State Arborist which would have ‘powers
similar to an
ombudsman in tree-related matters on private and public land’.207 The
State Arborist should have significant
arboricultural understanding and could
provide independent and impartial advice when a tree dispute occurs.208 The
State Arborist
could also ‘take part in mediation and court cases related
to trees’.209 In Dr Moore’s view, this approach would
cost-effective, consisting of only a few positions, such as the State Arborist,
a lawyer and support staff, and costs could be
met from the fees paid by the
parties to the dispute.210
7.114 One person suggested that both VCAT and the Magistrates’ Court
should have jurisdiction. This would allow an applicant
to decide the
7.115 Other responses proposed a role for local councils, through local laws
or otherwise, to inspect trees and put tree owners
on notice for trees causing
interference. These
community members suggested that tree owners who do not comply should be
issued with a fine.212
201 Submissions 12 (Dr Gregory Moore OAM),19 (Name withheld), 21 (Pointon
Partners Lawyers), 23 (Name withheld); Consultation 12 (City
202 Submission 19 (Name withheld); Consultation 12 (City of Port
203 Submissions 21 (Pointon Partners Lawyers), 23 (Name withheld).
204 Submission 21 (Pointon Partners Lawyers).
(Latin) means ‘from the beginning’: Peter
Butterworths’ Concise Australian Legal Dictionary
(LexisNexis/Butterworths, 3rd ed, 2004).
206 Submission 21 (Pointon Partners Lawyers).
207 Submission 12 (Dr Gregory Moore OAM).
211 Submission 5 (Name withheld).
212 Submissions 5 (Name withheld), 6 (Name withheld).
responses—important characteristics of a tree dispute forum
The expertise of decision makers
7.116 A large number of people suggested that one of the most important
characteristics of a decision maker in tree disputes
should be an expert in
arboriculture or other relevant fields.213 Many endorsed the approach of the
NSWLEC where commissioners trained
in arboriculture determine matters.214
7.117 Dr Gregory Moore OAM stated:
One of the advantages of the NSW Land and Environment Court in dealing with
trees was that it appointed people with arboricultural
expertise as
commissioners to deal with cases involving trees ... It would be worth
considering following this model in Victoria.215
7.118 Acting Commissioner David Galwey of the NSWLEC explained:
In my experience, appointing decision-makers with some arboricultural
expertise to hear these matters allows discerning review
of the situation and
any specialist evidence.
Experts’ evidence may occasionally be misleading, despite the
experts’ obligation to a court. If the decision-maker
expertise in the matter, this also allows many
parties, especially in less complex matters, to come to court without having
to pay for expert evidence. In NSW, the Commissioner
hearing the matter has
suitable expertise and can view the situation at the onsite hearing.216
7.119 Nillumbik Shire Council noted that an arborist would be best placed to
identify any risks posed by a tree.217 This approach
was further supported by
the City of Port Phillip.218 The City of Boroondara stated:
Cases should be heard by people with technical expertise in the field.
Council considers that if a merits-based assessment is going
to be made about a
tree, then such decisions should be made by technical experts. This is the way
in which the Planning and Environment
List at the Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal (VCAT) operates.
Council is also aware that some commissioners of the NSW Land and Environment
Court have an environmental and/or arboricultural background.219
7.120 One submission cautioned that the expertise and practices of arborists
can vary greatly. Accordingly, they stated that skills
and qualifications would
be best assessed by a panel that included experienced arborists and in
accordance with clear criteria.220
On-site hearings or inspections
7.121 The com
munity also felt strongly about the
ability of the decision maker to conduct inspections or hear the matter on
7.122 The NS
WLEC advised that on-site hearings are
a crucial aspect of the NSW scheme.222 Acting Commissioner Galwey of the NSWLEC
213 Submissions 4 (Name withheld), 19 (Name withheld), 23 (Name withheld), 25
(City of Boroondara).
214 Submissions 12 (Dr Gregory Moore OAM), 17 (Name withheld), 21 (Pointon
Partners Lawyers), 25 (City of Boorondara), 27 (Name
withheld), 29 (David
Galwey); Consultations 8 (City of Boroondara), 9 (Nillumbik Shire Council), 12
(City of Port Phillip), 14
(Robert Mineo).
215 Submission 12 (Dr Gregory Moore OAM).
216 Submission 29 (David Galwey).
217 Consultation 9 (Nillumbik Shire Council).
218 Consultation 12 (City of Port Phillip).
219 Submission 25 (City of Boorondara).
220 Confidential submission.
221 Submissions 10 (Professor Phillip Hamilton), 29 (David Galwey);
Consultations 9 (Nillumbik Shire Council), 12 (City of Port Phillip),
(Robert Mineo).
222 Consultation 11 (Land and Environment Court of New South Wales).
Having the hearing onsite is invaluable. Most
matters in NSW are also completed onsite. There are often many factors to
consider in
a tree dispute, and the interaction between these can be important.
It can be difficult to fully present this in a court.223
7.123 QCAT m
embers are supported by the expertise
of Tribunal-appointed tree assessors. QCAT explained that a site inspection is a
part of the tree assessor’s assessment
process.224
7.124 The City
of Boroondara, which also favoured
inspections of the tree on site, gave the example of VCAT, which conducts site
visits in planning
disputes to determine subjective issues such as neighbourhood
character. Boroondara stated that it believes these on-site visits
dispute, words and photos do not necessarily
provide the complete story, and
on-site visits can lead to more creative solutions.225
Other important features
7.125 Other characteristics that community members considered important
• support for self-represented litigants226
• conducting hearings in accessible locations so that parties do not
have to travel great distances227
• ensuring formal adjudication is not too costly.228
The Commission’s conclusions—where
should tree disputes be resolved?
VCAT to determine tree disputes under the new
7.126 The Magistrates’ Court has many characteristics that would make
it suitable to administer the new Act. However, on balance,
the Commission
concludes that VCAT is better placed to administer the new Act and to resolve
these community-based disputes. This
conclusion aligns with community
7.127 Tree disputes are generally small matters between two parties that
involve factual interpretation, not complex legal analysis.
The new Act is
intended to help parties to reach a practical and low-cost solution to their
dispute so that they can carry on living
close to each other.
7.128 The Commission is impressed by the success of interstate schemes and
observes that they do not demand significant resources.
circumstances it is unnecessary to burden the courts with these cases.
223 Submission 29 (David Galwey).
224 Consultation 15 (Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal).
225 Consultation 8 (City of Boroondara).
226 Submission 31 (Barwon Community Legal Service).
227 Consultation 10 (Baw Baw Shire Council).
7.129 Victoria does not have the benefit of a specialised Land and
Environment Court as exists in New South Wales. Many of the practical
of the New South Wales and
Queensland schemes could be adapted to work well in VCAT because VCAT has the
most flexibility to enable this to occur.
7.130 Disputes would most appropriately be adjudicated in VCAT for the
following reasons:
• Application costs can be kept to a minimum in VCAT proceedings and
parties generally bear their own costs.
• The use of ADR is encouraged and VCAT has established ADR
• VCAT has considerable flexibility in the way it can conduct hearings,
is specifically designed for parties without legal representation
and is less
formal than a court.
• VCAT decision makers have existing relevant experience in hearing
planning, environmental and small civil claims.
7.131 The Commission’s reasons are explained in the following
Affordability and fast decision making
7.132 It is less costly to pursue a matter in VCAT than in the
Magistrates’ Court. VCAT has a fee relief program for people
experiencing
financial hardship.229 Fees may be postponed, reduced or completely
7.133 Parties in VCAT are expected to bear their own costs.231 The Commission
also acknowledges BCLS’ view that tree disputes
should be a ‘no cost
not burdened by a cost
order made against them.232
7.134 Baw Baw Shire Council was in favour of awarding costs when matters are
commenced vexatiously or without merit.233 VCAT may order
costs in certain
circumstances, such as where the matter was brought without merit, or to harass,
annoy or distress someone, or
is not well supported in fact or law.234
7.135 Matters are likely to be resolved more quickly in VCAT, with many
matters heard within four to eight weeks depending on their
subject matter.235
VCAT aims to limit the duration of hearings where practical so as not to
overburden parties.236
Alternative dispute resolution and flexibility
7.136 Tree disputes in Queensland and Tasmania can often be resolved at
mediation or negotiation prior to a hearing.237 QCAT’s
resolution rates
through ADR processes are high.238
229 Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
www.vcat.vic.gov.au/steps-to-resolve-your-case/fees-at-vcat/
fee-relief>.
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
; see also Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
Who Pays For My
Legal Costs?
(Web Page) <https://
www.vcat.vic.gov.au/steps-to-resolve-your-case/on-hearing-day/who-pays-for-my-legal-costs
232 Submission 31 (Barwon Community Legal Service).
233 Consultation 10 (Baw Baw Shire Council).
234 For a full list of circumstances in which VCAT can award costs, see
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
also Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
Who Pays For My Legal
(Web Page) <https://
www.vcat.vic.gov.au/steps-to-resolve-
your-case/on-hearing-day/who-pays-for-my-legal-costs>.
235 For example, owners corporation matters take eight weeks to reach a final
hearing; residential tenancies matters take two weeks
from the termination date
to reach a final hearing; civil claims such as for goods and services take eight
weeks to reach a final
hearing. Some matters in the Building and Property List
are resolved in eight weeks but many matters ‘may take longer for
reasons, such as the complexity of legal and technical issues particularly
where the dispute concerns multi-unit developments,
multiple related files,
additional parties are joined to a proceeding and defects are identified after a
proceeding starts.’:
See Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
How Long a VCAT Case Takes
(Web Page) <https://
www.vcat.vic.gov.au/about-us/how-long-a-vcat-case-takes
236 Consultation 5 (Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal).
237 Consultation 15 (Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal);
information provided by RMPAT to the Commission, April 2019.
238 Consultation 15 (Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal).
7.137 VCAT already offers extensive ADR services.239 Importantly, in 2017
VCAT and DSCV formally partnered to expand the provision
of DSCV’s ADR
services to VCAT.240 DSCV’s experience in managing tree disputes will be
of great benefit to VCAT in determining
tree disputes. The Commission considers
that VCAT’s existing ADR mechanisms should be used for tree disputes that
are initiated
in the Tribunal.
7.138 VCAT allows for more responsive and flexible processes than the
Magistrates’ Court. Unlike most Australian courts, VCAT
can take an active
role in determining the facts of a matter before the Tribunal, usually by asking
Accessibility and regional presence
7.139 Court processes are more difficult to navigate than those of a
tribunal. VCAT has been established to enable people to participate
without lawyers. It provides active case management and resources to help
selfrepresented litigants.241 It also provides
free interpreter services242 and volunteers from Court Network who offer
assistance, information and emotional support.243
7.140 VCAT is making further improvements flowing from recommendations from
the Access to Justice Review. It has partnered with Justice
Connect244 ‘to
identify the unmet needs of people representing themselves and scope a proposed
model for a self-help service
at VCAT’.245 This partnership builds on
VCAT’s previous Self Help Centre pilot program246
7.141 VCAT is also changing the way it manages cases. VCAT is instigating a
‘system where all parties can start a matter online,
have access to an
electronic case file and follow its
progress online’.247 In July 2017, VCAT began a four-year digital
strategy ‘to deliver better online services’.248
7.142 VCAT has less regional reach than the Magistrates’ Court.
VCAT’s only standalone location is in Melbourne’s
Central Business
7.143 Since the publication of the government’s response to the Fences
Review in 2001 which expressed concern about VCAT’s
regional reach, VCAT
has expanded its regional presence.249 VCAT’s Strategic Plan 2018–22
We want to expand access for people living in regional areas. We will enhance
our regional and suburban coverage with venues conveniently
located in areas
where our services are needed most. We are focussed on providing welcoming,
fit-for-purpose venues that respond
to local needs within local
communities.250
7.144 The Tribunal now visits a regional area every day in Victoria, as
determined by scheduled hearings and needs.251 VCAT sits at
regional locations
in Magistrates’ Courts, local council customer service centres and the
City of Yarra’s Neighbourhood
Justice Centre. During 2017–18, VCAT
held hearings at Magistrates’ Court locations in Bairnsdale, Ballarat,
Bendigo, Castlemaine, Colac, Dromana, Echuca, Geelong, Hamilton,
239 See, eg, Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
Practice Note
PNVCAT4: Alternative Dispute Resolution
(ADR), 19 December 2018.
240 Consultation 7 (Dispute Settlement Centre of Victoria).
241 See, eg, Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
Practice Note
PNVCAT3: Fair Hearing Obligation
, 1 January 2013, 4–5.
242 Ibid 3.
243 Supplementa
ry Consultation 1 (Victorian Civil
and Administrative Tribunal). Volunteers cannot provide legal advice. Court
Network is a community
organisation that supports people accessing the court
system: see Court Network,
(Web Page, 2019)
<https://courtnetwork.com.au/about/what-we-do/>.
244 Justice Connect is a not-for-profit organisation that aims to improve
access to the justice system by putting people in touch
with pro bono (free)
legal assistance, conducting research and engaging in advocacy: Justice Connect,
How We Help
<https://justiceconnect.org.au/how-we-help/>.
245 Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
VCAT Annual Report
(Report, 2018) 21.
246 Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
Building a Better VCAT:
Strategic Plan 2014–17
(Report) 1.
247 Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
VCAT Annual Report
(Report, 2017) 24.
248 Ibid 16.
249 See, eg, Justice Kevin Bell,
One VCAT–President’s Review
(Report, 30 November 2009) 71–2; Recommendations 54–56;
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal, Building A Better VCAT:
Strategic Plan 2014–17
(Report) 3;
Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal, VCAT For the Future: Strategic Plan 2018–22
(Report) 8.
250 Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
VCAT For the Future:
Strategic Plan 2018–22
(Report) 8.
251 Supplementary Consultation 1 (Victorian Civil and Administrative
Kerang, Korumburra, Mildura, Moe, Morwell,
Portland, Sale, Seymour, Shepparton, Swan Hill, Wangaratta, Warrnambool and
Wodonga.252
7.145 VCAT offers parties a range of technologies to provide flexible
processes such as telephone conference and video conference
facilities.253 Video conferencing ‘allows a party or multiple parties
to participate in a hearing from metropolitan, regional,
rural, interstate or
international locations including public and private facilities’.254 These
facilities may be of particular
benefit to people who live in regional areas and
may help to limit the need to appear in person at a final hearing or on-site
or for mediation.
7.146 The Tribunal has started delivering on some aspects of its strategic
plan, which will make its services more efficient and
accessible for people
living in regional areas:
• VCAT has extended principal registrar delegations to qualified
regional staff members to speed up processing or matters
(for example,
certifying Tribunal orders). This was implemented in VCAT’s Review and
Regulation and Legal Practice lists and
will be further expanded, especially
into regional areas.255
• The new Shepparton Law Courts opened in March 2018 and have been
specifically designed for use by all Victorian courts and
by VCAT. This court
has many innovative features, including a ‘remote judge’ facility
that uses technology to enable
a VCAT member in Melbourne to conduct a hearing
in Shepparton.256
Existing experience
7.147 VCAT has power to review decisions made by responsible authorities
Planning and Environment Act 1987
(Vic) and heritage laws
pursuant to the
Heritage Act 2017
(Vic) and other Acts. VCAT’s
existing experience in these areas supports the conclusion that it should be
given jurisdiction
to hear tree disputes. It will also ensure that where there
is overlap with an existing law, VCAT is able to triage the matter into
appropriate list or utilise relevant member expertise (see Chapter 10).
Alternative options
7.148 The Commission acknowledges the suggestions for other decision-making
forums from community members. One is for a Victorian
Land and Environment
Court257 or a new specialist Tribunal.258 While the proposal has merit, the
appropriateness of establishing
such a court is outside the scope of this
inquiry. The use of an existing jurisdiction is preferable to the creation of a
or a new specialist tribunal. VCAT already has established expertise
and programs that align well with the requirements for tree
7.149 For similar reasons the establishment of an Office of the State
Arborist is not recommended.259 Although such an office would
be able to provide
independent expertise, the new Act envisages a scheme that uses expert decision
makers or where decision makers
are guided by provision of independent expert
evidence from suitably qualified and experienced arborists.
252 Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
VCAT Annual Report
(Report, 2018) 87.
253 For a full list of facilities, see Victorian Civil and Administrative
Practice Note PNVCAT7: Hearing Room Technology,
14 December
2018 <https://
www.vcat.vic.gov.au/resources/vcat-practice-note-pnvcat7-hearing-room-technology
255 Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
VCAT Annual Report
(Report, 2017) 14, 28.
256 Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
VCAT Annual Report
(Report, 2018) 30.
257 Submission 19 (Name withheld); Consultation 12 (City of Port
258 Submissions 21 (Pointon Partners Lawyers), 23 (Name withheld).
259 Consultation 2 (Dr Gregory Moore OAM).
7.150 With its existing expertise in civil
disputes, VCAT would also be better equipped to decide certain matters, such as
and apportionment of liability. VCAT can provide accessible locations
in regional areas, opportunities to engage in alternative dispute
resolution,
and appeal and enforcement mechanisms. This approach is consistent with New
South Wales, Queensland and Tasmania, which
have conferred jurisdiction under
their respective Acts to existing courts and tribunals.
7.151 The proposals for a resolution and enforcement process through local
government recognise local councils’ expertise in
tree management,
particularly in public areas and developments on private land.260 However, the
primary objective of local councils
is to achieve the best outcomes for the
local community as a collective in areas such as health services, planning,
economic development,
waste and environmental management, and human and
community services.261 Local councils do not manage matters between private
Any system for resolving tree disputes that is administered by local
councils would therefore be at odds with the role and objectives
councils under the
Local Government Act 1989
The nature of jurisdiction given to VCAT
7.152 The new Act should provide VCAT with original jurisdiction to determine
matters that fall within its scope. Jurisdiction should
not be conferred in tree
dispute matters on either the Magistrates’ Court or the County Court.262
Original jurisdiction means
that VCAT is the first instance decision maker under
the new Act. It does not have exclusive jurisdiction. It is
the intention that VCAT hear the majority of tree dispute matters. However,
the Supreme Court will also have jurisdiction to hear
tree disputes. This is
because the Supreme Court has unlimited jurisdiction under the Victorian
Constitution
unless processes specified
Constitution
are followed to limit it in some way. 263 The Commission
does not recommend that those processes should be implemented.
7.153 The practical reality is that most tree disputes will be initiated by a
party in VCAT rather than the Supreme Court because
VCAT is less costly and less
formal. However, for reasons of clarity, it may be useful for the new Act to
state that VCAT is ‘to
be chiefly responsible’264 for determining
tree disputes and to introduce a provision which gives the
Supreme Court power to stay a proceeding commenced there if it could be
heard in VCAT and the Court is satisfied that it would be
more appropriately
dealt with by VCAT.265
260 Submissions 5 (Name withheld), 6 (Name withheld).
Local Government Act 1989
(Vic) s 3C; Victorian Government,
Guide to Councils
http://knowyourcouncil.vic.gov.au/guide-to- councils/how-councils-work/local-government-in-victoria
Magistrates’ Court Act 1989
County Court
Section 85(1)
Constitution
(Vic) provides that,
subject to that Act, the Supreme Court has ‘unlimited jurisdiction’,
so the Supreme Court will
have jurisdiction to determine tree disputes unless
the processes provided for in sections 18(2A) and 85(5) of the Victorian
Constitution
are followed to render VCAT’s jurisdiction exclusive.
264 See, eg,
Domestic Building Contracts Act 1995
265 See, similarly,
Australian Consumer Law and Fair Trading Act 2012
Domestic Building Contracts Act 1995
Depending on how such a provision is drafted, it might itself be considered to
limit the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court: see
Australian Consumer Law
and Fair Trading Act 2012
Domestic Building Contracts Act
This means that it will not be effective unless the
process prescribed in
Constitution
Act is followed, including
that the third reading of the Bill is passed by an absolute majority of both
Houses of Parliament:
Constitution
(Vic) s 18(2A).
Nevertheless, on balance the Commission is of the view that this approach is
sensible even if it may attract the
operation of section 85 of the Victorian
Constitution
7.154 Given th
at VCAT is recommended as the
appropriate forum in which tree disputes should be adjudicated, it is
necessary to note that diversity
7.155 In Chapter 5 it is recommended that legal action under the new Act
should be able to be brought against the owner of land on
which the tree is
situated. A situation may arise where a tree owner owns a property in Victoria
but resides in another state.
7.156 This raises complex constitutional issues because the adjudication of a
matter between natural people266 who permanently reside
in different states267
requires the exercise of federal ‘diversity jurisdiction’.
Diversity jurisdiction can be understood
as the authority to exercise judicial
power to resolve disputes between residents of different states.268
Diversity jurisdiction can only be exercised by a court of the state.269 VCAT
is a tribunal and not a court of the state.270
7.157 The High Court of Australia held in
Burns v Corbett
271 that New
South Wales’ equivalent tribunal, the New South Wales Civil and
Administrative Tribunal (NCAT), did not have authority
to exercise diversity
not a court of the state.272
7.158 Legal commentators have stated that this ruling also extends to
VCAT.273 However, VCAT notes on its website that the High Court’s
‘is specific to NCAT proceedings ... whether VCAT’s jurisdiction is
affected is yet to be determined’.274
VCAT further states that if its
authority were to be challenged in a case with similar grounds as
275 then it can ‘hear from the parties on whether to refer a
question of law to the Supreme Court of Victoria, and give notice
to the State
of Victoria to consider making submissions or to also be heard’.276
7.159 The iss
ue of diversity jurisdiction and VCAT
is beyond the scope of this inquiry. However, the Commission acknowledges that
some tree disputes
under the new Act may be affected. Therefore, any future
government consideration of diversity jurisdiction
issues in VCAT should extend to consideration of the scenarios raised above
and the implementation of the new Act.
266 A natural person means a human being in the ordinary sense, as opposed to
artificial persons or entities such as companies which
are recognised as legal
persons under the law: LexisNexis,
Encyclopaedic Australian Legal Dictionary
(at 15 April 2019).
267 Within the meaning of section 75(iv) of the
Constitution
. A resident of a state does not include a resident
of a territory: Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
Disputes Between Residents of Different Australian States
(Web Page, 13 June
www.vcat.vic.gov.au/news/resolving-disputes-between-residents-of-different-australian-states
Burns v Corbett
(2018) 92 ALJR 423 [149].
269 Within the meaning of s 77(iii) of the
Constitution
270 See generally
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
Burns v Corbett
(2018) 92 ALJR 423 [64] (Kiefel CJ, Bell J, Keane
J); see also
Judiciary Act 1903
273 Talitha Fishburn, ‘If NCAT is Not a Court It Has No Standing to
Hear Interstate Party Disputes’ [2018] (Spring),
The Journal of the NSW
Bar Association,
33, 34; WestLaw AU,
Lawyers Practice Manual Vic
(online at 11 June 2019) ‘7 Administrative Law’ [7.1.204];
Victoria Legal Aid, ‘High Court Decision Affecting Your
Practice in
(Web Page, 30 May 2018) <https://
www.legalaid.vic.gov.au/about-us/news/
high-court-decision-affecting-your-practice-in-vcat>.
274 Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
Resolving Disputes
Between Residents of Different Australian States
(Web Page, 13 June
www.vcat.vic.gov.au/news/resolving-disputes-between-residents-of-different-australian-states
275 (2018) 92 ALJR 423.
276 Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
Resolving Disputes
Between Residents of Different Australian States
(Web Page, 13 June
2018) <https://
www.vcat.vic.gov.au/news/resolving-disputes-between-residents-of-different-australian-states
VCAT also states on this webpage that ‘any referral to the Supreme Court
requires the consent of VCAT’s President’.
VCAT process for tree disputes
Tribunal-referred alternative dispute resolution
7.160 It is intended that the new Act will provide an improved framework for
the resolution of tree disputes generally, including
through mediation that is
either community-based or referred by VCAT.
7.161 Tribunal-referred mediation should be used wherever appropriate to
resolve tree disputes under the new Act. The Commission is
encouraged by the
successful resolution of tree disputes through tribunal-ordered ADR in
Queensland and Tasmania. The Commission
was informed that the formality of
the tribunal environment, combined with information about what orders can and
cannot be made and
the factors the tribunal will consider
in reaching its decision, encourage parties to negotiate informally.277
Similarly, RMPAT explained that the majority of applications
were withdrawn
because parties had engaged in negotiations between themselves or had
participated in formal mediation that had led
to resolution of the dispute.
Formal orders were not sought in these matters.278
7.162 The usefulness of ADR generally will be further enhanced by community
information which states that VCAT has the power to refer
parties to mediation.
See Chapter 12.
7.163 The fast track mediation hearing program should be expanded to tree
disputes. This program is currently only available for disputes
concerning goods
and services up to
$10,000.279 It is administered by DSCV and benefits from DSCV’s vast
expertise in handling and mediating tree disputes.
The program is currently
expanding in regional areas.280
7.164 The Commission acknowledges VCAT’s comments that fast-track
mediation may not be suitable for all cases, particularly
those that are more
complex and involve multiple witnesses, because the matter may not be able to be
referred to a hearing on the
day.281 The suitability of particular cases for the fast track program should
be determined by VCAT but the Commission considers it
may be of benefit in tree
dispute matters.
7.165 For those matters that are referred to mediation by the Tribunal, the
Commission favours the approach in the Tasmanian Act,
which outlines a range of
factors for the Tribunal
to consider in determining whether this is appropriate (for example, whether
there are threats of violence).282
277 Consultation 15 (Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal).
278 Information provided by the Resource Management and Planning Appeal
Tribunal to the Commission, April 2019.
279 Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
Fast Track Mediation and
(Web Page) <https://
www.vcat.vic.gov.au/resources/fast-
track-mediation-and-hearing>. In its most recent annual report VCAT
explains that ‘further regional expansion
of the program is
planned and the value of disputes mediated will gradually increase in stages to
$15,000 over four years’:
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
Annual Report 2017–2018
(Report, 2018) 25.
280 See Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
VCAT Annual Report
(Report, 2018) 25; see also Dispute Settlement Centre of
Civil Mediation at VCAT Program
(Web Page, 7 June 2019)
www.disputes.vic.gov.au/about-us/civil-mediation-at-vcat-
281 Supplementary Consultation 1 (Victorian Civil and Administrative
Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants Act 2017
The expertise of decision
7.166 The Commission agrees with community responses about the advantages of
having tree disputes heard and determined by expert decision
7.167 VCAT matters are heard by members with expertise in fields relevant to
the subject matter of VCAT’s Lists. In contrast
decision makers in courts
are judges and magistrates trained in the law.
7.168 One of the advantages of having matters heard by expert decision makers
is that the decision maker can rely on their own expertise
to evaluate a
dispute and the evidence put forward by the parties, which can be important
in cases where expert witnesses
have adversarial bias. Parties who cannot
access or afford an expert can also rely on the expertise of the decision maker.
of expert decision makers also potentially allows for more creative and
practical solutions to problems, as an expert decision
maker is able to draw
on their own practical experience to assess the workability of a solution.
7.169 Government should consider appointing members to VCAT with significant
arboriculture experience to hear tree disputes, as occurs
in New South Wales.283
Alternatively, VCAT should consider appointing Tribunal appointed independent
tree assessors to provide
expert assistance to the tribunal, as occurs in
Queensland. An expert decision maker
or tree assessor should hold a minimum qualification equivalent to an
Australian Qualification Framework (AQF) Level 5 and at least
experience. Arborists qualified at this level are specifically trained in the
assessment and management of trees.284
Expert assessors should conduct on-site
inspections, as occurs in Queensland.
7.170 The use of tree assessors may also limit expert costs for the
parties in these matters. As noted earlier, parties will
generally share
the cost of a tree assessor, up to a total of
7.171 Queensland’s tree assessor model may also be of use to VCAT in
regional areas. There is a large pool of tree assessors
in Queensland who travel
to inspect trees across Queensland.286
7.172 VCAT has suggested that tree disputes would best fit in the Civil
Division.287 The Commission observes that tree disputes between
neighbours are
unique and sit at the intersection of civil disputes between neighbours and
the broader environmental
context. Community feedback also stressed the importance of recognising the
public and environmental benefit of trees. Additionally,
tree disputes are
likely to involve complex matters relating to planning laws and regulation, for
which this expertise would be highly
valuable in a decision maker.
283 Schedule 1 of the
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
(Vic) sets out how the tribunal may be constituted for various
proceedings pursuant to enabling enactments. For example,
, section 2A
outlines how the Tribunal is to be constituted for the purposes of a
proceeding under
Aboriginal Heritage Act 2006
(Vic) as: (a)
one member who has sound knowledge of, and experience in, Aboriginal
cultural heritage; or (b) if it is constituted
by 2 members, at least one member
who has sound knowledge of, and experience in, Aboriginal cultural heritage; or
(c) if it is constituted
by 3, 4 or 5 members, at least 2 members who have sound
knowledge of, and experience in, Aboriginal cultural
284 See, eg, Department of Education and Training (Vic),
Arboriculture
(Web Page, 2017) <https://
www.skills.vic.gov.au/
victorianskillsgateway/Students/Pages/CourseSearchDescription.aspx?type=course&CourseId=12920&new=1>.
285 Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
QCAT Practice Direction
No 7 of 2013
Arrangements for Applications for Orders to Resolve
Other Issues About Trees
(Practice Document, 1 July 2013, updated 3 April
2014) 2; see also
Queensland Civil and Administrative Act 2009
286 Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
Information Kit: Tree
Assessors Expression of Interest
(EOI) (2013) 3.
287 Consultation 5 (Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal).
On-site hearings or inspections
7.173 The Commission agrees with community responses about the
importance of inspecting a tree in its physical context in
order to make a
thorough assessment of both the arboricultural problem and the broader context
of the dispute. An on-site hearing
would be easier to implement and more
appropriate in VCAT than in the Magistrates’ Court. VCAT informed the
Commission that
on-site inspections often occur in the Planning and Environment
7.174 A member of VCAT notes the following about the importance of on-site
inspections:
When I conduct inspections of properties after a hearing it is surprising how
often the person letting me onto the property says words
to the effect of
‘thank you, you are the first person to come and have a look’. The
benefit of a site inspection cannot
and should not be underestimated. It has
been said to me in other hearings that Council officers
do not have time to undertake inspections. Expert witnesses sometimes say
they have inspected the site but in reality it is a streetscape
inspection only
and not an inspection of the whole of the site. Often these approaches are just
not good enough ... in a case such
as this one, where there are narrow
properties; neighbours saying their amenity is being unreasonably impacted; and
the rear/back
gardens of the properties are not clearly visible from the street
boundaries, the veracity of the opinions and decision making becomes
questionable in the absence of an inspection.289
7.175 The Commission is persuaded by the advice of the NSWLEC and QCAT about
the importance of inspecting a tree, either via on-site
hearings or inspections
by tree assessors, and how
this feature is critical to the success of these interstate schemes. The
NSWLEC noted that an on-site hearing provides the decision
maker with the
‘complete picture’ of the tree and the dispute and enables the most
efficient and practical resolution.
The Court stated that the hearing process
would not be as successful if decisions were made on the basis of descriptions,
photographs and drawings alone. The Court noted that nearly all
tree disputes can be heard and determined entirely on site.290 The Commission
has also been guided by responses from arborists and
local councils which
suggested that inspection of a tree in its physical context is often
necessary for a professional arboricultural
assessment.
288 Supplementary Consultation 1 (Victorian Civil and Administrative
Tribunal); see, eg,
Gordon v Port Phillip CC
[2016] VCAT 282
Broome v Maroondah CC
[2016] VCAT 1161
Jones v Darebin CC
[2014] VCAT 1161
Gordon v Port Phillip CC
[2016] VCAT 282
290 Consultation 11 (Land and Environment Court of New South Wales).
and expert evidence
Introduction
Decision-making principles
Decision-making principles in other
Community responses—decision-making
The Commission’s
conclusions—decision-making principles
Expert evidence
Community responses—expert
The Commission’s
conclusions—expert evidence
VCAT decision-making
principles and expert evidence in neighbourhood tree disputes
Introduction
8.1 This chapter makes recommendations about the decision-making principles
that should be contained in the new Act. Decision-making
principles in Victorian
planning schemes, local laws and interstate Acts are examined as well as
community views about the matters
a decision maker should consider in tree
8.2 This chapter also makes recommendations about the use of expert evidence
to help the Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal
(VCAT) in its
decision-making process. It includes recommendations about who should give
expert evidence, what qualifications they
should have, and the format of their
Decision-making principles
8.3 A range of existing laws and regulations are relevant to the rights and
responsibilities of parties in tree disputes. They contain
decision-making
principles that assist decision
makers to decide in what circumstances trees on private land may be pruned or
removed. These principles have informed the Commission’s
recommendations
in this chapter.
Decision-making guidelines in planning
Planning and Environment Act 1987
(Vic) provides the framework
for Victoria’s planning system. If a regular planning permit process
applies and vegetation on
private land is protected by a Significant Landscape
Overlay,1 the Environmental Significance Overlay,2 the Vegetation Protection
Overlay,3 the Heritage Overlay,4 the Bushfire Management Overlay5 or the Native
Vegetation Particular Provisions,6 standard decision
guidelines apply for each
of these overlays.7 These guidelines outline principles that the relevant
authority must consider before
granting a permit. For example, the decision
guidelines for the Vegetation Protection Overlay require the decision maker to
among other things:
1 Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
Planning Provisions
(11 April 2019), cl 42.03. 2 Ibid, cl 42.01.
3 Ibid, cl 42.02.
4 Ibid, cl 43.01.
5 Ibid, cl 44.06. Other VPPs that relate to bushfire and vegetation removal
are: cl 53.02 ‘Bushfire Planning’; cl 52.12
Protections: Exemptions’. See also Department of Environment, Land, Water
and Planning (Vic),
Planning Practice Note No 64: Local Planning for Bushfire
Protection,
September 2015, 3 <
www.planning.vic.gov.au/publications/planning-practice-notes
6 Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
Planning Provisions
(11 April 2019), cl 52.17. Particular provisions
are specific prerequisites or planning provisions for a range of particular
and developments. They apply consistently across the state: Department of
Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
A Practitioner’s Guide to
Victorian Planning Schemes
(Version 1.1, October 2018) [3.4] <https://
www.planning.vic.gov.au/guide-home/a-practitioners-guide-to-victorian-planning-schemes
7 These decision guidelines in overlays or schedules to overlays must also be
considered as part of the VicSmart permit application
process. For the native
vegetation particular provisions these guidelines are encompassed within the
Department of Environment, Land,
Water and Planning
, Guidelines for the
Removal, Destruction or Lopping of Native Vegetation
(2017), an incorporated
document in all Victorian
planning schemes: see Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning
Victoria Planning Provisions
(11 April 2019) cl 59.06-2
‘Decision guidelines’; 72.04 ‘Documents incorporated in this
planning scheme’.
• the effect of the proposed use, building, works or subdivision on the
nature and type of vegetation to be protected
• the role of native vegetation in conserving flora and fauna
• the need to retain native or other vegetation if it is rare,
supports rare species of flora or fauna or forms part of a
• the need to retain vegetation which prevents or limits adverse
effects on ground water recharge
• whether provision is made or is to be made to establish and maintain
vegetation elsewhere on the land
• the need to retain vegetation which is of heritage or cultural
significance
• any other matters specified in a schedule to this overlay.
Planning scheme schedules
8.5 Councils may add local content to planning schemes through schedules.8
These schedules may modify the state wide decision-making
principles in the
Victoria Planning Provisions (VPPs).
8.6 The East Gippsland Shire has eight local schedules to the Vegetation
Protection Overlay which outline the nature and significance
of the vegetation
to be protected as well as additional decision-making guidelines to those
contained within the standard overlay
clause.9 Schedule 8 is the Mallacoota
Vegetation Protection Area.10 It seeks to protect vegetation of high
conservation value and
vegetation with high aesthetic and landscape value within
built-up areas around the township of Mallacoota. Before deciding on an
application, in addition to the decision guidelines in clause 42.02-5, the
responsible authority must consider, as appropriate:
• the extent to which the vegetation sought to be removed or cleared
contributes towards the need to:
- conserve and enhance areas of high conservation value vegetation, as
determined by the Draft East Gippsland Native Vegetation Plan
- conserve and enhance fauna habitat and habitat corridors
- protect and enhance the visual amenity and landscape quality of the
- minimise the risk of soil erosion, sedimentation and degradation of water
• the need to work towards the Victorian Government’s policy of
achieving a net gain in the extent and quality of native
vegetation throughout
• whether there are other options regarding the removal of vegetation,
to better achieve the overlay objectives
• whether there is a need to undertake revegetation with appropriate
indigenous species to offset any loss of environmental
values resulting from the
works or development, or to replace key non-indigenous vegetation where this is
important to the aesthetic
values of a particular site
• whether the vegetation is planted vegetation that blocks views from
adjoining properties.11
8 Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
Practitioner’s Guide to Victorian Planning Schemes
(Version 1.1,
October 2018) [3.4] <https://
www.planning.vic.gov.au/guide-home/a-practitioners-guide-to-victorian-planning-schemes
9 Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic), ‘East
Gippsland Planning Scheme’,
Planning Schemes Online
2019) cl 42.02-5 ‘Decision guidelines’,
http://planning-schemes.delwp.vic.gov.au/schemes/eastgippsland
10 East Gippsland Shire Council,
East Gippsland Planning Scheme
April 2019) sch 8 to the Vegetation Protection Overlay—Mallacoota
Vegetation Protection Area
http://planning-schemes.delwp.vic.gov.au/schemes/eastgippsland
8.7 Decision-making principles in the planning
schemes reflect the broader policy considerations that underpin the planning
framework in Victoria. Not all of them will be relevant in the context of
tree disputes but where they are it will be important that
they continue to be
considered by VCAT under the new Act. Relevant recommendations can also be found
in Chapter 10.
8.8 Some councils have local laws to protect trees on private and public
land. The Commission consulted with two councils who have
enacted local laws to
protect trees on private land.12 The decision-making process applied by councils
provides another useful insight
into the types of issue that may need to be
considered by VCAT under the new Act. Some of these considerations are similar
in planning schemes. Local laws are also discussed in detail in Chapter
City of Boroondara
8.9 The City of Boroondara in the eastern suburbs of Melbourne includes
established leafy suburbs alongside the Yarra River.13 The
City of Boroondara
Tree Protection Local Law 2016 was enacted to:
• ensure that the established treed character of the municipal district
is maintained
• prohibit, regulate and control any activities which may endanger
Significant Trees and canopy trees within the municipal district.14
8.10 The Boroondara Local Law sets out detailed decision-making criteria that
council must apply, to the extent it considers appropriate,
when determining
permit applications for works to protected trees:
• the effect of the proposed action on the aesthetics of the
neighbourhood
• whether the tree is a significant tree
• the condition of the tree (health and structural integrity)
• the appropriateness of the tree for its location on the property
having regard to the existing buildings and conditions on
the property
• whether the proposed action is to be undertaken for reasons of health
• whether the tree is causing any unreasonable property damage
• whether the tree is causing any unreasonable public nuisance or
creating any unreasonable nuisance to private property owners
or occupiers
• whether the tree is a recognised weed
• zoning under the Boroondara Planning Scheme
• any legislative requirements
• any other relevant matter.15
8.11 The decision-making principles are intended to produce a decision that
is ‘holistic and balanced’.16
12 Local laws are made by local governments under the
Local Government Act
(Vic). Local laws are therefore aimed at dealing with local issues
13 It includes the suburbs of Ashburton, Balwyn, Balwyn North, Burwood,
Camberwell, Canterbury, Deepdene, Glen Iris, Glenferrie South,
Hawthorn, Hawthorn East, Kew, Kew East, Mont Albert and Surrey Hills: Victorian
Government, ‘Boroondara City’,
Know Your Council
http://knowyourcouncil.vic.gov.au/councils/boroondara
Tree Protection Local Law 2016
(City of Boroondara)
‘significant tree’ means a tree listed in Council’s
Significant Tree Study. A ‘canopy tree’ means
any tree (a) with a
total trunk circumference of 110cm or more measured at a point 1.5 metres along
the trunk’s length from
the closest point above ground level; or (b)
if multi-stemmed, with a total trunk circumference of all its trunks of 110cm or
more measured at a point 1.5 metres along the trunks’ lengths from the
closest point above ground level; or (c) with a
trunk circumference of 150cm or
more measured at ground level.
Tree Protection Local Law 2016
(City of Boroondara) s 12(2).
8.12 Boroondara supports the principle that if the
tree existed prior to occupation or development, it should generally not be
or removed in favour of newer structures.17 However, each application
still needs to be assessed on its merits having regard to evidence.18
8.13 If a permit to remove vegetation is granted under local law, Council may
also require replanting to offset any net loss of vegetation.19
City of Port Phillip
8.14 The City of Port Phillip Local Law No 1 (Community Amenity) 2013
protects significant trees.20 Council advised the Commission
that the local law
applies to and protects a large number of trees within the municipality.21 A
permit is required to carry out works
or allow works to a significant tree or
8.15 In eciding whether to grant a permit Council must have regard to:
• whether an arborist’s report is needed
• whether the tree is included on any register
• the reasons for the permit request
• the impact on the amenity and the safety of the area
• any proposed replacement plantings
• any other matter considered relevant by council.23
Decision-making principles in other
8.16 The New South Wales, Queensland and Tasmanian Acts require the decision
makers to consider certain matters before determining
an application.24 The New
South Wales Land and Environment Court informed the Commission the decision
maker does not need
to address every decision-making principle in its decision even though it is
mandatory to consider each one, because some principles
may be irrelevant in
the particular circumstances.25 In Tasmania, decision makers must consider these
principles but only to the
extent that they are relevant.26
8.17 Principles to be considered which are common to all three Acts
• the location of the tree in relation to the boundary or other
structures on the land
• whether consent or authorisation would ordinarily be required under
local laws and Acts, and whether that consent has been
• whether the tree has any historical, cultural, social or scientific
• any contribution the tree makes to the local ecosystem and
biodiversity
• any contribution the tree makes to public amenity
17 Consultation 8 (City of Boroondara).
Local Law No.1 (Community Amenity) 2013
(City of Port Phillip)
defines a significant tree as ‘a tree or palm on private land: with a
trunk circumference or 150 centimetres
or greater, measured 1 metre above the
ground; or with multiple stems where the circumference of its exterior stems is
or greater than 150 centimetres when measured 1 metre about ground
21 Consultation 12 (City of Port Phillip).
Local Law No 1 (Community Amenity) 2013
(City of Port Phillip) s
44(1). Note that a permit does not apply where an adjacent landowner removes
branches which overhang that
adjacent land.
Trees (Disputes Between Neighbours) Act 2006
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants Act 2017
25 Consultation 11 (Land and Environment Court of New South Wales).
Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants Act 2017
Parliamentary Debates, House of Assembly,
4 April 2017, 6
(Rene Hidding);
Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants Bill 2017
27 See generally
Trees (Disputes Between Neighbours) Act 2006
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants Act 2017
• any contribution the tree makes to the natural landscape, garden
design, privacy and protection from natural elements.
• the impact of works such as pruning (including maintaining the tree
at a particular height, width or shape) to the health
of the tree
• any impact of the tree on soil stability, water table or other
natural features of the land or locality
• the type of tree and whether it is native, protected or considered a
• such other matters that the decision maker considers relevant in the
circumstances of the case
• any risk associated with the tree due to seasonal changes and extreme
weather events.28
8.18 If the applicant’s allegations relate to the tree causing damage
to property or harm, additional decision-making considerations
apply in the
interstate Acts. These include:
• anything other than the tree that may have contributed to the damage
or harm, including any act or omission by the applicant
• any steps taken by the applicant or the owner of the land to prevent
or rectify the damage or harm.29
8.19 The Queensland and Tasmanian Acts further specify that the decision
maker may consider additional principles where an order could
involve destroying
a tree or plant.30
New South Wales
8.20 The NSWLEC advised that the decision-making principles underpinning the
NSW Act are sufficient and cover a broad range of issues
such as the social,
public amenity and environmental value of trees.31 The Court also identified
that the decision-making
principles in the NSW Act reflect the public policy position that trees are
beneficial to the community and that people wish to live
among trees.32
8.21 New South Wales has an annotated version of its Act outlining how some
of the decision- making principles have been applied to
particular cases.33 Of
particular note is section 12(h) of the Act, which requires the court to
consider whether anything other than
the tree in question may have contributed
to the damage, or likelihood of damage or injury, and the steps taken by both
the affected
neighbour and the owner or occupier of land
on which the tree is situated to prevent such damage or injury.34 This
decision-making principle enables the court to consider any
past actions or
omissions of both parties, including any development on land that occurred
subsequent to the tree’s existence.
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants Act 2017
This decision-making principle is unique to the dedicated tree dispute
schemes in Queensland and Tasmania only.
Trees (Disputes Between Neighbours) Act 2006
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants Act 2017
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants Act 2017
These principles include anything, other than the tree or plant, that has
contributed, or is contributing, to the injury or damage
or likelihood of
injury or damage, including any act or omission by the affected landholder or
neighbour and the effect of any
tree or plant situated on the affected
landholder’s or neighbour’s land and any steps taken by the affected
or neighbour, or the owner of the area of land or tree-keeper on
which the tree or plant is situated, to prevent or rectify the
injury or damage
or the likelihood of injury or damage.
31 Consultation 11 (Land and Environment Court of New South Wales).
33 Land and Environment Court of New South Wales,
(Disputes Between Neighbours) Act 2006
(14 January 2013).
Trees (Disputes Between Neighbours) Act 2006
8.22 Under this provision of the NSW Act, the NSWLEC has adopted a tree
dispute principle: ‘the tree was there first’:35
The existence of a tree prior to the construction of a structure which has
subsequently been damaged by the tree is not a matter likely
to be taken into
consideration on the question of whether or not some order should be made for
interference with or removal of that
tree or other remedial work. On that
question, the seriousness of the damage and any attendant risks are the primary
matters for
consideration.
If interference with or removal of the tree or other work is warranted
because of the extent of the damage the tree has caused or
risks now posed by
the damage, the fact that the tree was already growing in the vicinity at the
time the structure was built is
a matter which may be relevant and appropriate
to take into account on the question of who should undertake any work and/or
apportionment
of the cost of such work.
However, it will also be relevant to consider whether or not the tree was
self-sown or was planted. If it was planted, consideration
will need to be
given to the appropriateness or otherwise of:
• the type of tree planted; and
• the suitability of the location in which it has been planted.
Equally, it will be relevant to consider whether the choice of location for
the structure was unnecessary or avoidable or, on the
other hand, if it would
have been an unreasonable constraint on the development potential of the site
had the existence of the tree
limited that potential.36
8.23 In other cases the Court has ordered that the costs of rectifying the
damage caused by a tree should be shared equally by both
parties.37 For example,
O’Connell v Gallagher
it was held that because the affected neighbours had not made any effort to
remedy the damage which had been developing over a number
of years, the costs to
rectify it should be equally shared between the parties.39
8.24 Steps taken by tree owners to address potential problems have also been
taken into account by the Court. For example in
Nolan v Psaltis
owner of land had installed root barriers along the fence and regularly
pruned the tree to prevent damage or injury
to neighbours. It was determined
that the installation of the root barrier had reduced the growth of the
tree rendering it
less likely to cause damage or injury and that the tree should
not be removed.41
35 The Court publishes decisions under the NSW Act which contain ‘tree
dispute principles’. These principles provide an
understanding of how
the Court has approached a particular aspect of a dispute. Three principles have
been published to date
– ‘claims for structural damage to
property’, ‘the tree was there first’ and ‘urban trees
and ordinary maintenance.’ For a list of the Court’s Tree
Dispute Principles, see Land and Environment Court
of New South Wales,
Tree Dispute Principles
(Web Page, 25 September 2017)
http://www.lec.justice.nsw.gov.au/ Pages/practice_procedure/principles/tree_principles.aspx
36 This tree dispute principle is derived from the case of
Black v Johnson
[2007] NSWLEC 513
[15]. In this case the court ordered the
removal of a tree on a common boundary that had caused damage to the affected
neighbour’s
building. A relevant consideration was that the
tree pre-existed the construction of the building. The court considered
alternative designs of the building and an alternative location would have
mitigated the damage that resulted. The
court determined that the tree would
have posed a problem regardless and therefore did not require the affected
neighbour to pay
for its removal.
O’Connell v Gallagher
[2007] NSWLEC 718
[2008] NSWLEC 1231
Lazarus v Le
[2010] NSWLEC 1118
[11–13] where the Court considered the failure by the affected neighbour
to give notice to the tree owner when the damage
[2007] NSWLEC 718.
O’Connell v Gallagher
[2007] NSWLEC 718.
The damage was
caused by a tree root to a low brick wall supporting a hot water pipe.
[2007] NSWLEC 764.
Nolan v Psaltis
[2007] NSWLEC 764
8.25 The Queensland Act sets out mandatory decision-making criteria that
largely replicate the approach in the NSW Act. Queensland’s
vulnerability
to cyclones any other extreme weather events is an additional
consideration.42
8.26 The Queensland Act also provides additional principles that
be considered by the decision maker in specific situations —where
serious injury, damage or unreasonable interference are alleged
or where a tree
is ordered to be destroyed under section 66.43 For example, in making an order
to carry out work that involves destroying
a tree, Queensland Civil and
Administrative Tribunal
• how long the neighbour has known of the injury or damage
• any steps that have been taken by the tree-keeper or the neighbour to
prevent further injury or damage
• anything other than the tree that may have caused or contributed to
some or all of the injury or damage
• any other matters QCAT considers relevant.44
8.27 Another key difference between the NSW and Queensland legislation is
that the Queensland Act sets out the responsibilities of
tree owners.45 QCAT
confirmed that
the tree owner’s responsibilities under the Queensland Act are mirrored
in the principles QCAT takes into account when making
decisions.46
8.28 Under the Queensland Act, the primary consideration is the safety of any
individual.47 However, in an attempt to counteract any
presumption about the
removal of trees in the interest of safety, section 72 of the Act provides that
a living tree should not be
removed or destroyed unless there is no other
satisfactory means to resolve the issue.48 Further, one of the decision-making
relating to substantial, ongoing and unreasonable interference is
whether the tree existed before the neighbour acquired the land.49
8.29 In response to community suggestions on the statutory review of the
Queensland Act the Queensland Law Reform Commission (QLRC)
recommended that QCAT
must consider whether the tree is interfering with the use and enjoyment of the
neighbour’s land.50 While
the QLRC accepted that the actions of neighbours
are relevant in some cases, it did not recommend the elevation of this
consideration
to a mandatory decision-making criteria.51
8.30 The Tasmanian Act largely replicates the Queensland Act by having a list
of general matters that must, to the extent that they
are relevant to the
application, be considered by the Resource Management and Planning Appeal
Tribunal (RMPAT).52 The Act also contains
additional matters that RMPAT
consider if an application relates to an alleged threat of serious injury or
damage.53 These additional principles largely mirror
those in New South Wales
and Queensland.
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
The Queensland Act also provides that ‘no financial value or
carbon trading value may be placed on a tree’: see
Neighbourhood
Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
provision aims to prevent the resolution of disputes being affected or
frustrated by ‘unsettled methods of calculating the monetary
trees’: see Explanatory Notes,
Neighbourhood Disputes Resolution Bill
(Qld) cl 73.
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
46 Consultation 15 (Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal).
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
50 Queensland Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Neighbourhood Disputes
(Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
(Report No 72, December (2015)
51 Ibid 128.
Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants Act 2017
8.31 If RMPAT is considering an order that involves
destroying a plant, RMPAT may consider additional principles akin to the
Act, for example how long the neighbour has known of the injury or
8.32 RMPAT may also consider additional matters if unreasonable interference
is alleged by the applicant.55 One of these considerations
is whether the plant
existed before the applicant owned the affected land.56
Community responses—decision-making
8.33 There was strong community support for including decision-making
principles in the new Act.57 VCAT supported the idea of including
non-exhaustive list of decision-making guidelines in the new Act, as long as
this list was not overly prescriptive. VCAT noted
that a list of decision-making
guidelines would also assist and guide experts drafting reports for tree dispute
hearings.58
8.34 The Commission received a number of suggestions about what kinds of
principles should be taken into account by the decision maker
determining tree
disputes. Several submissions stated that the decision-making principles
contained in interstate statutory schemes
would be appropriate for a new
statutory scheme in Victoria.59
8.35 The majority of responses related to the following themes:
• protecting the community from harm or damage.
• consideration of the benefits provided by the tree to the broader
community, and balancing that against any harm it causes
• the ‘first in time’ principle—whether the tree
existed before the affected neighbour began to occupy the
land affected by the
• past actions of the parties that may have contributed to the
8.36 These themes are discussed in the following paragraphs.
Protecting the community from harm or
8.37 Some community members emphasised that physical well-being should be a
primary consideration under the new Act.60 This view was
supported by Baw Baw
Shire Council.61
8.38 The Commission received a handful of responses about whether the
decision maker should give greater weight to particular decision-making
principles. Arborist Dr Karen Smith stated:
The highest weight should be always determined based on a risk assessment.
It is no good saying heritage or conservation value
should take precedence,
if the risk cannot be mitigated or managed.62
8.39 ENSPEC noted that ‘management of unreasonable risk is appropriate;
however, the elimination of all risk from any cause,
including trees, is not
practical’.63
Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants Act 2017
s 31(2)(a).
57 Submissions 4 (Name withheld), 5 (Name withheld), 7 (Ben Kenyon), 9 (Dr
Karen Smith), 12 (Dr Gregory Moore OAM),17 (Name withheld),
18 (ENSPEC), 19
(Name Withheld), 20 (Name Withheld), 22 (Name withheld), 25 (City of
Boroondara), 27 (Name withheld), 28 (HVP Plantations),
29 (David Galwey);
Consultations 2 (Dr Gregory Moore OAM), 6 (Ben Kenyon), 8 (City of Boroondara),
9 (Nillumbik Shire Council), 10
(Baw Baw Shire Council), 12 (City of Port
Phillip), 14 (Robert Mineo).
58 Supplementary Consultation 1 (Victorian Civil and Administrative
59 Submissions 20 (Name withheld); Confidential submission.
60 Submissions 9 (Dr Karen Smith), 19 (Name withheld), 22 (Name withheld),
24 (Name withheld), 38 (L. Barry Wollmer); Consultations
3 (HVP Plantations),
10 (Baw Baw Shire Council).
61 Consultation 10 (Baw Baw Shire Council).
62 Submission 9 (Dr Karen Smith).
63 Submission 18 (ENSPEC).
The broader benefits of trees
8.40 Trees are increasingly viewed as community assets.64 Several responses
to the Commission emphasised the need for the decision
maker to consider any
benefits the tree provides to the broader community.65 Arborist Dr Karen Smith
expressed the view that one
of the aims of new laws should be to ‘bring
the law up to date with community views and expectations where
possible’.66
Another arborist, Mr Kenyon, explained that the
community’s knowledge, appreciation for and expectations of trees and
forests have changed considerably over the past decades.67
8.41 Acting Commissioner David Galwey of the NSWLEC stated:
I would suggest any statutory scheme should give significant consideration to
the benefits of the tree to the broader community, including
its ecosystem
services and amenity. This is one clear advantage of a statutory scheme over the
traditional common law process, reflecting
current scientific understanding,
social attitudes and government policy.68
8.42 There was broad community support for a decision maker to balance the
value of the tree with any damage or harm caused or likely
to be caused by the
tree.69 The City of Boroondara argued that:
Legislation should set out criteria that the Court/Tribunal must consider
when determining what order they should make. These criteria
should ensure
that the benefits of the tree are weighed against its disbenefits. At a
minimum, the criteria should require consideration
of matters such as the
aesthetic benefits of the tree, the environmental/ ecological benefits of the
tree and the benefits of the
tree to the neighbourhood character of the area.
In Council’s experience, it is often the case that a tree may be causing
minor damage or nuisance but that the benefit of the tree outweighs these
8.43 VCAT noted that a tree’s contribution to amenity as well as other
broader benefits are considerations that intersect with
planning and environment
law. It suggested that these factors are also important considerations in
neighbourhood tree disputes.71
8.44 Dr Gregory Moore OAM explained that a tree should be assessed through a
cost-benefit model, stating ‘if the cost of repair
is greater than the
benefit the tree offers, then the tree can go’.72 Dr Moore referred to
quantifiable benefits provided by
• Trees provide shade and natural cooling, and reduce deaths during
heat waves.
• In a storm, leaves and branches filter wind and remove force,
preventing damage to property.
• Trees in a front garden add to the value of a suburban house.73
8.45 Dr Moore suggested that VCAT’s current processes and procedures in
matters concerning vegetation can result in outcomes
that disregard or overlook
the merits of the tree.74
64 Submission 9 (Dr Karen Smith); Consultations 6 (Ben Kenyon), 8 (City of
Boroondara), 9 (Nillumbik Shire Council), 10 (Baw Baw Shire
Council), 11 (Land
and Environment Court of New South Wales), 12 (City of Port Phillip).
65 Submissions 18 (ENSPEC), 19 (Name Withheld), 25 (City of Boroondara); 29
(David Galwey); Consultations 2 (Dr Gregory Moore OAM),
14 (Robert Mineo).
66 Submission 9 (Dr Karen Smith).
67 Consultation 6 (Ben Kenyon).
68 Submission 29 (David Galwey).
69 Submissions 7 (Ben Kenyon), 18 (ENSPEC), 25 (City of Boroondara); 27 (Name
withheld); Consultation 2 (Dr Gregory Moore OAM).
70 Submission 25 (City of Boroondara).
71 Supplementary Consultation 1 (Victorian Civil and Administrative
72 Consultation 2 (Dr Gregory Moore OAM).
8.46 ENSPEC submitted that ‘urban tree canopy is being lost, both
through overall reduction in tree numbers, as well through
“replacement” of trees with smaller growing species and shrubs.
Planting a new tree is not a replacement of the loss
of a mature tree, even if
it is replaced by the same species, as the decades of growth required to develop
to maturity are lost.
It is therefore necessary to prevent the removal of mature
trees without solid justification.’75
‘First in time’ principle
8.47 The Commission was told that consideration should be given to whether
the tree existed before the built structure on adjoining
land. As discussed
under the NSW Act, if damage is caused by an existing/established tree to a
new dwelling on neighbouring
land, then this may result in the affected
neighbour paying some or all of the costs associated with pruning or removing
the tree.76
Similar considerations exist in the Tasmanian Act and Queensland
Acts in relation to interference claims.77
8.48 VCAT suggested that if a tree pre-dates development on neighbouring
land, consideration should be given to whether any conditions
were attached to
a development permit requiring protection of the tree, for example to avoid the
tree’s protection zone.
VCAT suggested that these protections are not
always followed in planning matters.78
8.49 Arborist Ben Kenyon expressed the view that ‘one of the most
important considerations should be whether the tree pre-existed
structure or landowners taking control of [neighbouring] land’.79 He
provided the example of concerns that emerged
in a 10–15 year old housing
estate about the potential for damage from remnant trees that were hundreds of
years old. In his
view, people need to accept that trees are part of the
environment they are looking to occupy and should be more accommodating of
8.50 Baw Baw Shire Council also stated that the decision maker should have to
consider whether the tree or the built structure came
first.81 HVP Plantations
added that the ‘first in time principle’ could be considered in
the allocation of legal
costs to ensure the outcome is just and fair.82
Past actions of the parties
8.51 A number of community members suggested that any past actions of the
parties that may have contributed to the tree dispute should
also be taken into
account.83 One community member stated that irresponsible tree planting, for
example allowing a tall tree
to grow close to a house, should be taken into
consideration by the decision maker.84
75 Submission 18 (ENSPEC).
76 This is a Tree Dispute Principle developed by the Court under
Trees (Disputes Between Neighbours) Act 2006
Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants Act 2017
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
78 Supplementary Consultation 1 (Victorian Civil and Administrative
79 Consultation 6 (Ben Kenyon).
81 Consultation 10 (Baw Baw Shire Council).
82 Submission 28 (HVP Plantations).
83 Submissions 5 (Name withheld), 22 (Name withheld).
84 Submission 22 (Name withheld).
Other issues
Consideration of other laws
8.52 One submission advised that consideration should be given to the
application of other laws protecting the tree, for example significant
registers.85 The City of Boroondara explained that:
[decision-making] criteria should also require the Court/Tribunal to consider
whether the tree is protected by a planning scheme,
a current valid Planning
Permit, a Local Law or other legislation such as the Aboriginal Heritage Act
Tree removal as a last resort
8.53 The City of Boroondara, Nillumbik Shire Council and arborist Robert
Mineo submitted that the decision maker should first consider
remedies that do
not require removal of the tree.87
The Commission’s
conclusions—decision-making principles
8.54 The new Act should facilitate evidence-based, transparent and consistent
decision making. This will require clear and comprehensive
principles to be
introduced in the new Act.
8.55 In practice this means that if a claim is initiated about damage or
harm, a range of additional matters will be considered
by the decision maker
in determining orders. Importantly, these broader considerations will not
detract from consideration of
the alleged damage or harm but will help the
decision maker to balance competing rights and interests fairly and
transparently in
making orders.
8.56 Mandatory decision-making principles will:
• ensure that all relevant information about the tree dispute is taken
into account during the decision-making process;
• help to balance competing rights and interests fairly and
transparently
• guide the community about the application of the law and help the
parties anticipate the likely outcome of a hearing
• help the community to resolve their disputes informally by applying
these principles to their own disputes.
One list of decision-making principles
8.57 The New South Wales approach of having all decision-making principles
under the one provision is the best way to ensure that
no principle is excluded
from the decision-making process. This will also allow parties or other
community members to easily find
and determine the principles that VCAT will
consider when it decides a matter.
Principles should be mandatory
8.58 The Queensland and Tasmanian schemes distinguish between mandatory and
discretionary decision-making criteria. The New South
Wales approach of grouping
all decision-making principles together and requiring the court to consider them
preferred. The Commission sees value in the Tasmanian Act’s limitation
that the Tribunal only needs to consider the listed principles
extent that they are relevant in relation to the application’.88
85 Submissions 17 (Name withheld).
86 Submission 25 (City of Boroondara).
87 Consultations 8 (City of Boroondara), 9 (Nillumbik Shire Council), 14
(Robert Mineo).
Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants Act 2017
Principles should be
non-exhaustive
8.59 Tree disputes can be complex. They may involve claims of property damage
that need to be assessed by experts including builders,
or claims of future harm
requiring specialist medical evidence. For this reason it is recommended that
the list of decision-making
principles in the new Act be non-exhaustive and that VCAT be able to consider
such other matters as it considers relevant in the circumstances
of the case.
For example, VCAT may decide that if a tree is to be removed, another should be
planted in its place.
Other Acts and laws
8.60 The Commission has been guided by the decision-making guidelines set out
in other laws and policies. Many of these broader considerations
are reflected
in the Commission’s recommendations below and will assist VCAT to balance
competing rights and interests fairly
and transparently.
8.61 The list of decision-making principles in the new Act should require the
decision maker to consider whether interference with
the tree would otherwise
require consent or authorisation under other Acts or local laws and, if so,
whether such consent or
authorisation has been obtained. The decision maker should also be required
to consider the requirements that may apply under other
laws and policies to
that land or tree. Even where consent or authorisation is not required under
other laws, these laws may still
point to matters that VCAT should have regard
to in making its decision, for example, the zone use of the land in
8.62 Other relevant laws include:
Planning and Environment Act 1987
• local laws made pursuant to the
Local Government Act 1989
Heritage Act 2017
Aboriginal Heritage Act 2006
Fences Act 1968
Catchment and Land Protection Act 1994
Environmental Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act
8.63 In Chapter 10 the Commission makes recommendations about the interaction
of laws and elaborates on some of these decision making
principles. The weight
that should be given to other laws and policies in the decision making process
is also considered.
The benefits of trees
8.64 Decision-making principles should recognise the broader intrinsic
benefits of trees to the community (for example, shade and
natural cooling). Our
community is also placing increasing importance on protecting and encouraging
more vegetation in urban spaces.
Viewing tree disputes strictly as
party–party disputes overlooks some of the broader interests and
considerations that arise
in our modern urban spaces.
8.65 The new Act should seek to balance the tension between property
owners’ rights and the community benefits of living in
environment. Broader environmental considerations often underpin decision-making
guidelines in planning schemes and local
laws. The Commission supports the
decision-making principles in interstate legislation that aim to consider the
amenity, scientific,
social, cultural, historic and environmental contributions
of the tree. The importance of the tree for soil stability should also
considered.90
89 Other Acts also relate to the management of vegetation for fire
prevention; to minimise interference with powerlines and to protect
health and wellbeing and the environment. These Acts are less likely to impact
the new Act. See Ch 10.
90 See, eg,
Lee v Waugh
[2012] NSWLEC 1341.
In this case the tree
owner contended that the tree was ‘important as a means of retaining the
sandy soil in the sloping backyard.
The Court took this into account by ordering
that steps be taken to stabilise the soil in removing the tree. This was by way
of reducing
the tree to a stump of 1m high: [25],[36]
8.66 In addition, the decision maker should have
regard to whether the tree is listed on the Victorian Heritage Register under
Heritage Act 2017
(Vic) or whether the tree is an Aboriginal scarred
tree or other tree of Aboriginal cultural heritage significance protected under
Aboriginal Heritage Act 2006
(Vic). This approach will ensure that
the new Act either does not interfere with the existing Acts in place to protect
trees of heritage
value or only does so in an emergency, where the tree poses an
imminent danger to life or property.91 This is the approach taken
Queensland scheme to identify culturally significant trees.92
Location and health of the tree and impact of
8.67 VCAT should have regard to the location of the tree, for example in
relation to the common boundary and any nearby built
structures. This is the
approach in all interstate jurisdictions. In the case of
93 the Court advised that this decision- making principle
enables a determination of whether the tree is ‘sufficiently
proximate’ to adjoining land that it could in fact cause damage or harm in
the event that it failed.
8.68 VCAT should also have regard to the condition of the tree, for example
its health and structural integrity. This is the approach
taken by the City of
Boroondara.94 It would ensure the decision maker takes into account
arboricultural evidence about the health
of the tree and any risks that are
posed by the tree.
8.69 It follows that the impact of works to the tree should be articulated as
a distinct decision- making principle. In New South
Wales this decision-making
principle has enabled the Court to consider whether pruning of the tree would be
detrimental to the tree’s
health and structural stability.95 For example,
if the tree is assessed as healthy, pruning works should be conducted so as to
render the tree unsafe in the future. Alternatively, if the tree is
unhealthy the most appropriate order may be to remove it.96
Past actions of parties
8.70 VCAT should also consider whether anything other than the tree may
have contributed to the damage or harm. For example,
this may require the
decision maker to consider whether trees on the affected neighbour’s land
have contributed to the
damage or harm97 or whether the affected neighbour
failed to give the tree owner an adequate opportunity to respond to the
While this would not result in an otherwise hazardous tree being
retained, it may result in a portion of the cost of repairs an affected
neighbour might be seeking being borne by them.
8.71 This decision-making principle would also require the decision maker to
consider any steps taken by the affected neighbour or
the tree owner to resolve
the dispute. If the tree owner has taken steps to prevent damage or harm then
this may mean that an order
for ongoing maintenance is more appropriate than
tree removal.
91 See, eg,
Aboriginal Heritage Act 2006
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) 2011
[2008] NSWLEC 152
NSWLR 98 [222].
Tree Protection Local Law 2016
(City of Boroondara)
Morris v Kedziora
[2011] NSWLEC 1156.
Morris v Kedziora
[2011] NSWLEC 1156
the Court determined that
pruning the tree would make it unstable and therefore the Court ordered its
removal. The lopping sought
by the applicants (that is, the
‘flat-topping’ of the tree) would have had a detrimental impact on
the structural integrity
of the tree [17].
97 See, eg,
O’Connell v Gallagher
[2007] NSWLEC 718
[2009] NSWLEC 1347.
98 See, eg,
Osborne v Hook
[2008] NSWLEC 1231
[2009] NSWLEC 1349
time’ principle
8.72 The new Act should specifically include a decision-making principle that
addresses whether the tree existed before the affected
neighbour began to occupy
the land that is affected by the tree.
8.73 It is not intended that this principle have the effect of preventing an
applicant from pursuing relief under the new Act but
instead that it is one
of a range of principles that VCAT should consider in making its orders.
This approach most closely
aligns with the provision in the Tasmanian Act.99
The Commission observes that the NSWLEC has produced a tree dispute principle
this issue.100 The Commission considers that the
same outcome may be better achieved by clearly articulating the principle in
the new Act.
Recognised weed
8.74 The new Act should apply to a recognised weed provided it both meets the
definition of ‘tree’ in the new Act and
has caused, is causing or is
likely to cause damage to property or land or harm to people in the next 12
months. The VCAT application
form should also specifically ask the applicant for
information about the species of tree and whether it is a recognised weed.
8.75 Whether the tree is a recognised weed should also be considered by VCAT
in making orders. It may be appropriate for VCAT to consider
any past actions
taken by the landowner with respect to the weed, for example whether or not
the landowner was issued with a directions
notice under the
Catchment and
Land Protection Act 1994
(Vic) and failed to comply with this notice.101 It
may also be more appropriate for VCAT to order the removal of a recognised
Not recommended: Tree removal as a last
8.76 The Commission is not persuaded that the new Act should include a
decision-making principle that the tree be removed only as
a last resort. The
cumulative effect of the range of other decision-making principles is that tree
removal and indeed any tree works
will only occur as a last resort where the
situation demands it. The principles do this by
encouraging the decision maker to find solutions that consider the broader
benefits of the tree and underpinning decisions with impartial
arboricultural
Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants Act 2017
Black v Johnson (No 2)
[2007] NSWLEC 513.
Catchment and Land Protection Act 1994
Recommendations
The Act should state that before determining an application the
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal must consider the following
to the extent that they are relevant to an application:
(a) the location of the tree in relation to the boundary of the land and any
structures or premises
(b) the condition of the tree in respect of its health and structural
(c) whether works to the tree would require any consent or authorisation
under other Acts or laws and, if so, whether the consent
or authorisation has
been obtained
(d) the provisions of the planning scheme which apply to the land under the
Planning and Environment Act 1987
(Vic) including relevant zones and
overlays and the provisions of other relevant Acts or laws that apply to the
land or tree
(e) the impact any pruning, including the impact of maintaining the tree at a
particular height, width or shape, would have on the
(f) any contribution the tree makes to:
i. the amenity of land on which it is situated, including its contribution to
sun, wind, noise, odour
ii. the local ecosystem and biodiversity
iii. the natural landscape and scenic value of the land
(g) whether the tree has any historical, cultural, social or scientific
value. This includes a tree that is part of Aboriginal
cultural heritage under
Aboriginal Heritage Act 2006
(Vic) or is a registered tree or is
situated in a Victorian heritage place under the
Heritage Act 2017
(h) any impact the tree has on soil stability, the water table or other
natural features of the land or locality
(i) anything, other than the tree, that has contributed, or is contributing,
to any harm or damage or likelihood of harm or damage,
i. any act or omission by the applicant and the impact of any other trees
owned by the applicant
ii. any steps taken by the applicant or the owner of the land on which the
tree is situated to prevent or rectify damage
(j) whether the tree and any risk, obstruction or interference associated
with the tree existed before the affected neighbour began
to occupy the land
affected by the tree
(k) whether the tree is a recognised weed
(l) such other matters as the decision-making body considers relevant in the
circumstances of the case.
Expert evidence
8.77 Expert evidence will be important in the formal hearing process under
the new Act. Tree disputes can encompass complex issues
such as the condition of
the tree, tree roots, issues with damaged pavements and built structures, and
medical issues such as pollen
allergies and psychological distress. The new Act
should be underpinned by the requirement for arboricultural evidence that shows
that the tree is the real and actual cause of damage or harm that has occurred
or is likely to occur in the next 12 months. This
was broadly supported by
community responses.102
8.78 Nillumbik Shire Council expressed concern that any new Act ‘not
provide scope for vindictive neighbours to take advantage
of a new scheme by
bringing unmeritorious claims against neighbours on adjoining land’.103
The requirement for expert evidence
will reduce the scope for neighbours to
bring claims without merit. Arboricultural evidence will also help VCAT devise
solutions to tree problems.
8.79 This chapter focuses on arboricultural evidence because most submissions
and consultations emphasised this issue. However, some
comments about medical
evidence were also received, such as where pollen allergies are claimed.104 The
role of qualified building
inspectors and surveyors,105 construction and
geotechnical engineers for property damage106 and plumbers for damage to pipes
also raised in submissions.107
8.80 Arborists specialise in the assessment and management of individual
trees.108 The Commission has been informed that the quality
of arboricultural
assessment can vary significantly and can affect the direction of neighbourhood
tree disputes.109 Conflicting assessments
could result in an escalation of the
dispute. Further, poor quality assessments could result in trees being
unnecessarily removed
or, alternatively, trees being retained that present risks
to health and safety. In addition, the Commission was informed that assessments
undertaken by arborists can be prohibitively expensive for many members of the
community.110
8.81 The next section examines evidentiary requirements in planning
schemes and local laws. It then considers how VCAT currently
manages expert
evidence across its lists and how this is done by decision makers in tree
disputes interstate. Community responses
are also considered.
Expert evidence—planning schemes
8.82 Planning scheme overlays and native vegetation particular provisions can
protect vegetation on private land. In deciding whether
to grant a permit for
proposed tree works, such as pruning or tree removal, the responsible authority
must consider certain decision-making
criteria. Planning schemes can specify the
information that permit applicants are required to provide to the responsible
to facilitate informed decision making. Often this is done through
local schedules to the planning scheme. This information may require
evidence from an arborist and specify the form of that evidence.
8.83 Under schedule 1 of the Significant Landscape Overlay within the City of
Boroondara Planning Scheme, the following evidence is
required to obtain a
permit to remove, destroy or lop vegetation:
102 Submissions 2 (Name withheld), 12 (Dr Gregory Moore OAM), 18 (ENSPEC), 20
(Name withheld), 25 (City of Boroondara).
103 Consultation 9 (Nillumbik Shire Council).
104 Consultations 8 (City of Boroondara),12 (City of Port Phillip).
105 Submission 4 (Name withheld).
106 Submission 9 (Dr Karen Smith).
107 Submission 4 (Name withheld); Consultation 8 (City of Boroondara).
108 Arboriculture Australia,
Australian Qualification Framework (AQF) and
Australian Training Programs
http://arboriculture.org. au/Qualification
109 Submission 18 (ENSPEC); Consultations 4 (Participants in facilitated
discussion at VTIO ArborCamp2018), 8 (City of Boroondara),
9 (Nillumbik Shire Council), 10 (Baw Baw Shire Council), 11 (Land and
Environment Court of New South Wales), 14 (Robert Mineo).
110 Consultations 5 (Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal), 10 (Baw
Baw Shire Council), 14 (Robert Mineo).
(a) a written explanation justifying the removal of the vegetation, supported
by a suitably qualified arborist111
(b) a description and accurate site plan denoting the position, height,
number, trunk circumference, branch spread, slope of land
and species of any
vegetation to be removed
(c) plan details of the location of proposed replanting.112
8.84 The planning scheme does not define what it means by a suitably
qualified arborist. However, council advised that it has report
guidelines for arborists for the assessment of development applications under
the planning scheme.113 These guidelines recommend
that arboricultural reports
‘should be prepared by a suitably qualified and experienced arborist with
a Diploma in Arboriculture
(AQF Level 5) or higher relevant qualification and
demonstrated tree assessment and report writing experience’.114 They also
recommend that:
• reports must be written within the preceding three months of
• reports must be submitted in an accepted format and all resource
material including any calculations, figures, or photographs
appropriately referenced using an acceptable format
• a clear and detailed existing survey plan and/or proposed development
plan must be used within all reports
• the report must focus on the characteristics of each tree. It must
define each tree’s size, health and vigour, the structural
condition and
longevity, and rate the retention value of each tree as high, medium or low.
Consideration must be given to the requirements
of the Preliminary
Arboricultural Assessment as defined in Section 2.3.2 of the Australian Standard
AS 4970-2009—Protection
of Trees on Development Sites.115
8.85 The guidelines further outline what must be included in a report,
including a description of the inspection process used, for
example the risk
assessment methodology; a discussion of the application of any local planning
policies or tree protection controls;
and an overview of the retention value of
the tree.116 Council may reject a report with significant errors or
omissions.117 Council
has found that the reports it receives from arborists vary
considerably in quality and content.118 The most common error that arborists
make is not undertaking a risk assessment in line with an industry-recognised
methodology.119
8.86 Nillumbik Shire Council advised that if a planning application is
received by Council which requires tree removal or may impact
on existing
vegetation, a private consulting arborist has usually been engaged by the
developer to undertake a site inspection and
assessment. If not, an
arborist’s report will be required for assessment.120 Generally, all
arborist reports submitted with
a planning application will be reviewed by the
Services’ consulting arborist, which will include a site inspection, to
ensure the information
111 The qualification requirements of arborists are not further defined
within the City of Boroondara Planning Scheme.
112 City of Boroondara,
City of Boroondara Planning Scheme
2019) cl 42.03 sch 1, 4.0 Application Requirements.
113 City of Boroondara,
Arboricultural Report Writing Guide: Guide for the
Preparation of Preliminary Arboricultural Reports, Arboricultural Impact
Assessments,
Root Investigation/ Mapping Reports, Tree Management and Protection
Plans and Transplant Method Statement,
(Guidelines, June 2017).
115 Ibid 3. See Ch 6 for a detailed discussion on the Australian Standards
Pruning of Amenity Trees
AS4373-2007 and
Protection of Trees on
Development Sites
AS4970-2009. In Ch 9 the Commission recommends that orders
for tree works made under a the new Act be
carried out by a qualified arborist in accordance with the Australian
AS4373-2007 Pruning of Amenity Trees
AS4970-2009
Protection of Trees on Development Sites.
116 City of Boroondara,
Arboricultural Report Writing Guide: Guide for the
Preparation of Preliminary Arboricultural Reports, Arboricultural Impact
Assessments,
Root Investigation/ Mapping Reports, Tree Management and Protection
Plans and Transplant Method Statements
(Guidelines, June 2017) 4.
117 Ibid 3.
118 Consultation 8 (City of Boroondara).
120 Consultation 9 (Nillumbik Shire Council).
is correct and the impacts to trees can be
mitigated.121 Nillumbik believes that the best way to avoid poor quality
arboricultural
assessments is to require a minimum set of qualifications.122
8.87 Baw Baw Shire Council noted that if a tree is subject to a heritage
overlay, the tree owner needs to apply to council for a permit
to prune, chop,
lop or remove it.123 After receiving an application, council arranges for an
independent arborist to assess the tree.124
Council does not have any in-house
arborists of AQF Level 5. Council arborists are of AQF Level
4. Council advises community members to have risk assessments made by
arborists with qualifications of AQF Level 5.125 Council contracts
arborists of AQF Level 5 when they need to conduct a tree assessment.126 Council
then determines whether the tree can be
pruned or removed, based on the
tree’s current health and expected lifespan.127 Council stated that
photographs, including
aerial photographs, can be helpful in making permit
decisions.128 Photos allow Council to determine the species of tree, and its
appearance and position.129
8.88 Baw Baw stated that residents generally provide the correct information
in their applications.130 In some cases the cost of gathering
material for an
application (including photography and arborist report) can be prohibitive, and
sometimes people choose to run the
risk of a fine for unauthorised tree works or
removal.131 Council explained that a major problem with arborists’
assessments
is that many fail to complete a risk assessment as part of their
overall assessment of tree health.132 While they may assess the
of a tree as ‘poor’, they do not necessarily assess the
consequences if it fails.133 Council requires arborists’
contain risk assessments as well as health assessments.134
8.89 The City of Port Phillip noted that Council will generally require a
report from a suitably qualified arborist prior to approving
a development
application.135
Expert evidence—local laws
City of Boroondara
8.90 The City of Boroondara advised that:
Council makes its decisions based on evidence. Where sufficient and
compelling evidence is provided, Council will generally grant
requested by the tree owner. Council accepts that obtaining expert evidence can
be costly for residents but believes informed
decisions cannot be made without
this information.136
8.92 Council does not provide formal guidelines for
report writing for applications under the local law. However, guidelines for
reports are in place for the assessment of development
applications under the Planning Scheme.139
8.93 Boroondara receives approximately half a dozen claims relating to pollen
allergies each year. Council has started to gather information
from medical
practitioners, including immunologists from the Australasian Society of Clinical
Immunology and Allergy, about the sources
of common allergens. Pathology
services can run allergy tests for a wide range of tree and vegetation species.
Council confirmed
that if a reaction is severe and limits a resident’s use
of property, then they will consider issuing a permit for removal.
situation council will consider a range of factors when it examines causation,
such as whether the allergy can be attributed
to more than one tree, and whether
the removal of the tree would solve the problem.140
City of Port Phillip
8.94 People who wish to remove a significant tree or palm under
council’s local law are required to apply to the City Permits
(CPU)141 which must decide the application within 15 days. The decision is
evidence-based. Council’s arborist will make
a recommendation about the
permit application to the Coordinator of the CPU who will then make a
decision.142
8.95 Council arborists provide expert advice on permit applications under
the local law.143 There are currently three council
arborists with relevant
qualifications such as a Certificate IV, diploma or degree. Council requires
an objective arboricultural
assessment by an experienced arborist, providing
observations on tree health and whether or not they support removal of the tree
or palm.144
8.96 It is not uncommon for permit applicants to submit their own expert
advice, but Council advised that the quality of information
provided can be
poor.145 For example, applicants may submit only a quote as evidence that they
have engaged an arborist or structural
engineer. Often no further information
Council will
request further information prior to making a decision under the
local law.146 Council noted that the community is generally unaware
obtain advice from a suitably qualified arborist.
8.97 Local law requires pruning of significant trees or palms to be done to
Australian Standard AS 4373-2007—Pruning of Amenity Trees.
suitably qualified arborist would be needed to carry out these works.147
8.98 Council noted that if a pollen allergy is given as the reason for
requesting removal of the tree or palm, then this will generally
supported by specialist medical evidence. Psychological distress caused by fear
of a tree has sometimes formed the basis
for an application to remove a tree or
Expert evidence—VCAT
VCAT has in relation to the appointment of expert witnesses and the provision
of expert evidence. Section 80 of the VCAT Act confers
broad discretion on VCAT
to make a range of directions:
• providing for the appointment of single joint experts or
Tribunal-appointed experts
• limiting expert evidence to specified issues.150
8.100 In appropriate cases VCAT may appoint its own expert under clause 7 of
schedule 3 of the Act or a special referee under section
95 of the Act.151 The
Tribunal may do this at the request of the parties, or occasionally on its own
initiative.152 If the Tribunal
proposes to appoint an expert or special referee
on its own initiative, it will first obtain the views of the parties in writing
or at a directions hearing. The costs of the expert will be shared equally by
the parties, unless otherwise ordered.153
8.101 VCAT can direct experts to narrow the issues in dispute and provide the
Tribunal with a joint report specifying matters agreed,
matters not agreed, and
the reasons for the
disagreement.154 In addition, VCAT can require experts to provide evidence
concurrently, generally doing so in a panel format.155
8.102 VCAT can appoint ordinary members with specialised knowledge or
experience to enable the proper functioning of the Tribunal.156
Expert reports—VCAT
8.103 VCAT provides the following guidance about what to include in an expert
report, under clause 11 of its Practice Note –
PNVCAT2 – Expert
Evidence (1 October 2014):
• the full name and address of the expert witness
• qualifications, experience and area of expertise
• a statement of expertise to make the report
• reference to any private or business relationship between the expert
witness and the party for whom the report is prepared
• all instructions that define the scope of the report (original and
supplementary and whether in writing or oral)
• the facts, matters and all assumptions upon which the report
• reference to those documents and other materials the expert has been
instructed to consider or take into account in preparing
his or her report and
the literature or other material used in making the report
• the identity and qualifications of the person who carried out any
tests or experiments upon which the expert relied in making
• a statement including:
- a summary of the opinion
- whether there are provisional opinions that are not fully researched for
any reason (including the reasons)
- any questions falling outside the expert’s expertise
- whether the report is incomplete or inaccurate in any respect
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
151 VCAT may refer a question to a special referee for
opinion/determination.
152 Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal (VCAT),
Practice Note
PNVCAT2: Expert Evidence,
1 October 2014, 7.
153 Ibid 8.
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
(Vic) sch 3;
see also Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal (VCAT),
Practice Note
PNVCAT2: Expert Evidence,
1 October 2014, 6.
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
(Vic) sch 3;
see also Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal (VCAT),
Practice Note
PNVCAT2: Expert Evidence,
1 October 2014, 7.
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
• a signed declaration by the expert:
I have made all the inquiries that I believe are desirable and appropriate
and that no matters of significance which I regard as relevant
have, to my
knowledge, been withheld from the Tribunal.157
8.104 The requirements of clause 11 do not apply to reports obtained from
treating doctors and hospitals, unless the Tribunal directs
otherwise.158
Doctors and hospitals are nonetheless encouraged to follow these requirements to
the extent practicable.159 Written
submissions are not compulsory, but they are the most common and preferred
form of presentation to VCAT.160
Duty of expert witnesses—VCAT
8.105 The duty of an expert witness to the Tribunal is described in the VCAT
Act as follows:
• An expert witness has a paramount duty to the Tribunal and not to the
party retaining the expert.
• An expert witness has an overriding duty to assist the Tribunal on
matters relevant to the expert’s expertise.
• An expert witness is not an advocate for a party to a
proceeding.161
8.106 VCAT told the Commission that 80 per cent of parties at VCAT are
self-represented.162 Expert evidence can be a significant cost
to the parties.
It was suggested that regardless of whether the parties have engaged an expert
or not, they are often dependent on
the expertise of the judicial officer or
8.107 In the Planning and Environment List, expert evidence from arborists is
frequently received about the health of a tree, its
longevity, implications of
cutting roots, and protective mechanisms.164 It was suggested that VCAT members
in the Planning and Environment
List develop skills in assessing the accuracy
of reports and VCAT members are not bound by the evidence presented to
Other jurisdictions—expert evidence
New South Wales
8.108 The application form in New South Wales puts parties on notice about
the importance of evidence.166 The NSWLEC encourages parties
to carefully
consider whether expert evidence is necessary.167 It does this because tree
dispute hearings are generally fixed for
a final hearing before a commissioner
who is a qualified arborist168 and therefore able to use his or her knowledge of
arboriculture
in deciding the application. The Court may also engage arborists
as court-appointed experts in certain circumstances.169
157 Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal (VCAT),
Practice Note
PNVCAT2: Expert Evidence
, 1 October 2014, cl 11. 158 Ibid cl 13.
160 Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal (VCAT),
Submissions
(Web Page) <https://
www.vcat.vic.gov.au/steps-to-resolve-your-case/how-
to-prepare-for-your-hearing/submissions>.
161 Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal (VCAT),
Practice Note
PNVCAT2: Expert Evidence,
1 October 2014, 3; see also
Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
(Vic) sch 3.
162 Consultation 5 (Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal).
166 Consultation 11 (Land and Environment Court of New South Wales); see Land
and Environment Court of New South Wales,
Form C: Tree Dispute Application
(Version 3)
http://www.lec.justice.nsw.gov.au/Pages/types_of_disputes/class_2/Trees-hedge-disputes-process/ treedisputes_how.aspx
Land and Environment Court of New South Wales, Form
Tree Dispute Claim Details (Damage to Property
or Injury to a Person)
(Version 1)
http://www.lec.justice.nsw.gov.au/Pages/types_of_disputes/class_2/Trees-hedge-disputes-process/ treedisputes_how.aspx
167 Land and Environment Court of New South Wales (NSWLEC),
Practice Note
Class 2: Tree Applications
, 1 December 2018 [41].
168 Ibid [42].
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005
(NSW) r 31.20(2)(g); see
generally Justice Rachel Pepper, ‘Expert Evidence in the Land and
Environment Court’ (Speech
delivered at the Australian Property Institute,
21 January 2013)
http://www.lec.justice.nsw.gov.au/Pages/publications/ speeches_papers.aspx
8.109 The Court acknowledged that arborists engaged by parties may have a
high level of adversarial bias.170 Where parties have their
own experts who
cannot agree, the Court may order the experts to meet together on site.171
Concurrent evidence is favoured by the
NSWLEC because it facilitates a
discussion between the experts and helps to narrow the issues in dispute.172 It
can also reduce the
likelihood of adversarial bias and save costs and
8.110 There is no requirement that expert evidence be provided by an arborist
with particular qualifications.174 However, it is generally
accepted that only
arborists of AQF Level 5 will complete assessment reports. The Court considers
that arborists in New South Wales
are generally well trained and
knowledgeable.175 The Court also noted that all arborists know about the
relevant Australian Standards
relating to pruning and tree protection
8.111 Any experts engaged independently by the parties are generally not
required to attend the hearing. Written evidence is considered
sufficient.177
The expert and expert’s report must comply with the
Uniform Civil
Procedure Rules 2005
provides that an expert’s
report must include the following:
• the expert’s qualifications as an expert on the issue the
subject of the report
• the facts, and assumptions of fact, on which the opinions in the
report are based (a letter of instructions may be annexed)
• the expert’s reasons for each opinion expressed
• if applicable, that a particular issue falls outside the
expert’s field of expertise
• any literature or other materials used in support of the opinions
• any examinations, tests or other investigations on which the expert
has relied, including details of the qualifications of
the person who carried
• in the case of a report that is lengthy or complex, a brief summary
of the report (to be located at the beginning of the report).
8.112 If an expert witness believes that their expert report may be
incomplete or requires clarification on certain points, this must
be stated in
the report.179 These requirements broadly replicate the expert report writing
guidelines published by VCAT. The NSWLEC
Practice Note for tree disputes
hearings also states that ‘it is not the role of experts to express an
opinion about whether
a tree application should be granted or
dismissed’.180
8.113 Where an application is made based on injury said to arise from a
medical condition, the Court gives specific Supplementary
Standard Directions
requiring an applicant to provide properly qualified medical or scientific
evidence of a link between the injury
and the trees which are the subject of the
application.181
8.114 QCAT may make an order requiring a survey to be undertaken to clarify
the tree’s location in relation to the common
boundary; authorising a
person to enter the tree-keeper’s land to carry out an order, including
entering land to obtain
a quotation for carrying out an order; and requiring
a report by an ‘appropriately qualified arborist’.182 QCAT
170 Consultation 11 (Land and Environment Court of New South Wales).
172 See Justice Rachel Pepper
‘Expert Evidence in the Land and
Environment Court’ (Speech delivered at the Australian Property Institute,
http://www.lec.justice.nsw.gov.au/Pages/publications/speeches_papers.aspx
173 See, eg, Justice Peter Garling, ‘Concurrent Expert Evidence:
Reflections and Development’ (2011) 49(10)
Law Society Journal
174 Consultation 11 (Land and Environment Court of New South Wales).
177 Land and Environment Court of New South Wales (NSWLEC),
Practice Note
Class 2: Tree Applications,
1 December 2018, [43].
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005
(NSW) r 31.27.
180 Land and Environment Court of New South Wales (NSWLEC),
Practice Note
Class 2: Tree Applications
, 1 December 2018, [44]. The Commission notes that
Practice Notes do not have legislative force.
181 Ibid 3, 11.
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
the Commission that it will appoint a tree
assessor183 if the Tribunal is unable to make a decision without expert
arboricultural
opinion.184
8.115 QCAT has issued a Practice Direction detailing ‘Arrangements for
applications for orders to resolve other issues about
trees’.185 The
directive states that QCAT will generally appoint an expert tree assessor to
assist with disputes.186 The assessor
is asked to inspect the tree/s and the
properties subject to the application and provide a report which outlines
solutions to the
dispute.187
8.116 Alternatively, parties may engage an expert to provide a report. In
this case, the experts may be required to attend an experts’
conclave,188
after which, the experts should be able to produce a short joint report.189 On
QCAT’s website, community members
are encouraged to contact the Queensland
Aboricultural Association to locate a qualified arborist.190 The
Association’s website
details the criteria for both a qualified arborist
consultant and a qualified arborist contractor.191
8.117 Expert reports must adhere to
Uniform Civil
Procedure Rules 1999
, containing the same requirements as under the
8.118 In Tasmania, under
section 33(6)(g)
Neighbourhood Disputes
(Tas), RMPAT may make an order requiring a report to
be obtained from an
appropriately qualified arborist. No further information is provided about
the qualification required of arborists.
8.119 RMPAT requires experts to adhere to a code of conduct.192 It can direct
experts to concur and submit a joint report.193
8.120 Expert reports must contain certain information as set out in a RMPAT
Practice Direction governing the giving of evidence by
expert witnesses.194 This
information is the same as that required by the NSWLEC and QCAT.
Community responses—expert evidence
8.121 There was broad community support for tree dispute decisions to be
underpinned by expert evidence.195 Dr Gregory Moore OAM explained
Too often trees are assumed to be causing problems to infrastructure but
there are no data to support the assumptions or assertions
made. If for example
tree roots are said to be damaging infrastructure, there should be some evidence
that the roots of the said
183 An AQF Level 5 arborist with 5 years of experience: Consultation 15
(Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal). 184 Consultation
15 (Queensland
Civil and Administrative Tribunal).
185 Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
Practice Direction No 7
Arrangements for Applications for Orders to Resolve Other Issues
186 An AQF Level 5 arborist with 5 years of experience: Consultation 15
(Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal); Queensland
Administrative Tribunal,
Practice Direction No 7 of 2013: Arrangements for
Applications for Orders to Resolve Other Issues About Trees,
187 Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
Practice Direction No 7
of 2013: Arrangements for Applications for Orders to Resolve Other Issues About
188 This is a private meeting between the experts, chaired by a member of the
Tribunal: see Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
Practice Direction No 4 of 2009: Guide to Expert Conferences
189 See Ibid 1.
190 Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
Tree Disputes
Page, 29 February 2019)
http://www.qcat.qld.gov.au/matter-types/ tree-disputes
191 Queensland Arboricultural Association,
(Web Page, 2018) <https://qaa.net.au/approved-arborist/>
192 Resource Management and Planning Appeal Tribunal,
Practice Direction
No 12A: Expert Witness Code of Conduct’
www.rmpat.tas.gov.au/practice_directions
193 Ibid; Resource Management and Planning Appeal Tribunal,
Direction No 12: Expert Witnesses
www.rmpat.tas.gov.au/
practice_directions>.
194 Resource Management and Planning Appeal Tribunal,
Practice Direction
No 12A: Expert Witness Code of Conduct
www.rmpat.tas.gov.au/practice_directions
Resource Management and Planning Appeal Tribunal,
Practice Direction No 12:
Expert Witnesses
www.rmpat.tas.gov.au/practice_directions
195 Submissions 12 (Dr Gregory Moore OAM), 25 (City of Boroondara);
Consultations 2 (Dr Gregory Moore OAM), 10 (Baw Baw Shire Council),
12 (City of
Port Phillip).
tree are found in the vicinity of the damaged structure. For far too long,
lazy consultants have got away with asserting that trees
are causing problems
without providing evidence.196
8.122 The City of Boroondara agreed:
Legislation should be prefaced by the principle that the party seeking the
removal of the tree must be able to establish an actual
and real impact of the
tree, rather than a perceived or fanciful impact. In Council’s experience,
perceived (and often irrationally
perceived) impacts of trees are difficult, if
not impossible, to assess.197
8.123 The City of Port Phillip and Baw Baw Shire Council commented that
assessment and expert advice from an appropriately qualified
arborist would
assist the decision- making process.198 Baw Baw Shire Council suggested that
expert advice from other suitably qualified
individuals, such as environmental
scientists and botanists, would be appropriate.199
8.124 Other community responses supported specialist medical evidence or
pathology testing for claims relating to future harm.200
Qualifications of arborists
8.125 Community members overwhelmingly supported an approach that would
require minimum qualification levels for arborists who provide
evidence for
matters initiated under the new Act. In particular, a minimum AQF Level 5
qualification with additional practical experience
was supported.201 However,
one submission noted that a new scheme should not attempt to ‘codify the
role of arborists as the
admissibility of evidence would be a matter for the
decision-making body to consider’.202
8.126 Arborist Ben Kenyon explained that:
The guidelines set out in AS 4970-2009 Protection of trees on development
sites should be followed. The standard specifies that
a suitably qualified
person is one that has an AQF Level 5 in arboriculture as the minimum.203
8.127 Dr Gregory Moore OAM supported such an approach:
In Victoria, there is a very good argument that it should be higher such as a
minimum of level 5. The reason for this is that there
are several hundred
trained/educated arborists in Victoria at level 5 or above, but this is not the
case in other states.204
8.128 Arborist Robert Mineo explained that arboricultural qualifications
under the Australian Qualification Framework have undergone
some changes. Mr
Mineo stated:
Many experienced arborists are qualified with what used to be a Level IV
arborists’ qualification (advanced certificate). This
was described as the
‘old school diploma’ and it is no longer offered. The arborist
qualification regime changed in 2009–10.
Under the current qualification
framework, a full tree assessment qualification is usually at Level V (diploma)
but lesser elements
of tree assessment, mostly to determine safely working
around trees, is undertaken in Level 3.205
196 Submission 12 (Dr Gregory Moore OAM).
197 Submission 25 (City of Boroondara).
198 Consultations 10 (Baw Baw Shire Council); 12 (City of Port Phillip).
199 Consultation 10 (Baw Baw Shire Council).
200 Submission 12 (Dr Gregory Moore OAM); Consultation 8 (City of
Boroondara), 12 (City of Port Phillip).
201 Submissions 2 (Name withheld), 4 (Name withheld), 7 (Ben Kenyon), 9 (Dr
Karen Smith), 12 (Dr Gregory Moore OAM); Consultations
4 (Participants in
facilitated discussion at VTIO ArborCamp2018), 6 (Ben Kenyon), 8 (City of
Boroondara), 9 (Nillumbik Shire Council).
202 Submission 21 (Pointon Partners Lawyers).
203 Submission 7 (Ben Kenyon).
204 Submission 12 (Dr Gregory Moore OAM).
205 Consultation 14 (Robert Mineo).
8.129 ENSPEC, an arboricultural consulting firm, advised:
Arboriculture is a specialist skillset and knowledge base that is still
relatively new and evolving. Many people, both lay persons
professions, believe they “know trees” without having the
training and experience of an arborist. Expertise
must be demonstrated through
formal training, experience and ongoing updating of knowledge in
arboriculture, and not, as is often
found in practice, from related disciplines
such as landscape architecture or horticulture, or outdated training.
The arboricultural training packages under the Australian Qualifications
Framework have been updated regularly and substantially since
first introduced.
Practitioners who were qualified under the earlier versions, or even before the
AQF, and have not updated their
qualifications, are out of date. Further, the
AQF is structured in such a way that persons with a qualification below AQF
would not be expected to provide consultancy or expert witness
testimony.206
8.130 VCAT was supportive of the need for experts to provide assistance
during tree dispute hearings. VCAT suggested experts should
be suitably
qualified and experienced, but it did not support enshrining minimum
qualification levels and experience in the new Act.
VCAT noted that
qualifications are subject to change over time.207
8.131 QCAT informed the Commission that the qualification of an arborist is a
relevant consideration when determining the weight given
to evidence submitted
on behalf of a party.208
Duty to the Court
8.132 A common theme raised in submissions and consultations was the need for
independent and impartial arboricultural assessment
to guide decision making
under a new Act.209
At present, it is claimed, people shop around for arborists to support their
case for tree removal or retention, rather than seeking
impartial advice.210
8.133 The City of Boroondara noted that ‘it is Council’s
experience that people seeking to remove trees will often be
able to find an
expert who will support their application’.211 ENSPEC stated that:
Unfortunately, arboriculture is an unregulated profession, meaning that there
is a wide variation in the quality of training, experience
and up-to-date
knowledge amongst practitioners. There is also no professional recourse to
address unethical behaviour as there is
in licensed professions. There are also
many practitioners that provide both consultancy/advice and undertake practical
leading to a potential conflict of interest in providing
impartiality. Establishing impartiality of expertise will be crucial to
outcomes. 212
8.134 Dr Gregory Moore OAM suggested that ‘expert witnesses should be
experts of the court not of either of the parties’.213
One community
member stated that experts under new laws should ‘be bound by an
appropriate Code of Conduct and be independent
from either
neighbour’.214
8.135 Some respondents preferred the approach of appointing one independent
expert to guide the tree dispute hearing. Professor Phillip
Hamilton stated,
‘One expert should be appointed in each case. Otherwise there will be a
dispute as to the expert report. We
206 Submission 18 (ENSPEC).
207 Supplementary Consultation 1 (Victorian Civil and Administrative
208 Consultation 15 (Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal).
209 Submissions 10 (Professor Phillip Hamilton), 12 (Dr Gregory Moore OAM),
18 (ENSPEC), 25 (City of Boroondara); Consultations 4
(Participants in
facilitated discussion at VTIO ArborCamp2018), 12 (City of Port Phillip).
210 Submission 12 (Dr Gregory Moore OAM); Consultation 8 (City of
Boroondara).
211 Submission 25 (City of Boroondara).
212 Submission 18 (ENSPEC).
213 Submission 12 (Dr Gregory Moore OAM).
214 Confidential submission.
want to achieve quick results at minimal
cost.’215 The City of Boroondara supported an approach that would enable
the Tribunal
to appoint an independent expert rather than the expert being
appointed by the party.216
8.136 Nillumbik Shire Council endorsed QCAT’s use of independent tree
assessors by stating that ‘this is a sensible
approach and could
facilitate better outcomes’.217 Nillumbik suggested that if parties are
each responsible for 50 per cent
of this cost it would encourage them to be
more reasonable about resolving the dispute.218 It further observed that
this cost ‘may also discourage vindictive neighbours from bringing
unmeritorious claims’.219 Arborist Robert Mineo supported
the appointment
of an independent tree assessor and noted that requiring the costs to be shared
equally could save each party the
total cost of engaging an arborist.220
The quality of expert reports
8.137 There was general agreement amongst arborists, councils, VCAT and QCAT
that the quality of arboricultural reporting can vary.221
Boroondara and Baw Baw
Councils explained that a key issue with reports is a failure to complete an
industry-recognised risk assessment
as part of their overall assessment of the
8.138 To address this issue, some arborists favoured a template for report
writing or report writing guidelines. Arborists at
ArborCamp agreed that the
Council Arboriculture Victoria’s Arboricultural Reporting Guidelines are
useful.223 Arborist Robert
Mineo added that:
It would be wise for arborists to have a template for reporting writing. This
would encourage arborists to adhere to the same benchmark,
and for the
decision-making body to receive unified reports. A report writing template would
also make it easier for arborists to
supply information and for decisionmakers
to consider information.224
The Commission’s conclusions—expert
Evidence-based decision making
8.139 The new Act should be underpinned by evidence-based decision making,
supported by arboricultural (and other) expert evidence.
Expert evidence will
assist VCAT to ensure that the tree is the real and actual cause of the damage
or harm that has occurred or
likely to occur in the next 12 months. Expert assistance will also help VCAT
to incorporate practical and durable solutions in its
8.140 The recommendations in Chapter 7 support the use of VCAT members with
arboricultural expertise or the use of independent tree
assessors in hearings
under the new Act. This means that parties may not need to retain experts to
provide evidence to VCAT. It will
also help to reduce the cost of expert
evidence. However, the Commission acknowledges that tree disputes can be highly
emotive and
contentious and that parties will sometimes want their own experts
to assist them during a hearing. Parties that provide expert evidence
a tree dispute including any independent tree assessors should be required to
meet certain evidentiary requirements as
discussed below.
215 Submission 10 (Professor Phillip Hamilton).
216 Consultation 8 (City of Boroondara).
217 Consultation 9 (Nillumbik Shire Council).
220 Consultation 14 (Robert Mineo).
221 Consultations 4 (Participants in facilitated discussion at VTIO
ArborCamp2018), 5 (Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal),
Boroondara), 10 (Baw Baw Shire Council), 14 (Robert Mineo), 15 (Queensland Civil
and Administrative Tribunal).
222 Consultations 8 (City of Boroondara), 10 (Baw Baw Shire Council).
223 Consultation 4 (Participants in facilitated discussion at VTIO
ArborCamp2018). See also Council Arboriculture Victoria,
Arboricultural
Reporting Guidelines for Developments
(Version 2.0, November 2009)
www.councilarboriculturevictoria.com.au/wp-content/
uploads/2016/04/Arboricultural-Reporting-Guidelines-for-developments-Version-2.0-2009.pdf>
224 Consultation 14 (Robert Mineo).
Minimum qualification requirements
8.141 The Act should specify minimum qualification requirements for expert
roles in VCAT.
8.142 Requiring minimum qualification levels will help ensure trees are
appropriately assessed in line with industry-approved
risk assessment
methods.225 This is of primary importance for a scheme that will consider
whether trees have caused damage or may
cause future damage or harm.
8.143 Arborists trained to AQF Level 5 have relevant expertise in using
industry-approved risk assessment tools to properly determine
whether the tree
may fail and cause damage or harm.226 The City of Boroondara identified the
following risk assessment methodologies
and explained that one or more of these
assessments form part of the regular training of an AQF Level 5 arborist:
• Quantified Tree Risk Assessment (QTRA) —a United Kingdom system
with two-day courses offered in Australia227
• Tree Risk Assessment Qualification (TRAQ)—a United States
system with two-day courses followed by a half-day assessment
Australia228
• the Matheny & Clarke method.229
8.144 The Commission has considered the course requirements of a
diploma in Arboriculture and notes that an additional tree
method, the Visual Tree Assessment (VTA), is listed as required
knowledge.230 ENSPEC relies on the VTA ‘to inspect
and assess trees in
order to identity any defects or problems that may lead to structural
instability or failure’.231
8.145 Independent expert evidence provided to VCAT about the health of the
tree and likelihood of risk should be provided by those
at a minimum AQF Level 5
or equivalent with at least two years of practical experience. This is
reasonable given that Victoria is
trained/educated arborists in Victoria at level 5 or above’.232
8.146 This requirement will also act as a reference point for people in the
community who wish to obtain their own expert advice outside
VCAT. See Chapter
12 for recommendations about providing the community with information about what
to look for when hiring an arborist.
8.147 Enabling arborists to provide evidence with a qualification that is
equivalent to an AQF Level 5 will help to account for any
changes to arborist
qualifications over time, as identified by VCAT.233 The Commission is aware that
a review of existing arborist
qualifications is currently being undertaken.234
Any changes will enhance the provision
of expert arboricultural evidence at tree dispute hearings. It follows that
changes to the arborist qualification framework will need
to be taken into
account in implementing the recommendations in this chapter.
225 Submissions 2 (Name withheld), 4 (Name withheld), 7 (Ben Kenyon), 9 (Dr
Karen Smith), 12 (Dr Gregory Moore OAM); Consultations
4 (Participants in
facilitated discussion at VTIO ArborCamp2018), 6 (Ben Kenyon), 8 (City of
Boroondara), 9 (Nillumbik Shire Council).
226 Consultation 8 (City of Boroondara).
227 See Quantified Tree Risk Assessment,
Training in Quantified Tree Risk
(Web Page, 2019) <https://
www.qtra.co.uk/cms/index.
php?section=124>.
228 See International Society of Arboriculture,
Credentials
www.isa-arbor.com/Credentials/ISA-Tree-Risk-Assessment-
Qualification>.
229 See Nelda P. Matheny & James R. Clark,
A Photographic Guide to the
Evaluation of Hazard Trees in Urban Areas
(International Society of
Arboriculture, 1 December 1993).
230 National Register of Vocational Education and Training (VET) in
Unit of Competency Details: AHCARB501A—Examine and Assess
(Release 2) (Database entry, 21 December 2017)
<https://training.gov.au/Training/Details/AHCARB601>.
231 ENSPEC, ‘Visual and Hazard Tree Assessments’,
Consultancy
(Web Page, 2019)
http://www.enspec.com/Consultancy/ VisualTreeAssessments.aspx
232 Submission 12 (Dr Gregory Moore OAM).
233 Supplementary Consultation 1 (Victorian Civil and Administrative
234 Skills Impact,
Amenity Horticulture, Landscaping, Conservation &
Land Management Industry Reference Committee
(Web Page, 2019)
www.skillsimpact.com.au/horticulture-conservation-and-land-management/training-package-projects/arboriculture-project/
Expert’s duty to VCAT
8.148 VCAT should remind the parties and experts in the tree disputes
hearing about the duties of expert witnesses to the Tribunal:
• An expert witness has a paramount duty to the Tribunal and not to the
party retaining the expert.
• An expert witness has an overriding duty to assist the Tribunal on
matters relevant to the expert’s expertise.
• An expert witness is not an advocate for a party to a
proceeding.235
8.149 These duties, outlined in a Tribunal practice note, should be referred
to in the detailed information guide that VCAT should
produce on the new Act.
See Chapter 12.
Concurrent evidence
8.150 In situations where both parties decide to bring their own arborists to
VCAT tree dispute hearings, the provision of a joint
report or concurrent
evidence would be appropriate. VCAT is able to direct experts to provide the
Tribunal with a joint report,
or require experts to provide evidence
concurrently. 236 The provision of joint evidence would assist VCAT to:
• narrow the issues in dispute
• resolve the matter more quickly and efficiently
• assist the parties to accept the final decision in the hearing.
8.151 This approach would also help to reduce the incentive for parties to
hire arborists to simply advocate on their behalf.
8.152 One arborist provided the example of three arborists jointly conferring
in a coronial matter. It was suggested that this process
took approximately two
hours whereas it was estimated that it may have taken two days for the arborists
to provide their evidence
individually.237
Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
Practice Note
PNVCAT2: Expert Evidence,
1 October 2014, 3; see also
Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
(Vic) sch 3.
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal 1998
(Vic) sch 3; see
also Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal (VCAT),
VCAT Practice Note
PNVCAT2: Expert Evidence,
1 October 2014, 6.
237 Consultation 4 (Participants in facilitated discussion at VTIO
ArborCamp2018).
Guidelines for written reports
8.153 In accordance with existing VCAT procedure, experts engaged by the
Tribunal or by the parties to the dispute should submit
a written report
adhering to the requirements set out in clause 11 of VCAT’s Practice
Note PNVCAT2.238
8.154 Additional requirements should apply to written reports from arborists,
given that the quality of arboricultural reporting can
vary. The Commission has
identified additional requirements from the Council Arboriculture Victoria,
Arboricultural Reporting Guidelines
for Development.239 They are:
• a requirement that the on-site assessment has been undertaken within
the three months preceding the hearing
• a detailed description of the assessment methodology relied on,
including the date of the tree inspection and any limitations
• a record of the expert’s observation of the tree, providing an
assessment of the categories for the tree’s health,
condition, form and
structure240
• a photograph supporting observations and highlighting points of
• details of the local planning scheme overlays and local laws applying
to the tree
• a statement of whether the tree is remnant, indigenous, native,
exotic or weed species
• a statement of the retention value of trees based on the objectives
of the local planning scheme or the local law.241
8.155 Claims relating to future harm may encompass risks of slipping and
falling over leaf litter,242 pollen allergies243 and psychological
distress.244
Specialist medical evidence and/or testing demonstrating a causal link between
the tree and the medical condition should
be required. This view was supported
by one community member and a number of councils.245 VCAT should develop a
specific Practice
Note about this requirement.
8.156 Where an application is made based on injury said to arise from a
medical condition, the NSWLEC gives supplementary standard
requiring applicants to ‘to provide properly qualified medical or
scientific evidence of a link between the injury
and the trees’.246 This
approach is a good guide for Victoria.
8.157 Other experts who may be relied upon by the Tribunal, such as
building surveyors, engineers and plumbers, will also need
to adhere to the
procedures VCAT has in place for expert evidence.
238 Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
Practice Note PNVCAT2:
Expert Evidence,
1 October 2014.
239 Council Arboriculture Victoria,
Arboricultural Reporting Guidelines
for Developments
(Version 2.0, November 2009).
240 The categories must be explained in the report (ie good, fair, poor etc)
and the descriptors listed in the appendix at the end
of the report: Ibid 2.
241 As a guide, trees that have ‘high’ value should be retained
and trees that have ‘low’ value may be unsuitable
for retention:
242 Consultation 12 (City of Port Phillip).
243 Submission 9 (Dr Karen Smith); Consultations 6 (Ben Kenyon), 8 (City of
Boroondara), 9 (Nillumbik Shire Council), 12 (City of
Port Phillip).
244 Consultations 8 (City of Boroondara), 12 (City of Port Phillip). As
discussed in Ch 5, the Commission is not recommending
a compensation
scheme for personal injury under the new Act,
245 Submission 9 (Dr Karen Smith); Consultations 8 (City of Boroondara), 9
(Nillumbik Shire Council), 12 (City of Port Phillip).
246 Land and Environment Court of New South Wales (NSWLEC),
Practice Note
Class 2: Tree Applications
, 1 December 2018, sch B.
Recommendations
27 The Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal should direct experts in
tree dispute matters to comply with clause 11 of Practice
Note PNVCAT2: Expert
Evidence, 1 October 2014 with the following additional requirements:
(a) a requirement that the on-site assessment has been undertaken during the
three months leading up to the hearing
(b) a detailed description of the assessment methodology relied upon,
including the date of the tree inspection and any limitations
(c) a record of the expert’s observation of the tree, providing an
assessment of the categories for the tree’s health,
condition, form and
(d) a photograph supporting observations and highlighting points of
(e) details of the local planning scheme overlays and local laws applying to
(f) information about whether the tree is remnant, indigenous, native, exotic
or weed species
(g) information about the retention value of the tree based on the objectives
of the local planning scheme or the local law.
28 The Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal should develop a Practice
Note about the requirement for a causal link between
the tree and any harm, such
as a medical condition, that is the subject of an application.
in neighbourhood tree disputes
Introduction
Other jurisdictions—orders
Community responses—orders
The Commission’s
conclusions—orders available
Other jurisdictions—appeals
Community responses—appeals
The Commission’s
conclusions—appeals
Enforcement of orders
Other jurisdictions—enforcement of
Community responses—enforcement of
The Commission’s
conclusions—enforcement of orders
Orders, appeals and enforcement in
neighbourhood tree disputes
Introduction
9.1 The new Act should allow for timely, practical and effective remedies for
tree disputes. This section considers the types of order
available in interstate
Acts and community responses. The Commission’s recommendations respond to
some of the limitations with
the common law remedies of negligence, nuisance and
trespass. They aim to provide greater clarity about the range of likely outcomes
if matters proceed to hearing at VCAT.
9.2 This chapter considers:
• the types of order that the Victorian Civil and Administrative
Tribunal (VCAT) should be able to make under the new Act
• rights to seek an appeal or a variation of orders
• how orders should be enforced.
Other jurisdictions—orders available
New South Wales
Trees (Disputes Between Neighbours) Act 2006
(NSW) (the NSW Act) sets out the types of orders that the Land and
Environment Court of New South Wales (NSWLEC) can make in tree
disputes. The
NSWLEC has broad jurisdiction to make ‘such orders as it thinks fit to
remedy, restrain or prevent damage to
property, or to prevent injury to any
person’ and is not limited to making orders requested by the parties to
the dispute.1
9.4 The NSWLEC may make orders that:
• require specified action to be taken to remedy damage to property or
restrain or prevent damage or future damage to property
• require specified action to be taken to prevent injury to any
• authorise the applicant to take specified action to remedy, restrain
or prevent damage or future damage to property
• authorise the applicant to take specified action to prevent injury to
• require a party to make an application to obtain consent or
authorisation that is required under another Act
• authorise the entry onto land for the purposes of carrying out an
• require the payment of costs for works specified in an order
Trees (Disputes Between Neighbours) Act 2006
Department of Justice and Attorney General (NSW),
Review of the
(Disputes Between Neighbours) Act 2006
(NSW) (Report, 2009) 8.
2 This includes entry onto land for the purposes of obtaining quotations for
the carrying out of work on the land.
• require the payment of compensation for property damage
• require a replacement tree to be planted and specify that the new
tree is to be of a mature growth.3
9.5 It is common for the NSWLEC to adjust or deviate from the order that the
parties seek. For example, instead of ordering the removal
of the tree, the
Court may order ongoing pruning of overhanging branches.4
9.6 Applicati
ons for an award of legal costs are
usually sought by the successful party in the NSWLEC and are heard by judges.
Commissioners who
hear tree disputes cannot make orders for legal costs.5 The
NSWLEC power to award costs is similar to those of RMPAT and QCAT,6 in
NSWLEC may not order payment for costs unless the Court considers that an order
for the whole or any part of the costs is
fair and reasonable in the
circumstances [of each individual case].7
9.7 The Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal may make any order it
considers necessary to prevent serious injury or prevent,
remedy or restrain
serious damage to property or substantial, ongoing and unreasonable
interference with the use and enjoyment
of the neighbour’s land.8
9.8 The range of orders are similar to those in New South Wales, but the
Queensland Act additionally provides that orders may:
• require the production of a report by an appropriately qualified
• require that a survey be undertaken to clarify the tree’s
location in relation to the common boundary.9
9.9 Where an affected neighbour’s application relates to a tree that
has been completely removed after causing damage, QCAT
can make an order about
the removed tree, for example to pay compensation or repair costs, provided the
tree owner did not sell their
land in the meantime.10
9.10 If QCAT makes an order for the destruction or removal of a tree, it can
also make an order for the tree to be replaced with one
that is more appropriate
to the surroundings, or of a different maturity, or to be placed in a more
appropriate location.11
9.11 The Queensland Act provides that a living tree should not be removed or
destroyed unless the issue relating to the tree cannot
otherwise be
satisfactorily resolved.12
9.12 In QCAT each party is expected to bear their own costs of proceeding.
The Tribunal may order costs if it is in the interest of
justice to do so.13
Trees (Disputes Between Neighbours) Act 2006
4 Consultation 11 (Land and Environment Court of New South Wales).
5 Ibid. An order of a court of tribunal stipulating that legal costs be paid
by one party to another. Also known as ‘party–party’
These costs are ‘either the amounts lawyers charge their
clients for providing legal services or amounts
recoverable by the
successful party for the work done by their lawyers in legal proceedings. Legal
costs include charges for
the lawyers’ services and disbursements,
barristers’ fees, doctors’ reports and the reasonable costs of
court recordings and transcripts’. Parties can also
agree that one party
will pay the other parties’ costs to settle their dispute: Supreme Court
of Victoria,
Costs Court
(Web Page, 2019) <https://
www.supremecourt.vic.
gov.au/law-and-practice/areas-of-the-court/costs-court>.
6 See discussion below.
Land and Environment Court Rules 2007
(NSW) cl 3.7(2).
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2009
9.13 The Resource Management and Planning Appeal Tribunal (RMPAT) may make
the orders it considers appropriate to prevent, restrain
or reduce the
likelihood of serious injury to a person or serious damage to a person’s
land or any property. It may also make
orders to ensure a branch does not
overhang another person’s land14 and make orders to prevent, restrain or
reduce substantial,
ongoing and unreasonable interference with a person’s
use and enjoyment of land caused by a plant.15
9.14 Orders under the Tasmanian Act largely mirror those that QCAT may make
under the Queensland Act.16 The Tasmanian Act provides
an order is not to be
made requiring the removal or destruction of a living plant to which the
order relates unless the
Tribunal is satisfied that the purpose for which
the application was sought could not otherwise be met.17
9.15 In RMPAT each party is to pay its own costs. The Tribunal may order
costs if it considers that it is fair and reasonable to do
Community responses—orders available
9.16 The Commission received a number of suggestions in response to the
question about what types of orders should be available under
a new Act.19
Suggestions included that orders should provide for:
• pruning or other maintenance of the tree20
• removal of the tree21
• installation of root barriers22
• recovery of costs for ongoing tree maintenance23
• orders that mirrored the NSW approach24
• the replacement planting of trees.25
9.17 Some community members were cautious about trees being removed too
readily and thought other remedies should be explored first.26
For example, Dr
Gregory Moore OAM stated ‘removing a tree can also cause future structural
issues for properties’ and
‘can lead to wind damage to roof tiles
and structures’.27 Arborist Robert Mineo advised that the removal of a
significant
number of branches can lead to the growth of ‘emergency
branches’ which are more prone to failure.28
9.18 Baw Baw Shire Council identified that one of the aims of a new Act
should be to require the replanting of suitable species in
the same location in
order to discourage people who simply want a tree removed even if it is not
causing damage or harm.29 Under
Baw Baw’s Planning Scheme, the council
must consider the future development of the land and whether planting,
replanting or
other treatment should be undertaken on any part of the land prior
to determining an application that may result in interference
with vegetation
under schedule 3 of the Significant Landscape Overlay.30
Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants Act 2017
s 33(2)(d).
Resource Management and Planning Appeal Tribunal Act 1993
19 Submissions 2 (Name withheld), 4 (Name withheld), 7 (Ben Kenyon), 9 (Dr
Karen Smith), 19 (Name withheld), 20 (Name withheld),
21 (Pointon Partners Lawyers), 25 (City of Boroondara), 29 (David Galwey);
Consultations 2 (Dr Gregory Moore OAM), 10 (Baw Baw Shire
Council), 11 (Land and
Environment Court of New South Wales).
20 Submissions 2 (Name withheld), 4 (Name withheld), 7 (Ben Kenyon), 9 (Dr
Karen Smith), 19 (Name withheld), 21 (Pointon Partners
21 Submissions 2 (Name withheld), 9 (Dr Karen Smith), 19 (Name withheld), 21
(Pointon Partners Lawyers).
22 Submissions 4 (Name withheld), 21 (Pointon Partners Lawyers), 25 (City of
Boroondara).
23 Submission 7 (Ben Kenyon).
24 Submissions 20 (Name withheld); Confidential submission.
25 Consultation 10 (Baw Baw Shire Council).
26 Submission 25 (City of Boroondara); Consultations 2 (Dr Gregory Moore
OAM), 9 (Nillumbik Shire Council).
27 Consultation 2 (Dr Gregory Moore OAM).
28 Consultation 14 (Robert Mineo).
29 Consultation 10 (Baw Baw Shire Council).
30 Baw Baw Shire Council,
Baw Baw Planning Scheme
(3 May 2019) cl
42.03 sch 3, 4.0 Decision guidelines.
9.19 The City of Boroondara advised that it may
require a replacement tree to be planted where residents illegally remove,
damage, kill or destroy protected trees without a permit under its local law.31
A fine may also be issued under local law. Replacement
planting may include
planting an established tree of a particular species and in the same position on
the site to neutralise potential
advantage gained from illegal tree works
and to ensure that the benefits of the removed tree are restored in the
9.20 One submission proposed that the remedies available to the
decision-making body should not be limited to those requested by an
neighbour.33
9.21 Baw Baw Shire Council stated that any new adjudicating body should have
the power to award legal costs for vexatious or unmeritorious
However, Barwon Community Legal Service suggested that costs should not be
awarded where one or both parties may be of
lower socio-economic
backgrounds.35
9.22 The NSWLEC reported that the types of orders set out in the NSW Act are
sufficient for the Court’s purposes and that tree
pruning is the most
common order made by the Court.36
The Commission’s conclusions—orders
9.23 Chapter 3 identified some of the limitations of the remedies available
for nuisance, negligence and trespass at common law when
applied to tree
disputes. These common law remedies generally only react to interference,
damage or trespass to land after it has
occurred. They also focus solely on the
civil aspects of the dispute and do not necessarily take into consideration the
broader role
of trees in the community.
9.24 The new Act should give the decision-making body broad discretion to
remedy, restrain or prevent damage to property or prevent
harm to a person on
adjoining land. The list of remedies suggested by the community aligns with the
remedies that are available under
the NSW Act. The Commission is of the view
that the range of orders provided for in the NSW Act would be appropriate in
Access to a neighbour’s land
9.25 The new Act should allow for access to land to carry out orders or to
obtain a quote to carry out works to the tree that is
the subject of an order.
This will also ensure that the problem can be properly assessed from both
properties and that tree works
can also be carried out in the most effective way
and in accordance with the Australian Standards.37 It is common for the
NSWLEC to order access to an applicant’s property (affected neighbour) to
permit effective pruning or other tree works.38
The Commission notes that other
Victorian Acts allow entry onto neighbouring land in similar circumstances.
example, under
Fences Act 1968
(Vic), an owner of
land can be granted authority to enter adjoining land to carry out fencing
31 Consultation 8 (City of Boroondara); see also
Tree Protection Local Law
(City of Boroondara).
32 Consultation 8 (City of Boroondara).
33 Submission 20 (Name withheld).
34 Consultation 10 (Baw Baw Shire Council).
35 Submission 31 (Barwon Community Legal Service).
36 Consultation 11 (Land and Environment Court of New South Wales).
37 Standards Australia,
Pruning of Amenity Trees
(AS 4373-2007)
(Sydney, NSW: Standards Australia, 2007); see also Standards Australia,
Protection of Trees on Development Sites
(AS4970-2009) (Sydney, NSW:
Standards Australia, 2009).
38 Land and Environment Court of New South Wales,
(Disputes Between Neighbours) Act 2006
(14 January 2013) 16.
Planting a replacement tree
9.26 The new Act should specifically include the power to order that a
replacement tree is planted if VCAT considers that this is
appropriate in the
circumstances. Replacement planting is an approach that received widespread
support from councils and community
members involved in this inquiry.39
9.27 Replacement planting is a feature of the NSW and Queensland Acts.40
Replacement planting can be required under Victorian planning
permits as well as
local tree protection laws. The City of Port Phillip and the City of Boroondara
often order replacement planting.41
Heritage Victoria also advised that it will
generally require replanting or replacement of a heritage-listed tree that has
been removed.42
9.28 Replacement tree planting may help to ensure that any environmental and
social benefits lost from the tree’s removal are
restored, although the
Commission notes the caution expressed by ENSPEC that:
planting a new tree is not a replacement of the loss of a mature tree, even
if it is replaced by the same species, as the decades
of growth required to
develop to maturity are lost. It is therefore necessary to prevent the removal
of mature trees without solid
justification.43
9.29 It may also deter people from illegally removing vegetation, for
example, in breach of a local law or planning scheme regulation,
applications made simply because a neighbour has unreasonable expectations about
living near vegetation. A neighbour may
be less likely to seek the removal of a
tree simply because they do not like it or to think twice about removing it
illegally if
another tree is ordered to be planted in its place.
Ongoing maintenance orders
9.30 The new Act should allow for ongoing maintenance orders if VCAT
determines that this is appropriate in the circumstances. VCAT
Commission that it is rare for it to make an order with ongoing obligations when
exercising original jurisdiction.44 VCAT
stated that any requirement for it to
monitor or follow up on orders would not be appropriate.45 However, the
Commission is of the
view that an ongoing order may be appropriate in certain
circumstances in a tree dispute, such as where the tree needs to be pruned
inspected at regular intervals.
9.31 Ongoing maintenance orders can be made under the interstate Acts.46
These orders often require maintenance at specified intervals
to prevent future
disputes.47 Ongoing maintenance orders were supported by a number of community
9.32 In New South Wales, for example, the Commission was told that orders
made for ongoing maintenance they are typically for periods
of 12 to 18
months.49 The NSWLEC advised that ongoing maintenance orders are less likely for
claims relating to damage and harm.
Claims based on the obstruction of sunlight
and views caused by high hedges
39 Submissions 1 (Ian Collier), 5 (Name withheld), 22 (Name withheld), 24
(Name withheld); Consultations 4 (Participants in facilitated
discussion at VTIO
ArborCamp2018), 8 (City of Boroondara), 10 (Baw Baw Shire Council), 11 (Land and
Environment Court of New South
Wales), 12 (City of Port Phillip); Survey
Respondents 1, 3, 18, 20, 27, 51, 52, 59, 76, 93, 109, 111, 123.
Trees (Disputes Between Neighbours) Act 2006
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
41 Consultations 8 (City of Boroondara), 12 (City of Port Phillip).
42 Consultation 16 (Heritage Victoria).
43 Submission 18 (ENSPEC).
44 Original jurisdiction means VCAT is the first instance decision maker
under the Act. See Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal
, Application
to VCAT to Make an Original Jurisdiction Decision
(Web Page) <https://
www.vcat.vic.gov.au/case-types/review-and-regulation/
application-to-vcat-to-make-an-original-jurisdiction-decision>.
45 Supplementary Consultation 1 (Victorian Civil and Administrative
Trees (Disputes Between Neighbours) Act 2006
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants Act 2017
Urquhart v Hayman (No 2)
[2012] NSWLEC 269
case the respondent was ordered to have the roots of the trees pruned to the
boundary between the applicant’s property
and the respondent’s
property at intervals of not less than every 12 months. See also
[2007] NSWLEC 200
(maintenance de-coning of a Bunya pine);
[2009] NSWLEC 1313
(periodic removal of deadwood).
47 See, eg, Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
Frequently Asked
Questions—Tree Disputes
(Web Page, 21 February 2019)
www.qcat.qld.gov.au/matter-types/tree-disputes/faq-tree-disputes
48 Submissions 2 (Name withheld), 4 (Name withheld), 7 (Ben Kenyon), 9 (Dr
Karen Smith), 20 (Name withheld).
49 Consultation 11 (Land and Environment Court of New South Wales).
are more suited to ongoing orders.50 The NSW Act
allows maintenance orders to bind successors in title, provided the affected
or the immediate successor in title of the affected neighbour gives a
copy of the order to the new tree owner.51 Only the immediate
successor in title
to the applicant is entitled to benefit from the original order. 52The issue of
new purchasers of land is discussed
further in Chapter 11.
9.33 QCAT advised that many of the orders it makes do not place ongoing
obligations on tree owners. However, when ongoing orders are
made (for example,
for annual pruning), they will remain active for 10 years unless otherwise
specified.53 Likewise, in Tasmania,
an order lapses after a period of 10 years
from the day on which it was made unless the order expressly states
otherwise.54
9.34 DSCV provides an example of ongoing maintenance featuring in a mediation
agreement on its website.55 In the example, a mediated
agreement provided that
the affected neighbour would be responsible for pruning back the overhanging
branches on a day- to-day basis,
but the parties agreed that the trees would be
maintained annually by a professional with the costs to be split between
9.35 The Commission does not support limiting the duration of orders in the
new Act as occurs in Tasmania and Queensland. Instead
the duration of orders
should be left to VCAT’s discretion or otherwise apply indefinitely until
Australian Standards and arborist
qualifications
9.36 Work carried out pursuant to orders made under the Act should be made in
accordance with the Australian Standards Pruning of
Amenity Trees57 and
Protection of Trees on Development Sites58 and carried out by a suitably
qualified arborist.
9.37 The Commission is of the view that incorporating the Australian
Standards into tree works ordered by the Tribunal will ensure
that those tree
works are more likely to be effective and less likely to damage the tree,
thereby reducing the likelihood of future
problems. The new Act should refer to
the Australian Standards generally rather than list them specifically because
the relevant
standards may change over time.
9.38 Some councils advise community members to prune in accordance with the
Standards and that failure to do so may result in damage
to the tree. It was
suggested that the best way to satisfy the Standards is to hire an arborist.59
VCAT was supportive of any works
ordered under a new Act to be carried out by a
person with relevant expertise.60
9.39 A suitably qualified arborist is likely to hold a qualification
equivalent to Level 3 of the Australian Qualification Framework
(AQF),61 to
prune or remove a tree, or a qualification of AQF Level 5 for more complex tree
issues involving an assessment of whether
the tree may fail. AQF Level 5
arborists are trained to draft expert reports.62
9.40 The NSWLEC typically requires orders for pruning or tree removal to be
undertaken by an AQF Level 3 arborist with appropriate
insurance cover and in
compliance with the
50 Consultation 11 (Land and Environment Court of New South Wales).
Trees (Disputes Between Neighbours) Act 2006
53 Consultation 15 (Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal);
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants Act 2017
55 Dispute Settlement Centre of Victoria,
Case Study—Tree Dispute
(Web Page, 3 June 2019) <https://
www.disputes.vic.gov.au/information-
and-advicetrees/case-study-tree-dispute>.
57 Standards Australia,
Pruning of Amenity Trees
(AS 4373-2007)
(Sydney, NSW: Standards Australia, 2007) [4]. The objective of the standard
is to ‘provide arborists, tree
workers, government departments, property
owners, and contractors with a guide defining uniform tree pruning procedures
and practices
in order to minimize the adverse or negative impact of pruning on
58 See also Standards Australia,
Protection of Trees on Development Sites
(AS4970-2009) (Sydney, NSW: Standards Australia, 2009). The objective of
this standard is to ‘provide guidance on the principles
for protecting
trees on land subject to development’.
59 Consultations 8 (City of Boroondara), 12 (City of Port Phillip).
60 Supplementary Consultation 1 (Victorian Civil and Administrative
61 The Australian Qualifications Framework (AQF) is the agreed policy of
Commonwealth, state and territory ministers for regulated
qualifications in the
Australian education and training system: Australian Qualifications Framework,
What is the AQF?
www.aqf.edu.au/what-is-the-aqf
62 Information provided by Robert Mineo to the Commission, 20 March 2019.
Australian Standard Pruning of Amenity Trees.63
QCAT noted that orders made pursuant to the Queensland Act will usually
that tree works are to be conducted by an appropriately qualified
arborist.64
9.41 The qualification level should be determined by VCAT depending on the
circumstances of the case and the work that needs to be
done. The Commission is
of the view that requiring work to be carried out by a suitably qualified
arborist will also educate and
guide the community more generally about
arborists’ qualifications and practice standards.
Not recommended: Tree removal as a last
9.42 The recommendations in this report should avoid the need for the Act to
specify that tree removal should be ordered as a last
resort. In Chapters 7 and
8 the Commission emphasises that the new Act should be underpinned by a
requirement for arboricultural
evidence that shows that the tree is the real and
actual cause of damage or harm that has occurred or is likely to occur in the
12 months. The decision-making principles in Chapter 8 also require
consideration of a wide range of factors that recognise the contribution
tree to amenity, local eco-systems and biodiversity, and its social, cultural
and scientific value. The combined effect of
these recommendations is that tree
removal is only likely to occur as a last resort.
Legal costs
9.43 Parties are expected to bear their own legal costs in VCAT.65 However,
VCAT may order legal costs in certain circumstances
such as where the matter
was brought without merit or to harass, annoy or distress someone, or is not
well supported in fact or
9.44 It may be appropriate for VCAT to exercise this power where a tree
dispute is initiated by a neighbour purely to annoy or distress
63 Land and Environment Court of New South Wales,
(Disputes Between Neighbours) Act 2006
(14 January 2013) 14–15.
64 Consultation 15 (Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal).
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
66 For a full list of circumstances in which VCAT can award costs, see
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal, Who Pays for My Legal Costs?
(Web Page) <
https://www.vcat.vic.gov.au/steps-to-resolve-your-
case/on-hearing-day/who-pays-for-my-legal-costs
Notification of
9.45 VCAT should ensure that any party who appeared in the proceeding should
be provided with a copy of the order under the new Act.
Any party who would
otherwise be required under other laws to provide consent or authorisation for
tree works should also be notified
of an order regardless of whether they attend
the hearing. This recommendation aligns with those in Chapter 5 about notice of
application under the new Act. It also mirrors interstate requirements.
9.46 The NSWLEC must provide a copy of any order it makes to the council of
the local government area on which the tree is situated,
regardless of whether
the local council appeared in the hearing, and also to the Heritage Council if
it appeared in the
proceedings.67 The same requirement applies in QCAT.68 In Tasmania RMPAT will
provide a copy of the order made to the council in relation
to the land on which
the tree is situated and any government body or party who appeared in the
proceedings.69
9.47 Nillumbik Shire Council stated that if a new statutory scheme were to be
adopted in Victoria, then it would want to be notified
of any orders made as the
relevant local council.70
9.48 An appeal is an application to a court with jurisdiction to hear an
appeal (also known as ‘appellate jurisdiction’)
on the ground
that there has been an error in the original decision.71 Where the decision has
been made by a lower court in the first
instance, an appeal must be made to a
higher court. Where the decision has been made by VCAT in the first
instance, an appeal
must be made to the Supreme Court of Victoria.72 An appeal
may be as of right or by leave. An appeal as of right means that
can be pursued without the need to obtain leave (or permission) of the
appellate court. For
appeals by leave, the appellate court must grant permission to a party
wishing to pursue the appeal.73
Appealing VCAT orders
9.49 The VC
AT Act provides for only a limited
right to appeal.74 Most VCAT decisions are final and binding.75 The limit on
appeals in VCAT is
designed to provide certainty and clarity once VCAT makes a
determination.76
Trees (Disputes Between Neighbours) Act 2006
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants Act 2017
70 Consultation 9 (Nilumbik Shire Council).
71 Peter Butt (ed),
Butterworths’ Concise Australian Legal
(LexisNexis/Butterworths, 3rd ed, 2004) ‘appeal’.
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
73 Peter Butt (ed),
Butterworths’ Concise Australian Legal
(LexisNexis/Butterworths, 3rd ed, 2004) ‘appeal by
74 See generally
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
75 Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
Annual Report
(Report, 2018) 10; see also Victorian Civil and Administrative
Appeal a VCAT Decision
(Web Page) <https://
www.vcat.vic.gov.au/steps-to-resolve-your-case/what-to-expect-after-the-final-hearing/
appeal-a-vcat-decision>.
76 Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
Annual Report
(Report, 2018) 10.
Appeal on a question of law
9.50 Appeals of VCAT decisions are limited to questions of law and determined
by a court with leave.77 An appeal on a question of
law is made where a party
believes that VCAT made a mistake in the way it applied the law.78 In order to
appeal on a question of
law, a person needs to seek leave of the Court of Appeal
of the Supreme Court of Victoria, if the VCAT decision was made by the president
or the vice president79 of VCAT (even if other members also heard the matter),80
or of the Trial Division of the Supreme Court if
the decision was made by a VCAT
member other than the president or vice president.81
9.51 An application seeking leave to appeal must be made no later than 28
days after VCAT makes an order and in accordance with the
rules of the Supreme
9.52 The Court of Appeal or the Trial Division may make an order affirming,
varying or setting aside: the order of the Tribunal; an
order that the Tribunal
could have made in the proceeding; an order remitting the proceeding to be heard
and decided again, either
with or without the hearing of further evidence, by
the Tribunal in accordance with the directions of the Court; or any other order
the Court thinks appropriate.83
9.53 In the 2017–18 financial year, the total number of appeals lodged
from VCAT was 82. Only nine applicants were granted
leave to appeal to the
Supreme Court of Victoria. Of these, four appeals were dismissed and five
appeals were upheld.84
Reopening an order
9.54 VCAT may reopen an order on s
grounds in limited circumstances under the VCAT Act.85 If a matter is reopened
on substantive grounds, VCAT may make an
order that revokes or varies the
original order.86
9.55 The VCAT Act allows VCAT to reopen an Order where a ‘person in
respect of whom an order is made’ did not attend
or was not represented
at the hearing.87 In deciding
whether to reopen an order, VCAT may consider whether the applicant had a
reasonable excuse for not attending or being represented
at the hearing and that
it is appropriate to conduct a re-hearing.88
9.56 If an a
pplication to reopen a matter is
successful, the original order is suspended until the subsequent hearing takes
place.89 These hearings
are conducted internally within VCAT and not by a court.
If the application is unsuccessful, the original order remains in place.90
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
78 A question of law, also known as a ‘legal error’, is ‘a
question to be resolved by applying legal principles,
rather than by determining
a factual situation; an issue involving the application or interpretation
of a law and reserved for
a judge’: Peter Butt (ed),
Butterworths’ Concise Australian Legal Dictionary
(LexisNexis/Butterworths, 3rd ed, 2004) ‘question of law’.
79 The president of VCAT is a judge of the Supreme Court; vice-presidents of
VCAT are judges of the County Court:
Victorian Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Act 1998
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
s 148(1)(b).
Supreme Court (Miscellaneous Civil Proceedings) Rules
(Vic) ord 4;
Supreme Court (General Civil Procedure) Rules 2015
(Vic) ord 64. See also order 64.19 of the
Supreme Court (General Civil
Procedure) Rules 2015
(Vic), which permits the Court of Appeal constituted
by two or more judges to treat an application for leave to appeal as the hearing
of the appeal.
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
84 Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
Annual Report
(Report, 2018) 82.
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
s 120(4)(b).
A person seeking to reopen an order must apply and obtain
the leave of VCAT within 14 days after they become aware of the order:
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Rules 2018
88 VCAT must also consider whether the applicant had a reasonable case to
argue in relation to the subject matter of the order as
well as any
prejudice that may be caused to another party if the application is heard and
determined: See
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
ss 120(4)(a)(i)
89 Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal, ‘Application to Reopen
An Order (Application for Review Section 120)’,
Forms, Guides and
(Online Form, 26 July 2016) 1 <https://
www.vcat.vic.gov.au/resources/application-to-reopen-an-order-application-for-review-
section-120>.
9.57 Some enabling statutes also allow a person to apply for a rehearing91 in
VCAT. Re- hearings are generally limited to matters
that involve human rights
matters, for example, a Guardianship and Administration case.92 These
re-hearings are conducted within
VCAT and not by a court.93
Other jurisdictions—appeals
New South Wales
9.58 The appeal of tree disputes determined under the NSW Act is governed by
Land and Environment Court Act 1979
(NSW), the Act governing the Land
and Environment Court of New South Wales (NSWLEC).
9.59 The NSWLEC is a superior court.94 An appeal of a tree dispute order
made by NSWLEC can be made on a question of law only.95
If the appeal is
against a decision of a commissioner of the NSWLEC, it is determined by a judge
in the NSWLEC.96 If the appeal
is against a decision of a judge of the
NSWLEC, it is heard by the NSW Court of Appeal.97
9.60 For tree disputes, an appeal will be in the form of a rehearing and
‘fresh evidence or evidence in addition to, or in substitution
evidence given on the making of the decision may be given on the
9.61 The appeal of tree disputes determined under the Queensland Act is
governed by the
Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2009
9.62 As noted in Chapter 7 QCAT is a ‘court of record’99 (or a
‘court of the State’)100 ‘capable of
being invested with the
judicial power of the Commonwealth’.101 Unlike VCAT, QCAT has an internal
Appeal Tribunal. A person
can appeal the decision of a QCAT member on a question
of law, fact or combination of law and fact in certain circumstances.102
A person must seek leave of the Appeal Tribunal to appeal a decision.103 A
person seeking leave needs to show that ‘there is
a reasonable argument
the QCAT decision was wrong, for example, if the tribunal applied the wrong
legal test and/or there has been
a substantial injustice and an appeal is
necessary to correct the decision’.104
91 Rehearings are a form of appeal which allows a case to be reopened and
determined on both issues of fact and law. New material
that was not produced in
the original hearing may also be considered: Peter Butt (ed),
Butterworths’ Concise Australian Legal Dictionary
(Lexis Nexis/
Butterworths, 3rd ed, 2004) ‘re-hearing’.
92 In limited circumstances it is possible to apply for a re-hearing of a
Guardianship and Administration case, Power of Attorney
case, Disability Act
case or Medical Treatment Planning and Decisions Act case.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1986
(Vic), s 60A;
Disability Act 2006
Powers of Attorney Act 2014
(Vic) divs 4–5;
Treatment Planning and Decisions Act 2016
Guardianship and Administration Act 1986
(Vic), s 60C;
Treatment Planning and Decisions Act 2016
Disability Act
Powers of Attorney Act 2014
Land and Environment Court Act 1979
[2018] NSWLEC 33. 97 Ibid
(4)(a)–(b).
Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2009
100 Within the meaning of section 77(iii) of the
Constitution
Owen v Menzies
[2012] QCA 170
(2012) 293 ALR 571.
Queensland Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 2009
101 Pamela O’Connor,
Tribunal Independence
(The Australasian
Institute of Judicial Administration Incorporated, 2013) 3 n [19].
Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2009
; Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
Decision About a
Minor Civil Dispute
(Web Page, 15 February 2019) <https://
www.qcat.qld.gov.au/qcat-decisions/appealing-a-qcat-decision/decision-about-
a-minor-civil-dispute>.
Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2009
; Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
Decision About a Minor
Civil Dispute
(Web Page,15 February 2019) <https://
www.qcat.qld.gov.au/qcat-decisions/appealing-a-qcat-decision/decision-about-a-
minor-civil-dispute>.
104 Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
Minor Civil
Disputes—Appeals
(Factsheet, version 3, May 2017) 1
https://www.qcat.qld.gov.
au/qcat-decisions/appeals-in-minor-civil-disputes
Queensland Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 2009
(Qld) sch 3 Dictionary ‘reopening
9.63 If leave is granted, then the appeal will be
decided by way of a rehearing in which the original information and evidence are
presented again.105 New information and evidence can also be presented with
9.64 However, if the original QCAT decision was made by a judge sitting in
QCAT then a party may appeal the decision to the Queensland
Court of Appeal.107
Appeals on a question
of law only are as of right.108 Appeals on questions of fact or mixed fact
and law require leave of the Court.109
9.65 A person may also apply for QCAT to reopen a matter if they did not
attend the hearing or if they would suffer substantial injustice
if the matter
were not reopened due to the availability of significant new evidence since the
original hearing.110 The hearing will
be conducted in QCAT as a new hearing on
its merits.111
9.66 The appeal of tree disputes determined under the Tasmanian Act is
governed by the
Resource Management and Planning Appeal Tribunal Act 1993
(Tas), the Act governing the Resource Management and Planning Appeal
Tribunal (RMPAT).
9.67 Any decision of RMPAT may be appealed as of right to the Tasmanian
Supreme Court on questions of law.112
9.68 The Tasmanian Supreme Court can make any orders it considers
appropriate, including orders affirming or setting aside the
original RMPAT
decision; substituting its own decision for the original RMPAT decision; or
remitting the matter to RMPAT for reconsideration
in accordance with any
directions.113
Community responses—appeals
9.69 Community responses about the grounds and scope of appeals of orders
made under a new Act were not sought in the consultation
paper. However, some
respondents provided views on this topic.
9.70 One suggestion was that matters should start in VCAT and then be
appealed to the Magistrates’ Court of Victoria.114
9.71 The NSWLEC also provided insight into its appeals processes. The Court
considers it important to confine all appeals to questions
of law because a
broader right of appeal may raise complex legal issues related to the legal
doctrines of estoppel115 and res judicata,
a legal principle that prevents a
party from re-litigating an issue or a defence which has already been
determined.116 By confining
an appeal to a question of law, the Court is able to
provide certainty to parties about the outcome of its decisions.
Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2009
For appeals concerning a question of fact or mixed law and fact, the
appeal is decided by way of rehearing.
Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2009
Bailey v Sullivan
[2017] QCATA 86
Member Hughes
explains, ‘The Appeal Tribunal will only accept fresh evidence if it was
not reasonably available at the
time the proceeding was heard and
determined. Ordinarily, an applicant for leave to adduce fresh evidence must
satisfy three
tests. Could the parties have obtained the evidence with
reasonable diligence for use at the trial? If allowed, would the
probably have an important impact on the result of the case? Is the evidence
credible?’: [19], citing
Clarke v Japan Machines (Australia) Pty Ltd
[1984] 1 Qd R 404
Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2009
s 149(3)(a)
s 149(3)(b).
110 Ibid div 7; sch 3 Dictionary ‘reopening ground’. 111 Ibid
Resource Management and Planning Appeal
Tribunal Act 1993
(Tas) s 25(1). See also Justice Alan Blow,
Chief Justice of Tasmania, ‘Planning, Environment and Heritage
and Legislation in Tasmania’ (Speech, Australasian
Conference of Planning and Environment Courts and Tribunals, 5 March
https://www.supremecourt.tas.gov.au/publications/speeches-articles/
Resource Management and Planning Appeal Tribunal Act 1993
25(5), 25(6)(a)–(b).
114 Confidential submission.
115 The doctrine of estoppel ‘is designed to protect a party from the
detriment which would flow from that party’s change
of position if the
assumption or execution that led to it were to be rendered groundless by
another’: Peter Butt (ed),
Butterworths’ Concise Australian Legal
(LexisNexis/Butterworths, 3rd ed, 2004)
‘estoppel’.
116 Consultation 11 (Land and Environment Court of New South Wales). Res
judicata is ‘the rule that if a dispute is judged
by a court of
competent jurisdiction, the judgment of the court is final and conclusive as to
the rights and duties of the parties
involved. Res judicata constitutes an
absolute bar to a subsequent suit for the same cause of action’: Peter
Butterworths’ Concise Australian Legal Dictionary
(LexisNexis/Butterworths, 3rd ed, 2004) ‘res judicata’.
9.72 The NSWLEC noted that the subject matter of a
tree dispute that has already been determined by the Court cannot be the subject
of a new application to the Court unless there is a change in circumstances or
fresh evidence is presented. It was suggested that
this prevents parties from
seeking to have the matter re-heard before a more favourable commissioner.
The Commission’s
conclusions—appeals
9.73 VCAT, like other tribunals that derive their powers from enabling
statutes, is intended to be a forum that provides for
the final resolution of
matters. Rights of appeal are thus often limited to questions of law in a court
with appellate jurisdiction.
9.74 Chapter 7 recommends that VCAT be given original jurisdiction and not
exclusive jurisdiction to hear and determine neighbourhood
tree disputes under
the new Act.118 This means that VCAT’s rights to review a decision would
be limited to an appeal on a question
of law to the Supreme Court and the
re-opening of an order on substantive grounds in the interests of fairness as
provided for in
the VCAT Act, where a person did not attend or was not
represented at the hearing.119 The Commission is of the view that these existing
appeal processes are appropriate for tree disputes under the new Act.
9.75 The costs of commencing an appeal in the Supreme Court may be
prohibitive, and there is a high level of formality and complexity
processes, which is at odds with the policy objectives of the new Act. However,
on balance it is more important to provide
for the resolution of
party–party tree disputes in a final and timely manner. The Commission
also notes that appeal processes at VCAT were recently considered in the 2016
Access to Justice
Review which concluded that ‘it is preferable not
to introduce an internal appeal mechanism in VCAT’.120
Varying or revoking an order
9.76 Trees are dynamic living organisms and therefore circumstances relating
to the trees in dispute can change.
9.77 In New South Wales, Senior Commissioner Moore and Acting Commissioner
Thyer explained:
Trees, whether living or dead, are evolving, changing dynamic structures.
Living trees may grow, flower, fruit or react to climatic
changes such as
drought... They are also subject to the influence, malignant or benign depending
on the species and the circumstances,
of all four of the ancient elements
– earth, air, fire or water.121
9.78 Arborists advised that predictions about how trees will live and grow
are not necessarily precise because of the variations in
arboricultural
assessments and dynamic environmental factors.122
117 The Court compared the outcomes in two cases:
Zangari v Miller (No 2)
[2010] NSWLEC 1093
Hinde v Anderson
[2009] NSWLEC 1148.
Zangari v Miller (No 2)
, the application was dismissed
because further evidence from excavation works, which were not carried
first instance, did not present a change in circumstances or new
evidence, as the evidence was available at the time of the
application: [3]–[5]. In
Hinde v Anderson,
where the applicant
alleged the tree had caused damage subsequent to the original decision, the
application for a new hearing was
allowed because the Court considered there was
scope to consider on substantive grounds these new circumstances and whether
evidence had become available: [39]. In the proceeding case,
Hinde v Anderson (No 2)
[2009] NSWLEC 1258
, the application was
considered on substantive grounds but dismissed due to a lack of evidence
118 Original jurisdiction means VCAT is the first instance decision maker
under the Act. VCAT has original jurisdiction
under Acts such as the
Local Government Act 1989
(Vic) and the
Owners Corporations
(Vic). See Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal
Application to VCAT to Make an Original Jurisdiction Decision
www.vcat.vic.gov.au/case-types/review-and-regulation/application-
to-vcat-to-make-an-original-jurisdiction-decision>.
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
120 Department of Justice and Regulation (Vic),
Access to Justice Review
Report and Recommendations
(2016) vol 1 [4.3.7
Hinde v Anderson
[2009] NSWLEC 1148
122 Consultations 2 (Dr Gregory Moore OAM), 4 (Participants in facilitated
discussion at VTIO ArborCamp2018), 14 (Robert Mineo).
9.79 As tree problems can also change over time, an order may no longer
accommodate the original problem, or may no longer be able
to be complied with,
through no fault of the parties. For example, an order may specify that the
branches of a tree are to be pruned
in a certain manner. This may not be
possible where weather events permanently change the character of the tree. As a
tree changes
with age, it may become necessary to enter a neighbour’s land
in order to prune it and this may not be accommodated in an original
9.80 The new Act should provide VCAT with the power on application by the
tree owner or affected neighbour (or immediate successors
in title123) to vary
or revoke an order. This may be necessary if VCAT is satisfied that the original
circumstances that caused the
damage or harm have changed, and that the new
circumstances are not accommodated in the original order. VCAT should be
to vary the original order by altering the terms of the order or by
substituting any other order. VCAT may also need to revoke an
order where it is
no longer relevant in the circumstances—for example, where there is an
order for ongoing maintenance of a
tree but the tree owner (or their successor
in title) subsequently decides to remove the tree. The tree owner may want to
the order to formally remove the payment obligation. Alternatively, a
vendor may want to revoke an order for ongoing maintenance
to ensure clear title
before the sale of a property.
9.81 These powers should be specified in the new Act rather than relying on s
51(2) of the VCAT Act. This provision outlines VCAT’s
powers when
reviewing a decision and will not generally be applicable to a situation where
the VCAT decision maker is exercising
original jurisdiction.124 This is similar
to the approach in the Tasmanian Act, which provides that either party to a tree
may apply to RMPAT for a variation or revocation of an order.125
9.82 The Queensland Act provides that QCAT may revoke an order by its own
motion but does not provide QCAT with the right to vary
an order. However, the
Queensland Act provides QCAT with the power to renew its orders where the order
cannot be complied with due
to difficulties with ‘interpreting,
implementing or enforcing’ the order.126 The effect of
this provision is similar to that proposed by the Commission and in the
Tasmanian Act— for example, there may be difficulties
interpreting the
way in which the tree is ordered to be pruned.127 A party can apply for a
renewal of an order and ‘QCAT
may make the same decision or another
decision that could have been made when the proceeding was originally decided.
That decision
is then enforceable as a final decision of QCAT.’128 An
order can only be reviewed once under this division.129
9.83 It is important to limit the number of times a party may seek to have
an order varied or revoked under the new Act to one application
per year. This
is consistent with the
Commission’s recommendation concerning damage or harm anticipated to
occur within the following 12 months.130 This requirement
should limit
opportunities for the matter to be repeatedly revisited at VCAT.
9.84 The applicant would have to provide notice to the original parties to
the dispute as well as any other interested parties that
were given notice of
the original application. Successors in title may also need to be notified if
either of the original parties
sold the land.
123 Successors in title are discussed in Ch 11.
124 Section 51(2) of the VCAT Act outlines the orders VCAT may make when
reviewing a decision.
Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants Act 2017
Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2009
Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal, Renewal of
QCAT’s Final Decision
(Web Page, 26 May 2017) <https://
www.qcat.qld.gov.au/qcat-decisions/enforcing-a-qcat-decision/renewal-of-qcats-
final-decision>.
127 Consultation 15 (Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal).
Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2009
Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal, Renewal of QCAT’s
Final Decision
(Web Page, 26 May 2017) <https://
www.qcat.qld.gov.au/qcat-decisions/enforcing-a-qcat-decision/renewal-of-qcats-final-
Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2009
130 See Ch 5 for more information about the recommended causes of action
under the new Act.
9.85 Where circumstances change such that there is
an entirely new set of circumstances that were not considered in an original
application
or order, or where new evidence
becomes available, the applicant would need to commence a new matter in VCAT.
A new application would be needed if there is evidence
that the health of a tree
has declined since the original application, such that there is greater support
for an applicant’s
claim that the tree may cause damage or harm. Another
example may be where a tree grows a new branch, not contemplated in the original
application, which overhangs neighbouring land and may cause future damage or
Recommendations
32 Where new circumstances are not accommodated in the original order, the
Act should allow the tree owner or affected neighbour or
in title to apply to the Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal to vary
or revoke the original order.
33 The Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal’s powers in
determining the application to vary or revoke the order should
be stated in the
Act as the power to:
(a) affirm the original order
(b) vary the original order by altering the terms of the order or by
substituting any other order that the Victorian Civil and Administrative
Tribunal may make under the new Act
(c) revoke an existing order.
34 The applicant should provide notice in writing of the application to vary
or revoke the original order to the original parties
to the dispute as well as
any other affected parties that were given notice of the original application or
any successors in title.
35 The Act should only provide for one application to vary or revoke the
order per year.
Enforcement of orders
9.86 The consultation paper asked how orders issued under a new Act should be
enforced when a party fails to comply with them.
Enforcement in VCAT
9.87 The options for a person to enforce an order where the other party
refuses to comply are set out in the VCAT Act. They are:
• Enforcement of a monetary order. A monetary order requires a party to
pay money to another party.131
• Enforcement of a non-monetary order. A non-monetary order is any
other order that does not involve monetary payments.132
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal 1998
(Vic) s 121; see
also Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
VCAT Decisions and
(Web Page) <https://
www.vcat.vic.gov.au/steps-to-resolve-your-case/what-to-expect-after-the-final-hearing/vcat-decisions-and-orders
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal 1998
(Vic) s 122; see
also Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
VCAT Decisions and
(Web Page) <https://
www.vcat.vic.gov.au/steps-to-resolve-your-case/what-to-expect-after-the-final-hearing/vcat-decisions-and-orders
• Contempt is a broad term for a body of law that seeks to prevent or
punish conduct that interferes with the proper administration
of justice,
including failure to comply with a Tribunal order.133
9.88 VCAT itself does not have power to enforce monetary or non-monetary
9.89 Enforce
ment proceedings in VCAT will be more
accessible with the implementation of Part 10 Division five of the
Legislation Amendment (Access to Justice) Act 2018
(Vic) (the amending
Act).135 The amending Act will alter some of the procedural requirements for the
enforcement of VCAT orders.136
Enforcing monetary orders
9.90 At prese
nt, when a person does not comply
with a VCAT monetary order, the aggrieved party can pursue the amount as a
judgment debt in the
court of relevant jurisdictional limit by filing the order
in the relevant court.137 For tree disputes under the new Act, this is
like to be the Magistrates’ Court which has a jurisdictional limit of
$100,000.138
9.91 A person will need to file in the Magistrates’ Court a certified
true copy of the VCAT order and an affidavit about the
amount not paid. There is
no fee for filing an order.139 Once filed, the VCAT order will be taken to be an
order of the Magistrates’
Court and enforced accordingly.140
9.92 When th
e relevant provisions of the amending
Act come into operation, the aggrieved party will no longer need to take
any additional
procedural steps to file the VCAT order in the relevant
court. The VCAT order will be automatically deemed to be an order of
and enforced accordingly once enforcement proceedings are commenced.141 This is
intended to avoid additional procedural
burden to the successful party.142
Enforcing non-monetary orders
9.93 When a person does not comply with a non-monetary order issued by VCAT,
the aggrieved party can seek to compel performance in
the Supreme Court of
9.94 A person who does not comply with a non-monetary VCAT order is guilty of
an offence.143 Penalties include imprisonment144 or
a fine for 20 penalty units
($3223.80) with 5 penalty units ($805.95) added for each day of non-compliance,
up to a maximum of 50
penalty units ($8059.50); or both imprisonment and a
fine.145 Criminal proceedings take place in the Magistrates’ Court.146
9.95 If a pers
on wishes to compel their neighbour
to carry out the nonmonetary order, then the matter needs to be taken to the
Supreme Court for
enforcement. The aggrieved party will need to file a certified
true copy of the VCAT order; an affidavit about the non-
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal 1998
(Vic) s 137;
see, eg, Julie R Davis, ‘Contempt in the Tribunal’,
(Research Paper, 23 May 2014) <https://
www.foleys.com.au/mobile/CpdResources.aspx
Peter Butt (ed),
Butterworths’ Concise Australian Legal
(LexisNexis/Butterworths, 3rd
ed, 2004) ‘contempt of court’.
134 Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
Enforcing VCAT Orders
(Web Page) <https://
www.vcat.vic.gov.au/steps-to-resolve-your-case/
what-to-expect-after-the-final-hearing/enforcing-vcat-orders>.
Justice Legislation Amendment (Access to Justice) Act 2018
(Vic) pt 10 div 5.
136 The enforcement of orders in VCAT are in Part 10, Division 5 of the
Amending Act. Part 10 comes into operation on a day or days
to be proclaimed: s
2(2). If a provision of division 5 of part 10 does not come into operation
before 1 July 2020, it comes into
operation on that day: s 2(5).
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
138 ‘Jurisdictional limit’ in a civil proceeding means $100,000:
Magistrates’
Court Act 1989
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
Justice Legislation Amendment (Access to Justice) Act 2018
142 Department of Justice and Regulation (Vic),
Access to Justice Review
Report and Recommendations
(2016) vol 1 288.
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
144 Imprisonment is to last until compliance occurs or for three months
(whichever is sooner):
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act
The current value of a penalty unit is $161.19 (as at 1
July 2018 to 30 June 2019): Victorian Government Gazette, ‘Notice Under
, Fixing the Value of a Fee Unit and a Penalty Unit’ (GG No
Thursday 29 March 2018) <https://
www.dtf.vic.gov.au/
financial-management-government/indexation-fees-and-penalties>.
146 See, eg,
Magistrates Court Act 1989
compliance; and a certificate from VCAT stating that the order is appropriate
for filing in the Supreme Court.147 There is no fee
for filing an order.148 Once
filed, the VCAT order will be taken to be an order of the Supreme Court and
enforced accordingly.149
Access to Justice
Review recommended that this process should
be repealed so that parties are not directed to the Supreme Court to seek
enforcement
of a non-monetary order. Instead, the Access to Justice Review
recommended that non-monetary orders of VCAT ‘should be enforced,
exceptional circumstances, using VCAT’s existing contempt
powers’.150
9.97 The ame
nding Act does not implement this
recommendation but will make it easier for a party to pursue enforcement by
removing some of the
existing procedural burdens.151 As is the case with
monetary orders, the amending Act will no longer require the aggrieved party
take any additional procedural steps to file the VCAT order and other documents
in the Supreme Court. Instead, the VCAT order
will be automatically deemed to be
an order of the Supreme Court and can be enforced accordingly.152
9.98 An enabling Act may also contain separate enforcement mechanisms. For
example, under the
Planning and Environment Act 1987
(Vic), if a party
fails to carry out any work specified in an enforcement or interim enforcement
order issued by VCAT under the Act,
then a local council or, with the consent of
VCAT, any other party, may carry out those works themselves. Any costs incurred
result of carrying out these works may then be recovered from the
defaulting party in the relevant court as a debt.153
9.99 In limite
d circumstances, VCAT’s
contempt powers can be used to enforce an order.154
VCAT’s contempt power reflects:
the importance of compliance with Tribunal Orders and the importance of
preserving the authority and standing of the Tribunal. However,
the power should
be exercised cautiously and should not be used unless there is no other
effective way of enforcing the Tribunal’s
9.100 When a person is found guilty of contempt, VCAT can order imprisonment,
a fine or both.156 The prison term is to be not more
than five years. The fine
is to be not more than an amount that is 1000 times the value of a penalty unit
($161,190).157 An example
a finding of contempt in VCAT can be found in the case of
Kanter v Milroy
Investments Australia Pty Ltd (Owners Corporations)
158 where the respondent
was fined $10,000 for failing to comply with previously issued VCAT orders.159
VCAT told the Commission that
proceedings for contempt can be lengthy and
complex.160
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
A non-monetary order is commonly enforced in the Supreme
Court by proceedings for contempt of court:
Access to Justice Review
Report and Recommendations
(2016) vol 1, 254. A person found to be in
contempt will face a fine, imprisonment or both. Imprisonment may be
appropriate
as ‘a coercive sanction, to compel compliance with the order,
disregard of which constituted the contempt’: Judicial
Victoria, ‘8.7 Sentencing in Contempt Cases’,
Victorian Criminal
Proceedings Manual
(26 February 2018)
http://www.judicialcollege.vic.edu.au/eManuals/VCPM/index.htm#48747.htm
150 Department of Justice and Regulation (Vic),
Access to Justice Review
Report and Recommendations
(2016) vol 1, 288.
Justice Legislation Amendment (Access to Justice) Act 2018
152 Ibid s 69.
Planning and Environment Act 1987
154 A person is guilty of contempt of the Tribunal if they insult a
member of the Tribunal while that member is performing
functions as
member; insult, obstruct or hinder a person attending a hearing before the
Tribunal; misbehave at a hearing before
the Tribunal; interrupt a hearing
before the Tribunal; obstruct or hinder a person from complying with an order of
the Tribunal
or a summons to attend the Tribunal; do any other act
that would, if the Tribunal were the Supreme Court, constitute
contempt of that
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
Kanter v Milroy Investments Australia Pty Ltd
Corporations)
[2015] VCAT 90
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
s 137(5)(a).
The current value of a penalty unit is $161.19 (as at 1
July 2018 to 30 June 2019): Victorian Government Gazette, ‘Notice Under
, Fixing the Value of a Fee Unit and a Penalty Unit’ (GG No
Thursday 29 March 2018) <https://
www.dtf.vic.gov.au/
financial-management-government/indexation-fees-and-penalties>.
[2015] VCAT 90.
Kanter v Milroy Investments Australia Pty Ltd
Corporations)
[2015] VCAT 90
[268], [274].
160 Supplementary Consultation 1 (Victorian Civil and Administrative
9.101 The amending Act will broaden VCAT’s
contempt powers. Once the amendments come into operation, VCAT will be able to
a person guilty of contempt where they fail to comply with an order
‘in circumstances where, if the Order were an Order of
the Supreme Court,
the failure would constitute contempt of that Court’.161
Reopening an order
9.102 As discu
ssed earlier in the context of
appeals, VCAT can reopen a matter on substantive grounds when a party did not
appear or was not represented
at the time of the hearing and making of an
Access to Justice
Review recommended that VCAT’s
powers to reopen orders should be expanded for enforcement reasons. The review
recommended:
The VCAT Act should be amended to enable VCAT to reopen or renew a proceeding
where there has been a problem with enforcement, similar
section 133
Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2009
(Qld). This would
provide an easy way to convert a non-monetary order to a monetary order where
there has not been compliance with
the former.163
9.104 Once th
e relevant provisions of the
amending Act come into operation ‘a person in whose favour an order of the
Tribunal is made may
apply to the Tribunal for review of the order to remedy a
problem with enforcing or complying with the order’.164 The Tribunal
be satisfied that there are problems with enforcing or complying with the
order and that it is therefore appropriate to vary,
revoke or make any other
Other jurisdictions—enforcement of
New South Wales
9.105 The NS
W Act states that failure to comply
with an order is an offence with a maximum of 1000 penalty units.166 This
equates to a maximum
of $110,000.167 Prosecution of this offence takes place in
the summary jurisdiction of the NSWLEC.168
9.106 The NSW Act also provides an enforcement mechanism through local
government.
On the request of the affected neighbour, the local council may also arrange
for an authorised person to enter the tree owner’s
land to ascertain
whether any orders relating to tree works have been carried out and if not,
arrange for the works to be carried
out.169 The local council can bring legal
action to recoup any costs incurred in carrying out the order. A judgement debt
registered as a charge on the tree owner’s land.170 During the
statutory review of the NSW Act it was found that local councils
usually do not
agree to enforce orders on the request of neighbours.171
Justice Legislation Amendment (Access to Justice) Act 2018
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
163 Department of Justice and Regulation (Vic),
Access to Justice Review
Report and Recommendations
(2016) vol 1, 288, Recommendation [5].
Justice Legislation Amendment (Access to Justice) Act 2018
165 Ibid s 67(4).
Trees (Disputes Between Neighbours) Act 2006
167 Land and Environment Court of New South Wales,
Enforcement
Page, 2 May 2015)
http://www.lec.justice.nsw.gov.au/Pages/ coming_to_the_court/end_of_a_case/enforcement.aspx
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
(NSW) which provides that
‘unless the contrary intention appears, a reference in any Act or
statutory rule to a number of penalty
units (whether fractional or whole) is
taken to be a reference to an amount of money equal to the amount obtained by
multiplying
$110 by that number of penalty units’.
Trees (Disputes Between Neighbours) Act 2006
Land and Environment Court Act 1979
See also Land and
Environment Court of New South Wales,
Practice Note Class 5: Proceedings,
29 March 2018
http://www.lec.justice.nsw.gov.au/Pages/ practice_procedure/practice_notes.aspx
. Enforcement of a non-monetary order
may also be pursued based on the
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005
div 2, which also set out criminal penalties for non-compliance.
Trees (Disputes Between Neighbours) Act 2006
171 Department of Justice and Attorney General (NSW),
Review of the Trees
(Dispute Between Neighbours) Act 2006
(NSW) (Report, 2009) 1.
9.107 Where the NSWLEC makes a monetary order, such as for the payment of
compensation of the cost of works, then the order can also
be enforced through
an action to recover a debt in the Local Court or District Court depending on
the amount.172
9.108 The Queensland Act states that substantial compliance with an order
will be considered adequate.173 The Queensland Law Reform
Commission (QLRC)
explains that this provision ‘recognises that minor deviations from
precise specifications are a practical
reality of the sort of work required by
an Order’ and that QCAT has recognised that minor variations are
‘not of such
magnitude as to constitute noncompliance’.174
9.109 Howeve
r, if the tree owner fails to follow
an order without reasonable excuse, they can be held liable under the Queensland
Act for an offence
with a maximum of 1000 penalty units.175 This equates to a
maximum of $130,550.176
9.110 During its statutory review of the Queensland Act, the QLRC recommended
the removal of the penalty under section 77 of the Queensland
Act for failing to
comply with a QCAT order.177 The QLRC thought that it was unclear whether the
penalty ‘has a deterrent effect’178
and a better approach may be to
create practical measures that would give effect to orders.179 The QLRC noted
that the penalty under
section 213 of the QCAT Act ($13,055) was
‘sufficient to deal with contravention of an order...’.180 This
recommendation
has not been implemented.
9.111 The QLRC also recommended a new provision in the Queensland Act where
the affected neighbour could apply to carry out work that
had was not performed
in accordance with an Order and recover the reasonable costs from the tree
owner as a debt.181 The QLRC noted
that, in some cases, ‘the failure of
one party to comply with an order may be addressed in the way the original order
is framed’.182
These are known as ‘guillotine’ orders which
‘build in the consequences of non-compliance’ by providing that
party can carry out the works and recover the costs from the defaulting
party.183 However, such orders are not frequently used.184
recommendation has not been implemented.
9.112 Like the NSW Act, the Queensland Act also provides a ‘last
resort’ enforcement mechanism through local councils
in the case where the
tree owner fails to carry out a QCAT order. The affected neighbour can contact
their local council and ask
it to carry out the order because the tree owner has
failed to do so. The local council is under no obligation to follow this
request.185
The QLRC reported that this mechanism is not frequently used.186
172 Land and Environment Court of New South Wales,
Enforcement
Page, 2 May 2015)
http://www.lec.justice.nsw.gov.au/Pages/ coming_to_the_court/end_of_a_case/enforcement.aspx
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
174 Queensland Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Neighbourhood Disputes
(Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
(Report No 72, December 2015) [5.25]
Franchi v Yazdani
[2015] QCAT 112
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
176 Queensland Government,
Sentencing Fine and Penalties for Offences
(Web Page, 5 July 2018) <
https://www.qld.gov.au/law/fines-and-
penalties/types-of-fines/sentencing-fines-and-penalties-for-offences
The penalty unit value in Queensland is $130.55 (current from 1 July 2018).
177 Instead it was suggested that the general penalty for non- compliance
under the QCAT Act would be sufficient.
Queensland Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Act 2009
178 Queensland Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Neighbourhood Disputes
(Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
(Report No 72, December (2015)
179 Ibid [5.127]
180 Ibid [5.126]
181 Ibid 242.
182 Ibid [5.68].
183 Ibid [5.68]; see, eg,
Attwell v Oman
[2017] QCAT 251.
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
186 Queensland Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Neighbourhood Disputes
(Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
(Report No 72, December (2015)
9.113 QCAT does not have jurisdiction to enforce
its own orders when there is noncompliance. A person wishing to enforce a
order must file the QCAT order and an affidavit confirming
non-compliance in a court of competent jurisdiction, usually the
Magistrates’
Court.187 A person wishing to enforce a nonmonetary order
must file the QCAT order and an affidavit confirming noncompliance in the
Supreme Court.188 The Supreme Court may transfer the application to either the
District Court or Magistrates Court.189
9.114 The Tasmanian Act does not set out penalties for parties who fail to
follow RMPAT’s orders as the New South Wales and
Queensland Acts do.
9.115 RMPAT does not have power to enforce its own orders. Where an order is
not complied with, the aggrieved party may take legal
action for noncompliance
in a court of competent jurisdiction, such as the Civil Division of the
Tasmanian Magistrates’ Court.190
Community responses—enforcement of
9.116 There was general agreement that orders under any new Act should be
binding and enforceable.191 Suggestions were made about
how orders should be
9.117 A number of people submitted that local councils should enforce orders
when a party fails to comply with them.192 Others argued
that it was not
appropriate for local councils to play an enforcement role because of the
private nature of tree disputes and the
substantial council resources this would
require.193
9.118 The City of Boroondara submitted:
Council would not support legislation which requires local government to
enforce Orders made by the Court/Tribunal. This would require
local government
to enforce what are essentially Court orders about civil matters. This would
also have resourcing implications
for local government.194
9.119 Nillumbik Shire Council told the Commission that the NSW approach of
enforcement through local councils would not be appropriate.
Nillumbik stated
that it is reluctant to become involved in private civil disputes between
neighbours and would not have the resources
to carry out an enforcement
process.195
9.120 Baw Baw Shire Council advised that enforcement should not be the
responsibility of local councils. Baw Baw explained that any
new statutory
scheme for tree disputes should not generate additional work for local councils.
Baw Baw also expressed significant
safety concerns for Council officers if they
were required to enforce orders.196
9.121 The NSWLEC and QCAT told the Commission that they are not aware of any
local councils exercising their discretion to enforce
orders despite the
provisions in the NSW
and Queensland Acts.197 The NSWLEC further surmised that it is unclear why a
local council
Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2009
The Magistrates Court has jurisdiction to enforce monetary
orders up to and including $150,000. For larger amounts, the
QCAT order may
need to be enforced through the District Court (from $150,000 up to
$750,000) or the Supreme Court (more than $750,000): Queensland Civil and
Administrative Tribunal,
Enforcing a QCAT Decision
(Web Page, 13 November
2018) <https://
www.qcat.qld.gov.au/qcat-decisions/enforcing-a-qcat-decision#Non-monetary%20decisions
Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2009
s 132(6)(a).
Non-monetary QCAT Orders for minor civil disputes can be
filed in the Magistrates’ Court:
s 132(7)(a)
; however tree disputes under
the Queensland Act are not considered minor civil disputes (cf. fence
disputes): Queensland Civil
and Administrative Tribunal,
Minor Civil Disputes
(Web Page, 25 October 2018) <https://
www.qcat.qld.gov.au/
matter-types/minor-civil-disputes>.
Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2009
190 Resource Management and Planning Appeal Tribunal,
Practice Direction
No 14—Civil Enforcement Proceedings
, amended 1 March 2016)
14.12 <https://
www.rmpat.tas.gov.au/practice_directions
191 Submissions 5 (Name withheld), 6 (Name withheld), 7 (Ben Kenyon), 20
(Name withheld), 21 (Pointon Partners Lawyers), 23 (Name
withheld), 27 (Name
192 Submissions 4 (Name withheld), 5 (Name withheld), 6 (Name withheld), 7
(Ben Kenyon).
193 Submissions 2 (Name withheld), 25 (City of Boorondara); Consultations 9
(Nillumbik Shire Council), 10 (Baw Baw Shire Council).
194 Submission 25 (City
of Boorondara).
195 Consultation 9 (Nillumbik Shire Council). 196 Consultation 10 (Baw Baw
Shire Council).
197 Consultations 11 (Land and Environment Court of New South Wales), 15
(Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal).
would choose to enforce the orders issued by the
NSWLEC as there is no obvious benefit to be gained by the local council.198 VCAT
also told the Commission that in the context of the
Planning and Environment
(Vic), local councils rarely take up the option of carrying out
works that a party has failed to complete under an enforcement or
enforcement order.199
Some respondents suggested that orders should be enforced through the
existing enforcement processes in the court or tribunal that
made the order.200
Boroondara further stated that ‘continued non-compliance should be
prosecuted as a criminal offence.’201
Another person suggested that VCAT
orders should have the same status as orders of the Magistrates’ Court and
be enforced accordingly.202
One respondent expressed concern about VCAT’s enforcement powers and
noted that, in their view, VCAT orders in other existing
matters are often
disregarded without significant repercussions or recourse for the affected
VCAT noted that the enforcement provisions under the
Planning and
Environment Act 1987
(Vic) could provide a possible model for enforcement
under the new Act. VCAT suggested that a party could be given the right to carry
out the work prescribed in an order themselves when it has not been performed,
and to recover the costs incurred as a debt in the
relevant court.204
Other suggestions were that orders be enforced by the Department of Justice
and Community Safety
205 or through
‘substantial fines’.206
The Commission’s
conclusions—enforcement of orders
The Commission acknowledges that sometimes a party will simply refuse to
comply with a VCAT order if they do not agree with it. At
times, it may be
expedient for a party to simply incur the cost of a fine, especially if the fine
is less than the cost associated
with the order. As the Access to Justice Review
While most people comply with VCAT’s orders as a matter of course,
there are some who disregard them. It can be difficult to
compel an unwilling
person to comply with an order. This challenge is not unique to VCAT.207
Reviewing the general enforcement powers of VCAT is beyond the scope of this
inquiry. However, the Commission refers to the findings
Justice Review
which illustrate the complexity of the issue
One option for reform would be to amend the VCAT Act to enable VCAT to
enforce its own orders, both monetary and non-monetary, similar
Magistrates’ Court’s powers to enforce its orders. However, this
would require VCAT to establish rules and
processes that reflect those used in the courts to compel payment. Further,
VCAT would have to allocate the time of members and registry
staff to deal with
these processes, which would require either more staff or redirection of
resources within VCAT. In addition, giving
VCAT power to enforce its own orders
would further fragment the process for enforcement of monetary orders, creating
greater procedural
variations between Victorian jurisdictions.208
198 Consultation 11 (Land and Environment Court of New South Wales).
199 Supplementary Consultation 1 (Victorian Civil and Administrative
200 Submissions 11 (Name withheld), 25 (City of Boorondara).
201 Submission 25 (City of Boorondara).
202 Submission 23 (Name withheld).
203 Consultation 2 (Dr Gregory Moore OAM).
204 This is a similar approach to
section 123
Planning and
Environment Act 1987
205 Submission 27 (Name withheld).
206 Submission 19 (Name withheld).
207 Department of Justice and Regulation (Vic),
Access to Justice Review
Report and Recommendations
(2016) vol 1, 288.
208 Ibid vol 1, 288.
Amendments contained in the
Justice Legislation
Amendment (Access to Justice) Act 2018
(Vic) will make it easier for
aggrieved parties to pursue the enforcement of both monetary and non-monetary
orders with respect to
tree disputes under the new Act. An aggrieved party will
have the option of recouping any money owed to them as a debt
in the Magistrates’ Court, compelling performance of an action in the
Supreme Court of Victoria, or applying to have their matter
reopened in VCAT due
to problems with compliance.
The Commission concludes that the enforcement mechanisms under the VCAT Act
should be relied upon and supplemented by practical enforcement
provisions in
the new Act.
Penalties for failure to comply
As discussed, the NSW and Queensland Acts both provide for fines where a
party does not comply with an order.
The Commission acknowledges the comments of the QLRC about the effectiveness
of the penalty provision in the Queensland Act. However,
on balance it would be
Existing penalties under the VCAT Act,209 which would also apply for
non-compliance with orders under a new Act, are significantly
smaller than the
penalty provisions in interstate tree dispute Acts.
On balance the Commission considers that including a penalty provision in the
new Act will send a clear message to the community about
the seriousness of the
hearing process.210 It will be also be easier for the community to identify a
monetary penalty in new Act
than it would be to determine penalties for
non-compliance of orders under the VCAT Act. It should also be easier to revise
a penalty in the new Act if
needed in the future. For the sake of simplicity the Act should as far as
possible contain a full statement of rights and obligations
of parties. The
Commission recommends that the new Act disapply section 133 of the VCAT Act and
include a specific penalty provision
instead.211
The Government should determine the appropriate amount for the penalty
provision in consultation with VCAT.
Councils should not enforce VCAT orders
There was strong community support for the enforcement of tree dispute orders
under the new Act to be undertaken by local councils.212
However, the Commission
is persuaded by councils and others who advised that such a role would be at
odds with the role
of local councils to provide for the collective public benefit of residents.
Councils are understandably reluctant to adjudicate private
disputes between
The Commission is also persuaded by concerns expressed by Baw Baw Shire that
this role would require significant resources and may
affect the safety of
council staff tasked to enforce orders in often emotive and potentially hostile
circumstances.213
209 For example, the VCAT Act states that for non-compliance with a
non-monetary order, a person may be fined $3223.80 plus an additional
$805.95 for each day of non-compliance up to a maximum of $8059.50:
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
The current value of a penalty unit is $161.19 (as at 1 July 2018
to 30 June 2019): Victorian Government Gazette, ‘Notice Under
Fixing the Value of a Fee Unit and a Penalty Unit’ (GG No
29 March 2018) <https://
www.dtf.vic.gov.au/financial-
management-government/indexation-fees-and-penalties>.
210 VCAT noted that several enabling Acts contain penalty provisions for
failure to comply with orders, for example, the
Motor Car Traders Act 1986
Owners Corporations Act 2006
Supplementary Consultation 1
(Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal).
211 See, eg,
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
(Vic), sch 1 cl 77A.
212 Submissions 4 (Name withheld), 5 (Name withheld), 6 (Name withheld), 7
(Ben Kenyon), 38 (L. Barry Wollmer).
213 Consultation 10 (Baw Baw Shire Council).
Further, the Commission
received advice that local councils generally refuse to enforce orders where
requested to in New South Wales
and Queensland where voluntary enforcement
provisions exist.214The same is also true for similar enforcement provisions
Planning and Environment Act 1987
(Vic).215 The Commission can
therefore see little practical benefit in such provisions.
Empowering the applicant to give effect to a VCAT
Rather than empowering council to enforce a VCAT order, the new Act should
empower the applicant to carry out tree works where a tree
owner fails to comply
with an order within the specified time.216
This approach aligns with VCAT’s powers under the
Planning and
Environment Act 1987
(Vic)217 and with the approach under the Fences Act.218
The Commission agrees with the approach recommended by the QLRC219 and is
view that this enforcement mechanism will provide practical benefit to
neighbours and provide certainty about the resolution
of the dispute.
Such an order may be necessary where the tree owner has deliberately refused
to comply with the order within the required time, or
where the tree owner has
failed to comply with the order and the affected neighbour is unable to identify
or locate the tree owner.
The reasonable costs of carrying out tree works should
be able to be recouped as a debt against the non-complying party in the relevant
court. The affected neighbour would need to make a new application to VCAT for
this order.
The Commission is mindful of the possibility of trespass and recommends that
any works carried out by the affected neighbour pursuant
to this power should
require VCAT’s permission to enter the tree owner’s land. Additional
safeguards in line with the
approach taken by the NSWLEC for third-party access
to adjoining land to carry out an inspection220 may also be prudent, namely:
• that reasonable notice is given to the landowner or occupier whose
land is to be accessed by the applicant
• that access only occur at a reasonable time during the day
• any other limitations that VCAT considers are appropriate.
214 Note also during the NSW Act’s statutory review the NSW Department
of Justice and Attorney General found that local councils
usually do not
agree to enforce orders on the request of neighbours: See Department of Justice
and Attorney General (NSW),
Review of the
Trees (Disputes Between Neighbours)
(NSW) (Report, 2009) 17.
215 Supplementary Consultation 1 (Victorian Civil and Administrative
216 See Ch 11 for discussion of options when a purchaser of land is not
properly informed about an existing action in VCAT or an order.
Planning and Environment Act 1987
Fences Act 1968
219 Queensland Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Neighbourhood Disputes
(Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
(Report No 72, December 2015)
Recommendation 5-1(a)–(b).
220 Land and Environment Court of New South Wales,
Practice Note Class 2:
Tree Applications
, 1 December 2018, 10
http://www.lec.justice.nsw.gov.au/Pages/practice_procedure/practice_notes.aspx
Land and Environment Court of New South Wales,
Schedule A. Usual Directions
on the Preliminary Hearing for Tree Applications
(November 2018) cl 13
http://www.lec.justice.nsw.gov.au/ Pages/types_of_disputes/class_2/Trees-hedge-disputes-process/treedisputes_prelimhearing.aspx
Interaction of the
new Neighbourhood
Introduction
The Planning and Environment Act
Local tree protection laws made under the
Local Government Act
The Heritage Act
The Aboriginal Heritage Act
The Fences Act
The Catchment and Land Protection
Other Victorian Acts
Community responses—interaction of
Other jurisdictions
—interaction
The Commission’s
conclusions—interaction of laws
Interaction of the new Neighbourhood Tree
Disputes Act with other laws
Introduction
10.1 In Victoria the management and removal of trees on private land is
affected by numerous laws and policies. These laws and policies
may be relevant
to the rights and responsibilities of parties in tree disputes and their
relationship to the new Tree Disputes
Act must be considered. The new Act may
intersect with the following:
Planning and Environment Act 1987
• local tree protection laws made under the
Local Government Act
Heritage Act 2017
Aboriginal Heritage Act 2006
Fences Act 1968
Catchment and Land Protection Act 1994
Victorian Conservation Trust Act 1972
Conservation, Forests and Lands Act 1987
Commonwealth
Environment Protection and Biodiversity
Conservation Act 1999
10.2 Other Acts also relate to the management of vegetation for fire
prevention; to minimise interference with powerlines and to protect
health and wellbeing and the environment.1 These Acts are less likely to impact
the new Act.
10.3 The first section of this chapter examines how the above laws operate
and how they may intersect with the new Act. The chapter
then considers
community responses on this issue and discusses how the interstate Acts address
the interaction of laws. The chapter
concludes with recommendations to ensure
that the new Act interacts with existing laws and policies as simply as possible
minimal disruption to existing legal processes and established
10.4 A key recommendation made in this Chapter is amendment to the Victoria
Planning Provisions (VPPs) to exempt orders made under
the Act from requirements
to obtain a permit to remove, destroy or lop vegetation under some planning
provisions. Orders
made by VCAT should override local tree protection laws. An amendment to the
Heritage Act
should address a situation of imminent danger to life or property
by a tree, and damage to fences should be addressed in the new
amendment to the
. In the case of other legislation discussed in this
chapter, the Commission is not recommending amendments or recommends further
consultation.
Country Fire Authority Act 1958
Metropolitan Fire Brigades
Electrical Safety Act 1998
Flora and Fauna
Guarantee Act 1988
Public Health and Wellbeing Act 2008
Road Management Act 2004
Rail Management Act 1996
10.5 The technical content of this chapter is
intended to assist in drafting the new Act, and to explain why the Commission
that the new Act should constrain existing laws in some
situations.
The Planning and Environment Act
Planning and Environment Act 1987
(Vic) (the P&E
Act) provides the framework for Victoria’s planning system. The P&E
Act sets out objectives for
planning in Victoria including provision for the
fair, orderly, economic and sustainable use and development
of land, as well as provision for the protection of natural and man-made
resources.2 The P&E Act does two key things: it establishes
the Victoria
Planning Provisions (the VPPs), and enables the responsible authority (in
most cases a council)3 to build its own
planning schemes from those standard
provisions.4
10.7 The VPPs are a statewide reference used to construct a planning scheme.
They comprise a comprehensive set of model planning provisions
that may be
incorporated into individual planning schemes in each municipality across
Victoria.5 VPPs ensure consistent rules for
planning across Victoria, and
consistency across local planning schemes.
10.8 The VPPs outline the purpose of a number of zones and overlays that
councils may apply, where appropriate, to land within their
municipality. Some
zones and overlays have local content added to them as schedules, which
‘can be used to supplement and fine-tune
the basic provisions of a
state-standard clause, zone or overlay in a planning scheme, adapting it to
local circumstances and locally
defined objectives’.6 Specific provisions
of the VPPs control the removal of native vegetation.7
10.9 The purpose of local planning schemes is to:
• provide a clear and consistent framework within which decisions about
the use and development of land can be made
• express state, regional, local and community expectations for areas
and land uses
• provide for the implementation of state, regional and local policies
affecting land use and development.8
10.10 Planning schemes are higher level subordinate legislation. They may
identify and manage significant or important vegetation
on public and private
land.9 Planning schemes typically require a permit to be obtained to remove, lop
or destroy native or other
identified vegetation.10
Planning and Environment Act 1987
The objectives of the
planning framework established by the P&E Act include enabling land use
and development planning and
policy to be easily integrated with environmental,
social, economic, conservation and resource management policies at state,
and municipal levels:
Planning and Environment Act 1987
To this end, the effects
on the environment, as well as social and economic effects, must be
considered as part of the decision-making process about the use
and development
Planning and Environment Act 1987
Planning and Environment Act 1987
administration and enforcement of a planning scheme is the duty of a responsible
authority. In most cases this will be a council
but it can be the Minister
administering the Act or any other person whom the planning scheme
specifies as a responsible
authority for that purpose.
4 Ibid pts 1A, 2; Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
A Practitioner’s Guide to Victorian Planning Schemes,
(Version 1.1,
October 2018) [2.2]-[2.4] <https://
www.planning.vic.gov.au/guide-home/a-practitioners-guide-to-victorian-planning-
schemes>; see also Stephen Rowley,
The Victorian Planning System:
Practice, Problems and Prospects
(The Federation Press, 2017) 23.
Planning and Environment Act 1987
These provisions are
under the central control of the Minister for Planning.
6 Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
Victoria’s Planning System
(Guide, 28 May 2015) [1.8.7]
www.planning.vic.gov.au/guide-home/using-victorias-planning-system
see also Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
Practitioner’s Guide to Victorian Planning Schemes
(Version 1.1,
October 2018) [6.5.3].
7 Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
Planning Provisions
(11 April 2019), cl 52.17.
Planning and Environment Act 1987
; see, eg, Hume
City Council,
General Planning Information Fact Sheet
www.hume.vic.gov.au/Building_Planning/Planning/About_Planning
9 See generally
Planning and Environment Act 1987
10 Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
Planning Provisions
(11 April 2019), cl 59.06.
Different policy considerations
10.11 Planning laws are underpinned by broad and complex policy
considerations. Section 4 of the P&E Act lists the objectives
of planning
law in Victoria which are to:
• provide for the fair, orderly, economic and sustainable use, and
development of land;
• provide for the protection of natural and man-made resources and the
maintenance of ecological processes and genetic diversity;
• secure a pleasant, efficient and safe working, living and
recreational environment for all Victorians and visitors to Victoria;
• conserve and enhance those buildings, areas or other places which are
of scientific, aesthetic, architectural or historical
interest, or otherwise of
special cultural value;
• protect public utilities and other assets and enable the orderly
provision and coordination of public utilities and other
facilities for the
benefit of the community;
• facilitate development in accordance with the objectives set out
• provide affordable housing in Victoria; and
• balance the present and future interests of all Victorians.
10.12 The relevant authority must make all planning applications available
for inspection by the public.11There are strict requirements
to advertise some
development applications where a proposal may cause a detriment to another
party. This mechanism allows an affected
person to consider the development
proposal and its potential impact on them.12 VicSmart applications are not
advertised in this
10.13 In addition, planning laws are applied consistently across
• The permit is the principal instrument of development approval.
• Local variations cannot be made to the state-standard provisions.
• Local provisions must not conflict with the state provisions.
• Local requirements are expressed in a schedule following the relevant
state-standard provision.14
10.14 Importantly, it is very difficult to change these existing policies.
Any amendment to a planning scheme must be formally approved
and gazetted.15
10.15 These features of planning schemes reveal the policy considerations at
play that are typically broader than those present
in disputes between
adjoining neighbours about trees. The Victorian planning framework assumes and
enables greater community involvement
in everyday planning decisions and in
setting standard planning policies that are applied consistently across
Permit process
10.16 The next part of this chapter considers the two permit processes and
the key planning mechanisms that apply to trees on private
land in Victoria that
may intersect with the new Act. This may occur in two key ways:
• a permit may need to be obtained before any works can be carried out
to the problem tree, or
Planning and Environment Act 1987
13 VicSmart applications are not advertised because VicSmart is a streamlined
assessment process for straightforward planning permit
applications: Department
of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
VicSmart—A Simpler
Planning Permit Process
(Web Page, 20 March 2019) <https://
www.planning.vic.gov.au/permits-and-applications/vicsmart
14 See, eg, Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
Using Victoria’s Planning System
(Guide, 28 May 2015) 2
www.planning.vic.gov.au/guide-home/using-victorias-planning-system
see also Stephen Rowley,
The Victorian Planning System: Practice, Problems
and Prospects
(The Federation Press, 2017) 22-26, 42-44.
Planning and Environment Act 1987
, D-E, G-J; see also
Stephen Rowley
, The Victorian Planning System: Practice, Problems and
(The Federation Press, 2017) 164-183.
• an existing permit may need to be amended or revoked so that works on
the problem tree can be carried out.
10.17 Two types of permit processes are provided—regular and
fast-tracked (VicSmart). Determining which permit process to use
will depend
upon the number of trees involved and the nature of the new tree works. Planning
schemes may also specify what evidence
needs to be provided to obtain a
10.18 An application for a permit is made to the responsible authority,
generally the local council.16 Permit applications for overlays
are generally
made by the owner of the land covered by the overlay.17 If the permit applicant
is not the owner, the application
must be signed by the owner of the land or
include a declaration that the applicant has notified the owner about the
application.18
In this way, the P&E Act does not restrict the category of
persons who can apply for a planning permit to the owner of the tree.19
Regular permit process
10.19 The permit process is outlined in Part 4 of the P&E Act. Key
components of the permit process are:
• notifying:
a) the owners and occupiers of adjoining land to which the application
applies, unless the responsible authority is satisfied that
the application will
not cause material detriment to any person20
b) any other persons if the responsible authority considers it may cause
material detriment to them
c) the municipal council if the application applies to or may materially
affect land within its municipal district
• allowing members of the public to inspect the permit application
prior to determination of the application by either the responsible
or the Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal (VCAT) on review21
• allowing any affected person to object in writing to a grant of the
permit application.22
10.20 In deciding whether to grant a permit, the responsible authority,
generally the local council, must consider:
• the relevant planning scheme
• the objectives of planning in Victoria
• all the objections and submissions it has received in relation to the
permit application
Planning and Environment Act 1987
Heritage Act 2017
(Vic) and some local laws made under the
Local Government Act 1989
Planning and Environment Act 1987
The Act does not
specify what matters may be taken into account by the responsible authority in
deciding whether or not material
detriment may be caused. Each application must
be considered on its merits. As a basic rule, it should be possible to link
to specific matters such as restriction of access, visual intrusion,
unreasonable noise, overshadowing or some other specific reason.
General terms
such as ‘amenity’ and ‘nuisance’ are not specific
enough, nor is the fact that the matter is
controversial a conclusive test that
a person may suffer material detriment. Conversely, agreement to the proposal by
and occupiers of adjoining land is not conclusive, although it may
situation by the responsible authority is necessary: see Department of
Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
Using Victoria’s Planning
(Guide, 28 May 2015) [3.1.2] <
www.planning.vic.gov.au/guide-home/using-victorias-planning-system
Planning and Environment Act 1987
A planning scheme may
exempt any class or classes of application from some or all of the notice
requirements that may otherwise apply
under section 52(1) of the Act. In these
cases, there is no opportunity for other people
to make submissions or objections in relation to the application. The
application must still be referred to any referral authority
and the responsible
authority must still take into account all relevant planning considerations in
deciding the application.
22 Ibid s 57.
• any decision and comments of a referral authority which it has
• any significant effects on the environment
• any social and economic impacts.24
10.21 The responsible authority may also consider other plans, policies,
planning scheme amendments adopted by a planning authority
and any agreement
made pursuant to section 173 of the P&E Act affecting the land.25
10.22 Reviews of permit decisions are heard by VCAT. In reviewing the
application, VCAT is limited to considering only the matters
that were before
the original decision maker.26 VCAT also has original jurisdiction to hear some
to cancel or amend permits and
applications for enforcement of orders.27
VicSmart permit process
10.23 VicSmar
t is a simple, fast planning permit
assessment process for straightforward, low- impact planning and development
applications in Victoria.28
VicSmart allows for a quick planning decision to be
made to ‘remove, destroy or lop a tree’.29
10.24 The VicSmart process has fewer steps than the regular permit process
and decisions are made within 10 business days.30 Key features
of the VicSmart
permit process are:
• Applications are exempt from the notice requirements under section 52
of the P&E Act. This means that they are not required
to be publicly
advertised.
• The application is only assessed against specific decision-making
guidelines set out in the planning scheme. 31
• The information to be submitted with an application is pre-set and
includes the species and size of the tree and any other
significant trees
removed in the past three years on the site. It must also explain why works need
to be conducted and include a
photograph of the tree.32
• Decision are made by the Chief Executive Officer of the Council or a
delegate.33
Planning and Environment Act 1987
referral authority may be a determining referral authority or a recommending
referral authority. Both types of referral
authority can object to the granting
of a permit, decide not to object, or specify conditions to be included on
a permit. The
effect of that advice on the final outcome of an application is
different for each type of referral authority. If a determining
authority objects, the responsible authority must refuse to grant a permit, and
if a determining referral authority specifies
conditions, those conditions must
be included in any permit granted. In contrast, a responsible authority must
consider the recommending
referral authority’s advice but is not obliged
to refuse the application or to include any recommended conditions. A
recommending referral authority can seek a review at the Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal if it objects to the granting
of a permit
or it recommends conditions that are not included in the permit by the
responsible authority:
Department of Environment, Land, Water and
Planning Practice Note No 54
Referral and Notice
Provisions,
June 2015 <https://
www.planning.vic.gov.au/resource-library/
planning-practice-notes>.
Planning and Environment Act 1987
the complete list of considerations see
Planning and Environment Act
Planning and Environment Act 1987
s 60(1A)(b)
example, if needed the responsible authority may consider the approved
regional strategy plan under section
Upper Yarra Valley
Dandenong Ranges Authority Act 1976
(Vic); the Melbourne Environs
Strategy Plan approved under section 46U(2); and any relevant state environment
policy declared
in any order made by the Governor-in- Council under
section 16 of the
Environment Protection Act 1970
Planning and Environment Act 1987
27 Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
Victoria’s Planning System
(Guide, 28 May 2015) [5.1.1] and Table
www.planning.vic.gov.au/guide-home/using-victorias-planning-system
For example, the Responsible Authority or a person can apply for an enforcement
order against one or more persons if a use or
development of land will
contravene the Act:
Planning and Environment Act 1987
28 Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic), ‘VicSmart
Permits in 10 Days—Fast Decisions for Simple Planning
Decisions’,
Permits and Applications
(Web Page, March 2017) 2 <https://
www.planning.vic.gov.au/permits-and-applications/vicsmart
29 Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
Planning Provisions
(11 April 2019), cl 59.06.
30 Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
‘VicSmart—A Simpler Planning Permit Process’,
Permits and
Applications
(Web Page, 20 March 2019) <
https://www.planning.vic.gov.au/permits-and-applications/vicsmart
31 These include considerations of the objectives of any applicable overlay,
whether the tree contributes to the significance of the
area and the extent
to which the health, appearance or significance of the tree will be
affected by the works. Department
of Environment, Land, Water and
Planning (Vic),
Victoria Planning Provisions
(11 April 2019), cl
59.06 –2 Decision guidelines. Additional requirements apply to
lopping trees the subject of
a Heritage Overlay under clause 59.07.
32 Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
Planning Provisions
(11 April 2019), cl 59.06 –1 Information
requirements.
33 See Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
‘VicSmart Permits in 10 Days—Applicant’s Guide
to Lodging a
VicSmart Application’,
Permits and Applications
(Web Page, January
2019) <https://
www.planning.vic.gov.au/permits-and-applications/vicsmart
10.25 Reviews
of VicSmart applications take place
at VCAT. Unlike the regular permit process, reviews of VicSmart permit
applications do not extend
to third-party objectors. They are limited to the
applicant requesting a review of a decision to refuse a permit application.
applications are heard in VCAT’s Short Cases List.34
Restrictions on tree works in planning
Tree protection overlays
10.26 Overlays are one of the main tools in the VPPs to protect vegetation.35
An overlay details practical constraints that apply
to a particular site.36
Overlay requirements could restrict or limit the ability of an affected
neighbour to obtain a remedy under
the new Act. Standard overlays for Victoria
are included in the VPPs.
10.27 Local councils are able to use schedules to include ‘local
content in planning schemes’37 and to describe
when an overlay will
apply to particular land through the planning scheme map. For example, councils
can use schedules to remove
a permit requirement as long as this accords with
the broader planning objectives of the overlay.38
10.28 The Commission has identified four main overlays39 that operate to
protect or preserve trees, other vegetation and significant
landscapes on
private land within Victoria:
Significant Landscape Overlay (SLO)
aims to conserve and
enhance the character of significant landscapes. It mainly applies when
vegetation is aesthetically or visually
important in the broader landscape and
vegetation is identified as ‘an important contributor to the character of
an area’.40
Environmental Significance Overlay (ESO)
is applied if
vegetation protection is ‘part of the wider objective to protect the
environmental significance of the area’.41
Vegetation Protection Overlay (VPO)
focuses on the
protection of significant vegetation, including native and introduced
vegetation in urban and rural environments.42
Heritage Overlay
43 aims to conserve and enhance heritage
places of natural or cultural significance and to ensure that development does
not adversely
affect the significance of heritage places.44
10.29 Tree protection overlays can apply to significant portions of land with
Victoria.45 As an example, in 2013, the VPO applied
to 2500 residential
properties within the City of Monash.46 The Environmental Significance Overlay
(ESO) applies to a significant
proportion of land within the Nillumbik
34 Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic), ‘VicSmart
Permits in 10 Days—Fast Decisions for Simple
, Permits and Applications
(Web Page, March 2017) 2
www.planning.vic.gov.au/permits-and-applications/vicsmart
The Short Cases List is a sub-list of the Planning and Environment List and
handles short and less complex disputes
that allow parties to have
their matter heard and determined within a short timeframe. Tribunal members
hearing cases in this
list are encouraged to provide oral decisions at the
conclusion of the hearing. Site inspections are unlikely to be undertaken.
35 Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
Practice Note No 7: Vegetation Protection in Urban Areas
, August 1999.
36 See Stephen Rowley,
The Victorian Planning System: Practice, Problems
and Prospects
(The Federation Press, 2017) 33. An overlay differs
from a zone because it considers the practical constraints that apply to
particular site, whereas a zone control is directed at the central purpose of
37 Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
Victoria’s Planning System
(Guide, 2015) [1.8.7]
<https://www.planning.
vic.gov.au/guide-home/using-victorias-planning-system>.
38 Ibid [6.5.3] <https://
www.planning.vic.gov.au/guide-home/a-practitioners-guide-to-victorian-planning-schemes
39 See Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning,
Practitioner’s Guide to Victorian Planning Schemes
(Version 1.1,
October 2018) [5.2.3] <https://
www.planning.vic.gov.au/guide-home/a-practitioners-guide-to-victorian-planning-schemes
40 Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
Planning Provisions
(11 April 2019), cl 42.03; Department of Environment,
Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
Planning Practice Note No 7: Vegetation
Protection in Urban Areas
, August 1999, 6.
41 Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
Planning Provisions
(11 April 2019), cl 42.01; Department of Environment,
Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
Planning Practice Note No 7: Vegetation
Protection in Urban Areas,
August 1999, 5.
42 Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
Planning Provisions
(11 April 2019), cl 42.02. 43 Ibid, cl 43.01.
44 A ‘heritage place’ includes both the listed heritage item and
its associated land.
45 Consultations 8 (City of Boroondara), 9
(Nillumbik Shire Council), 12 (City of Port Phillip), 16 (Heritage
46 Chris Harty, Robin Crocker and Lyn Denison,
Panel Report—Monash
Planning Scheme Amendment C115—Vegetation Protection Overlay Schedule
1—Tree Protection Area
(Panel Report, 13 August 2013) 7. This Panel
was appointed under delegation on the 8 May 2013 pursuant to
Sections 153
Planning and Environment Act 1987
to hear and consider
submissions in respect of the Amendment.
47 Consultation 9 (Nillumbik Shire Council).
10.30 Under the SLO, ESO and VPO a planning permit is required to remove,
destroy or lop any specified vegetation. The regular permit
process applies to
works to more than one tree and the VicSmart process applies to only one
10.31 A Heritage Overlay schedule can apply to the whole of a heritage place
(for example, over a house site or an area) or a tree
or group of trees could be
specifically nominated as the heritage place. Heritage Overlay tree controls are
intended to protect trees
that are ‘of intrinsic significance’ (such
as trees that are included on the National Trust Register or trees that
to the significance of a heritage place).48 A VicSmart permit will
only apply to the lopping of heritage trees. A regular permit
is still required
to remove or destroy one or more trees covered by a heritage overlay.
10.32 There is a standard list of exemptions to the requirement to obtain a
permit under the SLO, ESO and VPO.49 The Heritage Overlay
also contains an
exemption that enables works to keep whole or part of a tree clear of
electricity power lines,50 or ‘if the
tree presents an immediate risk of
personal injury or damage to property’.51
10.33 The standard exemption across all of these overlays allows tree works
or removal where a tree presents an immediate risk of
personal injury or damage
to property.52 The risk
is considered immediate if the vegetation needs to be removed before a permit
can be granted.53 The exemption does not extend to vegetation
that may cause
injury or damage in the longer term. A qualified arborist should assess whether
there is an immediate risk of tree
failure, where practical to do so.54
10.34 As noted above, schedules to overlays may modify permit requirements to
create additional exemptions. For example, schedule
1 to the City of Whitehorse
SLO provides that a permit to remove, destroy or lop a tree does not apply
• a tree with a single trunk circumference of 0.5 metre or less at a
height of one metre above ground level
• the pruning of a tree for regeneration or ornamental shaping
• a tree which is dead or dying to the satisfaction of the responsible
authority.55
10.35 In addition, schedule 1 to the VPO in the City of Whitehorse provides
that a permit is not required to remove, destroy or lop
a tree which is
‘deemed unsafe by a suitably qualified arborist, and to the satisfaction
of the responsible authority’.56
Bushfire management overlay
10.36 The Bushfire Management Overlay is used to guide the development of
land in areas where vegetation can create an extreme
bushfire hazard.57 It
operates to ‘prioritise human life and strengthen community resilience
to bushfire’.58 Therefore,
it manages vegetation
48 Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
Practice Note 1: Applying the Heritage Overlay,
August 2018, 4.
49 See, eg, Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
Victoria Planning Provisions
(11 April 2019), cl 43.02-3
‘Significant Landscape Overlay’, ‘Table of Exemptions’.
For example, the requirement
to obtain a permit does not apply to vegetation
that is to be removed, destroyed or lopped in an emergency or where it presents
immediate risk of personal injury or damage to property or to vegetation that
is to be removed, destroyed or lopped to the minimum
extent necessary to enable
the carrying out of fire protection activities. For a full list of examples see
Department of Environment,
Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
Victoria Planning
(11 April 2019), cl 42.01-3, 42.02-3, 42.03-3, ‘Table of
Exemptions’. These exemptions also apply to some processes in
including the
Geothermal Energy Resources Act 2005
Greenhouse Gas Geological Sequestration Act 2008
and Land Protection Act 1994
(Vic) and the
Traditional Owner Settlement
50 Action must be carried out in accordance with a code of practice prepared
Electricity Safety Act 1998
(Vic): Department of
Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
Victoria Planning Provisions
(11 April 2019), cl 43.01-1.
51 Ibid, cl 43.01-1.
52 For the SLO, ESO and VPO only that part of the vegetation that presents a
risk may be removed, destroyed or lopped under this exemption:
Department of
Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
Victoria Planning Provisions
(11 April 2019), cl 42.01-3, 42.02-3, 42.03-3.
53 See Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
Guidance—Exemptions From Requiring a Planning Permit To Remove, Destroy
or Lop Native Vegetation
(Practice Document, December 2017) 10.
55 City of Whitehorse,
Planning Scheme
(15 March 2019) sch 1 to the
Significant Landscape Overlay at cl 42.03.
56 Ibid sch 1 to the Vegetation Protection Overlay at cl 42.02. See also City
Planning Scheme
(29 April 2019) sch 1 to the Vegetation
Protection Overlay at 42.02 which provides that permit is required to remove or
destroy vegetation
protected under this provision but not to lop vegetation.
57 Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
Planning Provisions
(11 April 2019), cl 44.06; see Department of
Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic), ‘Information for
Bushfire Management Overlay
www.planning.vic.gov.au/policy-and-strategy/bushfire-protection/bushfire-management-overlay
58 Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
Planning Provisions
(11 April 2019), cl 44.06.
differently to the other environmental overlays.
10.37 Bushfire protection provisions in planning schemes also create permit
exemptions to allow people to create defendable spaces
around certain buildings
used for accommodation and along a fence line to reduce fuel load.59 Bushfire
exemptions override any other
requirement to obtain a permit in a planning
scheme, including if a different overlay requires a permit.60 These provisions
added following the recommendations of the 2009 Victorian Bushfire Royal
Commission.61
10.38 Nillumbik Shire Council informed the Commission that the permit
exemptions allowing the clearing of vegetation to create a defendable
around buildings used for accommodation have reduced the number of enquiries
council receives about removing trees on private
Native vegetation particular provisions
10.39 The native vegetation particular provisions of the VPPs control the
removal of native vegetation.63 A permit is usually required
to remove, destroy
or lop native vegetation unless an exemption applies.64 The process has three
steps: avoidance of removal; minimisation
of impacts; and offset requirements.65
Offset requirements compensate for removal, with the aim of ensuring that
clearing native
vegetation has a neutral impact on Victoria’s
biodiversity.66 The type of offset required depends on the characteristics of
the native vegetation being removed, and the extent of the loss.67
The native vegetation particular provisions will not affect most private
properties in Victoria.
They ‘aim to prevent broad-scale clearing of vegetation and will have
limited applicability in urban areas with small lot sizes’.68
more relevant in country areas with larger lots or Green Wedge areas because
this is where most native vegetation is located
and because of how the VPP
define native vegetation69 and how exemptions are framed.
10.40 If native vegetation particular provisions apply to private
property, the provisions allow the clearing of some vegetation
permit. A permit is not required for sites of less than 0.4 hectares.70 An
exemption to the requirement to obtain
a permit also applies in an emergency
or where there is an immediate risk of personal injury or damage to property.71
exemption allows lopping and pruning to maintain vegetation
provided no more than 1/3 of the foliage of each individual plant
is lopped or
59 Ibid, cl 53.02 ‘Bushfire Planning’; cl 52.12 ‘Bushfire
Protections: Exemptions’.
60 Department of Planning and Community Development (Vic),
Advisory Note 39—Bushfire Protection: Vegetation Exemptions
(Practice Document, November 2011) <
www.planning.vic.gov.au/publications/planning-advisory-notes
The exemptions do not apply if there is a legal agreement or covenant in place
that prohibits the removal, destruction or
lopping of the native vegetation.
This might arise if the vegetation is subject to a native vegetation
offset. Legal agreements
and covenants can be used to secure offsets for
vegetation that has been permitted to be removed. Agreements are typically
established
section 173
Planning and Environment Act 1987
Conservation, Forests and Lands Act 1987
can also be applied to vegetation under
Conservation Trust Act 1972
61 Department of Planning and Community Development (Vic),
Advisory Note 39—Bushfire Protection: Vegetation Exemptions
(Practice Document, November 2011) <
www.planning.vic.gov.au/publications/planning-advisory-notes
62 Consultation 9 (Nillumbik Shire Council).
63 Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
Planning Provisions
(11 April 2019), cl 52.17. Particular provisions are
specific prerequisites or planning provisions for a range of particular uses
developments. They apply consistently across the state and there is no ability
to include in planning schemes particular provisions
which are not in the VPP:
Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
Practitioner’s Guide to Victorian Planning Schemes
(Version 1.1,
October 2018) [3.4] <https://
www.planning.vic.gov.
au/guide-home/a-practitioners-guide-to-victorian-planning-schemes>.
64 See Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
Guidelines for the Removal, Destruction or Lopping of Native
(Practice Document, December 2017).
65 Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
Planning Provisions
(11 April 2019), cl 52.17.
66 See Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
Guidelines for the Removal, Destruction or Lopping of Native
(Practice Document, December 2017) 13–18.
67 See Ibid 15.
68 Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
Practice Note No 7: Vegetation Protection in Urban Areas,
August 1999, 4
www.planning.vic.gov.au/publications/planning-practice-notes
69 Native vegetation is defined as ‘plants that are indigenous to
Victoria, including trees, shrubs, herbs, and grasses: Department
Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
Victoria Planning Provisions
(11 April 2019), cl 73.01 ‘General Terms’.
The Guidelines for
The Removal, Destruction or Lopping of Native Vegetation
(2017) further
classify native vegetation as a patch or a scattered tree: [3.1].
70 Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
Planning Provisions
(11 April 2019), cl 52.17-7 ‘Table of
exemptions’.
71 Ibid, cl 52.17-7 ‘Table of exemptions’.
72 This does not apply to the pruning or lopping of the trunk of a native
Trees planted or maintained as a condition of
existing planning permits
10.41 A permit that has already been granted may need to be enforced or
amended in some way to enable a resolution of the tree dispute
under the new
Act. For example, a planning permit granted for the development of land may
specify that a tree is to be planted and
maintained as part of an endorsed
landscaping plan (landscaping plan) which forms part of the permit.73 Model
conditions of landscaping
plans require:
• maintenance to the satisfaction of the responsible authority,
including that any dead, diseased or damaged plants are to
be replaced
• that any tree or particular trees to be retained during development
are pruned by a qualified arborist to Australian Standard
AS 4373-2007 Pruning
of Amenity Trees.74
10.42 Permits generally operate indefinitely when acted on or after a
development project has commenced, and for as long as the landholder
benefiting from the use of the
land.75 This means that trees planted and maintained as part of a permit may
need to be maintained for months or years following the
initial development of
the land.76 This may not occur if a permit contains a sunset provision that
limits the duration of its
operation or under the circumstances listed in
section 68 of the P&E Act, which provides for the expiry of permits.77
10.43 Two scenarios may arise where an affected neighbour wants to obtain a
remedy under the new Act in relation to a problem tree
that already forms part
of an existing planning permit.
10.44 First, where an affected neighbour seeks to have a problem tree on
adjoining land properly maintained in accordance with the
model maintenance
provisions in a landscaping plan. In this situation the affected neighbour would
be able to contact the responsible
authority and ask them to investigate their
complaint about the tree.78 If this is unable to resolve their concerns, section
of the P&E Act provides that any person may apply to VCAT to force a
permit holder to comply with a condition of their permit.
10.45 However, if the permit conditions are such that the affected neighbour
needs the existing permit amended to resolve the dispute,
the affected neighbour
would have little redress. VCAT currently only has the power to cancel or amend
a permit at the request of:
• the responsible authority
• any person under section 89 of the P&E Act (this includes any
person who objected or would have been entitled to object
to the issue of the
• a referral authority
• the owner or occupier of the land concerned, or
• any person who is entitled to use or develop the land
concerned.80
10.46 Further, VCAT must be satisfied that one of the following circumstances
has occurred before it will interfere with a permit:
Broome v Maroondah CC
[2016] VCAT 1161
[28]. Permit conditions
can control more than just the actual development that may need planning
approval. Conditions regarding
fencing and landscaping are common on permits
relating to the development of multiple dwellings on a lot. See also City of
Boroondara,
Landscape Plan Guidelines
(Practice Document, 2019)
www.boroondara.vic.gov.
au/planning-building/planning-permit-applications/landscape-plan-guidelines>.
74 Department of Sustainability and Environment,
Writing Planning Permits
(2nd ed, February 2007) 20–21; see also Growth Areas Authority,
Growth Area Model Planning Permit Conditions—A Manual for
Implementation
(October 2011); see, eg, Knox City Council,
Landscape Plan
Guidelines—How to Prepare a Landscape Plan for Planning Applications
75 Stephen Rowley,
The Victorian Planning System: Practice, Problems and
(The Federation Press, 2017) 148.
78 Ibid 163.
79 The Commission notes that further limitations apply under section 89(1) of
the P&E Act. VCAT may cancel or amend the
permit if a) the person
believes that they should have been but were not given notice of the permit
application; or b) the person
believes that they have been adversely
affected by i) a material mis-statement or concealment of fact in relation
to the permit application; or ii) any substantial failure to comply with
the conditions of the permit; or iii) any material
mistake in relation to the
grant of the permit. VCAT may refuse to consider a request unless
satisfied that the request has
been made as soon as practical after the personal
making it had notice of the facts relied upon in support of the request:
Planning and Environment Act 1987
• a material mis-statement or concealment of fact in relation to the
application for the permit
• any substantial failure to comply with the conditions of the
• any material mistake in relation to the grant of the permit
• any material change of circumstances which has occurred since the
grant of the permit
• any failure to give notice in accordance with this Act, or
• any failure to comply with sections 55, 61(2) or 62(1) of the P&E
10.47 Under the current legislative framework, VCAT’s ability to amend
planning permits is limited to the circumstances outlined
above and this
amendment process would only be available to affected neighbours on adjoining
land who could show that they either
objected or would have been entitled to object to the grant of the permit.
VCAT will only act on such a request by an affected neighbour
if the person:
• could not reasonably be expected to have been aware of the
application for the permit in time to lodge an objection
• was substantially disadvantaged by the issue of the permit
• it would be just and fair in the circumstances to do so.82
10.48 The provisions of the P&E Act are complex and there are a number of
hurdles that must be satisfied if a request by a third
party to amend a permit
is to succeed.83 Further, if the Tribunal amends a permit, then compensation may
be payable to any person
who has incurred expenditure or liability that is now wasted as a result of
the permit amendment.84
Section 173 agreements
10.49 Some councils use section 173 of the P&E Act to protect trees on
private land.85 This provision allows councils to enter
into agreements with
private residents to protect and retain particular trees on private property or
to achieve other planning objectives
in relation to the land.86 These agreements
may expressly require owners of land to
maintain vegetation to the satisfaction of council.87 For example, in
Nillumbik Shire these agreements typically apply to applications
to subdivide
land less than 0.4 hectares in size.88 Lots of this size are not covered
by the native vegetation particular provision
under its planning scheme.
10.50 Section 173 agreements can be recorded on the title of the land so that
future owners and occupiers can be bound by conditions
under the agreement.89
VCAT has some scope to direct the responsible authority to amend or end these
agreements.90 However, the council
must initially agree to such a review being
undertaken.91 If the responsible authority decides that it does not agree in
to a proposal to amend or end an
Planning and Environment Act 1987
The P&E Act
provides that the Tribunal cannot cancel or amend a permit in a variety of
circumstances including: the permit is
for the construction of building or
works, and the construction or works are completed; the permit is for other
development,
and the development is substantially carried out; or the permit is
for subdivision or consolidation of land and the plan has
been registered
Subdivision Act 1988
ss 88, 91(5); See also Victorian Civil
and Administrative Tribunal,
Planning and Environment List
Guidelines—Cancellation & Amendment of Permits
(Sections 87 &
Planning and Environment Act 1987
) (Practice Document, 20 July 2016)
www.vcat.vic.gov.au/get-started/planning-and-environment/apply-to-cancel-or-amend-a-permit
Planning and Environment Act 1987
83 See, eg,
The Secretary to the Department of Health and Human Services
and Melbourne Health v Melbourne CC
[2016] VCAT 2051
Planning and Environment Act 1987
85 Consultation 9 (Nillumbik Shire Council).
Planning and Environment Act 1987
Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning,
Using Victoria’s
Planning System
(Guide, 28 May 2015) [8.1] <https://
www.planning.vic.gov.au/guide-home/using-victorias-planning-system
87 See generally Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
Using Victoria’s Planning System
(Guide, 28 May 2015) [8.3.1].
88 Consultation 9 (Nillumbik Shire Council).
Planning and Environment Act 1987
Consultation 9
(Nillumbik Shire Council).
91 Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
Victoria’s Planning System
(Guide, 28 May 2015) [8.8.2]
www.planning.vic.gov.au/guide-home/using-victorias-planning-system
agreement, then the agreement will remain in
place.92 The applicant cannot apply to VCAT for a review of this initial
10.51 Landowners can also enter into these agreements as an ‘ontitle
security agreement’ to establish native vegetation
offset sites.93 This
means that once the agreement is signed and registered on title, native
vegetation credits will be registered
in the landowner’s name.94 The
nature of these agreements are therefore varied and complex.
Local tree protection laws made under the Local
Government Act
10.52 Trees on private land may also be protected or managed under local
council laws. Local Laws are made by local governments under
Government Act 1989
(Vic). Under section 111 of this Act a local law must
not be inconsistent with any other Act or regulation. Local laws are therefore
aimed at dealing with local issues only. Decisions are made by council officers.
There are no appeal rights to VCAT for decisions
made under local laws; instead
councils may offer internal review processes.95 Local laws enable
councils to make the final decision in relation to the protection of a valued
tree in a timely and efficient manner.96
10.53 Not all councils have enacted local laws to manage vegetation. Where
they do exist, local laws generally contain similar tree
protections which
operate to:
• protect trees identified as ‘significant’ or
‘protected’ on private land
• extend protection by reference to a tree’s large size, age,
rarity, ecological value or cultural and historical significance
• extend protections to a root zone around the base of the tree and/or
a tree protection zone (TPZ) around the trunk of the
• require the owner to obtain a permit to prune or remove protected
trees or to carry out works in proximity to the TPZ.97
10.54 Some councils have enacted local laws in response to community concern
Local laws can
supplement overlays and sometimes councils choose to use local laws as the main
vegetation protection mechanism in
the municipality.99 Some councils choose not
to use local laws at all. Nillumbik Shire Council suggested that local laws
internal processes and it prefers to protect trees under the planning
10.55 In Boroondara, the Tree Protection Local Law 2016 (City of Boroondara)
protects ‘significant trees’ and ‘canopy
private land within the municipality.101
92 Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
Victoria’s Planning System
(Guide, 28 May 2015) [8.8.2]
www.planning.vic.gov.au/guide-home/using-victorias-planning-system
Planning and Environment Act 1987
93 This may be a first party offset site on land owned by the permit holder
to remove native vegetation and used to meet the landowner’s
offset requirements.
94 Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
Vegetation Credit Register: Process to Establish a Native Vegetation
Credit Site on Private Land
(Register) <https://
www.environment.vic.gov.au/native-vegetation/native-vegetation/offsets-for-the-removal-
of-native-vegetation/i-want-to-establish-a-native-vegetation-credit-site>.
95 This is in contrast to decisions about permits under planning schemes
which can be appealed to VCAT. The
Local Government Act
specifically require local laws to contain a provision for internal review of
decisions made or actions taken under local
laws, however, the guidelines
encourage councils to have an internal review process: Department of Planning
and Community Development,
Guidelines for Local Laws
(Manual, February
2010) <https://
www.localgovernment.vic.gov.au/council-innovation-and-performance/local-laws
96 Consultation 8 (City of Boroondara). Section 114(c)(iii) of the
Government Act 1989
(Vic) provides that a local law may delegate to a member
of the council staff the power to do any act, matter or thing necessary or
incidental to the performance or exercise of any function or power by the
97 See, eg,
Tree Protection Local Law 2016
(City of Boroondara).
98 Consultations 8 (City of Boroondara), 12 (City of Port Phillip).
99 Consultations 8 (City of Boroondara), 12 (City of Port Phillip).
100 Consultation 9 (Nillumbik Shire Council). If a planning scheme is in
force in the municipal district of a council, the council
must not make a local
law which duplicates or is inconsistent with the planning scheme:
Government Act 1989
(Vic) s 111(4).
101 ‘Canopy Tree’ means any tree: (a) with a total trunk
circumference of 110cm or more measured at a point 1.5 metres
trunk’s length from the closest point above ground level; or (b) if
multi-stemmed, with a total trunk circumference
of all its trunks of 110cm or
more measured at a point 1.5 metres along the trunks’ lengths from the
closest point above
ground level; or (c) with a trunk circumference of 150cm or
more measured at ground level. ‘Significant Tree’ means a
listed in Council’s Significant Tree Study. ‘Significant Tree
Study’ means the study prepared by John
Patrick and Associates in May 2001
of trees and vegetation within the Municipal District that
are considered to be of environmental, historic, horticultural, bio-diversity
or other value and includes any subsequent trees added
to the Significant Tree
Study by way of Schedule to the Significant Tree Study:
Tree Protection Local
(City of Boroondara)
Landowners and contractors need a permit to
interfere, or to authorise interference, with the protected tree.102 If a permit
issued and a protected tree is interfered with, the landowner is guilty
of an offence,103 whether or not the person who actually
interfered with the
tree is identified.104 The burden is on the landowner to prove that the
interference was undertaken by another
party without the landowner’s
knowledge.105
10.56 As discussed in Chapter 8, the Boroondara local law sets out detailed
decision-making criteria that must be applied by council
when determining
applications under the local laws.106 A decision must be made within five to 10
working days and an applicant for
a permit is able to apply for an internal
review of the decision to refuse to grant a permit.107
10.57 The City of Boroondara noted that approximately 75 per cent of rateable
properties in Boroondara contain trees protected by
the local law.108 Boroondara
stated that ‘the local law had been recently reviewed and was working
well to protect tree canopy’.109
10.58 The City of Port Phillip local law applies to and protects a large
number of significant trees on private land in the
locality.110 Port Phillip
informed the Commission that ‘there are approximately 200 significant
trees registered in the council
area, and the significant tree register is
constantly evolving’.111 A permit is needed from the City Permits Unit
remove a significant tree or palm.112 The CPU must decide the
application within 15 days and the applicant has no right of appeal
permit is refused, but the applicant will be advised of the reasons for the
decision.113 Council investigates all alleged
breaches of the local law and
has issued infringement notices on a few occasions.114
The Heritage Act
Heritage Act 2017
(Vic) establishes the Victorian Heritage
Register.115 Places and objects of cultural heritage significance116 to the
state are protected
by the Register.117 A permit is required to carry out any
works on a place or object protected by the Register.
10.60 Trees, gardens or other places of natural or cultural significance and
associated land can be listed on the Register.118 Therefore,
a permit may be
required for works to a registered heritage place, such as a tree or garden.119
The Commission was informed that
it very unusual for single trees to be listed
on the Register.120
102 For, eg, a permit is needed to prune or remove a protected tree, or to
carry out works within a specific area surrounding the
protected tree:
Tree Protection Local Law 2016
(City of Boroondara)
103 A person found guilty of an offence will be liable to a penalty not
exceeding 20 penalty units, unless otherwise specified.
Tree Protection Local Law 2016
(City of Boroondara)
108 Consultation 8 (City of Boroondara).
110 Consultation 12 (City of Port Phillip). The City of Port Phillip’s
Local Law No.1
(Community Amenity) 2013, defines a significant tree, as
‘a tree or palm on private land: with a trunk circumference or 150
centimetres or greater, measured 1 metre above the ground; or with multiple
stems where the circumference of its exterior stems is
equal to, or greater than
150 centimetres when measured 1 metre about ground level’.
111 Consultation 12 (City of Port Phillip).
Local Law No 1
(Community Amenity) 2013 (City of Port Phillip)
The requirement to obtain a permit does not apply: (a) where a person cuts,
trims or prunes a significant tree to comply with clause
38 of this Local Law;
(b) where an adjacent landowner removes branches which are overhanging that
adjacent land:
113 Consultation 12 (City of Port Phillip).
114 Consultation 12 (City of Port Phillip). See also City of Port Phillip,
City Permits—Fact Sheet Significant Tree Permits
(29 November
http://www.portphillip.vic.gov.au/significant-tree-permit.htm
Heritage Act 2017
116 Cultural heritage significance means aesthetic, archaeological,
architectural, cultural, historical, scientific or social significance:
Heritage Act 2017
‘Definitions’.
Heritage Act 2017
Places and objects of local
significance may be protected by a listing on a schedule to the Heritage
Overlay, and are therefore
reflected in planning schemes. The Commission notes
Heritage Act
requires the amendment of planning
schemes to reflect the current status of the Register. However, places and
objects listed on the
Register are managed by Heritage Victoria and not via the
planning scheme permit process administered by local councils.
Heritage Act 2017
‘Definitions’,
It is a criminal offence to
undertake works to a Heritage place without first obtaining a permit.
120 Consultation 16 (Heritage Victoria).
10.61 Heritage Victoria is the principal State
Government agency that identifies and protects non-Aboriginal cultural heritage
that are of state-level significance.121 The Act establishes the
Heritage Council, which is an independent statutory body that identifies
protects registered places and objects of cultural significance to Victoria.122
The Heritage Council or the Executive Director
of Heritage Victoria can create
exemptions to permits to allow certain works or activities to be undertaken
without a heritage permit.123
Heritage Act
specifies that a formal
application must be made to seek an exemption from the need to obtain a
permit.124 A permit exemption will
generally be issued:
• if the works relate to conservation of a place or object
• for routine maintenance activities which will not harm the cultural
heritage significance of the place or object
• to remove dead, diseased or dangerous trees provided an
arborist’s report is submitted verifying the condition of the
Heritage Act
does not otherwise contain an exemption allowing
emergency works to heritage-listed places or objects.
10.63 The Heritage Council can review permits that have been refused by
Heritage Victoria and conditions attached to permits.126 The
Minister may also
call-in a review and either determine the matter or refer the matter to VCAT for
determination.127
The Aboriginal Heritage Act
Aboriginal Heritage Act 2006
(Vic) establishes the Victorian
Aboriginal Heritage Register (VAHR), which records the details of all known
Aboriginal objects and
places in Victoria.128 The Act is administered by
Aboriginal Victoria.129
10.65 Aboriginal Victoria is a government agency under the auspices of the
Department of Premier and Cabinet (Vic). It is responsible
implementation of the
Aboriginal Heritage Act 2006
(Vic). It has a
statutory function to maintain the VAHR and ‘has regional teams who assess
recommendations for areas or objects
of Aboriginal cultural heritage
significance for inclusion on the VAHR’.130
10.66 Registered Aboriginal Parties (RAPs) are organisations that hold
decision-making responsibilities under the
Aboriginal Heritage Act
specified geographical area.131
Aboriginal Heritage Act
aims to minimise or prevent harm to
Aboriginal heritage, including Aboriginal scarred trees and other trees of
indigenous cultural
significance.132 Harm is broadly defined to include damage,
destroy, disturb, injure or interfere with.133 Harm would include pruning
Aboriginal scarred tree.134
121 Heritage Victoria exercises its functions in a number of ways, including:
Administering the
Heritage Act 2017
(Vic); Maintaining the Victorian
Heritage Register; Recommending places and objects that should be included in
the Heritage Register;
Issuing permits to make changed to heritage places and
objects: See Department of Environment, Land,
Water and Planning
Heritage Victoria
(Web Page, 9 July 2018) <
https://www.heritage.vic.gov.au/about-heritage-in-victoria/heritage-in-victoria
Heritage Act 2017
; see also Heritage Victoria,
Policy Guideline for Heritage
Permit Exemptions: Matters to be Considered in Determining Permit Exemptions
Heritage Act 2017
(Document, 7 September
2017). See also Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
Permits—Apply for a Permit
(Web Page, 15 March 2019) <https://
www.heritage.vic.gov.au/permits/apply-for-a-
126 Consultation 16 (Heritage Victoria).
Heritage Act 2017
Aboriginal Heritage Act 2006
129 Aboriginal Victoria is also responsible for the implementation of the
Aboriginal Lands Act 1970
130 Consultation 13 (Aboriginal Victoria); See
Aboriginal Heritage Act 2006
131 There are currently 12 RAPs in Victoria that cover approximately 66% of
Victoria’s geographical location. See Aboriginal
Registered Aboriginal Parties
(Web Page) <
https://www.vic.gov.au/aboriginalvictoria/heritage/registered-aboriginal-parties.html
132 Other trees such as ring trees and birthing trees can be of cultural
significance to Aboriginal people. These trees may have cultural
significance,
through natural or human processes, whereby branches have been fused and given a
Aboriginal Heritage Act 2006
Consultation 13
(Aboriginal Victoria).
10.68 The Commission was informed that there may
be approximately 3700 scarred trees on private land within Victoria, depending
the interpretation of available data.135
10.69 Pursuant to the
Aboriginal Heritage Act
, a landowner would need to
apply for either a Cultural Heritage Permit or a Cultural Heritage Management
Plan (CHMP) to carry out
any works to a scarred tree.136 A Protection
Declaration may also apply to the tree.137
10.70 A CHMP is mandatory for high-impact works within areas of Aboriginal
Cultural Heritage Sensitivity,138 and this includes areas
within 50 meters of a
scarred tree.139 Whether an area is of Aboriginal Cultural Heritage Sensitivity
can be ascertained by using
an online mapping tool.140 This map is specific to
individual parcels of land.
10.71 Permits or CHMPs are generally assessed by the relevant Registered
Aboriginal Party (RAP)141 or, if there is no RAP in the area,
then Heritage
Officers at Aboriginal Victoria.142
Aboriginal Heritage Act
provides VCAT with jurisdiction to
determine disputes about CHMPs, cultural heritage permits and protection
declarations.143 However,
most disputes are resolved on an informal basis
including via mediation or negotiation.144
The Fences Act
Fences Act 1968
(Vic) provides the Magistrates’ Court
with jurisdiction to resolve disputes about fences.145 The Act operates from the
principle that owners are liable to contribute in equal proportions to a
dividing fence.146
10.74 Fences and trees are often located within close proximity to one
another. Therefore, a tree may cause damage to a fence and
activate the
and the proposed Neighbourhood Tree Disputes
10.75 While the
provides a remedy to rectify and repair fences
damaged by a tree,147 it does not assist with the management of trees that have
or are likely to cause damage to fences, for example, through the making
of orders for the pruning or removal of trees. If the fence
itself is a
‘hedge or similar vegetative barrier that encloses or bounds
land’,148 then the Magistrates’ Court
may make orders for fencing
works, which include ‘the planting, replanting, repair or maintenance of a
hedge or similar vegetative
barrier that is the whole or part of a dividing
fence’.149 However, the Court cannot make orders for a tree that is
independent
of the fence.150
135 Consultation 13 (Aboriginal Victoria). Aboriginal Victoria calculated
this figure from DELWP data layers and noted that the number
would likely
include some trees under lease or licence that are not in fact situated on
private land within Victoria. Aboriginal
Victoria noted that the
Heritage Act 2006
(Vic) does not distinguish between scarred trees situated
on public land and those on private land.
Aboriginal people caused scars on trees by removing bark for a variety of
purposes. The scars vary in size and expose the sapwood
on a tree: see
Victorian Government,
‘Aboriginal Scarred Trees’, Aboriginal
(Brochure, June 2008) <https://w.
www.vic.gov.au/
aboriginalvictoria/heritage/aboriginal-cultural-heritage-of-victoria/aboriginal-places-objects-and-land-management.html>.
Aboriginal Heritage Act 2006
138 High-impact activities are categories of activity that are generally
regarded as more likely to harm Aboriginal cultural
heritage. Most
high- impact activities provided for in the Regulations are subject to a
requirement that the activity results
in significant ground disturbance.
The term ‘significant ground disturbance’ is defined in the
Regulations. For
more information, see Aboriginal Victoria,
Heritage Act 2006
—Practice Note: Significant Ground Disturbance
https://www.vic.gov.au/aboriginalvictoria/heritage/heritage-tools-and-publications/
guides-forms-and-practice-notes-for-aboriginal-heritage-management.html
139 Consultation 13 (Aboriginal Victoria).
140 Aboriginal Victoria,
Heritage Tools
(Web Page) <https://
www.vic.gov.au/aboriginalvictoria/heritage/heritage-tools-and-publications/
heritage-tools.html>.
Aboriginal Heritage Act 2006
142 Consultation 13 (Aboriginal Victoria); see
Aboriginal Heritage Act
Aboriginal Heritage Act 2006
Consultation 13
(Aboriginal Victoria).
145 Under the Act, a fence includes a vegetative barrier that encloses or
bounds land. It follows that fencing works include ‘the
replanting, repair or maintenance of a hedge or similar vegetative barrier that
is the whole or part of a dividing fence’:
Fences Act 1968
‘Definitions’.
Fences Act 1968
150 See, eg,
Fences Act 1968
Catchment and Land Protection Act
10.76 The proposed Neighbourhood Tree Disputes Act may interact with the
Catchment and Land Protection Act 1994
(Vic) (CLP Act) if the subject
tree is a declared noxious weed that the landowner would otherwise be required
to control or eradicate.
Noxious weeds are generally exempt from the requirement
to obtain a planning permit pursuant to the P&E Act.151
10.77 Landowners have responsibilities to manage specific weeds on their
properties pursuant to the CLP Act. Under this Act, certain
plants are declared
as noxious weeds in Victoria. These plants have the potential to cause
environmental or economic harm.152 Accordingly,
landowners may be issued with
directions by the Secretary of the Department of Environment, Land, Water and
Planning to prevent the
growth or spread of state- prohibited weeds.153
10.78 In addition, 70B of the CLP Act provides that a landowner may be
issued with a direction to take measures to control or
eradicate certain
categories of weeds on their land. Landowners have responsibility to take all
reasonable steps to eradicate regionally
prohibited weeds154 and to prevent the
growth and spread of regionally controlled weeds.155 It is an offence to fail
with a directions notice.156
Other Victorian Acts
10.79 Other Acts also require landowners to maintain vegetation on their
• for fire prevention
• to minimise interference with powerlines
• to protect public health and wellbeing
• for conservation purposes.
10.80 The Acts discussed below are unlikely to affect the operation of the
new Act recommended in this report. Rather, the Commission
considers that the
obligations placed on landowners under these Acts are likely to complement the
Country Fire Authority Act
10.81 This Act enables council Fire Prevention Officers to issue a Fire
Prevention Notice to a landowner requiring the removal of
vegetation fuel
hazards in the ‘country area of
Victoria’.157 These notices may be issued if the officer forms the
view that is it necessary, or may become necessary,
to remove vegetation to
protect life or property from the threat of fire.158 It is an offence for
a person to fail to comply
with a Fire Prevention Notice.159 Councils may
enter private lands to remove fire hazards if fire prevention notices are not
complied with.160
151 This includes ‘Vegetation that is a noxious weed subject of a
declaration under the
Catchment and Land Protection Act 1994
exemption does not apply to Australian Dodder (Cuscuta australis).
152 Agriculture Victoria,
Invasive Plant Classifications
(Web Page, 5
December 2018)
http://agriculture.vic.gov.au/agriculture/pests-diseases- and-weeds/weeds/invasive-plant-classifications
Catchment and Land Protection Act 1994
154 Regionally prohibited weeds are not widely distributed in a region but
are capable of spreading further.
155 Ibid. Regionally controlled weeds are invasive plants and are usually
widespread in a region. To prevent their spread, ongoing
control measures are
Catchment and Land Protection Act 1994
Country Fire Authority Act 1958
The ‘country
area of Victoria’ means that part of Victoria which lies outside the
metropolitan district, but does
not include any forest, national park or
protected public land.
s 41(2)(a).
160 Country Fire Authority,
Who Does What
(Web Page, 2019)
www.cfa.vic.gov.au/about/who-does-what
Metropolitan Fire
Brigades Act
10.82 This Act operates in the same way as the
Country Fire Authority Act
(Vic) but it applies to the metropolitan fire district.161
Electrical Safety Act
10.83 This Act requires a landowner or occupier of land to keep private
electric lines clear of vegetation.162 Notices may be issued
by Energy Safe
Victoria or the relevant distribution company requiring a person to clear
vegetation within a specified timeframe.163
10.84 If action is not taken within the given timeframe, works can be
carried out by third parties to ensure that the tree is kept
clear of the
Transport legislation and road reserves
10.85 Legislation regulating public land in rail corridors and road reserves
may require private landowners to maintain vegetation
on their property.165 For
example, private landowners may be required to prune or remove a tree on their
land if it poses a safety
risk to railway users or road users.
10.86 Some local laws may also place obligations on private landowners to
ensure vegetation on their land does not interfere with
or obstruct public
traffic, including pedestrian traffic.166
Public Health and Wellbeing Act
10.87 Under the
Public Health and Wellbeing Act
(PHW Act), councils have a
duty to investigate and remedy all nuisances within the municipality wherever
possible.167 The PHW
Act applies to nuisances which are dangerous to health or
offensive.168 It is possible for a tree to form
a nuisance and therefore for the PWH Act to be used in managing tree disputes
on private land.
10.88 Any person can contact their local council if they believe a nuisance
exists.169 The council can:
• issue an improvement notice or prohibition notice170
• initiate proceedings for an offence under the Act171
• enter the premises and abate the nuisance if the owner or occupier of
the land cannot be found,172 or
• advise the complainant of any options to settle the matter
privately.173
10.89 If council fails to investigate the nuisance within a reasonable period
of time, the complainant can commence proceedings in
the Magistrates’
10.90 The Commission asked a number of councils whether the nuisance offence
under the PHW Act applied to tree disputes on private
land. All councils
consulted with suggested that the PHW Act had not been used or had not played a
role in resolving neighbourhood
tree disputes.175
It is more likely to be used ‘to manage noise issues, odour issues and
rodent infestations’.176
Metropolitan Fire Brigades Act 1958
(Vic) ss 87–92.
Electricity Safety Act 1998
(5)–(7). The third-party contractor is able to recover
the costs of undertaking the works from the owner or occupier of land
which the tree is situated.
165 See, eg,
Road Management Act 2004
Rail Management Act
166 See, eg,
General Local Law 2017
(East Gippsland Shire Council) cl
Local Law No 1 (Community Amenity) 2013
(City of Port Phillip) s
Public Health and Wellbeing Act 2008
168 Municipal Association of Victoria,
Public Health and Wellbeing Act
—Guidance Manual for Local Government Authorised Officers
(March 2010) 15–16. Offensive is defined as ‘noxious or injurious
to personal comfort’
Public Health and Wellbeing Act 2008
s 62(4)(c).
s 62(3)(b).
175 Consultations 8 (City of Boroondara), 9 (Nillumbik Shire Council), 10
(Baw Baw Shire Council), 12 (City of Port Phillip).
176 Consultation 9 (Nillumbik Shire Council).
Flora and Fauna Guarantee Act
10.91 This Act protects certain flora and fauna within Victoria.177 It aims
to conserve threatened native plants or communities of
native plants and animals
and manage processes that are potentially threatening to them.178
10.92 The obligation to obtain a permit or other authorisation under the Act
does not generally apply to private landowners or occupiers
land.179 However, a permit is required to take flora from private land which
is part of the critical habitat of that
Under the Act a determination may be made that the whole or any part or parts
of the habitat of flora is critical to the survival
of that particular category
of flora.181 If such
a determination is made, the landowner or occupier of land will be
notified.182 At the time of writing the Victorian Government
has not used this
mechanism to protect critical habitats.183
Victorian Conservation Trust Act
10.93 Native vegetation on private property can also be protected by a
conservation covenant established under the
Victorian Conservation Trust Act
(Vic).184 Baw Baw Shire Council suggested that it has some of these
covenants within its local government area.185
10.94 These agreements are legally binding, registered on title and are
entered into voluntarily between the Trust for Nature and
landowners.186 Once agreed, the Trust assumes responsibility for monitoring the
restrictions and rights agreed to through
the Trust’s Stewardship
10.95 Each conservation covenant is approved by the Minister for Environment.
The covenant is then registered on the Certificate of
Title and remains there,
binding current and future owners of the land to the terms and conditions of the
covenant.187
10.96 All currently worded covenants are subject to responsible fire
prevention, weed and pest control as well as acts that are outside
the control
of the owner, for example a natural disaster that may adversely affect protected
habitats. Restrictions set out in this
covenant, for example, disallowing tree
removal, may also be waived to the extent necessary for:
• reasonable maintenance of fences, culverts, dams, bridges,
watercourses, buildings, tracks, paths, roads and other services
• any act required under any law, rule or regulation of any government
or government agency, executive or administrative order
or act of general or
particular application
• the proper management of the land as a protected environment for
indigenous flora and fauna.188
Flora and Fauna Guarantee Amendment Bill 2018
was introduced into
Parliament in May 2018 to amend this Act but did not pass the Parliament before
the final scheduled sitting day
of the 58th Parliament of Victoria: see
Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic), ‘Review of the
Flora and Fauna Guarantee Act
Engage Victoria
<https://engage.vic.gov.au/review-flora-and-
fauna-guarantee-act-1988>.
Flora and Fauna Guarantee Act 1988
s 47(2)(b).
s 20(2)(c).
183 Department of Environment, Land, Water and
Planning (Vic),
Review of the
Flora and Fauna Guarantee Act 1988
Consultation, Submission and Response Summary
(Report, 2017) 9
<https://engage.vic.gov.au/review-flora-and-fauna-guarantee-act-1988>;
Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning
‘Protected Flora Controls’,
Conserving Threatened Species
(Web Page, 22 February 2019)
www.environment.vic.gov.au/conserving-threatened-species/flora-and-fauna-guarantee-act-1988/protected-flora-controls
Conservation Trusts Act 1972
(Vic) s 3(1)(b). The Trust
website says that it has secured over 100,000 hectares of private land by
working with land owners and
others. This includes land protected by more than
1400 voluntary conservation covenants and 41 Trust for Nature reserves.
for Nature Reserves
(Web Page, 2017) <https://
www.trustfornature.org.au/
185 Consultation 10 (Baw Baw Shire Council).
186 Trust for Nature,
Conservation Covenants
(Web Page) <https://
www.trustfornature.org.au/land-services
187 Trust for Nature,
What is a Conservation Covenant?
2017) <https://
www.trustfornature.org.au/landowner-support
188 Trust for Nature Covenant Deed (2019), clause 10. Other exemptions can be
permitted by the Trust via a Letter of Approval. A Letter
of Approval is
not registered on the title. If a new landowner wants the same conditions as the
previous landowner, they will
need to apply for a new Letter of
Approval: Trust for Nature,
What is a Conservation Covenant?
2017) <https://
www.trustfornature.org.au/
landowner-support>.
• Only in ‘extreme and highly unusual
circumstances’ will removal of a covenant be considered. The Trust and the
Minister must agree to the removal.189
10.97 The current intention of the Trust is to ensure that the deeds of
covenant do not impede covenantors (landowners) from complying
with general
laws, rules or regulations.190 This means that a tree owner whose land is
subject to a conservation covenant would need
to comply with an order if a
statutory scheme is implemented to resolve neighbourhood tree disputes.
10.98 Landowners are also able to enter into these agreements as an
‘on-title security agreement’ to establish native
vegetation offset
sites.191 This means that once the agreement is signed and registered on title,
native vegetation credits will
be registered in the landowner’s name and
can be traded.192 The nature of these agreements is varied and complex.
Conservation, Forests and Lands Act
10.99 Land management co-operative agreements can also be entered into under
Conservation, Forests and Lands Act
between the Secretary to the Department
of Environment, Land, Water and Planning and landowners. These agreements, known
agreements’, can either:
• relate to the management, use, development, preservation or
conservation of land in the possession of the landowner, or
• otherwise give effect to the object or purposes of a relevant law,193
in relation to land in the possession of the landowner.194
10.100 Agreements may be binding on a landowner’s successors in
title.195 For this to occur the Secretary must record the agreement
Register of Titles.196
10.101 This Act may be used for agreements between the Secretary and the
Trust for Nature.197 However, the land to which these agreements
apply must be
managed as if it were Crown land.198
10.102 All agreements restrict the use of the land, with some agreements
requiring more active land management than others. The landowner
can receive
funding to undertake actions to manage vegetation subject to the
agreement.199
10.103 As discussed in relation to section 173 agreements and conservation
covenants, landowners can use section 69 agreements as
an ‘on-title
security agreement’ to establish native vegetation offset sites.200 This
means that once the agreement is
signed and registered on title, native
vegetation credits will be registered in the landowner’s name and, for
section 69 agreements,
can be traded.201
Victorian Conservation Trust Act 1972
; Trust for
What is a Conservation Covenant?
(Web Page, (2017)
www.trustfornature.org.au/landowner-support
190 Information provided by the Trust for Nature to the Commission, March
191 See further Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
I Need to Secure an Offset
(Web Page, 2019) <https://
environment.vic.gov.au/native-vegetation/native-vegetation/offsets-for-the-removal-of-native-vegetation/i-need-to-secure-an-offset>.
192 Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
Vegetation Credit Register: Process to Establish a Native Vegetation
Credit Site on Private Land
(Register) <https://
www.environment.vic.gov.au/native-vegetation/native-vegetation/offsets-for-the-removal-
of-native-vegetation/i-want-to-establish-a-native-vegetation-credit-site>.
193 ‘Relevant law’ means the
Conservation, Forests and Lands
(Vic), the Regulations, an Act specified in schedule 1, the
Regulations under an Act specified in schedule 1, and in part 9 (except
89, 97 and 98) includes an Act specified in schedule 1A and Regulations under
any such Act.
Conservation, Forests and Lands Act 1987
s 70(1)(ma).
; Department of Environment and Primary Industries (Vic),
Land Protection Under the Biodiversity Conservation Strategy— Melbourne
Strategic Assessment
(Report, May 2014) 4.
200 Serer further Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
I Need to Secure an Offset
(Web Page, 2019)
www.environment.vic.gov.au/native-vegetation/native-vegetation/offsets-for-the-removal-of-native-vegetation/
i-need-to-secure-an-offset>.
201 Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
Vegetation Credit Register: Process to Establish a Native Vegetation
Credit Site on Private Land
(Register) <https://
www.environment.vic.gov.au/native-vegetation/native-vegetation/offsets-for-the-removal-
of-native-vegetation/i-want-to-establish-a-native-vegetation-credit-site>.
10.104 An agreement may be varied or terminated in
a number of ways, including by agreement between the Secretary and the landowner
or by a VCAT order.202
Commonwealth law: the Environment Protection and
Biodiversity Conservation Act
Environment Protection and Biodiversity Act 1999
(EPBC Act) provides a legal framework to protect and promote the recovery of
threatened species and ecological communities and
preserve significant places
from decline. The Act regulates matters of national environmental significance
including World Heritage
property, listed threatened species and communities,
and wetlands of international importance.203
10.106 A person must not take an action that has, will have or is likely to
have a ‘significant impact’ on any of the
matters of national
environmental significance or other protected matters without approval.204 If
the proposed action meets the
‘significant impact’ test, it
must be referred to the Commonwealth Department of Environment and Energy for
and approval by the Minister.205
10.107 The EPBC Act affects any group or individual, including landowners,206
whose actions may have a significant impact on a matter
of national
environmental significance. An action
is broadly defined and can include the clearance of vegetation.207 Generally,
a significant impact refers to an impact which is important,
notable, or of
consequence, having regard to its context or intensity.208
10.108 The regular permit process under Part 4 of the P&E Act is one of
the accredited assessment processes under a bilateral
agreement between the
Commonwealth and Victoria.209 This means that once the Commonwealth has
determined an action is
a ‘controlled action’, it can be assessed by a responsible
authority under the permit application process. The relevant
Victorian Minister
must assess the action in parallel with the related assessment undertaken by the
relevant authority. The assessment
process invites the public to comment on the
proposed action and an assessment report must be prepared by the Victorian
Minister.210
10.109 An order under the new Act may in theory have a significant impact on
a matter of national environmental significance, for
example listed threatened
species and communities or migratory species.211 If a private landowner wishes
to clear native vegetation
on their property which is listed as a threatened
species or part of a
threatened ecological community, the requirements of this legislation
will only apply if the clearance meets the significant
impact test. While it
is highly unlikely that the removal of one or two trees on a suburban block
would meet this test, it might
apply on a larger property outside Melbourne.
Conservation, Forests and Lands Act 1987
Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999
; see also Department of the Environment and Energy (Cth),
EPBC Act—Frequently Asked Questions
(Web Page, 2013)
http://www.environment.gov.au/epbc/publications/factsheet-epbc-act- frequently-asked-questions
Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999
Department of the Environment (Cth),
EPBC Act—Frequently Asked
(Web Page, 2013)
http://www.environment.gov.au/epbc/publications/ factsheet-epbc-act-frequently-asked-questions
Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999
; see also Department of the Environment and Energy (Cth),
Controlled Actions—What Next?
http://www.environment.gov.au/heritage/management/referrals/controlled-actions
206 Landholders are defined to include an owner, lessee or occupier of the
area of land:
Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999
207 Department of Environment and Energy (Cth),
Significant Impact
Guidelines 1.1—Matters of National Significance
http://www. environment.gov.au/epbc/publications/significant-impact-guidelines-11-matters-national-environmental-significance
208 Whether an impact is significant will depend on a number of factors,
including the quality of the environment affected and the
intensity, duration,
magnitude and geographic extent of the impacts: Department of the Environment
and Energy (Cth),
Significant Impact Guidelines
1.1 —Matters of National Environmental Significance
http://www.environment.gov.au/epbc/publications/significant-impact- guidelines-11-matters-national-environmental-significance
209 Department of the Environment and Energy (Cth),
Victorian Assessment
Bilateral Agreement
(27 October 2014)
http://www.environment. gov.au/protection/environment-assessments/bilateral-agreements/vic
Victoria has not yet entered into an ‘approval bilateral’
under which the state approval would also constitute
the authorisation for the
purposes of the EPBC Act: Stephen Rowley,
The Victorian
System—Practice, Problems and
(The Federation Press, 2017) 238.
210 See, eg, Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
Environmental Assessment Bilateral Agreement
(Web Page, 10 April 2019)
www.planning.vic.gov.au/environment-assessment/environmental-assessment-bilateral-agreement
211 Department of the Environment (Cth),
EPBC Act—Frequently Asked
(Web Page, 2013)
http://www.environment.gov.au/epbc/ publications/factsheet-epbc-act-frequently-asked-questions
Routine vegetation management, for example to
maintain existing facilities or roads, is not normally considered to have a
significant
impact on a matter of national
environmental significance.212 The clearing of vegetation for the creation of
a new road, however, may require referral under the
As most tree disputes occur between neighbours living in the urban context
where land has already been developed in accordance
with assessment processes
under the P&E Act, these scenarios would rarely be relevant to tree disputes
and are more likely to
arise in relation to larger development projects.214
Community responses—interaction of
Interaction of laws
The community has told the Commission that it finds the laws governing tree
disputes unclear. One community member explained that
navigating the
existing ‘multitude of legal considerations surrounding tree
disputes’ is ‘extremely complex’.215
A number of survey
respondents also expressed dissatisfaction with the variation in laws that may
apply to protect trees on private
land.216 For example, one survey
respondent expressed the view that:
the law or laws governing this area are spread over what seems to be a number
of acts. The efficacy in understanding the implications
of such laws then
becomes quite
cumbersome. It is not always obvious to neighbours when a tree enjoys
‘extra’ protective status, such as heritage status
as deemed by
council or other such bodies.217
The Law Institute of Victoria noted that ‘conservation covenants have
the potential to spark a dispute about trees or vegetation
land’. Disputes may arise between neighbours about competing interests in
land, for example:
a farmer may be concerned by the spread of weeds, or an increase in native
fauna such as kangaroos, as a result of the conservation
covenant, whereas the
covenantor might be concerned with chemical spray drift, soil disturbance and
noise, caused by farming operations.218
In the consultation paper, the community was asked how a new Act to govern
neighbourhood tree disputes should interact with other
Acts and laws. A range of
responses were received to this question. A number of submissions were in favour
of new tree dispute laws
overriding existing local laws and other
legislation.219 Others suggested that only local laws, rather than other Acts of
Parliament,
should be interfered with.220
On the other hand, a number of responses supported an approach where orders
made under a new tree disputes Act would work alongside
existing local laws and
other legislation.221 Arborist Ben Kenyon suggested that many existing
mechanisms, such as significant tree
registers and planning permits, work well
to protect vegetation and have adequately built-in exceptions for safety and
212 Department of Environment and Energy (Cth),
Significant Impact
Guidelines 1.1— Matters of National Environmental Significance
http://www.environment.gov.au/epbc/publications/significant-impact-guidelines-11-matters-national-environmental-significance
214 Confirmed by VCAT: Supplementary Consultation 1 (Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal).
215 Confidential submission.
216 Survey Respondents 3, 19, 57, 83, 88, 110.
217 Survey Respondent 57.
218 Submission 30 (Law Institute of Victoria).
219 Submissions 23 (Name withheld), 27 (Name withheld), 29 (David
220 Submissions 4 (Name withheld), 9 (Dr Karen Smith), 21 (Pointon Partners
Lawyers), 25 (City of Boroondara), 33 (Annette Neville);
Consultation 6 (Ben
221 Submissions 2 (Name withheld), 19 (Name withheld); Consultations 8 (City
of Boroondara), 9 (Nillumbik Shire Council), 10 (Baw
Baw Shire Council), 12
(City of Port Phillip).
222 Consultation 6 (Ben Kenyon).
The Commission met with a number of local councils to discuss the possible
interaction of a new Act with existing laws that are either
administered by
councils or where council is the responsible authority under other legislation
for example in planning schemes. These
councils generally supported an approach
that would see the new Act working alongside existing local laws and other
legislation.223
The City of Port Phillip thought that any new tree dispute scheme should not
override planning schemes but rather complement them.224
It was suggested that
this approach would enable a broader range of issues to be to be heard by the
same decision-making body, for
example, VCAT.225 Similarly, Nillumbik Shire
Council stated ‘any new scheme should align with planning controls and not
them and Council should be given a place at the decision-making
Baw Baw Shire Council’s preference is not to enable the new Act to
override planning schemes or local laws. However, Baw Baw
expressed the view
The Queensland approach where an applicant was required to progress through
local council policies and processes first before an order
was made by QCAT may
also be helpful.227
The City of Boroondara explained that:
Planning schemes consider a broad spectrum of environmental and public policy
matters which would not be considered in a civil case.
It is therefore
appropriate for a Planning Permit to continue to be required, to enable these
matters to be considered even if an
order [under a new Act] has been
The City of Boroondara also raised concerns about an order under a new Act
fettering council’s ability to make its own decision
under a local law.229
Boroondara proposed
a process whereby council would make a final determination about a protected
tree following an order made under a new Act.230
Arborist Robert Mineo observed:
Overriding the decisions made by councils under planning schemes and local
laws could be problematic. However, there is merit in having
a third party
mediate serious tree disputes between neighbours. The NSW approach of providing
councils with the opportunity to attend
tree dispute hearings would provide some
compromise and appeared to be a sensible approach.231
VCAT drew a distinction between the interaction of a new Act with decisions
that are made under local laws and with decisions that
are made pursuant to the
P&E Act. VCAT commented that decisions made under local laws provide no
external right of review and
so are distinct from decisions made under the
P&E Act.232
VCAT explained that planning schemes made pursuant to the P&E Act operate
in a different context to inter-party neighbourhood
tree disputes, for
• Overlay controls apply to land for purposes that relate to broader
issues, such as soil stability, native vegetation, landscapes
biodiversity.
• In some cases where tree removal is authorised under a planning
scheme, the responsible authority may require re-vegetation
to offset any loss
of vegetation.
223 Consultations 8 (City of Boroondara), 9 (Nillumbik Shire Council), 10
(Baw Baw Shire Council), 12 (City of Port Phillip).
224 Consultation 12 (City of Port Phillip).
226 Consultation 9 (Nillumbik Shire Council).
227 Consultation 10 (Baw Baw Shire Council).
228 Consultation 8 (City of Boroondara).
231 Consultation 14 (Robert Mineo).
232 Supplementary Consultation 1 (Victorian Civil and Administrative
• Decisions made by the responsible
authority pursuant to planning schemes enable third parties to seek an
administrative review
of the decision in VCAT.233
For these reasons VCAT did not support the new Act addressing both civil and
planning law matters. The Tribunal was unsure about how
the new Act could give
effect to the often complex issues that arise as part of the planning scheme
decision-making process.234
Bushfire protections
Some specific responses were received about the interaction of the new Act
with bushfire protections under the P&E Act. Some submissions
suggested that
concerns can arise about trees located on adjoining land that may pose a risk of
damage or harm in the event of a
bushfire.235
The Law Institute of Victoria noted the obligations a bushfire management
overlay imposes on landowners:
Private owners whose land is affected by a Bushfire Management Overlay must
undertake pre-emptive work to plan and prepare for bushfire,
often including the
removal of trees or vegetation, which may result in a dispute.236
Nillumbik Shire Council, much of it covered by a Bushfire Management Overlay,
stated that any new scheme to resolve neighbourhood
tree disputes should not
interfere with the bushfire protection exemptions in place in planning
schemes.237
Other jurisdictions—interaction of
Planning law frameworks in New South Wales, Queensland and Tasmania use
different mechanisms to regulate vegetation on private land.
planning permits for control of vegetation on private land in each
council level, either
through planning scheme mechanisms or local laws. This is in keeping with the
approach in Victoria.
New South Wales, Queensland and Tasmania all adopted a cautious approach to
how their new tree dispute laws would interact with established
planning laws
and other regulations. Ultimately, they all allow orders to override local
laws238 provided certain safeguards are
met. Some also allow state planning laws
to be overridden in certain circumstances. The interstate schemes do not
generally allow
orders that are prohibited under other Acts.239
New South Wales
Regulation of trees on private land in NSW
In New South Wales, trees on private land may be managed by planning laws at
the state level and requirements at the council level.
These laws have recently
undergone significant amendment.240
233 Supplementary Consultation 1 (Victorian Civil and Administrative
235 Submissions 5 (Name withheld), 13 (Mandy Collins), 19 (Name
236 Submission 30 (Law Institute of Victoria).
237 Consultation 9 (Nillumbik Shire Council).
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants Act 2017
The Commission’s research suggests that local laws may not be relied upon
to manage vegetation on private land in New South
Wales as they are in
Victoria. The Commission notes that the application of the Tasmanian Act is in
its infancy and so there is
currently no case law about how RMPAT have
interpreted these specific provisions. The Commission is uncertain, for example,
how RMPAT orders may intersect with local tree protection laws in
Tasmania. This is discussed in further detail below.
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants Act 2017
Trees (Disputes Between Neighbours) Act 2006
Trees (Disputes Between Neighbours) Act 2006
Environmental Planning and Assessment Act 1979
updated following the passing of the
Environmental Planning and Assessment
Amendment Act 2017
in November 2017. Most of the changes came into effect
from 1 March 2018: Department of Planning and Environment (NSW),
the Updated
Environmental Planning and Assessment Act 1979
www.planning.nsw.
gov.au/Policy-and-Legislation/Environmental-Planning-and-Assessment-Act-updated/Guide-to-the-updated-Environmental-Planning-and-
Assessment-Act-1979>.
The NSW Government describes the planning system as having a hierarchical
structure, with the
Environmental Planning and Assessment Act
the primary piece of legislation. It sets up Environmental Planning Instruments
(EPIs) comprising State Environmental Planning
Policies (SEPPs) and Local
Environmental Plans (LEPs).241State
Environmental Planning Polices (SEPPs) cover issues of statewide
importance.242 One SEPP addresses vegetation in non-rural areas.243
The aims of
that policy are to:
• protect the biodiversity value of trees and other vegetation in
nonrural areas of the state
• preserve the amenity of non-rural areas of the state through the
preservation of trees and other vegetation.244
Each local government authority has a Local Environment Plan (LEP) to guide
development, for example through applying zoning controls
to land, and protect
natural resources.245 A Standard Instrument sets out compulsory and optional
provisions for LEPs.246
Development Control Plans (DCPs) also fit within the framework of the
Environmental Planning and Assessment Act
. These plans are provided by councils
and provide more detailed guidance about design and planning requirements in
local areas.247
Prior to recent legislative amendments, Tree Preservation Orders were the
main mechanism by which councils managed vegetation on
private land. Tree
preservation orders previously made under clauses 5.9 and 5.9AA of the Standard
Instrument (Local Environmental
Plans) have largely been replaced by the State
Environment Planning Policy (Vegetation in NonRural areas)248 but existing tree
preservation
orders will continue to have effect.249
The clearing of native vegetation in rural New South Wales is governed
separately by the
Local Land Services Act 2013
(NSW) and the
Biodiversity
Conservation Act 2016
Trees (Disputes Between Neighbours) Act 2006
Trees (Disputes Between Neighbours) Act 2006
(NSW) (the NSW Act)
provides that an order does not authorise or require a person to carry out work
or engage in activity for which
consent or other authorisation must be obtained
under any other Act without that consent or authorisation.251 However, a NSWLEC
has effect despite any requirement that would otherwise apply to obtain
consent or authorisation under the
Environmental Planning and Assessment Act
(NSW) or the
Heritage Act 1977
(NSW).252 This exception is
mitigated by two safeguards:
241 See Department of Planning and Environment (NSW),
The Planning System
(Web Page, 26 May 2018) <https://
www.planning.nsw.gov.au/
Assess-and-Regulate/Development-Assessment/Your-guide-to-the-DA-process/Getting-started/The-planning-system>.
State Environmental Planning Policy (Vegetation in Non-Rural
Areas) 2017
. This policy was implemented to ensure that the clearing of
native vegetation in urban areas is regulated. For example,
individual councils to declare in their development control plan that
the removal of certain species of vegetation
or vegetation of a particular size
requires a permit or approval to be issued by council.
State Environmental Planning Policy (Vegetation in Non-Rural Areas)
, cl 3. For example,
does not enable people to clear native
vegetation in urban areas that would exceed the biodiversity offsets
scheme threshold
section 7.4
Biodiversity
Conservation
Act 2016 without approval by the
Native Vegetation Panel.
245 See Department of Planning and Environment (NSW),
Local Planning and
(Web Page, 18 February 2019) <https://www.planning.
nsw.gov.au/Plans-for-your-area/Local-Planning-and-Zoning>.
Standard Instrument
(Local Environmental Plans) Order 2006
247 See Department of Planning and Environment (NSW),
The Planning System
(Web Page, 26 May 2018) <https://
www.planning.nsw.gov.
au/Assess-and-Regulate/Development-Assessment/Your-guide-to-the-DA-process/Getting-started/The-planning-system>;
Manly Development Control Plan 2013,
cl 3.3.2.1(b), 3.3.2.3.
248 This has substantially reproduced the effect of clauses 5.9 and 5.9AA,
allowing councils to continue to regulate clearing of vegetation
through their
Development Control Plan (DCP): Office of Environment and Heritage (NSW),
Local Government Information and Resources
(Web Page, 23 November 2018)
www.environment.nsw.gov.au/biodiversity/localgovernment.htm
249 See further Office of Environment and Heritage (NSW),
Local Government
Information and Resources
(Web Page, 23 November 2018)
www.environment.nsw.gov.au/biodiversity/localgovernment.htm
250 Office of Environment and Heritage (NSW),
Native Vegetation
Page, 21 September 2018) <https://
www.environment.nsw.gov.au/
vegetation/>.
Local Land Services Act 2013
(NSW) repealed the
Native Vegetation Act 2003
Trees (Disputes Between Neighbours) Act 2006
• The NSWLEC must consider whether interference with the tree would
normally require consent or authorisation under these Acts
and if so whether it
has been obtained.253
• A relevant authority, for example a council or heritage officer, is
able to appear in proceedings.254
Tree Preservation Orders (TPOs) have been recognised as a hybrid statutory
mechanism under the
Environmental Planning and Assessment Act 1979
(the EPA Act).255 An order made by the NSWLEC has effect despite a TPO or
presumably a Vegetation SEPP256 that might otherwise
prevent or restrict
interference with the tree.257
Where local council’s authority or a permit would ordinarily be needed,
the NSWLEC will consider the factors that the local
council would ordinarily
take into account in its decision-making process.258 This includes matters
concerning native vegetation
and bushfire zones. The Court may also consider
whether or not the permit was refused by local council where a prior application
was made.259
The NSWLEC gives significant weight to consistently applied council policies
relating to TPOs, for example policies about the management
of trees including
circumstances in which tree removal may be permitted.260
Regulation of trees on private land
Queensland has also recently overhauled its planning system with the
Planning Act 2016
(Qld) commencing in 2017. It establishes state planning
policies to identify issues of statewide importance.261 One of the broad policy
themes is environment and heritage, including the conservation of biodiversity
and cultural heritage.262
Local planning instruments are made by local governments in consultation with
the community. They consider local growth and development
and take into account
the state planning instruments. There are three local planning instruments:
planning schemes; temporary local
planning instruments and planning scheme
policies.263 Local planning schemes specify defined land uses and assessment
requirements.264
Trees (Disputes Between Neighbours) Act 2006
Chapman v Harris [
2012] NSWLEC 1183
[12] (a council had
previously given consent to interfere with the tree);
Todorovic v Mendham
[2019] NSWLEC 1088
[13], in which the Court would have given
‘considerable weight to local government tree controls but the relevant
did not provide any submissions or appear at the tree dispute
Trees (Disputes Between Neighbours) Act 2006
Applicants are requirement to inform the Court in the application form whether a
tree preservation order applies to the tree subject
to the dispute, or whether
the tree is of heritage value. The Court also requires the applicant to notify
any relevant authority
that would be entitled to appear in proceedings in
relation to the tree by providing the relevant authority with a copy of the
application
form and any order sought at least 21 days prior to the first
Trees (Disputes Between Neighbours) Act 2006
255 See, eg,
Haindl v Daisch
[2011] NSWLEC 1145
; see also Andrew H
Kelly (2013) ‘Tree Preservation Orders: A New Vision?’ in S
K Manley and K Hampson (eds),
Proceedings of the 19th CIB World Building
Congress: Construction and Society
(Queensland University of Technology,
State Environmental Planning Policy (Vegetation in Non-Rural Areas)
‘Vegetation SEPP’. The Commission notes that clause 8(3) of
the Vegetation SEPP provides that an authority is not required
under this policy
for the removal of vegetation that the council is satisfied is a risk to human
life or property. The Commission
notes that the legislative mechanisms used to
protect vegetation on private land in New South Wales have recently changed and
implications of these changes for tree dispute hearings in the NSWLEC are
not fully apparent at the time of writing this report.
Trees (Disputes Between Neighbours) Act 2006
also Land and Environment of Court New South Wales,
Annotated Trees Act
January 2013
(1 September 2016) 6; see further
Ghazal v Vella (No. 2)
[2011] NSWLEC 1340.
258 See, eg,
Trees (Disputes Between Neighbours) Act 2006
; Consultation 11 (Land and Environment Court of New South Wales).
259 Consultation 11 (Land and Environment Court of New South Wales).
Haindl v Daisch
[2011] NSWLEC 1145.
Note that this is not
determinative weight.
261 Department of State Development, Manufacturing, Infrastructure and
Planning (Qld),
State Planning Policy
(Web Page, 2019)
<https://planning.dsdmip.qld.gov.au/planning/better-planning/state-planning/state-planning-policy-spp>.
263 Department of State Development, Manufacturing, Infrastructure and
Planning (Qld),
The Framework: The ‘What’ of Planning–
State and Local Planning Instruments
(Web Page, 2019)
<https://planning.dsdmip.qld.gov.au/planning/our-planning-system/the-framework>.
264 See Department of State Development, Manufacturing, Infrastructure and
Planning (Qld),
Queensland’s New Planning System (Document, 2018)
https://planning.dsdmip.qld.gov.au/planning/our-planning-system
see, eg, City of Gold Coast, ‘City Plan Version 6’,
(Web Page) cl 9.4.14.1-3.
In Queensland, trees can also be protected by local councils through
Vegetation Protection Orders administered under local laws, created
Local Government Act 1993
(Qld).265 For example under the
Assets Local Law 2003
(Brisbane City Council), Council can protect
significant vegetation by requiring a permit to be lodged for any proposed
or works that may interfere with protected vegetation.266 This
includes significant native vegetation (from small ground covers and
grasses to large trees) and significant urban vegetation (both native and exotic
vegetation on private property).267
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
The Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal (QCAT) cannot make an order
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
(Qld) (the Queensland Act) that would be unlawful under another Act.268
Section 43 further provides that the Queensland Act does not otherwise limit
the operation of another law requiring consent or authorisation
to be obtained
before work to a tree can be carried out. QCAT confirmed it would not hear a
matter if consent to intervene with
the tree is required under another
This limitation is qualified in relation to local laws. Section 67 of the
Queensland Act provides that if QCAT is satisfied there
is a genuine dispute, it
may make an order for a person to carry out works to a tree even though:
• consent is withheld by a local government or a tree-keeper under a
vegetation protection order
• a local law requires consent or authorisation to be given before the
work may be carried out, or
• the work is otherwise restricted or prohibited under a local
The Queensland Act specifically provides that work carried out pursuant to
this section is lawful despite a local law.271 Section
65(b) also provides that
QCAT may make an order if it is satisfied that the neighbour has taken all
reasonable steps to resolve
the issue under local law, a local government scheme
or local government administrative process.
In Queensland, ‘it is the specific intention of the Bill that QCAT can
override a local law, particularly relating to vegetation
protection orders,
where it can be demonstrated that the tree is a nuisance’.272
If a council has local law which would allow concerns about a dangerous tree
to be addressed, then the process under the local law
should be used first to
try to resolve the issue.273
265 See, eg, Michelle Lensink, ‘Tree Protection Laws in Australian
States and Territories’,
(Web Page, 2017)
<https://treenet.org/
resources/tree-protection-laws-in-australian-states-and-territories/>.
Natural Assets Local Law 2003
(Brisbane City Council) pt 3, s
19. The Commission notes that a person may interfere with protected
vegetation without
a permit under the local law if the interference constitutes
‘removal of trees or parts of trees that are causing
immediate and significant threat to persons or property’ as demonstrated
by adequate photographic evidence and an arborist’s
requested. Exemptions also apply to the removal of protected vegetation where
the removal is essential for emergency
access or emergency works or where
the removal is immediately required in response to an accident or
and pruning vegetation other than a significant landscape tree
for the purpose of maintenance or hazard management,
as long as no
more than 20% of the live foliage volume of a tree or shrub is removed in
any 12-month period and the part
removed is distributed sufficiently evenly over
the whole crown that the
tree or shrub
is not left lop-sided:
Natural Assets Local Law 2003
(Brisbane City
Council) pt 7, s 44 ‘Exempt activities’.
267 See Brisbane City Council,
Page, 24 January 2019) <https://
www.brisbane.qld.gov.au/laws-permits/
laws-permits-residents/protected-vegetation/types-protected-vegetation>.
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
(3). For example, the Act does not override laws such as the
Queensland Heritage Act 1992
(Qld) which protects trees that have
‘particular cultural heritage significance’ or any other Act.
269 Consultation 15 (Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal).
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
Beriley Pty Ltd v Novadeck Pty Ltd
[2017] QCAT 29
Neighbourhood
Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
272 Deputy Premier and Attorney-General, Minister for Local Government and
Special Minister of State (Qld),
Neighbourhood Disputes Resolution Bill 2010
Results of Consultation Process
<https://cabinet.qld.gov.au/monthly.aspx?date=2010-Nov>.
273 Explanatory Notes,
Neighbourhood Dispute Resolution Bill 2010
(Qld) cl 65. In the case of
Inslay v Wilson
[2018] QCAT 79
examined the relevant local Council’s website and could not identify a
council process for resolving a dispute about
a dangerous tree. It was therefore
determined that an Order could be made under the QLD Act.
Regulation of trees on private land
In Tasmania, councils can protect vegetation under their individualised
planning schemes established under the
Land Use Planning and Approvals Act
(Tas), which also controls land use and vegetation.274 The Tasmanian
planning framework is undergoing significant change and now operates
similar way to the planning schemes in New South Wales, Queensland and
Victoria.275 For example, the Tasmanian planning scheme
consists of State
Planning Provisions and Local Provisions Schedules for each municipal
Planning schemes contain standardised codes that can apply to control and
protect trees. The Local Historic Heritage Code enables
local councils to
recognise and protect significant trees so that they are not unnecessarily
destroyed and are managed in a way that
maintains their health, structural
stability and appearance.277 The pruning of a tree
to improve its health or appearance is exempt from a permit application
provided that ‘its normal growth habit is not retarded’.278
Councils may also create local laws, known in Tasmania as by-laws, to protect
Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants Act 2017
Pursuant to
Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants Act 2017
(Tas) (the Tasmanian Act), RMPAT cannot make orders that would be unlawful
under another Act or otherwise limit the operation of another
law requiring a
consent or authorisation to be obtained before work may be carried out on a
The Tasmanian Act includes a number of mechanisms that enable parties to
obtain the relevant consent or authorisation and to notify
other authorities of
an action under the Act:
• At the outset the applicant is required to identify the consent or
approval that would ordinarily be required by a government
body if the type of
order sought was granted by RMPAT.280 The applicant is required to notify any
interested government party that
it is entitled to appear in proceedings.281 The
Act authorises that government body to appear in proceedings if it wishes to do
• In making an order, RMPAT must consider, among other factors, whether
consent or other authorisation would normally be required
under any other
274 Michelle Lensink, ‘Tree Protection Laws in Australian States and
Territories’,
(Web Page, 2017)
<https://treenet.org/resources/
tree-protection-laws-in-australian-states-and-territories/>; Tasmanian
Commission, State Planning Provisions (Web Page)
www.planning.tas.gov.au/planning_our_future/state_planning_provisions
275 See, eg, Department of Justice (Tas),
Tasmanian Planning
Reform—An Overview (Fact Sheet 1, December 2017)
https://www.planningreform.tas.gov.au/
The Land Use Planning and Approvals Amendment (Tasmanian Planning Polices and
Miscellaneous Amendments) Bill 2018 amends the
Land Use Planning and
Approvals Act 1993
(Tas) by establishing a mechanism to make and amend a
suite of Tasmanian Planning Provisions to provide strategic direction on matters
of state interest within Tasmania’s land use planning system. It was
introduced into Parliament on 18 October 2018 and commenced
on 17 December 2018:
Tasmanian Government,
Tasmanian Planning
Reform—The Policies
(Web Page, 17 December 2018) <https://
www.planningreform.tas.gov.au/policies
276 Tasmanian Planning Commission,
State Planning Provision
www.planning.tas.gov.au/planning_our_future/state_
planning_provisions>.
277 A significant tree means a tree that is listed and identified in the
significant trees list in the relevant Local Provisions Schedule:
Planning Scheme—State Planning Provisions
, C6.1.1(b) ‘Local
Historic Heritage Code’, C6.9 ‘Significant trees’
<https://planningreform.tas. gov.au/scheme>.
The Local Provisions Schedule
indicates how State Planning Policies will apply in each local municipal
Tasmanian Planning Scheme—State Planning Provisions,
Table C6.4.1 ‘Exempt development’, C6.9.1
‘Significant Trees’. Works requiring the removal or
tree or which may impact on the health, structural stability or appearance of a
listed tree must demonstrate: (a) that
there are no feasible alternatives
which could be implemented to avoid impacting on the tree and the proposed
methodology of
the works incorporates measures to minimise and mitigate any
damage to the tree; and (b) there are environmental, economic or safety
of greater value to the community than the cultural significance of the tree;
or (c) the tree is determined to be dead or dying based
on a written statement
to that effect prepared by a suitably qualified person.
279 See, eg,
Health and Environmental Services By-law 3 of 2011
(Kingborough Council). Part 7 – Trees on Private Property provides
that a person must not cut down, top, lop, remove, ringbark,
injure or wilfully
destroy any tree which: (a) has a trunk circumference of greater than 80cm at
1.5m or more about ground level,
unless authorised by a permit to do so; or (b)
is listed on a register of significant trees applicable to the municipal area,
authorised by a permit to do so; or (c) is protected under an agreement
Land Use Planning and Approvals Act 1993
or covenant
on the title:
Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants Act 2017
s 23(5)(f).
• Where a planning permit would ordinarily
be required for the works to the tree,
section 33(3)(a)
allows RMPAT to defer
its determination until the application for a planning permit is made or
determined.
Section 33(3)(b)
allows RMPAT to make an order that the applicant can
appeal a decision to grant a planning permit where they might otherwise be out
of time under
section 61(5)
Land Use Planning and Approvals Act 1993
(Tas). This process ensures that RMPAT has the best available information
before it when determining its decision.
• Ultimately, section 33(3)(c) of the Tasmanian Act provides RMPAT with
the power to amend a permit granted under the
Land Use Planning and Approvals
The interaction between the Tasmanian Act and planning scheme permits was
outlined by Minister Hidding in the Second Reading Speech:
Parties who are seeking redress under the bill will be required to obtain the
relevant permit from the planning authority in the first
instance, or if the
permit has not been obtained when the matter comes before the tribunal, the
tribunal may put a stay on proceedings
in order to enable the relevant permit to
be obtained. In this way, the bill retains the current policy settings for
decision-making
under other legislative regimes, including notification and
rights of appeal.284
The application of the Tasmanian Act is in its infancy and at the time of
writing there is no case law about how these specific provisions
interpreted by RMPAT. The Commission is therefore uncertain about how RMPAT
orders may intersect with local tree protection
laws in Tasmania.
The Commission’s
conclusions—interaction of laws
The Commission recommends a straightforward, accessible and timely statutory
scheme to resolve neighbourhood tree disputes. A tree
dispute should not be
revisited by multiple decision makers, and the community should not have to
navigate multiple dispute resolution
frameworks to obtain a decision.
Interaction with other laws should cause minimal disruption to existing legal
processes and established
The Planning and Environment Act
Neighbourhood tree disputes are essentially party–party civil disputes
and generally involve factual interpretation rather than
complex legal
interpretation. Existing laws are underpinned by much broader, more complex
policy considerations.
The Commission’s recommendations therefore only sanction interference
with planning instruments in limited situations and subject
to safeguards. These
are discussed in the following sections.
Tree protection overlays
If a tree on neighbouring land is protected under a planning scheme overlay,
an affected neighbour would be required under planning
law to obtain a permit
from council to remove, destroy or lop the tree. Because the affected neighbour
would not be the owner of
the tree, they would need to persuade their neighbour
to seek a permit or require the owner of land to sign the permit application
form.285 This is likely to be impractical in a situation in which neighbours are
in disagreement. Alternatively, the affected neighbour
would need to declare
that they had notified the owner of the application. There is no need for the
owner of the land to consent
to the application being made.286
284 Tasmania,
Parliamentary Debates, House of Assembly,
4 April 2017,
6 (Rene Hidding).
Planning and Environment Act 1987
; see also Stephen Rowley,
The Victorian Planning System:
Practice, Problems and Prospects
(The Federation Press, 2017) 45.
The question arises as to who would bear the costs
of the planning application and the works to the tree. It would be unfair to
all of this burden on the affected neighbour.
Further, if the council decided not to grant a permit to the affected
neighbour to interfere with a protected tree, this decision
would be reviewable
by VCAT pursuant to the P&E Act.287 Alternatively, if council decided to
grant the permit, the owner of
land may be entitled to object to the grant of
permit and possibly seek review of the decision in VCAT.288 The tree
could potentially be the subject of multiple VCAT applications if
a new Act is implemented.
Requiring affected neighbours to apply for a permit to interfere with
protected trees on neighbouring land would duplicate application
processes and
be burdensome. It would also frustrate the objective of a quick, inexpensive
resolution process for trees disputes.
Even if the affected neighbour is able to obtain a planning permit to
interfere with the tree on adjoining land, the remedies available
provide for ongoing maintenance of the tree or compensation for damage caused by
the tree.289
It makes sense to streamline this process.
The Commission’s conclusions—a new
exemption to the VPPs to cover tree disputes
A more streamlined approach would involve expanding the exemptions in the
Victoria Planning Provisions (VPPs) to cover tree works
ordered by VCAT
under the new Act. This exemption would apply to both the regular permit
process and the VicSmart permit process.
The current table of exemptions in the VPPs is reasonably broad and covers
a wide variety of circumstances to allow the removal
of vegetation to comply
with requirements in other Acts. They include, for example, the removal of
vegetation that presents an immediate
risk of personal injury or damage to
property.290 For the risk to be considered immediate, the only option to manage
the risk must
be to remove the vegetation within a shorter timeframe than it
would take to apply for and be issued with a permit for its
removal. Only that part of vegetation that presents the risk may be removed,
destroyed or lopped.291
Moreover, and as discussed earlier, councils have created additional
exemptions within schedules to overlays, often relaxing the permit
requirement
for the pruning of a tree. This is consistent with recommendations made in the
Cutting Red Tape in Planning report to
‘rewrite overlays so that only
matters linked to the purpose of the control need planning approval’,
citing ‘tree
pruning’ as a matter that could benefit from full or
partial removal.292
Expanding the exemptions in the VPPs would mean that an affected neighbour
would not need to obtain a permit under the P&E Act,
prior to applying to
VCAT for a remedy under the new Act if the jurisdictional requirements of the
new Act are satisfied. See Chapter
The suggested amendment to the existing VPP exemption would not lead to major
changes in policy or produce a different or new land
use or development outcome,
Planning and Environment Act 1987
289 Remedies under the proposed Act are considered in Ch 9.
290 See, eg, Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
Victoria Planning Provisions
(11 April 2019) cl 42.01-3, 42.02-3,
42.03-3, 43.01-1, 52.17-7. See also Department of Environment, Land, Water and
Planning (Vic),
Exemptions from Requiring a Planning Permit to Remove,
Destroy or Lop Native Vegetation
(Guidance Document, December 2017).
291 See, eg, Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
Exemptions from Requiring a Planning Permit to Remove, Destroy or Lop Native
(Guidance Document, December 2017)10. In comparison, a shorter
timeframe for the regular permit process is less than 60 days. A shorter
timeframe for the VicSmart permit process is less than 10 days.
292 Department of Sustainability and Environment,
Cutting Red Tape In
Planning—15 Recommendations For a Better Victorian Planning System
(Report, August 2006) 16–17.
• Protected vegetation will only be interfered with on the basis of
damage caused or damage or harm likely to be caused within
the next 12 months as
determined by a suitably qualified arborist and when ordered by VCAT. Leaf
litter and maintenance issues as
well as concerns about perceived risks posed by
a tree will not fall within the scope of the new Act.
• Decisions to interfere with protected vegetation will be based on
comprehensive decision-making principles in the new Act
that take into account
broader planning policy objectives.
Further, because the proposed change is based on exemption to the VPPs, the
broader notification requirements that apply to permits
under the P&E Act
would not apply. Instead, it would only be necessary to notify the parties to
the dispute and any other party
specified in the new Act. In addition, most tree
disputes would invoke the VicSmart permit process, designed to streamline
straightforward
and low-impact planning permit applications where only one tree
is involved. Under this process, there are no notification requirements
providing third parties with an opportunity to object to or to seek review of
the decision made and decisions are made at the officer
level in Council. It is
therefore envisioned that the new Act will not commonly remove any review rights
that would otherwise be
available to third parties under the P&E Act.
The Commission acknowledges VCAT’s concerns about a new Act not being
able to account fully for the complex, broader issues
that come into play under
the P&E Act. However, some of the issues underpinning neighbourhood tree
disputes do intersect with
planning and environment law. For example, a
tree’s contribution to amenity and other broader environmental benefits
are important
considerations in the context of private tree disputes. Other
considerations, including whether the tree was first in time and landscaping
plan requirements, may also be relevant.
The Commission is persuaded by community responses that overwhelmingly favour
a clear and simple legislative pathway for the resolution
of neighbourhood tree
disputes. As one community member explained: ‘there should be a single,
clear Act that sets out neighbours’
rights and duties and explains where
to go for information and support’.293
The Commission acknowledges that expanding the VPP exemptions is not a
straightforward process. An amendment should not seek to change
the planning
scheme in a manner that conflicts with the State Policy Planning Framework.294
The Minister295 can prepare an amendment
to a VPP at any time and this may
involve a small change
to one provision, or major changes or additions.296 The VPP amendment process
has similar requirements to those outlined for the amendment
of planning
schemes.297 Strict notification requirements apply.298 However, there are
exemptions to the notice and advertising requirements
if the Minister considers
that they are not warranted, or that the interests of Victoria or any part of
Victoria make such an exemption
appropriate.299
293 Consultation 1 (Aldo Taranto).
294 Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
Victoria’s Planning System
(Guide, 28 May 2015) [2.3.3]
www.planning.vic.gov.au/guide-home/using-victorias-planning-system
295 The Minister may authorise any other Minister or any public authority or
municipal council to prepare an amendment to the Victoria
Planning Provisions:
Planning and Environment Act 1987
Planning and Environment Act 1987
Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
Victoria’s Planning System
(Guide, 28 May 2015) [2.15] <
www.planning.vic.gov.au/guide-home/using-victorias-planning-system
Planning and Environment Act 1987
, (4). Unlike
planning scheme amendments, the Minister or the body or person authorised to
prepare the amendment can receive and consider
submissions which seek a change
to the terms of a state standard provision. The change may be made or the
submissions may be referred
to a panel for consideration. The panel can
recommend that an amendment be adopted with changes to the terms of the VPP: see
of Environment Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
Victoria’s Planning System (Guide,
28 May 2015) [2.15.1] <
www.planning.vic.gov.au/guide-home/using-victorias-planning-system
Planning and Environment Act 1987
ss 17(1)(a)
If an amendment is approved, notice of the approval must be published in the
Government Gazette.300 The amendment comes into operation
when the notice is
published in the Gazette, or on any later day or days specified in the
notice.301 An amendment to provisions of
a VPP can also amend specified planning
schemes that include those provisions. When the amendment to the VPP is
approved, the amendment
to the planning scheme is also approved.302
On balance the Commission is persuaded that broadening the exemption in the
VPPs will lead to a streamlined approach that will be
easier for parties to
navigate. The Commission recommends safeguards to ensure that the broader
policy considerations raised
by VCAT are considered where relevant by the
decision maker under the new Act.
The Commission recommends that safeguards should apply, namely:
• The affected neighbour should provide information in the application
form detailing any application of planning scheme overlays
or other applicable
provisions. This recommendation is discussed in Chapter 5.
• The relevant responsible authority should be notified of applications
and invited to participate in tree dispute hearings.
• VCAT should consider factors that the responsible authority would
have been required to take into account, such as the relevant
planning scheme,
the objectives of planning in Victoria and any decisions or comments by the
responsible authority.303
These safeguards are similar to those in the NSW Act. They aim to ensure
the broader policy considerations behind planning laws
are considered in the
decision-making process for tree disputes. The relevant authority’s views
will be heard in the decision-making
process, and the factors which that
authority would have considered under existing laws will be taken into account
when an order
Bushfire overlays
The new Act should not interfere with bushfire policies and provisions in
Victorian planning schemes, which are comprehensive and
intended to protect
human life. If a person is concerned about the bushfire risk posed by a tree on
neighbouring property, they should
use existing legislative measures to address
those concerns.
Native vegetation particular provisions
An order made under a new Act is unlikely to impact upon existing native
vegetation particular provisions due to the permit exemptions
that currently
apply for those provisions. A permit is not required for:
• sites of less than 0.4 hectares
• the pruning or lopping of trees for maintenance, provided no more
than 1/3 of the foliage is removed
• removing, destroying or lopping native vegetation in an emergency or
where it presents an immediate risk of personal injury
or damage to property
• the construction or maintenance of a fence.304
Planning and Environment Act 1987
303 See, eg,
Planning and Environment Act 1987
304 Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
Planning Provisions
(11 April 2019), cl 52.17-7.
However, there may be circumstances where the existing permit exemptions do
not apply.305 For this reason, the Commission recommends
that the general
exemption recommended for overlays where an order is made under the new Act,
also apply to native vegetation particular
provisions. Where this occurs, the
decision maker should have regard to the assessment pathways detailed in the
Guidelines for the
Removal, Destruction or Lopping of Native Vegetation.306
Recommendations
39 The Commission recommends exemptions in the Victoria Planning Provisions
be expanded to enable an order made under the Act to have
effect despite any
requirement to obtain a permit in a Victorian Planning Scheme to remove, lop or
destroy vegetation under a:
(a) Significant Landscape Overlay
(b) Environmental Significance Overlay
(c) Vegetation Protection Overlay
(d) Heritage Overlay
(e) Native Vegetation Particular Provision.
40 Where an exemption referred to in Recommendation 39 applies, the following
safeguards should apply:
(a) the relevant responsible authority must be notified of the application
and invited to participate in hearings
(b) the Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal must consider the factors
that the responsible authority would have been required
to consider in
determining a matter under the
Planning and Environment Act 1987
i. the objectives of planning in Victoria
ii. the provisions of the relevant planning scheme that apply to the land the
subject of the application, including decision-making
guidelines in planning
iii. information provided by the responsible authority.
305 For example, the permit exemptions may not apply to the removal of a
large tree protected on a lot size of 0.4 hectares or more
306 See Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
Guidelines for the Removal, Destruction or Lopping of Native Vegetation
(Practice Document, December 2017) 18–23. This document is
incorporated into all planning schemes pursuant to s 6(2)(j) of the
Act: See Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
Planning Provisions
(11 April 2019), cl 72.04 ‘Documents Incorporated
in This Planning Scheme’.
The Commission’s
conclusions—further consideration of trees planted or maintained as a
condition of existing planning
In recognition of the benefits of retaining trees, councils are increasingly
incorporating endorsed landscape plans into planning
permits.307 This means that
it may become more common for trees to be planted and maintained as a
requirement of planning permits.
These permit requirements may operate to
facilitate the resolution of tree disputes, for example by compelling a
landowner to comply
with landscaping maintenance conditions. Alternatively, they
may limit the ability of an affected neighbour to obtain a remedy if
amendment to an existing permit is needed.
Enforcing permit conditions
Section 114 of the P&E Act enables VCAT to issue an ‘enforcement
order’ on the application of any person if a use
or development of land
contravenes or has contravened, or unless prevented by the enforcement order,
will contravene:
• the P&E Act
• a planning scheme
• a condition of a permit, or
• an agreement made under section 173.
Parties can pursue the enforcement of planning permit conditions through the
relevant authority and, if need be, under the P&E
Act at VCAT
disputes about landscape plans may be able to be resolved through the local
council if they are solely about a tree owner not
properly maintaining a tree
where a landscaping plan requires them to do so.
Section 49 of the P&E Act requires the responsible authority to keep a
register ‘of all applications for permits and all
decisions and
determinations relating to permits’ and this register must be made
available to any member of the public to inspect
free of charge. Affected
neighbours would therefore be able to confirm with their local council whether
an endorsed landscaping
plan applies to the tree in dispute.
In situations where the affected neighbour is unaware of the permit and
therefore unable to provide VCAT with this information
in their application
form (see Chapter 5), it is likely that this will be brought to VCAT’s
attention by the tree owner.
For example, QCAT advised that trees
planted as a condition of development are almost always brought to the
attention of
the Tribunal by the tree owner as a factor in their favour.308
Amending permit conditions
To resolve a tree dispute an affected neighbour may need an existing planning
permit amended. This may arise, for example, where the
affected neighbour seeks
• remove a tree that was required to be planted pursuant to a planning
permit condition
• vary vegetation maintenance conditions so that a tree is pruned more
• replace an existing tree with a different variety of tree that is
more suited to the nature or use of the land.
As discussed earlier it is very difficult for a third party to amend an
existing planning permit under the P&E Act.
307 See, eg, City of Stonnington,
New Tree Protection Process
Page, 14 June 2018) <
https://www.stonnington.vic.gov.au/Development/
Planning/Planning-News/New-Tree-Protection-Process
>; City of Whitehorse,
Whitehorse Landscape Guidelines: How to Prepare A Landscape Plan (July 2012) 7;
City of Boroondara,
Landscape Plan Guidelines
(Web Page, 2019)
www.boroondara.vic.gov.au/
planning-building/planning-permit-applications/landscape-plan-guidelines>.
308 Consultation 15 (Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal).
In contrast to the recommendation above to expand the VPP exemptions for
permits not yet granted, the position in relation to existing
permits is much
more complex. The P&E Act provides very little recourse for third parties
who are not permit holders to
amend or vary a permit. Affected neighbours who
were not entitled to object to the permit
application, for example neighbours who moved next to the development site
months or years after the development, would not be able
to apply to VCAT to
amend or cancel the permit. Even if affected neighbours did object to the permit
or would have been entitled
to object, there are many other hurdles for these
individuals to overcome prior to having a permit amended pursuant to the P&E
In addition, the P&E Act provides that the responsible authority may be
required to pay compensation for wasted expenditure as
a result of a permit
amendment.309
The Commission concludes that because of the complex policy considerations
involved, further consultation is needed on this issue.
It would not be
appropriate to provide VCAT with the power to amend an existing planning permit
without Government further consulting
with VCAT, the Department of Environment,
Land, Water and Planning and Victorian councils on this issue.
The Queensland Act does not apply to trees planted or maintained as a
condition of development approval.310 The Second Reading
introducing this Act explained the aim of this approach was to ensure that
‘developers do not use the provisions
of this legislation to escape the
responsibilities that might be imposed upon them in terms of
vegetation or other issues as part of that development approval’.311The
Commission raises this as a further policy issue that
needs to be addressed in
this context.
In New South Wales orders have effect despite ‘any requirement that
would otherwise apply for a consent or authorisation in
relation to the tree
concerned to be obtained under the
Environmental Planning and Assessment Act
(NSW)’.312 This is a more straightforward approach. However,
because of the complexity of existing planning provisions in Victoria
aim to cause minimal disruption to existing laws, the Commission considers that
the NSW approach would require extensive
consultation by Government.
Further considerations for Government
The Commission has considered some further issues that may arise if the new
Act allows existing planning permits to be amended. These
• Payment of compensation
• Protecting the intent of a landscaping plan
It may not be appropriate for the responsible authority to be required to pay
compensation as is possible under the P&E Act313
for any wasted expenditure
as a result of the permit amendment. These provisions mainly apply in situations
where serious consequences
flow from the amendment of a permit, for example an
amendment to delete three levels from a proposed apartment building.314
The Commission envisages that most permit amendments would require tree
maintenance rather than removal, resulting in no net loss
of expenditure on the
planting and maintenance of the tree as part of the endorsed landscaping plan.
The Commission further notes
that the ‘proximate effect’ of section
94 of the P&E Act is for responsible
Planning and Environment Act 1987
(Vic) s 94.These provisions
mainly apply in situations where serious consequences flow from the amendment of
a permit, for example
an amendment to delete three levels from a proposed
apartment building: see, eg, The Secretary to the
Department of Health and
Human Services v Melbourne
[2017] VCAT 2139.
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and
s 42(4)(c).
311 Queensland,
Parliamentary Debates,
2 August 2011, 3204
Trees (Disputes Between Neighbours) Act 2006
Planning and Environment Act 1987
314 See, eg,
The Secretary to the Department of Health and Human Services
v Melbourne CC
[2017] VCAT 2139.
authorities to pay compensation only ‘in
some circumstances’ when they have made an error in granting the
permit’.315
Safeguards may be necessary to ensure that the policy objectives of the
P&E Act are considered and to also make sure that developers
of land do not
use the new Act to remove or destroy vegetation that is planted and maintained
as part of an endorsed landscaping
plan—for example, through contrived
applications under the new Act where no genuine dispute exists.
The following safeguards may be appropriate:
• all relevant parties should be invited to appear at the tree dispute
hearing in accordance with section 90(1) of the P&E
• the planning scheme, planning permit and objectives of planning in
Victoria should be taken into account as part of the decision-making
process—for example to what extent did the permit holder comply with the
conditions to plant and maintain the species of tree
required by the responsible
authority in the endorsed landscape plan316
• tree removal or destruction will only be ordered as a last resort, if
no lesser impact on the tree would be sufficient.
The Commission’s conclusions—further
consideration of Section 173 agreements
It is difficult to amend or cancel a section 173 agreement. Legislative
amendments in 2013 attempted to address this difficulty by
introducing a process
for amending or removing agreements where the amendment or removal has the
support of council.317 However,
these changes do not assist where council does
not support the amendment or removal of the agreement.
The Commission does not recommend that the new Act interfere with section 173
agreements because these agreements are unable to be
reviewed by VCAT without
the approval of the relevant council.
Section 173 agreements are also complex. Agreements are made between council,
landowners and in some cases third parties such as referral
authorities.
Neighbours on adjoining lots of land are not parties to these agreements and
they do not have the ability to interfere
with the protected vegetation.
Moreover, the agreements appear on land title certificates and bind any future
owner/s of land.
A template agreement recommended for use by councils pursuant to section 173
of the P&E Act enables a landowner to remove, destroy
or lop native
vegetation to the minimum extent necessary to mitigate an immediate risk of
personal injury or damage to property.318
While this clause may not provide a
remedy for an affected neighbour, it
does enable tree owners to prune or remove vegetation that does pose an
imminent risk to people or property.
Affected neighbours may have some recourse under section 114 of the P&E
Act if land is not maintained pursuant to any of the conditions
section 173 agreements, discussed above.
315 See Stephen Rowley,
The Victorian Planning System: Practice, Problems
and Prospects
(The Federation Press, 2017) 151; Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal,
Planning and Environment List Guidelines for
Cancellation & Amendment of Permits
(Sections 87 & 89
Planning and
Environment Act 1987
) (Practice Document, 20 July 2016) 4–5 <https://
www.vcat.vic.gov.au/get-started/planning-and-environment/apply-
to-cancel-or-amend-a-permit>.
Planning and Environment Act 1987
Planning and Environment Amendment (General) Act 2013
318 Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
Section 173
Planning and Environment Act 1987
10.1.1(c) <https://
www.environment.vic.gov.au/__data/assets/word_doc/0025/329461/Final-S.173-Template-Offset-Agreement.do
cx+&cd=1&hl=en&ct=clnk&gl=au>.
Given the complex nature of these agreements,
Government should consider further consultation with councils about how these
operate and the way they would interact with the new Act.
The Commission’s conclusions—local tree
protection laws
Final decisions made under local laws are not reviewable in VCAT. Further
complicating this scenario is the likelihood that the affected
neighbour will be
unable to apply for a permit under local laws because they often allow only the
owner of a tree to apply for a
permit or require the owner’s written
consent to be submitted with the application.319
In the Commission’s view, this outcome would be unsatisfactory and
would limit the ability of a new Act to resolve a large number
of neighbourhood
tree disputes. As well as being impractical in many situations, requiring an
affected neighbour to obtain an
additional permit would add unnecessary costs and increase the administrative
burden on applicants.
Local laws can be overridden in Queensland. In New South Wales vegetation in
urban areas is protected under planning legislation and
relevant council
policies rather than local laws. However, the Commission is of the view that the
interaction of the NSW Act with
these lower level planning instruments is a good
guide for the new Act. The NSWLEC advised:
Where local council’s authority or a permit would ordinarily be needed,
the Court will look to the factors that the local council
would ordinarily take
into account. The Court may also consider whether or not the permit was refused
by local council where a prior
application was made.320
The Commission notes that the NSWLEC gives significant weight to tree
preservation orders and relevant council polices in the decision-making
process.321 For example, in the case of
Haindl v Daisch
322 the relevant
council submitted information to the Court,
including applications that had been previously made under the
council’s tree preservation order. The material was referred
discussed by the Court. In particular, the Court focused on the council’s
policy of not permitting the removal of trees
in the particular circumstances of
the case. This policy was given significant weight in the decision-making
process even though
the Court decided that the removal of the trees would not be
appropriate for a range of other reasons.
An appropriate balance could be achieved by adopting the approach taken by
the NSWLEC in relation to the planning policies of local
councils. This approach
would enable a decision-making body to override local laws cautiously and on a
case-by-case basis through
adoption of the following safeguards:
• affording ‘significant weight’ to local laws and policies
in place to protect vegetation
• notifying local councils of applications made
• enabling local council to appear at tree dispute hearings.
This approach is appropriate given the nature of local laws: decisions are
generally made at the council officer level, there are
no appeal rights and no
advertising requirements under local laws. It would also respond to council
concerns that the interaction
of laws not limit its decision-making authority by
involving them in the process if they so wished. The approach is generally
with the submissions received in relation to this inquiry.
In Chapter 5 it was recommended that the
initiating VCAT application form should require an applicant to provide
information about
any requirements affecting the management
of the tree under other laws, including local laws. This will assist VCAT to
identify issues involving local laws early.
The Commission’s conclusions—the
Heritage Act
It is rare for the
Heritage Act
to protect individual trees on private land
within Victoria. However, trees that form part of the significance of a heritage
are more commonly listed on the Heritage Register. For proposed
maintenance works to registered trees, Heritage Victoria will generally
permit exemption.323
For example, a permit exemption may be issued for the removal of dead,
diseased or dangerous trees. An arborist report must be submitted
verifying the
condition of the tree, unless considered inappropriate by the Executive
Director.324 Heritage Victoria stated that
‘the bulk of tree removals and
planting are done by way of permit exemptions’.325 The key consideration
is that the
proposed works will not harm the cultural significance of the place
or object.326
A tree owner must make a formal application seeking a permit exemption.
Section 92(3) of the
Heritage Act
only allows only an owner to apply for a
permit exemption or another individual who has obtained the owner’s
written consent
of the owner. Therefore, an affected neighbour would not be able
to apply for a permit exemption to undertake works to a heritage-
listed tree on
adjoining land.
Heritage-listed trees have been assessed by the Heritage Council as of
importance to the history of Victoria.327 In these circumstances
it would not be
appropriate for a new Act to interfere with heritage-listed trees, except in
emergency situations.
If there is an emergency situation and the tree poses a danger to life or
property, the new Act should provide a remedy to an affected
neighbour where the
tree is declared dangerous by VCAT. If the new Act does not operate in this way
the affected neighbour cannot
remedy the situation or resolve the dispute.
323 Consultation 16 (Heritage Victoria); Permit exemptions are generally
issued by the Executive Director of Heritage Victoria:
Heritage Act 2017
section 102
for the granting of permits.
324 Heritage Victoria,
Policy Guideline for Heritage Permit Exemptions:
Matters to be Considered in Determining Permit Exemptions under
Heritage Act 2017
(Practice Document, 7 September 2017).
325 Consultation 16 (Heritage Victoria).
326 ‘The Heritage Council or the Executive Director must not make a
determination in relation to any works or activities
if they consider
the works or activities may harm the cultural heritage significance of the
registered place or registered object.’:
Heritage Act 2017
327 Heritage Council Victoria,
The Victorian Heritage Register
<https://heritagecouncil.vic.gov.au/heritage-protection/levels-of-
protection/>.
Heritage Act
is limited by an emergency order under the
Building Act
(Vic) relating to the securing, pulling down or removal of dangerous
buildings if a municipal building surveyor is of the opinion
that the order is
necessary because of a danger to life or property.328
Heritage Act
should be expanded to encompass circumstances where an emergency
order is made under the new Act to remove a dangerous tree/s where
decided that there is an imminent danger to life or
property. An arborist’s assessment should be obtained in these
circumstances to properly assess risk. However, this would ultimately
decision for VCAT.
The Commission recommends that safeguards should apply to enable Heritage
Victoria, and the National Trust of Australia (Victoria),329
to participate in
tree dispute hearings. The application form should also seek information about
whether Heritage laws might apply
to the management of the tree. See Chapter
Where a decision is made to interfere with a tree for which authorisation
would ordinarily be required by Heritage Victoria, the
Commission recommends
that the VCAT decision maker consider the factors that Heritage Victoria
would be required to consider under
Heritage Act
. Further, where a
heritage-listed tree is removed, it recommends that the decision maker consider
requiring a replacement tree to
be planted as occurs in Heritage Victoria
decision-making process.330
Heritage Act 2017
Building Act 1993
329 Although the National Trust Register is not legally binding, many of the
trees in the National Trust Register are reflected in
the Heritage Victoria
Register: Consultation 16 (Heritage Victoria).
330 Consultation 16 (Heritage Victoria).
The Commission’s
conclusions—the Aboriginal Heritage Act
Aboriginal Heritage Act
a person does not commit an offence if
is the result of doing an act that is necessary because of an
emergency’.331 This provides some scope for an affected neighbour
interfere with a scarred tree in the case of an emergency.
If the situation is not an emergency and an affected neighbour is seeking to
carry out works to a scarred tree on adjoining land,
they can apply for an
Aboriginal heritage permit because these applications are not restricted to the
owner of the land.332 This
is because one of the key principles underpinning the
Aboriginal Heritage Act
recognises that as far as practicable Aboriginal
Cultural Heritage should be owned by traditional owners.333
This means that there is sufficient scope in the
Aboriginal Heritage Act
allow an affected neighbour to apply for a permit to carry out works to a
protected tree. For these reasons, a new Tree Disputes
Act should not amend
Aboriginal Heritage Act
and decisions about works to trees protected under
Aboriginal Heritage Act
should continue to be determined by Registered
Aboriginal Parties or Aboriginal Victoria.
If an affected neighbour seeks a remedy under a new Act that impacts on a
tree that is of Aboriginal cultural significance, this should
be identified in
the VCAT application form. See Chapter 5.
The Commission’s conclusions—the Fences
If a tree is found to be causing damage or likely to cause damage to a fence,
VCAT should have jurisdiction to make orders in relation
to both the tree and
This is the approach taken in New South Wales. The NSWLEC informed the
Commission that allowing the Court to determine tree disputes
involving fences
is ‘working well’ and is generally ‘very
straightforward’.334
The NSWLEC has jurisdiction under the NSW Act to hear matters and make
orders under the
Dividing Fences Act 1991
Section 13A
Dividing Fences
gives jurisdiction to the NSWLEC to hear and
determine matters arising under that Act if:
• the application for the exercise of the jurisdiction is made in
relation to proceedings under
Trees (Disputes Between
Neighbours) Act 2006
that have been commenced but not determined, and
• the tree that is the subject of those proceedings:
- has caused, is causing, or is likely in the near future to cause damage to
a dividing fence, or
- is part of a dividing fence and has caused, is causing, or is likely in the
near future to cause damage to the applicant’s
property or is likely to
cause injury to any person.
QCAT has jurisdiction to hear neighbourhood disputes about trees and dividing
fences with reference to a single Act.335 In Tasmania,
the provisions of the Act
will apply if trees are causing or are likely to cause serious damage to a
Aboriginal Heritage Act 2006
s 12(1)(a).
334 Consultation 11 (Land and Environment Court of New South Wales). The
Court acknowledged that some fence matters can be complicated
and require
different expertise. The Court can make orders that require parties to obtain
further evidence where it is needed.
335 See, eg,
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants 2017
Where a tree has caused damage to a fence or a
tree is part of a fence that has caused, is causing or is likely to cause
to property or harm to any person, it would be prudent for orders to be
made in relation to the tree and the damaged fence at the
The Commission’s conclusions—noxious
It has been suggested to the Commission that noxious weeds should be
excluded from the scope of a proposed Act.337 However,
most community responses
are supportive of a broad definition of vegetation, including environmental
Noxious weeds can cause disputes between neighbours for which a remedy under
a proposed Act may be appropriate.339 Baw Baw Shire Council
‘environmental weeds can become an issue’.340 Arborist Robert Mineo
suggested that a new scheme should not
discriminate between tree species. For
example, a common weed tree, the pittosporum, is viewed as a valuable tree by
some individuals
despite its categorisation as a weed.341
All interstate Acts encompass noxious weeds where the jurisdictional tests
are otherwise met—that is, the weed has caused, is
causing, or is likely
in the near future to cause damage to the applicant’s property or is
likely to cause harm to any
person. The NSWLEC held that the NSW Act does not
specify particular species of plants, and the jurisdiction of the Court may be
engaged whether the plant is or is not a declared weed.342
In the Queensland case of
Sowden v Winzar
,343 QCAT heard a tree
dispute concerning a tree of a species defined as a weed. However, the only
basis for the application to remove
the tree was its status as a weed. The
Tribunal held:
The fact that the umbrella tree is a weed species is the only basis for its
removal. There is no evidence that the tree is posing
a threat of serious
injury to person or property. There is no evidence to suggest that it is causing
substantial, ongoing or unreasonable
interference with Mr Sowden’s land.
Therefore, there is no reason to make an order about the umbrella tree.344
337 Submissions 2 (Name withheld), 27 (Name withheld).
338 Submissions 6 (Name withheld), 7 (Ben Kenyon), 9 (Dr Karen Smith), 23
(Name withheld), 21 (Pointon Partners Lawyers); Consultations
Boroondara), 10 (Baw Baw Shire Council), 14 (Robert Mineo).
339 Consultation 10 (Baw Baw Shire Council).
341 Consultation 14 (Robert Mineo).
342 See, eg,
Sultana v Micallef
[2012] NSWLEC 1078.
[2014] QCAT
Sowden v Winzar
[2014] QCAT 68
The new Act should apply to noxious weeds if the
weed has caused, is causing or is likely to cause damage to property or harm
individuals. Excluding noxious weeds from the definition of vegetation would
unnecessarily prevent a number of tree disputes
from being resolved under a
new statutory scheme.
Whether a tree is a declared weed is something that VCAT should consider as
part of the decision-making process under a proposed new
Act. This would enable
the VCAT member to turn their mind to any past actions taken by the landowner
with respect to
the weed, for example whether or not the landowner was issued with a
directions notice and failed to comply with this notice.
Vegetation declared as a noxious weed345 is exempt from the permit
requirements to remove, destroy or lop vegetation pursuant to most
of the tree
protection overlays under the P&E Act, namely the Significant Landscape
Overlay, Environmental Significance
Overlay and Vegetation Protection
Overlay.346 There is also an exemption to remove, destroy or lop weeds listed
in a schedule to
the native vegetation particular provision but this is limited
to 15 native trees347 over a five-year period.348
The Commission’s conclusions—the
Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act
Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999
(Cth) (the EPBC Act) is a Commonwealth Act. Therefore, the new Act cannot
override it and will be invalid to the extent that is inconsistent
with it. If
tree works are likely to have a significant impact on a matter of National
Environmental Significance or other protected
matter then the tree dispute
hearing should be vacated and the applicant should work through the Commonwealth
assessment and approval
process under the EPBC Act.
Even if an exemption currently applies under a VPP and the EPBC Act is
triggered, consent would still need to be sought from the Commonwealth
Government.349
The Commission’s conclusions—further
consultation required on some other Acts
Victorian Conservation Trust Act 1972
The current wording of conservation covenants requires landowners who are
subject to these agreements to comply with existing requirements
under other
Acts and laws. This suggests that tree owners would need to comply with orders
made under the new Act.
However, the Commission cautions that this may differ for older existing
conservation covenants and the specific provisions of each
covenant would need
to be considered.
Catchment and Land Protection Act 1994
exemption does not apply to Australian Dodder (Cuscuta australis).
346 Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
Planning Provisions
(11 April 2019), cl 42.01-3, 42.02-3, 42.03-3.
347 These trees must have a trunk diameter of less than 20 centimetres at a
height of 1.3 metres above ground level. 348 Ibid,
cl 52.17-7.
349 Supplementary Consultation 1 (Victorian Civil and Administrative
Tribunal); see also Stephen Rowley,
The Victorian Planning System: Practice,
Problems and Prospects
(The Federation Press, 2017) 238.
Given the unique, varied and complex nature of conservation covenants
Government should consult more broadly with the Trust for Nature
landowners subject to these agreements to determine the practical effect of
these covenants and the extent to which they
may intersect with the resolution
of neighbourhood tree disputes under the new Act. It may be necessary to
consider whether the Trust
would need to be notified of any proceedings under
the new Act involving land that is subject to a Trust for Nature Covenant.
Conservation, Forests and Lands Act 1987
Land management co-operative agreements made pursuant to
Conservation, Forests and Lands Act 1987
(Vic) (the CFL Act) are complex
vegetation conservation and protection management arrangements that require
landowners to protect
and conserve land. They do so by enabling the government
to pay landowners to carry out land management and conservation activities.
Agreements vary in nature depending on the environmental matters that are
At this stage the Commission does not think it would be appropriate for the
new Act to limit the operation of section 69 agreements
under the CFL Act. This
is in keeping with the Commission’s approach to Trust for Nature Covenants
and section 173 agreements
under the P&E Act.
The Commission is of the view that the Government should also undertake
further consultation with the Department of Environment, Land,
Planning and landowners subject to land management cooperative agreements to
determine whether and to what extent these
agreements may intersect with the
operation of the new Act.
New owners of land
Introduction
New South Wales
Community responses—new owners of
The Commission’s conclusions—new
owners of land
New owners of
land and neighbourhood tree disputes
Introduction
11.1 Tree disputes and associated issues can continue after the sale of the
land of the tree owner or the affected neighbour. Acts
in New South Wales,
Queensland and Tasmania set out the legal position when land that is the
subject of a tree dispute is
sold. They shift the responsibility and benefits of
tree dispute orders to new owners. The way that this is done differs in each
11.2 This chapter describes key elements of the interstate Acts. It then
considers community responses to the questions posed in the
consultation paper.
It concludes with recommendations about how rights and obligations that arise in
pre-existing disputes should
apply where land is bought and sold; and concludes
that a searchable database of orders is not required in Victoria.
New South Wales
Affected neighbour must inform new tree
11.3 In New
South Wales a new tree owner will be
bound by pre-existing orders after title to the land has passed to them,
provided that the
affected neighbour (applicant) gave them a copy of the
11.4 The Lan
d and Environment Court of New South
Wales (the Court) provides the affected neighbour with information about how to
notify new tree
owners of orders. Copies of orders are sent to the affected
neighbour ‘with a standard letter advising the applicant of the
... and, as a consequence, the steps that the [affected neighbour] must take to
ensure that the orders remain in force
if the tree owner sells the property on
which the tree is located’.2
11.5 The NSW Act does not state whether the affected neighbour is required to
give the new tree owner a copy of the order before transfer
of land (or
settlement) occurs.3 Any timelines in the orders re-commence when a copy of the
order is given to the new tree owner.4
Trees (Disputes Between Neighbours) Act 2006
2 Land and Environment Court of New South Wales,
Trees (Disputes
Between Neighbours) Act 2006
(January 2013) 39.
Trees (Disputes Between Neighbours) Act 2006
Trees (Disputes Between Neighbours) Act 2006
orders for any payments of compensation may remain with the original tree owner.
Joaquim v Adamson
[2009] NSWLEC 1312
in which Senior
Commissioner Moore and Acting Commissioner Fakes stated: “The orders
concerning direct payment of monies by
the respondents to the applicants as
compensation for damage to the applicants’ property will continue to bind
the respondents
notwithstanding the sale of their property” [108].
How are purchasers informed?
11.6 One way that the New South Wales Act seeks to inform purchasers of land
which can be
inspected by purchasers during the sale of land process.5 The
Environmental
Planning and Assessment Regulations 2000
(NSW) require planning certificates
to state whether an order has been made under the NSW Act but only where the
local council has
been notified.6 This is likely to occur because the NSW Act
states that the Court must provide a copy of an order to ‘the council
the local government area in which the tree is situated’.7 The 2009
statutory review of the NSW Act found this to be an
‘appropriate safeguard
for potential buyers of the property’.8
11.7 The NSW Act does not provide penalties for failure to provide notice to
purchasers about the existence of litigation or orders.9
Sale of affected neighbour’s land
11.8 If the affected neighbour’s land is sold the new affected
neighbour is entitled to the same benefits under the orders.10
This benefit only
extends to the immediate successor in title. Orders for ongoing maintenance can
last for the total duration of
the new affected neighbours’ ownership but
typically they are for a period of 12–18 months.11
Change of ownership during tree dispute hearing
11.9 If a Court matter is still in progress when the land is sold, then the
Court may make orders that take the change of ownership
into account, such as
requiring the original tree owner ‘to advise the new owners of the need to
provide any necessary access
for the purpose of quoting and undertaking the
Joinder of parties
11.10 If a property has changed ownership over the period which the damage is
said to have occurred, an applicant may make an application
against the current
owner/s but the former owner/s may be joined in the proceedings.13
Tree owner must inform new tree owners
11.11 The relevant provisions of the Queensland Act apply to land on which a
tree the subject of an application or order is situated
(the tree owner’s
land).14 Therefore, the Queensland Act places an onus on the tree owner to
ensure that the purchaser of their
land is notified of an application or orders
before they enter into a contract of sale.15 This shifts the burden of carrying
any orders onto the new tree owner once transfer of land occurs.16
Environmental Planning and Assessment Act 1979
Environmental Planning and Assessment Regulation 2000
(NSW) sch 4,
Trees (Disputes Between Neighbours) Act 2006
8 Department of Justice and Attorney General (NSW),
Review of the
(Disputes Between Neighbours) Act 2006
(NSW) (Report, 2009) 22.
9 See generally,
Trees (Disputes Between Neighbours) Act 2006
Trees (Disputes Between Neighbours) Act 2006
11 Consultation 11 (Land and Environment Court of New South Wales).
12 See, eg,
Kennedy v Hayes
[2014] NSWLEC 1114
Smith & Hannaford v Zhang & Zhou
[2011] NSWLEC 29
Cincotta v Huang
[2011] NSWLEC 1086
cited in Land and Environment Court
of New South Wales,
Annotated Trees Act January 2013
(1 September 2016)
9. The Court may join a party if the joinder is proper or necessary: see, eg,
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005
(NSW) reg 6.24.
14 The provisions of
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences
and Trees) Act 2011
(Qld) refer to the sale of ‘land affected by an
application or order’ which ‘means land on which a tree the subject
of an application or order is situated’:
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
The Seller’s disclosure obligation under s 83 of the Act is
contained in REIQ Contracts: Queensland Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
(Report No 72,
2015) [3.585].
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
Consultation 15 (Queensland and Civil Administrative Tribunal).
11.12 When a purchaser is given a copy of the
application and then enters into a contract of sale, they are joined as a party
QCAT proceeding.17 QCAT suggested that joinder does not happen
automatically on entry into a contract of sale; the purchaser must
be first put
on notice.18
11.13 Any period of time mentioned in the orders for carrying out the
required work begins from the date of the transfer of land.19
Any ongoing
maintenance orders lapse after 10 years.20
11.14 The Queensland Act does not state what happens if the affected
neighbour sells their land.
Failure to provide notice
11.15 A tree owner who fails to give copies of the application or orders to a
purchaser before they enter into a contract of sale
can incur a maximum penalty
of 500 penalty units ($65,275).21 In addition, the purchaser will have the right
to terminate the contract
of sale and recover their deposit.22 If transfer of
land occurs without the purchaser being given this information, then the
tree owner will remain liable to carry out the orders despite the
change in ownership.23 These are significant incentives to provide
purchasers.
Notice to local councils
11.16 QCAT must give a copy of any order to the local government in the area
in which the tree is situated as well as any government
authority that appeared
in proceedings.24
11.17 QCAT also administers a searchable tree orders register which is freely
available. Any person, including prospective buyers,
can search a property by
its address or a party’s name to see if any tree on the land is subject to
an order.25
Both the tree owner and affected neighbour must
inform purchasers
11.18 Prima facie the Tasmanian Act places the onus on both the tree owner
and affected neighbour to inform purchasers of their respective
land about any
legal action taking place or orders made.26
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
Joinder means that a party who is not named in the original application but
is believed to have a role in the matter and is joined
ether as an
applicant, a respondent or only as a joined party. Joiner brings
together, before the court, all the matters
in the contest between all the
relevant parties. Joinder serves in the interests of
administrative convenience as
well as finality: Trischa Mann,
Australian Law Dictionary
(Oxford University Press, 2010).The
consequence of not joining purchasers and title passing hands during the
trial could be a mistrial. See, eg,
PGC Holdings Pty Ltd v Jalfire Pty Ltd
[2018] QCAT 29
PGC Holdings Pty Ltd v Jalfire Pty Ltd (No. 2)
[2018] QCAT 363.
18 Consultation 15 (Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal).
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
; The penalty unit value in Queensland is currently $130.55 (from
1 July 2018): Queensland Government,
Sentencing Fines and Penalties for
(Web Page, 5 July 2018) <https://
www.qld.gov.au/law/fines-and-penalties/types-of-fines/sentencing-fines-and-
penalties-for-offences>.
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
(4). However, if an application is commenced after the purchaser has
entered into a contract of sale then the Act imposes no obligation
on the tree
owner to notify the purchaser about the proceedings. If a dispute arises between
the tree owner and purchaser, then this
can be dealt with as a contractual
matter: Consultation 15 (Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal); see
also Queensland
Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Neighbourhood Disputes
(Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
(Report No 72, 2015)
[3.586]–[3.587], [3.593]–[3.595].
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
25 Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
Tree Orders Register
(Database, 21 February 2019) <
www.qcat.qld.gov.au/matter-types/tree-
disputes/tree-order-register>.
26 The provisions in Division 2 of the
Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants
(Tas) refer broadly to ‘An owner of land to which an
application or an order relates’. The Commission notes that this
has not been formally interpreted by the Tribunal.
Joinder of parties
11.19 If either party decides to sell their land while a matter is in
progress, they must give the purchaser a copy of the application
information filed with the Resource Management and Planning Appeal Tribunal
(RMPAT) or the order before the purchaser enters
into a contract of sale.27 The
Tasmanian Act provides that any person who is provided with notice is joined as
a party when they
enter into a contract for sale, and orders are binding on
11.20 On the day of settlement the purchaser is then bound by the orders as
if they were the original land owner, to the extent the
orders have not been
carried out.29 Any period
of time mentioned in the orders for carrying out the required work begins on
the day of settlement.30
11.21 A seller must notify RMPAT after a contract of sale has been entered
into that the purchaser is joined as a party.31
11.22 The Tasmanian Government has developed template forms to help vendors
make the required disclosures.32 These can be downloaded
from the Tasmanian
Department of Justice’s webpage on tree disputes.33
Notice to local councils
11.23 In Tasmania, local councils must be informed of any orders made by
RMPAT pursuant to the Tasmanian Act.34 Information certificates
provided by
local councils to prospective purchasers under
section 337
Government Act 1993
(Tas) provide details about any orders made.35 As
explained in the Second Reading Speech to the Tasmanian Act:
These provisions will ensure that prospective purchasers of land on which
problem plants are situated are aware that matters relating
to plants may need
to be dealt with in the future. This will also ensure that landholders who are
affected by a plant will
not, in most cases, be required to seek fresh
orders if the owner of the plant fails to fulfil his or her obligations under
order before selling the property.36
Failure to provide notice
11.24 Failure to provide copies of the application or orders to a purchaser
before they enter into a contract of sale will result
in a maximum penalty of
200 penalty units ($32, 600).37 In addition, the purchaser will have the right
to terminate the contract
of sale and recover their deposit before settlement.38
Where orders are not provided before the contract of sale is signed and those
orders are not complied with before the transfer of land occurs, the original
owner will remain liable for carrying out the orders,
despite the fact that they
no longer own the property.39 The Act allows the original owner access to the
land to carry out this work.40
Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants Act 2017
s 16(1)(a).
Fuller v Estate of Nelder Josephine Hunt
[2018] TASRMPAT 28
[48]. 29 Ibid
32 See Department of Justice (Tas),
Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants
(Web Page) <https://
www.justice.tas.gov.au/mediation_and_
dispute_resolution/neighbourhood-disputes-about-plants>.
Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants Act 2017
s 34(3)(a).
35 See further
Local Government (General) Regulations 2015
(Tas) r 45,
sch 6, No 11A.
36 Tasmania,
Parliamentary Debates, House of Assembly,
4 April 2017, 8
(Rene Hidding).
Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants Act 2017
penalty unit value in Tasmania is currently $163 (from 1 July 2018):
Department of Justice (Tas),
Value of Indexed Amounts in Legislation
Page) <https://
www.justice.tas.gov.au/about/legislation/value_
of_indexed_units_in_legislation>.
Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants Act 2017
11.25 The Tasmanian Act provides for a publicly ‘searchable register of
tree or hedge orders’, maintained by RMPAT.
11.26 This information includes ‘the terms of the order, when the order
takes effect, when any work is required to be carried
out and who is required to
carry out the work’.41 However access to this database is more limited
than in Queensland. Although
any member of the community can search the
is narrower.42
Community responses—new owners of
11.27 The consultation paper asked how a new Act should respond when land
affected by a tree dispute application or order is bought
and sold. Community
responses generally supported:
• ensuring that purchasers are fully informed about existing disputes
before they commit to buying the land
• ensuring that orders are able to be fulfilled after title changes to
prevent relitigation of the same issues.
New affected neighbours
11.28 Issues may arise involving a new affected neighbour where:
• an order has not been fully complied with by the tree owner
• where there is an order for ongoing maintenance
• where an order stipulates shared responsibility for any tree works or
maintenance.
11.29 The majority of people who provided responses supported binding a new
affected neighbour to the outcome of pre-existing legal
action.43 It was
suggested that this would prevent the same dispute arising again and would
promote closure.44
11.30 Others emphasised the importance of notification. It was suggested that
new affected neighbours should be bound only if they
have been made aware of
legal action and any orders prior to purchasing, such as through a real estate
agent, or a Section 32 Vendor
Statement under the
Sale of Land Act 1962
11.31 One submission noted that there should be scope for new land owners to
‘bring in new ideas’ about how the tree could
be managed despite
existing orders. They suggested that a tree dispute with the original owner may
have had interpersonal dimensions,
so the introduction of new owners may bring
interpersonal conflict to an end.46Another
suggestion was that compliance with an order should be optional because a new
affected neighbour may not need it:
The new owner of a site for which the previous owners successfully achieved a
determination as a response to dispute action may in
turn appreciate the
presence of the tree, and not wish to remove or jeopardise its future potential.
It should be optional.47
41 Tasmania,
Parliamentary Debates, House of Assembly
, 4 April 2017, 8
(Rene Hidding).
Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants Act 2017
Resource Management and Planning Appeal Tribunal,
Practice Direction No 18
— Applications under the
Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants Act 2017
(19 November 2018) [18.5.1]. It costs individuals $23.70 to search the
Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants Act
(Tas): Resource Management & Planning Appeal Tribunal,
(effective from 1 July 2018) <https://
www.rmpat.tas.gov.au/fees
43 Submissions 2 (Name withheld), 4 (Name withheld), 6 (Name withheld), 7
(Ben Kenyon), 9 (Dr Karen Smith), 10 (Professor Phillip
Hamilton), 11 (Name
withheld), 19 (Name withheld), 23 (Name withheld).
44 Submissions 9 (Dr Karen Smith), 10 (Professor Phillip Hamilton).
45 See for eg Submissions 2 (Name withheld).
46 Confidential submission.
47 Confidential submission.
11.32 A small number of people thought new owners should not be bound by the
outcome of legal action because they considered it would
‘be difficult to
implement’48 and lead to unfairness.49
New tree owners
11.33 A new tree owner may be affected by a pre-existing order requiring tree
works or ongoing maintenance. The majority of responses
to the consultation
paper supported binding a new tree owner to the outcome of pre-existing legal
action about trees on their land.50
11.34 Arborist Dr Karen Smith thought that this was important because
otherwise ‘legal action is wasted’.51 A tree disputes
consultant in
New South Wales supported binding new owners in this way:
By being bound by the outcome of legal action, consistency is maintained as
is fairness to the original parties in the dispute.
Additionally, as land is
purchased by successors
in title, so is the tree that is the subject of the dispute. I consider the
success of the proposed statutory scheme to be its adjudicative
nature and as
such, any outcome of legal action should remain and run with the land. Unlike
mediation, Court orders are enforceable,
and the gravitas of the statutory
scheme ensured...52
11.35 One submission observed that the approach of binding new tree owners is
consistent with planning law, where responsibility for
complying with decisions
or orders ‘runs with the land’.53 It was further noted that having
orders that run with the
land may be beneficial in urgent situations where time
does not allow for fresh legal proceedings.54
11.36 The Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal (VCAT) supported
binding new owners of land to carry out existing orders. However,
that it should not be required to play a role in implementing this process. VCAT
also suggested that consideration be
given to whether the order attaches to the
land or the landowner. VCAT noted that if an order is to attach to the land to
subsequent owner or occupier, like
section 124
Planning and
Environment Act 1987
(Vic),55 this would need to be reflected in the
of Land Act 1962
11.37 Another submission stated that new tree owners should be bound only if
they are made aware of any orders before buying the land,
such as through
information provided by
a real estate agent.57 Some people suggested that if a new owner is able to
come to a new arrangement with an affected neighbour58
or alter the original
order with the affected neighbour’s cooperation,59 they should not be
11.38 A small number of submissions stated that new tree owners should not be
bound by legal action.60 One reason was that it would
be too difficult to
implement fairly.61
48 Submission 21 (Pointon Partners Lawyers).
49 Submissions 5 (Name withheld), 21 (Pointon Partners Lawyers).
50 Submissions 4 (Name withheld), 7 (Ben Kenyon), 8 (Victoria Thieberger), 9
(Dr Karen Smith), 10 (Professor Phillip Hamilton), 11
(Name withheld), 19 (Name
withheld), 20 (Name withheld), 23 (Name withheld), 27 (Name withheld).
51 Submission 9 (Dr Karen Smith).
52 Submission 20 (Name withheld).
53 ‘Run with the land’ means an interest or burden that passes
with the transfer of land, binding subsequent owners: Peter
Butterworths’ Concise Australian Legal Dictionary
(LexisNexis/Butterworths, 3rd ed, 2004) ‘run with the land’.
54 Confidential submission.
Planning and Environment Act 1987
enforcement Order or interim enforcement Order served on an owner or occupier of
land is binding on every subsequent owner
or occupier to the same extent as if
the Order had been served on that subsequent owner or occupier.’
56 Supplementary Consultation 1 (Victorian Civil and Administrative
57 Submission 2 (Name withheld).
58 Confidential submission
59 Confidential submission.
60 Submissions 5 (Name withheld), 21 (Pointon Partner Lawyers).
61 Submission 21 (Pointon Partners Lawyers).
When should the burden and benefit of orders pass to purchasers?
11.39 Community responses were mixed. Some stated that purchasers should only
be bound at the point of transfer of title (or settlement).62
Others said this
should occur when a contract for sale is entered into.63 A smaller number made
alternative suggestions such after
one year;64 following a ‘grace
period’ after transfer of title;65 or once possession of the property is
Informing potential purchasers
11.40 There w
as overwhelming support for a
process to inform potential purchasers about legal action or orders before a
sale is formally finalised.67
11.41 Drawing on experience enforcing local laws and planning schemes, a
number of local councils reported that notification is important
purchasers are not surprised by obligations that pass to them with
ownership.68
11.42 Nillumbik Shire Council stated that it would be useful for purchasers
of land to be made aware of any orders that put a positive
obligation on them to
carry out maintenance of vegetation on their land.69
11.43 One community member stressed that proceedings underway at the time of
sale must be disclosed because ‘purchasers need
to know what they are
buying into’.70 Another community member agreed that new owners
‘should be made aware as soon as
possible [of] what[‘]s going
11.44 Another suggested that if the purchaser does not wish to be
responsible for carrying out any one-off orders that have not
been complied
with, then they should ensure the original owners carry out the works completely
before transfer of title occurs.72
How should notice be provided?
11.45 Some re
sponses suggested a disclosure
process that informs purchasers through a real estate agent;73 a signed
disclosure statement74 or a
Vendor Statement.75 Baw Baw Shire Council
suggested that a
Vendor Statement should include results of an
arborist’s risk assessment for the problem tree.76
11.46 A number of arborists at ArborCamp2018 supported an approach similar to
that in the United Kingdom.77 In the UK, a vendor must
complete a Seller’s
Property Information Form on which they must provide detailed information about
issues affecting their
property, including historic, ongoing or likely disputes
with neighbours.78 If inaccurate or misleading information is provided,
purchaser may be able to make a claim for compensation or refuse to complete the
purchase.79
62 Submissions 2 (Name withheld), 7 (Ben Kenyon), 19 (Name withheld), 20
(Name withheld).
63 Submissions 4 (Name withheld), 11 (Name withheld), 27 (Name withheld).
64 Confidential submission. It was not specified at what point this one year
period should commence.
65 Confidential submission. The period of this suggested grace period was not
66 Submission 23 (Name withheld).
67 Submissions 2 (Name withheld), 6 (Name withheld), 27 (Name withheld);
Consultations 1 (Aldo Taranto), 3 (HVP Plantations),
4 (Participants in facilitated discussion at VTIO ArborCamp2018), 8 (City of
Boroondara), 9 (Nillumbik Shire Council), 10 (Baw Baw
Shire Council), 12 (City
of Port Phillip ).
68 Consultations 8 (City of Boroondara), 9 (Nillumbik Shire Council), 10 (Baw
Baw Shire Council), 12 (City of Port Phillip).
69 Consultation 9 (Nillumbik Shire Council).
70 Submission 10 (Professor Phillip Hamilton).
71 Submission 6 (Name withheld).
73 Submission 2 (Name withheld).
74 Submission 27 (Name withheld).
75 Submission 10 (Professor Phillip Hamilton).
76 Consultation 10 (Baw Baw Shire Council).
77 Consultation 4 (Participants in facilitated discussion at VTIO
ArborCamp2018).
78 The Law Society (United Kingdom),
Property Information Form
(TA6)—Explanatory Notes for Sellers and Buyers
(2013), 5, questions
79 Ibid 1; See, eg,
McMeekin v Long
[2003] EWCA Civ 1746
[2003] All ER (D) 124
Joining new parties to proceedings
11.47 The majority of community responses supported the idea of joining new
owners to existing proceedings in VCAT. The Commission
was told that the
possibility of being joined as a party should be stated in the contract of
11.48 Two people stated that purchasers should be joined as a party at the
time they enter into a contract of sale.81 Another suggested
that the purchaser
should be joined when they take possession of the property.82
11.49 A smaller number stated that purchasers should not be joined to
pre-existing disputes.83 One alternative was that new tree owners
undertaking at sale and set aside a portion of the sale price to be held on
trust to complete works in the order:
the new owners should sign a declaration that they will accept the result of
any action currently underway and, that if the action
was to be found against
the vendor, the vendor would pay all costs. The vendor should also sign such
an agreement and a reasonable
portion of the sale fee should be held in trust to
complete works, should any be required by an order. The party bringing the
action should be liable for any loss caused by a portion of the sale fee being
held in trust, if their action fails ...84
11.50 Pointon Partners stated that whether or not a new owner should be
joined as a party to the hearing should be a matter for the
11.51 QCAT reported that matters regarding the joinder of new owners do not
arise frequently in Queensland. If a joinder cannot
be made under the
Queensland Act then it may be made under the
Queensland Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 2009
(Qld) instead.86 QCAT noted that
purchasers tend to express annoyance when they are joined to proceedings.87 QCAT
also explained
that it does not have jurisdiction to make orders in relation to
a previous tree owner and can only make orders in relation to current
A searchable database
11.52 Most responses supported the establishment of a searchable database of
orders.89 The City of Boroondara Council stated it would
also provide neighbours
with a good resource for monitoring trees in their area.90 The Land and
Environment Court of New South Wales
noted that a database could be a useful
tool for notifying potential new owners
of land about tree orders affecting their properties.91 Nillumbik Shire
Council stated that a database administered by the decision-making
reduce the burden on local councils because residents would be able to find
information themselves online.92
11.53 Responses were received about the broader benefits of a searchable
A searchable database of Orders relating to trees and ... judgments should be
made available in Victoria. This would give potential
disputants a means of
building their knowledge before approaching the scheme and ‘testing’
their dispute scenario against
a variety of outcomes.93
80 Submission 11 (Name withheld).
81 Submissions 23 (Name withheld) and Confidential submission.
82 Confidential submission.
83 Submissions 4 (Name withheld), 27 (Name withheld).
84 Submission 27 (Name withheld).
85 Submission 21 (Pointon Partners Lawyers).
Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2009
87 Consultation 15 (Queensland and Civil Administrative Tribunal).
88 Ibid. See also
PGC Holdings Pty Ltd v Jalfire Pty Ltd (No. 2)
[2018] QCAT 363
89 Submissions 4 (Name withheld), 5 (Name withheld), 6 (Name withheld), 7
(Ben Kenyon), 9 (Dr Karen Smith), 11 (Name withheld),
19 (Name withheld), 20 (Name withheld), 21 (Pointon Partners Lawyers), 23
(Name withheld), 27 (Name withheld), 33 (Annette Neville);
Consultations 8 (City
of Boroondara), 9 (Nillumbik Shire Council).
90 Consultation 8 (City of Boroondara).
91 Consultation 11 (Land and Environment Court of New South Wales).
92 Consultation 9 (Nillumbik Shire Council).
93 Submission 20 (Name withheld).
11.54 The City of Boroondara stated that the
be difficult to obtain.
11.55 Some people suggested limiting access to the database. One submission
stated that a ‘small fee’ should apply for
conducting a search of
the database.94 Another stated that the database should not be available to the
public and should only be
representative.95 Another observed that the database would likely be
‘expensive’.96
11.56 Only one submission objected to the database:
Given that the contest over tree-related disputes is potentially highly
charged and emotive without external influence, I see no reason
why further
publication is appropriate for the well-being of those involved.97
The Commission’s conclusions—new
owners of land
11.57 The new Act should specify the rights and obligations of new tree
owners and new affected neighbours towards trees that have
been the subject of a
formal tree dispute proceeding in VCAT. This will bring finality to the tree
dispute, certainty to the parties
and avoid duplication of legal
proceedings.
11.58 However, the system should not allow tree owners to bypass obligations
by selling their property. In addition, it would be unfair
to create a system
where a purchaser is left with a significant burden for a problem that they did
not create.
11.59 To address these issues, the new Act should:
• require relevant matters to be disclosed to potential purchasers
before they commit to sale;
• ensure new affected neighbours can continue to benefit from
• avoid making the sale of land process more complex.
Providing certainty
11.60 If the new Act does not shift the burden and benefit of orders to new
purchasers of land then previous resolutions would be
worthless. The same tree
disputes could go back to VCAT with the same result. Any scheme that duplicates
legal proceedings or prolongs
a tree dispute would be the opposite of the policy objective: to resolve tree
disputes efficiently and inexpensively. It would also
be a waste of VCAT’s
11.61 The Commission concludes that new tree owners and new affected
neighbours (new owners of land) should be bound by the outcomes
of prior legal
action. Most cases are likely to involve new affected neighbours seeking to
benefit from orders. However,
sometimes new affected neighbours may have to carry out pre-existing
obligations, such as sharing the costs of maintenance.
11.62 Any Orders requiring payment of compensation should rest with the
original owner. It would be unfair to shift responsibility
for compensation to a
new owner who was not involved. This is also the approach in New South
11.63 The right to benefit from orders should be limited to the immediate new
affected neighbour (the applicant’s successor
in title).98 The Commission
is persuaded by the approach in New South Wales where the right is limited in
this way so as not to burden
94 Confidential submission.
95 Submission 2 (Name withheld).
96 Submission 10 (Professor Phillip Hamilton).
97 Confidential submission.
98 This means those who first purchase from the tree owner or affected
neighbour. It will not apply to subsequent purchasers.
‘title to the land indefinitely,
particularly in the case of orders relating to ongoing maintenance’.99
Tree dispute orders
should not run with the land.
11.64 The Commission acknowledges the concerns that new owners should not be
bound by the outcome of legal action because they may
view the tree differently
from the original parties in dispute. For example, a new affected neighbour may
wish to retain overhanging
branches because they provide shade and greenery.
However, because the new Act deals only with damage or likely future damage or
harm, it is more likely that the same problem will impact a new owner. This may
be different if more subjective issues were being
considered, for example,
access to sunlight and views or leaf litter not causing damage.100 If new
owners do not agree with a preexisting
order then they should be able to apply
to VCAT to vary or revoke them (see Chapter 9). This may also be needed where an
order provided access rights that need to be updated or modified.
When should new owners be bound?
11.65 New owners should be bound from the date of settlement, when the title
to the land passes to the purchaser.101
11.66 Binding a purchaser earlier than settlement, such as from the date they
enter into a contract of sale, or the time of auction,
would not be appropriate.
There are too many variables at this stage and the sale may fall through.
11.67 The date of settlement, which includes transfer and registration of
title, is clear proof that ownership has now changed
hands. It is also a
point in the sale of land process that is clear and easy to identify. Other
suggestions such as ‘one
year’; a grace period after transfer or
title; or date of occupation, may be less clear.
11.68 For consistency and clarity, any timeframes stipulated in the orders
should re-commence on the date of settlement.
99 Department of Justice and Attorney-General (NSW),
Review of the
(Disputes Between Neighbours) Act 2006
(Report, 2009) 23; see
Trees (Disputes Between Neighbours) Act 2006
100 See Chapter 13 for a discussion of trees
blocking access to sunlight or views.
101 Peter E Nygh and Peter Butt,
Butterworths Australian Property Law
(Butterworths, 1997).
Who should inform purchasers?
11.69 Potential purchasers should be notified of existing disputes and orders
before settlement so that they know about the scope
of the problem and future
obligations. This will help them to make informed decisions and encourage
compliance if they buy. It may
also empower a purchaser to require works
pursuant to an order to be completed before settlement.
11.70 It should be the role of the original owner (both the original tree
owner and original affected neighbour) to inform potential
purchasers, using the
processes outlined below under ‘How should notice be provided?’
11.71 It should not be the sole duty of the affected neighbour to inform
new owners of the tree, as is the case in New South
Wales. The Commission
agrees with QCAT’s observation that it would be problematic for the
neighbour to have to provide
the new tree owner with a copy of any orders to
ensure they are carried out.102 The neighbour may not know that the land is
being sold or who is buying it, so it would be unfair to put the onus on them
to monitor ownership of their neighbour’s
What should be disclosed?
11.72 Disclosure should include providing relevant documentation, either a
copy of the application or orders, to the purchaser. If
the matter has not been
settled then a copy of the application should be provided. If the matter has
been determined then a copy
of the Orders (if any) should be provided.
How should notice be provided?
11.73 Disclosure should not make the sale of land more complex or burden
buyers by with additional enquiries during conveyance. Instead,
notice of formal
tree disputes or Orders should form part of the usual disclosure process of
selling land in Victoria. This notice
should be provided in the Due Diligence
Checklist and in the Section 32 Vendor Statement.104
102 Consultation 15 (Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal).
104 The information it must contain is set out in
of Land Act 1962
statement contains information about the
property’s title, including: mortgages; covenants; easements; zoning;
(for example, rates); and declaration if located in a bushfire-prone
area. As it is a legal document, it must be factually accurate
and complete. If
it contains incorrect or insufficient information, a buyer may be able to
withdraw from the sale or take legal
action: Consumer Affairs Victoria,
Conveyancing and Contracts for Sellers
(Web Page, 1 April 2019)
www.consumer.vic.gov.au/housing/buying-and-selling-property/selling-property/conveyancing-and-contracts-
for-sellers>.
Due Diligence Checklist
Sale of Land Act 1962
(Vic) mandates the provision of a Due
Diligence Checklist. This Checklist is intended to help prospective buyers in
‘identifying
information they may wish to obtain in respect of the land
for sale’.105 It must be provided to prospective buyers by the vendor
an agent from the time the land is offered for sale,106 in the form published by
Consumer Affairs Victoria.107 The Checklist contains
general information about a
range of issues that may affect the property and impose restrictions or
obligations on them.108 The checklist
should be amended to include information
Vendor Statement
Sale of Land Act
requires a Vendor Statement to
be provided to a purchaser.109 The
Vendor Statement is a legal
document and requires the vendor to disclose certain matters to the purchaser
before they enter into
a contract of
sale.110 Many of the matters in the Vendor’s Statement elaborate on
matters that appear in the Checklist. This means that potential
purchasers could
be provided with notice through both the Checklist and more thoroughly in the
Vendor’s Statement.
11.76 A Vendor Statement is not currently required to disclose matters
relating to trees or vegetation on the land. It is recommended
is amended to include a provision in
to expand the
provisions to require disclosure of ongoing legal action under the new Act at
the time of sale, or if legal action has
concluded, information about incomplete or ongoing orders. For clarity and
transparency, copies of the application or orders should
be provided to the
purchaser. The Commission considers that this would be a straightforward
If purchasers are not informed
11.77 If a purchaser is not properly informed about legal action or orders,
the purchaser may seek recourse under the
Sale of Land Act
11.78 The Queensland and Tasmanian Acts include penalties for failing to give
purchasers notice of an application or order before
they buy.111The Commission
is of the view that existing penalties under the
Sale of Land Act
satisfactory. If prospective purchasers are not given copies of the Due
Diligence Checklist as required by the
Sale of Land Act
, a maximum penalty of 60
penalty units ($9,671.40) applies.112
11.79 The failure of the vendor to provide accurate information in a
Vendor Statement gives the purchaser the right to rescind the contract at any
time before settlement or acceptance of title.113 Knowingly
or recklessly
supplying false information to the purchaser is a criminal offence equating
to a maximum of 60 penalty units
($9671.40).114 There is also a general maximum penalty of 10 penalty units
($1611.90) for contravention of the Sale of Land Act.115
Sale of Land Act 1962
108 Consumer Affairs Victoria,
Due Diligence Checklist - For Home and
Residential Property Buyers
(15 January 2019) <https://www.consumer.
vic.gov.au/housing/buying-and-selling-property/checklists/due-diligence>.
109 Consumer Affairs Victoria,
Conveyancing and Contracts for Sellers
(Web Page, 8 January 2019) <https://
www.consumer.vic.gov.au/
housing/buying-and-selling-property/selling-property/conveyancing-and-contracts-for-sellers>.
Sale of Land Act 1962
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants Act 2017
Sale of Land Act 1962
, (4). The current value of a
penalty unit is $161.19 (as at 1 July 2018): Department of Justice and Community
Safety (Vic),
Penalties and Values
(Web Page, 14 August 2018)
www.justice.vic.gov.au/justice-system/fines-and-
penalties/penalties-and-values>.
Sale of Land Act 1962
Or, 300 penalty units in the case of a body corporate. The
current value of a penalty unit is $161.19 (as at 1 July 2018): Department
Justice and Community Safety (Vic),
Penalties and Values
(Web Page, 14
August 2018) <https://
www.justice.vic.gov.au/
justice-system/fines-and-penalties/penalties-and-values>.
Sale of Land Act 1962
This penalty may be applied
‘where no other penalty is expressly provided’.
11.80 As the
Sale of Land Act
already provides
penalties for failure to disclose the Commission does not support duplicating
these penalties and provisions in
the new Act.
Joining new parties to proceedings
11.81 There is
potential for a mistrial116 where
the ownership of a tree changes part way through legal proceedings, resulting in
the wrong party
being sued. This occurred in a Queensland case where the tree
owner, a corporation, sold its land to another
corporation in the time between the commencement of the matter and the
hearing. The original owner did not inform QCAT of the change
in ownership. QCAT
held there had been a mistrial and explained:
The Tribunal ... has jurisdiction to make orders only in respect of those
matters which parliament has given it jurisdiction. In this
case, it can make
orders in relation to tree disputes, in essence between tree-keepers and
neighbours...The Tribunal cannot proceed
to make orders about the tree dispute
in these circumstances as between [the two corporations] as though the transfer
to [the new
owner] had not occurred. It has no power to do so. [The new owner]
is the tree-keeper and the proper respondent. Further, the sale
and transfer of
the property to [the new owner] and the failure...to disclose that sale and
transfer raises issues affecting the
substantial merits of the case.117
11.82 The Commission intends to limit the possibility of a mistrial in such
circumstances. While this could be achieved through automatic
joinder of the new
parties—as occurs in Queensland and Tasmania—118 this may cause
a) A purchaser may resent having to become involved in legal proceedings when
they buy a property. Indeed the prospect of being joined
as a party may
discourage the sale. It would probably require the purchaser to obtain
additional legal advice, which would be costly.
b) The sale may fall through, making the legal action even more complex.
116 A trial that must be aborted and from which no valid outcome results:
Trischa Mann,
Oxford Australian Law Dictionary
(Oxford University
Press, 2010).
PGC Holdings Pty Ltd v Jalfire Pty Ltd
[2018] QCAT 29
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants Act 2017
11.83 A better approach would be for the vendor to
notify VCAT immediately after a contract of sale is fully executed as occurs in
Tasmania.119 VCAT should decide whether to join the parties depending on the
facts of the case. The VCAT Act provides VCAT with the
power to do this if it
considers ‘that the person ought to be bound by, or have the benefit of,
an Order of the Tribunal in
the proceeding; the person’s interests are
affected by the proceeding; or for any other reason it is desirable that the
be joined as a party’.120
11.84 When making an application to initiate a matter under the new Act, all
parties involved in the dispute should be obliged to
reveal whether they have
entered into a contract of sale of land at the time. This should be one of the
details included in the application
form. See Chapter 5.
Not recommended: a searchable database of
11.85 Although there was considerable support for the idea of a searchable
recommended as it may
result in unnecessary duplication of information to be disclosed through a
Section 32 Vendor Statement. The
amended Vendor’s Statement would provide
sufficient notice and information to purchasers. Furthermore, unless the
is widely publicised and freely available,121 it may not be used, and
it would be costly to monitor and update.
11.86 Some responses favoured a searchable database because it might assist
the members of the wider community who may have concerns
However, tree disputes do not typically impact people other than the parties
involved and the Commission has not
recommended that orders run with the land
indefinitely. The decision-making principles in Chapter 8 should be enough to
ensure that
any wider benefits of the tree are considered. These principles
reflect broader considerations in planning laws which have a broader
11.87 Notice of an application under the new Act will be provided to anyone
who the applicant has reason to believe may be affected
by the outcome of an
order. Therefore, there
is little benefit in allowing a searchable database of orders that other
residents in the neighbourhood may inspect. Other databases
already inform the
community about matters relating to trees: the Victorian Heritage Database, the
National Trust’s Significant
Tree Register, and significant tree registers
of local councils.122 The subject matter of those databases is in the wider
Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants Act 2017
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
121 It costs individuals $23.70 to search the database pursuant to
Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants Act 2017
Management & Planning Appeal Tribunal,
Table of Fees
(Web Page, effective from 1 July 2018) <https://
www.rmpat.tas.gov.au/fees
122 See, eg, Heritage Council Victoria,
Victoria’s Significant
Heritage Places and Objects <
https://vhd.heritagecouncil.vic.gov.au/
National Trust,
Significant Tree Register
(Web Page, 2019)
www.nationaltrust.org.au/services/significant-tree-register/
Bayside City Council,
Significant Tree Register
(Web Page, 2019)
www.bayside.vic.gov.au/significant-tree-register
Community resources
Introduction
Current resources
Other jurisdictions—community
Community responses—community
The Commission’s
conclusions
—community resources
Community resources for neighbourhood tree
Introduction
12.1 The resolution of tree disputes is hindered by a poor understanding of
the law and a lack of supporting information. Community
members must piece
together information published by different government and community agencies to
work out a possible
resolution process. The Commission has also been told that the community does
not have a good understanding of which experts can assist
them. In particular,
there is limited awareness of the role and qualifications of arborists.
12.2 This chapter considers what supporting material should be created to
practice and better
prepare people to resolve their disputes both through the Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal (VCAT)
and informally.
Current resources
12.3 There are already some information sources available to the community
to help prevent tree disputes and to resolve them as
they arise. These range
from information about responsible tree planting to information that supports
alternative dispute resolution.
Not all of these resources are easy to find
and they are not universally available across Victoria.
Responsible tree planting
12.4 It was widely recognised in responses to the Commission that appropriate
planting of trees—by species and location—may
minimise the
occurrence of tree disputes.1 Around Victoria some councils provide information
to residents about sustainable planting
and some provide helpful guidance about
planting more generally.
12.5 Sustainable Gardening Australia (SGA) has produced comprehensive
booklets on sustainable gardening for some local government
areas within
Victoria.2 The booklets contain information on plant selection to suit local
conditions of soil and climate.
12.6 For example, the City of Mildura Rural City Council SGA booklet
classifies a range of plants according to their growing requirements
drought-tolerant), the origin of the plant (native or nonnative) and the growing
habit of the plants (such as its anticipated
1 Submissions 1 (Ian Collier), 5 (Name withheld), 22 (Name withheld), 24
(Name withheld); Consultations 4 (Participants in facilitated
discussion at VTIO
ArborCamp2018), 10 (Baw Baw Shire Council), 11 (Land and Environment Court of
New South Wales), 12 (City of Port
Phillip); Survey Respondents 1, 3, 18, 20,
27, 51, 52, 59, 76, 93, 109, 111, 123.
2 Sustainable Gardening Australia,
Gardening Booklets for Local Areas
(Booklets, 2019) <https://
www.sgaonline.org.au/sustainable-
gardening-booklets/>. Sustainable Gardening Australia is a not-for-profit
organisation promoting environmentally sustainable gardening.
gardening booklets for these local government areas: Brimbank, Casey, Darebin,
East Gippsland and Wellington Shire,
Frankston, Hobsons Bay, City of Melbourne,
Hume, Melton, Mildura Region, Mitchell/Strathbogie, Moonee Valley, Moreland,
Stonnington, Whittlesea, Wyndham and the Yarra Ranges.
height and width).3 It also lists plant species
that are invasive in the Mildura area and should not be considered for
12.7 Some council nurseries are directly involved in sustainable planning
programs in their communities. The Mornington Peninsula
Shire nursery grows an
extensive range of indigenous plants from locally collected seed for retail sale
to the public.5 The range
includes groundcovers, grasses, wildflowers, shrubs
and trees. Banyule City Council also encourages the planting of native tree
and provides a buy-one-get-one- free voucher as an incentive for
residents to select native plants.6 Vouchers can
be redeemed at selected nurseries, with a link to the Victorian Indigenous
Nurseries Cooperative provided on council’s website.7
In this way, council
nurseries play a role in advising people about what species are appropriate to
plant on their land.8
12.8 In addition, some councils have helpful information on their websites
and in policy documents about which plant species are most
suitable for the
local environment.9 For example, the City of Boroondara has a website dedicated
to ‘choosing suitable trees’
and advises residents to take certain
steps prior to selecting trees. These include considering:
• whether the tree will have enough space to grow healthily
• whether the size of the tree when fully grown could affect built
structures on the land and on neighbouring land
• whether root growth could cause damage to underground pipes.10
Talking with your neighbour
12.9 Chapter 2 identifies that a break-down in communication between
neighbours is an underlying factor that contributes to tree disputes
12.10 Some government and community organisations have published useful
resources aimed at helping neighbours to resolve their tree
disputes. Chapter 3
briefly canvassed some of the strategies promoted in these materials about how
to negotiate effectively with
your neighbour.
12.11 The Dispute Settlement Centre of Victoria (DSCV) has a section on its
website about resolving tree disputes. It advises affected
neighbours to engage
a tree professional and obtain a quote about any proposed tree works prior to
talking with the tree owner.11
It suggests the following approach:
Find out your neighbour’s concerns over an informal chat. Ask yourself:
“Have I really listened to them and tried to come
solution?” “What am I willing to negotiate over?”
“Is there a different way to resolve this?”12
12.12 If an informal discussion does not resolve the issue and the parties
have been unable to reach a solution on their own, DSCV
recommends its free
mediation services as a possible next step.
3 Mildura Rural City Council and Sustainable Gardening Australia,
Sustainable Gardening in the Mildura Region
(Booklet, 2011)
5 Morning Peninsula Shire,
Shire (Briars) Nursery
(Web Page, 2019)
www.mornpen.vic.gov.au/Activities/The-Briars/Shire-Nursery
6 Banyule City Council,
Native Plant Vouchers
www.banyule.vic.gov.au/Council/Environment-and-Sustainability/Trees-
and-Plants/Native-Plant-Vouchers>.
8 Consultation 10 (Baw Baw Shire Council).
9 See, eg, Moreland City Council,
Gardening with Indigenous Plants
(Web Page) <
https://www.moreland.vic.gov.au/environment-bins/
gardening-and-food/gardening-indigenous-plants/
>; City of Casey and
Cardinia Shire Council,
Indigenous Plant Guide
(Booklet) <https://
www.casey.vic.gov.au/indigenous-plants
>; City of Boroondara,
Suitable Trees
(Web Page, 2019) <https://
www.boroondara.vic.
gov.au/waste-environment/trees-and-naturestrips/choosing-suitable-trees>.
10 City of Boroondara,
Choosing Suitable Trees
(Web Page, 2019)
www.boroondara.vic.gov.au/waste-environment/trees-and-
naturestrips/choosing-suitable-trees>.
11 Dispute Settlement Centre of Victoria,
(Web Page, 24 April
2019) <https://
www.disputes.vic.gov.au/information-and-advice/trees-0
12.13 The Fitzroy Legal Service’s
offers practical tips and encourages neighbours to resolve disputes
informally:
Clear and open communication between neighbours with the aim of working out a
dispute in a cooperative and friendly way is more likely
to bring about a
long-term outcome that all parties are able to live with.13
Law Handbook
provides a brief overview of the common law
action in nuisance as well as the self-help remedy of abatement.14 People are
to discuss any proposed branch removal with neighbours prior to
undertaking the work.15
12.15 The Victorian Law Foundation has published a guide, Neighbours, the
Law and You, on how to be a good neighbour, explaining
individual rights
and responsibilities in relation to common issues that arise such as
overhanging tree branches or roots.16
The guide provides information about how
local councils may be able to help because actions could be dependent on local
planning schemes. It also includes information about abatement, and
provides links to DSCV and to the Magistrates’ Court
websites. The
clearing of vegetation in rural areas is also addressed, with individuals
advised to contact the Country Fire Authority
or the Metropolitan Fire Brigade
if they are concerned about vegetation on neighbouring land posing a bushfire
12.16 Local council websites and customer service centres often provide a
range of information and links, with significant variation
in detail between
councils. Individuals can find relevant information about their local council on
a dedicated government website.17
Engaging an arborist
12.17 The City of Port Phillip noted that the community is generally unaware
of how to obtain advice from a suitably qualified arborist.18
12.18 Many people work in the tree care industry and some have undertaken
little or no training.19 However, Dr Gregory Moore OAM noted
that arborists in
Victoria are generally well trained. He suggested that there are approximately
1000 arborists with qualifications
of level 4 or above.20
12.19 ENSPEC noted that ‘arboriculture is an unregulated profession,
meaning that there is a wide variation in the quality of
training, experience
and up-to-date knowledge amongst practitioners. There is also no professional
recourse to address unethical
behaviour as there is in licenced
professions.’21 Arboriculture Australia, the national peak body for
arborists, has introduced
a voluntary industry licence to promote quality of
practice.22
12.20 The City of Port Phillip advises the community to ‘be aware of
unsolicited door knockers’ who are usually ‘unqualified
tree loppers
who try to intimidate people ... into removing healthy trees’.23
12.21 Arborist Robert Mineo commented that the community does not generally
understand the different qualification levels of arborists.24
13 Peter Cotter, ‘Neighbour Disputes’ in Naomi Saligari (ed),
The Law Handbook 2019: Your Practical Guide to the Law in Victoria
(Fitzroy Legal Service, 41st ed, 2019) 539.
14 Ibid 542–3.
16 Victoria Law Foundation,
Neighbours, the Law and You: Your Guide to
Neighbourhood Laws in Victoria, Victoria Legal Aid
(Brochure, March 2015)
www.legalaid.vic.gov.au/find-legal-answers/free-publications-and-resources/neighbours-law-and-you
17 Victorian Government,
Know Your Council
<https://knowyourcouncil.vic.gov.au/home>.
18 Consultation 12 (City of Port Phillip).
19 Consultation 12 (City of Port Phillip). This is also recognised by
Arboriculture Australia,
Australian Qualification Framework (AQF) and
Australian Training Programs
http://arboriculture.org.au/Qualification
20 Consultation 2 (Dr Gregory Moore OAM).
21 Submission 18 (ENSPEC).
22 Arboriculture Australia,
Australian Arborist Industry Licence
(Brochure, version 4, 2017)
http://arboriculture.org.au/License
23 Consultation 12 (City of Port Phillip); see also City of Port Phillip,
City Permits—Fact Sheet Significant Tree Permits
(29 November 2017)
24 Consultation 14 (Robert Mineo).
12.22 Arboriculture Australia, the peak national
organisation promoting and representing arborists, has established an online
for consulting and practising arborists.25 Arboriculture Australia
distinguishes between practising and consulting arborists to help
the community
to understand arborist qualifications.26
Alternative dispute resolution
12.23 DSCV maintains a comprehensive and informative website which gives a
general outline of the law, sets out answers to frequently
asked questions
resolution.27 During consultations Baw Baw
Shire Council commended DSCV’s
website, especially the case studies, as providing information that is clear,
simple and helpful.28
12.24 A helpful case study of a mediation on DSCV’s website steps the
community through the process and explains what to expect.29
It also includes
information about community mediation more generally that covers determining
whether a matter is suitable for mediation,
what happens in mediation and the
benefits of mediation.30
Court/Tribunal resources
12.25 VCAT has existing online resources to help parties to resolve their
case in a timely, cost- effective and efficient way.31 Resources
practice notes and factsheets, as well as application guides for particular
outlines the ‘Steps to
Resolve Your Case’ from lodging an application with VCAT through to what
to expect at the final
12.26 The website encourages applicants to represent themselves,
discussing the resolution of cases by agreement and detailing
the alternative
dispute resolution services that are available at VCAT. Making an agreement
legally binding via Consent Orders
at VCAT is also canvassed.
12.27 Some people commented on the effectiveness of proceedings in the
Magistrates’ Court under the
Fences Act 1968
(Vic).34 The
Magistrates’ Court provides helpful information for neighbours
contemplating action under the
. A comprehensive Information Guide
provides general information about the civil process for fencing disputes in the
Court and outlines
key definitions under the
35 The guide
strongly advises people to seek advice or mediation through DSCV and also
outlines how to commence a proceeding.36
12.28 These resources provide a useful foundation for the development of
specific materials to underpin the new Act.
25 Arboriculture Australia,
Directory Listing
(Online Directory)
http://arboriculture.org.au/listings.aspx
Arboriculture Australia arborists are qualified to at least AQF Level 3 and are
required to continually update their knowledge
on the latest arboricultural
techniques.
26 Consultation 8 (City of Boroondara). Practising arborists are able to
undertake practical operations in tree care, for
example to carry out
tree pruning. Consulting arborists have the skills, experience and
educational backgrounds to provide
specialised arboricultural services,
such as tree hazard and risk assessments: Arboriculture Australia,
(Online Directory)
http://arboriculture.org.au/listings. aspx
27 Dispute Settlement Centre of Victoria,
(Web Page, 6 June
2019) <https://
www.disputes.vic.gov.au/information-and-advice/trees-0
28 Consultation 10 (Baw Baw Shire Council).
29 Dispute Settlement Centre of Victoria,
Case study—Tree Dispute
(Web Page, 3 June 2019) <https://
www.disputes.vic.gov.au/information-
and-advice/trees/case-study-tree-dispute>.
30 Dispute Settlement Centre of Victoria,
(Web Page, 3 June
2019) <https://
www.disputes.vic.gov.au/about-us/mediation-0
31 Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
Forms, Guides and
(Web Page) <https://
www.vcat.vic.gov.au/resources
33 Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
Steps to Resolve Your Case
(Web Page) <https://
www.vcat.vic.gov.au/steps-to-resolve-your-
34 Submissions 21 (Pointon Partners Lawyers); Consultation 3 (HVP
Plantations).
35 Magistrates’ Court of Victoria,
Fencing Disputes Information
(9 January 2019) <https://mcv.vic.gov.au/news-and-resources/
publications/fencing-disputes-information-guide>.
Other jurisdictions—community
12.29 Interstate jurisdictions that have enacted specific tree dispute Acts
have produced a range of very helpful material to assist
the community.
New South Wales
12.30 Community Justice Centres (CJCs) provide free mediation services and
encourage parties to resolve their dispute before taking
the matter to court.
The Community Justice Centre website provides information about resolving
neighbourhood disputes, including
talking to your neighbour, asking a third
party for help and contacting the CJC to arrange
a mediation.37 The website refers people to a NSW State Library-published
guide to neighbours and the law which covers tree issues.38
12.31 The NSW Act is supported by a wide range of useful resources for the
community. The Commission has been impressed by this information
and found it
particularly helpful in its preliminary research for this inquiry.
12.32 First, the NSWLEC maintains a comprehensive website dedicated to the
resolution of neighbourhood tree disputes.39 Helpful materials
• a detailed step-by-step Plain English guide to understanding the
application of the NSW Act
• an annotated version of the NSW Act 40
• tree dispute principles which guide the community on the
interpretation of the Act41
• case studies
• a Practice Note
• court forms and fees.
12.33 The NSWLEC emphasised the usefulness of its step-by-step Plain English
guide,42 which explains the requirements and process
at each stage of the Court
proceedings, helping parties to be better prepared for their court
appearances.43
12.34 The annotated version of the NSW Act available on the NSWLEC website
outlines key cases to elaborate on sections of the NSW
Act and explains how the
law applies to particular fact scenarios. A 2009 review of the NSW Act
undertaken by the NSW Department
of Justice and Attorney General found:
Generally, annotated legislation is published in textbook or looseleaf
format, and is not available for free. It is highly unusual
unique – for a Court to have developed, published and maintained such a
valuable resource, and made it available
without charge.44
37 Department of Justice (NSW),
(Web Page, 5 June 2018)
http://www.cjc.justice.nsw.gov.au/Pages/cjc_whatis_mediation/ com_justice_neighbours.aspx
38 Nadine Behan,
Neighbours and The Law
(LIAC, State Library of New
South Wales, 2nd ed, 2017) <https://legalanswers.sl.nsw.gov.au/
neighbours-and-law>.
39 Land and Environment Court of New South Wales,
(Web Page 22 November 2018)
http://www.lec.justice.nsw. gov.au/Pages/types_of_disputes/class_2/Trees-hedge-disputes-process/Treedisputes-helpfulmaterials/treedisputes_helpfulmaterial.
aspx#Legislation
40 Land and Environment Court of New South Wales,
(Disputes Between Neighbours) Act 2006
(14 January 2013) 24.
41 The NSWLEC website states that a tree dispute principle is ‘a
statement of a probable outcome from a chain of reasoning
aimed at reaching a
list of appropriate matters to be considered in making a decision concerning an
application which has been
made pursuant to
Trees (Disputes Between Neighbours) Act 2006
(NSW)’: Land
and Environment Court of New South Wales,
Tree Dispute Principles
Page, 25 September 2017)
http://www.lec.justice.nsw.gov.au/Pages/practice_procedure/principles/tree_principles.aspx
42 Land and Environment Court of New South Wales,
Tree Disputes:
Understanding the Law
(Information Sheet)
http://www.lec.justice.nsw. gov.au/Pages/types_of_disputes/class_2/trees_and_hedges.aspx
43 Consultation 11 (Land and Environment Court of New South Wales).
44 Department of Justice and Attorney General (NSW),
Review of the
(Disputes Between Neighbours) Act 2006
(Report, 2009) 12.
12.35 In a submission to that review, the Law Society of NSW commented:
The level of information and assistance provided to applicants, tree owners
and Local Councils contributes greatly to the Court being
able to deliver a
simple and low cost dispute resolution system.45
12.36 In terms of educating the community about the NSW Act, the NSWLEC has
run seminars in conjunction with professional bodies,
such as the Law Society of
NSW.46 Commissioners have also given speeches to tertiary institutions and
professional arboricultural
associations. A journal article was also published
detailing the background and operation of the Act.47
12.37 QCAT has a website dedicated to tree dispute hearings.48 It has links
to various resources, including:
• an information guide about the Queensland Act
• an application checklist
• a fact sheet on overhanging branches and debt recovery
• a list of frequently asked questions
• a list of tree professionals at the Queensland Arboricultural
Association
• a tree order register
• a neighbourhood mediation kit
• tips on how to manage conflict.
12.38 The application checklist requires applicants to ensure upfront that
their tree dispute falls within QCAT’s jurisdiction.
It also informs them
12.39 The neighbourhood mediation kit contains information about the
mediation process at a Dispute Resolution Centre within Queensland
and contains
a workbook for individuals to fill out in preparation for mediation. The
workbook helps people to organise their thoughts
and think about how and what
they may wish to say during the mediation.50
12.40 The tree order register enables individuals to search for a tree order
made by QCAT, either by location or the name of the applicant
or the respondent
in the matter.51 The register shows what land is affected by an order and
includes who is responsible for carrying
out the order and in what
timeframe.52
12.41 QCAT has recently introduced a chatbot53 on its website, known as
SANDI. People can type in questions, or note issues such as
‘overhanging
branches’ in a search box, and SANDI responds by providing information and
links to the QCAT webpages and
45 Department of Justice and Attorney General (NSW),
Review of the
(Disputes Between Neighbours) Act 2006
(Report, 2009) 13.
47 The Hon Justice Brian J Preston and Commissioner Tim Moore, ‘The
Trees (Disputes Between Neighbours) Act 2006
—Background and
(2008) 14 Local Government Law Journal 84.
48 Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
Tree Disputes
Page, 29 February 2019) <https://
www.qcat.qld.gov.au/matter-types/
tree-disputes>.
49 Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
Application Checklist:
Tree Dispute Resolution
(Form, version 3, 3 March 2017)
http://www.qcat.qld.gov.au/matter-types/tree-disputes
50 Department of Justice and Attorney General (Qld),
Neighbourhood
Mediation Kit
(19 May 2015) <https://publications.qld.gov.au/dataset/
neighbourhood-mediation-kit/resource/050c6991-1e22-4933-b185-c92f770eb78a>
51 Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
Tree Orders Register
(Database, 21 February 2019)
http://www.qcat.qld.gov.au/matter- types/tree-disputes/tree-orders-register
53 A Chatbot is a conversational agent that creates live conversational
interaction between the chatbot and another user through voice
commands or text:
Joanna Goodman,
Chatbot Pioneer Builds Free Tool for Law
Firms’ (17 October 2016)
The Law Society Gazette
www.lawgazette.co.uk/news/chatbot-pioneer-builds-free-tool-for-law-firms/5058339.article
54 Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
QCAT Welcomes SANDI to
(Web Page, 12 February 2019)
www.qcat.qld.gov.au/about-qcat/sandi
12.42 QCAT told the Commission that the range of
resources currently available to the community is working effectively to help
to resolve their disputes.55
12.43 The Queensland Government also has a webpage about resolving disputes
disputes, for example, by keeping on good terms with neighbours and putting some
thought into appropriate planting.
A step-by-step guide to resolving tree
disputes provides information about mediation through dispute resolution bodies,
and explains
how tree disputes can be resolved at QCAT.
12.44 The Queensland Government website directs users to resources to resolve
particular types of neighbourhood dispute, including
problems with
next-door-neighbours about trees.57 This website aims to make services easier to
find and use.58
12.45 The Queensland Government website has also introduced a chatbot, named
MANDI, which provides information about common neighbourhood
issues, including
12.46 A Practice Direction published by RMPAT in September 2018 is available
on RMPAT’s website.60 It provides a guide to completing
the application
forms and information about the tribunal process.61 A link is also provided to
the Tasmanian Government Department
of Justice website where there is a detailed
overview of the Tasmanian Act and information about how to resolve tree disputes
informally.62
12.47 A database containing details of orders and applications has been
established by RMPAT. People can search the database by submitting
application and paying the prescribed fee.63 Information in the database
includes: the terms of the order, when it takes effect,
when any work is to be
carried out and by whom.64
Community responses—community
12.48 Chapter 2 canvassed community concerns about the lack of information
and assistance available to help people resolve tree disputes
in Victoria. DSCV
highlighted that there is low awareness in the community about existing rights
and obligations and that many people
their rights and obligations with regards to tree issues’.65
12.49 Specific suggestions from the community included:
• a dedicated website that promotes informal dispute resolution as a
first step to resolving tree disputes66
55 Consultation 15 (Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal).
56 Queensland Government,
Ways to Approach Your Neighbour
(Web Page, 8
January 2019) <https://
www.qld.gov.au/law/housing-and-
neighbours/disputes-about-fences-trees-and-buildings>.
57 Queensland Government,
How to Resolve Neighbourhood Disputes
Page, 2 September 2015) <https://
www.qld.gov.au/law/housing-
and-neighbours/resolve-disputes>. This website was discussed as the key
online tool for community members to use to resolve issues
Queensland Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Neighbourhood Disputes
(Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
(Report No 72, December 2015) 192.
59 Queensland Government,
Ways to Approach Your Neighbour
(Web Page, 8
January 2019) <https://
www.qld.gov.au/law/housing-and-
neighbours/disputes-about-fences-trees-and-buildings>.
60 Resource Management and Planning Appeal Tribunal,
Practice Directions
(Web Page, 8 November 2018) <https://
www.rmpat.tas.gov.au/
practice_directions>.
61 Resource Management and Planning Appeal Tribunal,
Practice Direction No
18: Applications Under the
Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants Act 2017
(Practice Document, 19 November 2018 <https://
www.rmpat.tas.gov.au/
62 Department of Justice (Tas),
Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants
(Web Page) <https://
www.justice.tas.gov.au/mediation_and_dispute_
resolution/neighbourhood-disputes-about-plants>.
63 Resource Management and Planning Appeal Tribunal,
Neighbourhood
Disputes About Plants Act 2017
www.rmpat.tas.gov.au/neighbourhood-disputes-about-plants
It costs individuals $23.70 to search the database pursuant to
section 37(4)
Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants Act 2017
(Tas): Resource
Management and Planning Appeal Tribunal,
Table of Fees
(effective from 1
July 2018) <https://
www.rmpat.tas.gov.au/fees
64 Tasmania,
Parliamentary Debates, Legislative Council,
22 June 2017
(Leonie Hiscutt).
65 Information provided by the Dispute Settlement Centre of Victoria as part
of a data request from the Commission, August 2017 and
clarification of data
provided in May 2019.
66 Submission 4 (Name withheld); Consultation 8 (City of Boroondara); Survey
Respondent 19.
• information about responsible tree
planting, including types of species and suitable locations67
• information to help applicants fill out prescribed forms and navigate
other processes under new laws68
• information about where to go for professional arboricultural
• a tree order register or database.70
12.50 Pointon Partners emphasised that assisting the community to access
relevant planning and local law controls would be of great
assistance.71 This
view was echoed by Nillumbik Shire Council in relation to planning scheme
provisions.72
12.51 The Commission met with some councils who provided information about
ways to get information to the community. Nillumbik Shire
Council and Baw Baw
Shire Council
suggested that they may be in a position to provide educational resources to
support new laws.73 The City of Port Phillip believed
it could play a role
recommending sensible tree planting guidelines to prevent tree disputes.74
12.52 Baw Baw Shire Council emphasised that planting guidelines about what
people could plant in their backyards should complement
new laws.75
12.53 Some arborists explained that they often educate neighbours about the
law.76 Arborists can help parties with tree disputes at
multiple stages, from
initially communicating with neighbours to providing expert evidence during the
formal resolution of disputes.
One arborist explained that he is usually called
‘at the quoting stage’ and can sometimes end up next door to talk to
the other party about the tree, manage the dispute and effectively act as a
mediator. The arborist estimated that he achieves good
outcomes for both parties
nine times out of ten.77 It will be important that arborists understand the
operation of
the new Act, given their central role as information disseminators in the
12.54 Some arborists noted that contracts for sale of land should be required
by law to contain information and guidelines about how
to live with neighbours
so that new owners understand their responsibilities about trees, fences,
drainage, and other matters likely
to be subject to neighbourhood
disputes.78
The Commission’s conclusions—community
A new tree disputes website
12.55 The Commission agrees with the community’s views about the need
for a website dedicated to the resolution of neighbourhood
tree disputes. A
website would ensure that information is widely available, including in regional
12.56 The Commission recommends that this website be established and hosted
by the Department of Justice and Community Safety. This
department already hosts
a helpful webpage about the
. Information about the new Neighbourhood
Tree Disputes Act could be co-located with this.79
67 Submissions 1 (Ian Collier), 5 (Name withheld), 22 (Name withheld), 24
(Name withheld); Consultations 4 (Participants in facilitated
discussion at VTIO
ArborCamp2018), 10 (Baw Baw Shire Council).
68 Submissions 19 (Name withheld), 20 (Name withheld); Survey Respondent
69 Submissions 2 (Name withheld), 9 (Dr Karen Smith); Consultations 8 (City
of Boroondara), 14 (Robert Mineo).
70 Consultation 9 (Nillumbik Shire Council).
71 Submission 21 (Pointon Partners Lawyers).
72 Consultation 9 (Nillumbik Shire Council).
73 Ibid, 10 (Baw Baw Shire Council).
74 Consultation 12 (City of Port Phillip).
75 Consultation 10 (Baw Baw Shire Council).
76 Consultation 4 (Participants in facilitated discussion at VTIO
ArborCamp2018).
79 Department of Justice and Community Safety,
Fencing Law in Victoria
(Web Page, 31 January 2019) <https://
www.justice.vic.gov.au/
justice-system/laws-and-regulation/civil-law/fencing-law-in-victoria>.
12.57 The website should include the following key information:
• guidance on how to negotiate with your neighbour, including a sample
standard letter which affected neighbours can use to
communicate with the tree
owner about a problem tree
• information about informal resolution options, including
• detailed information on alternative dispute resolution (ADR) and a
link to the DSCV website highlighting that DSCV provides
a free service to the
community outside of the VCAT hearing process
• guidance on engaging appropriately qualified arborists to help
resolve tree disputes, with a link to the online directory
maintained by
Aboriculture Australia
• a step-by-step overview of the law
• information to help people decide whether they can commence
proceedings under the new Act and how to go about doing this,
with links to the
VCAT webpage containing application forms and prescribed fees
• information about how to identify their local council, and the zone
of the property.
• other laws (planning scheme overlays and local, environmental or
heritage laws) that may apply to the problem tree and links
to relevant
government authorities such as the Department of Environment, Land, Water and
Planning, Heritage Victoria and Aboriginal
12.58 The Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning has a website
where property reports can be generated free of charge.80
Property Report’ identifies the relevant council, the planning zone, the
application of any planning overlays,
the area is of Aboriginal Cultural Heritage Sensitivity, and whether the
property is in a designated bushfire prone area. There is
also a downloadable
PlanningVIC app for Apple and android phones.81
12.59 The recommended website could prompt people to ask their councils
whether local tree protection laws apply to the land that
the tree is situated
on or the tree itself.
12.60 The recommended sample letter for communicating with neighbours could
be similar in format to the letter published by Community
Legal Centres
Queensland, suggesting affected neighbours:
• identify themselves, their address and the problem tree (this may
include a sketch plan showing the location of the tree)
• outline how the problem tree is affecting their land or property on
• ask the tree owner if they would be willing to set aside a time to
discuss the issue to determine whether the issue can be
resolved.82
12.61 Another useful guide for material to include in a standard letter is
contained in the prescribed notice under section 22 of
the Tasmanian Act. This
notice can be used when a formal branch removal notice cannot be issued under
the Tasmanian Act.83 The
Commission notes that this prescribed notice is more formal than that
envisaged for the new Act but it asks for useful information
such as how the
plant affects the neighbour’s land and what actions the affected neighbour
would like the tree owner to take
to resolve the issue.
80 Department of Environment, Water, Land and Planning (Vic),
Land.vic.gov.au
(Database, 2017) <https://services.land.vic.gov.au/
landchannel/content/addressSearch>.
81 Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
PlanningVIC:
Planning Property Report Mobile App
(27 April 2018)
www.planning.vic.gov.au/schemes-and-amendments/get-information-about-your-planning-scheme/planningvic-planning-
property-report-mobile-app>.
82 See, eg, Community Legal Centres Queensland,
Writing to Your Neighbour
(Letter Template) <https://
www.qldneighbourhoods.com/
writing-to-your-neighbour.html>.
Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants Act 2017
Department of Justice
Neighbourhood Disputes About
(Web Page) <https://
www.justice.tas.gov.au/mediation_and_dispute_resolution/neighbourhood-disputes-about-plants
Information provided by
12.62 The VCAT Practice Note for matters in the Planning and Environment List
is helpful and outlines general procedures and timeframes
for matters in that
list.84 The Commission considers that a more detailed guide, similar in format
to the guide developed by the
Magistrates’ Court for fencing disputes,
would greatly assist applicants in matters under the new Act.
12.63 A further consideration is making the reasoning behind tree
dispute outcomes public. This would enable people to understand
how and why
tree disputes decisions have been made and help them to anticipate how their
matters might be resolved. It would also
give the community information about
how the law applies.
12.64 It is VCAT’s current practice to publish all written decisions on
the Australian Legal Information Institute website
(AustLII). VCAT also
publishes high-profile decisions on its website.85 Decisions that are handed
down orally are not always
published, but a party can request written
reasons for final orders under
section 117
Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
(Vic). Currently, under clause 4J of
schedule 1 to the VCAT Act, a request for written reasons in a small claim
must be made before or at the time of the hearing. Under the
Justice Legislation Amendment (Access to Justice) Act 2018 clause
repealed thereby allowing parties to request written reasons for
decisions for small claims within 14 days of
the hearing in accordance with s
This reform is expected to commence by 1 July 2019.86 It was suggested that
proposed changes could lead to fewer oral decisions being
made at VCAT.87
12.65 The Commission has been informed that NSWLEC’s an annotated
version of the NSW Act is ‘very helpful to community
members’ and
it is of the view that such a resource would assist both informal and formal
dispute resolution processes.88 VCAT
advised the Commission that it has prepared
annotated Acts for Owners Corporations and Residential Tenancies legislation
published by ANSTAT. ANSTAT then publishes and maintains the
electronic versions of these Acts for VCAT. The Commission observes
public access to an annotated Act is important. Any cost associated with its use
may limit its usefulness to professionals.
12.66 In Chapter 8 it was recommended that VCAT develop a specific Practice
Note about the need for a causal link between the tree
and any harm that is the
subject of an
application. It was also recommended that VCAT’s Practice Note about
expert evidence be modified to include additional requirements
disputes. The Commission considers that information about the new Act on
VCAT’s website should include a link to the
recommended Practice Note
ADR.90 Reminding parties about VCAT’s powers
to refer parties to mediation and other ADR processes may encourage them to use
community-based mediation before initiating an application.
84 Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
Practice Note PNPE1:
Planning and Environment List General Procedures
, 31 December 2018
www.vcat.vic.gov.au/resources/practice-note-pnpe1-planning-and-environment-list-general-procedures
85 Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
www.vcat.vic.gov.au/decisions
86 Supplementary Consultation 1 (Victorian Civil and Administrative
88 Consultation 11 (Land and Environment Court of New South Wales).
89 Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
Practice Note PNVCAT2:
Expert Evidence, 1 October 2014.
90 Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
Practice Note PNVCAT4:
Alternative Dispute Resolution
(ADR), 19 December 2018.
Improving awareness of DSCV
12.67 DSCV receives a large number of enquiries about tree disputes.91
However, the Commission was told that its services are not
widely known to
arborists92 or some councils.93 This should be addressed because arborists often
act as intermediaries between disputing
neighbours94 and often play a pivotal
role in helping to resolve disputes. It would therefore be beneficial for
arborists to refer
parties to DSCV.
12.68 DSCV undertakes community education workshops including sessions about
the services offered by DSCV.95 Arborists and councils
should be targeted for
such information sessions about the services offered by DSCV to assist with the
resolution of neighbourhood
tree disputes.
Local council resources
12.69 The Commission is cautious about recommending that councils take on
additional responsibilities given that public land is outside
the scope of
the new Act. However, some councils have advised that they are often
private disputes and are therefore in
a good position to direct parties towards practical information that may prevent
these disputes
arising, or ensure that they are resolved
swiftly.96 The Commission’s recommendations below are within the scope
of activities that councils currently perform. The Commission
also notes that a
continuing role for councils is contemplated in the recommendations that
consider the overlap between the new Act
and existing local laws in Chapter
Responsible planting
12.70 Supporting new laws with information about responsible planting would
should include guidance
relation to neighbouring land.
This information will encourage property owners
to think more carefully about how particular plants grow and whether they are
to drop fruit and leaves. It will also encourage people to think about
the longterm consequences of planting particular species on
properties.
12.71 Councils should be encouraged to develop tree planting guidelines to
disseminate to the local community. As noted earlier, some
councils already do
this. This information
should be more broadly available across our communities. For neighbourhoods
with little vegetation, guidance could simply consist
of advice about which
also provide useful information
More accessible information about local laws
12.72 Chapter 10 identified that it would be helpful for the community to
have better access to information about the local laws that
apply to trees in
council areas and how these laws work. There is confusion in the community about
how and when local laws may apply
to trees on private land. This was also
recognised as an issue in the review of the Queensland Act.98
91 Consultation 7 (Dispute Settlement Centre of Victoria). See Ch 2 for more
information.
92 Consultation 4 (Participants at facilitated discussion at VITO ArborCamp
93 Consultations 4 (Participants in facilitated discussion at VTIO
ArborCamp2018); 7 (Dispute Settlement Centre of Victoria).
94 Consultations 4 (Participants in facilitated discussion at VTIO
ArborCamp2018), 6 (Ben Kenyon).
95 Dispute Settlement Centre of Victoria,
Community Engagement Workshops
(Web Page, 21 March 2019) <https://
www.disputes.vic.gov.au/
training-and-room-hire/community-engagement-workshops>.
96 Consultations 8 (City of Boroondara), 9 (Nillumbik Shire Council), 10 (Baw
Baw Shire Council), 12 (City of Port Phillip).
97 Consultation 12 (City of Port Phillip).
98 Queensland Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Neighbourhood Disputes
(Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
(Report No 72, December 2015)
12.73 Councils with local tree protection laws
should ensure there is publicly accessible information about these laws on
websites. This information, even when available on websites, is often
hard to find. The City of Port Phillip has published a factsheet
tree protection laws. This is a good example of the information that should be
more widely available.99
Guidance about hiring an arborist
12.74 The Commission was told that councils regularly employ arborists to
protect, maintain and plant new trees on public land.100
Councils are well
placed to give local residents information about what to look for in an
arborist; how arborists can help with disputes;
and arborists’
qualification levels. Some councils already provide good information and this
could be supplemented with a link
to Arboriculture Australia that could provide
easily accessible information about qualification levels.
Further community education
12.75 The proposed Act will not only impact the parties to a dispute but also
professional bodies, in particular arborists. For example,
the new Act will
modify abatement and outline decision-making principles to guide the resolution
of tree disputes in VCAT and include
requirements for expert evidence. Given
that arborists are often involved early on in tree disputes, it is vital that
they have access
to information about the operation of the new Act.
12.76 To that end the Commission is of the view that educational sessions
should occur for arboricultural groups, councils, DSCV and
other interested
organisation or bodies that are likely to be involved in, or contacted for
information about, the new Act.
99 See, eg, City of Port Phillip,
City Permits—Fact Sheet
Significant Tree Permits
(29 November 2017)
http://www.portphillip.vic.gov.au/ significant-tree-permit.htm
100 Consultations 8 (City of Boroondara), 9 (Nillumbik Shire Council), 10
(Baw Baw Shire Council), 12 (City of Port Phillip).
Recommendations
58 The Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal should provide supporting
information for parties about the operation of the Act
and Tribunal processes.
Resources could include:
(a) a detailed information guide, similar in format to the guide developed by
the Magistrates’ Court for fencing disputes
(b) information about key decisions made under the Act
(c) an annotated version of the Act outlining how the Tribunal has
interpreted particular provisions and highlighting key cases
(d) a link to the Dispute Settlement Centre of Victoria website
(e) key Practice Notes relevant to tree disputes, for example, about the
provision of expert evidence and alternative dispute resolution.
59 The services of the Dispute Settlement Centre of Victoria should be
promoted more broadly. Community engagement workshops could
be conducted for the
arboricultural industry and other interested organisations and professional
60 Local councils should continue to provide resources to the community
relevant to tree disputes. These resources could include:
(a) tree planting guidelines suited to local areas
(b) fact sheets on the application of local tree protection laws
(c) information about engaging appropriately qualified arborists.
61 The arboricultural industry should provide information to the community
qualified arborists.
Other matters
and conclusions
Introduction
Online dispute resolution
Other options for law reform
Issues beyond the scope of this
Review of the new Act
Other matters and conclusions
Introduction
13.1 This chapter looks at a range of final issues. It examines online
dispute resolution (ODR) and how it could be used to
aid the resolution of tree
disputes. It also considers
community suggestions for reform that were different to those raised for
discussion in the consultation paper.
13.2 Some issues that were raised in responses but are outside the
Commission’s terms of reference for this inquiry are also
identified.
These issues are likely to require consideration if the new Act is
implemented. Preliminary views on these issues
are provided.
13.3 The chapter concludes with a recommendation for review of the new Act
after it has been operational for five years to ensure
that it is meeting its
objectives.
Online dispute resolution
13.4 ODR is a general term, describing a range of technology-assisted forms
of dispute resolution. The styles of ODR are outlined
Online dispute resolution techniques range from methods where parties have
full control of the procedure, such as in an online negotiation,
where a neutral third party is in control of both the process and the outcome,
such as online arbitration. In online dispute
resolution, the information
management role is often carried out not by physical persons, but by computers
and software.1
13.5 There is no one format of ODR. It makes use of a range of tools in
combination with traditional legal dispute resolution tools.2
The Victorian
Civil and Administrative Tribunal’s (VCAT) Residential Tenancies Hub
enables tenants and landlords with a
renting dispute to use an online system to
apply to have their matter heard in VCAT. Registered users are able to pay
their application
fee online, receive their hearing date, and even create
notices relating to requests for housing repairs or ending the tenancy.3
other online platforms, for example in Canada, agreements reached via the use
of ODR tools can be converted into formal
orders or transferred to a
court/tribunal hearing when they cannot be resolved.4
13.6 ODR is generally used for smaller, simpler disputes, which can be
‘triaged’ with threshold questions, and potentially
resolved using
good quality information and tools. Some of the benefits of ODR methods may
1 Department of Justice and Regulation (Vic),
Access to Justice Review
Report and Recommendations
(2016) vol 1, 272; see also Pablo Cortes,
‘Online Dispute Resolution Services: A Selected Number of Case
Studies’ (2014)
Computer and Telecommunications Law Review
2 See, eg, Nussen Ainsworth and Meghann Clark, ‘Technology in
Mediation’ (1 April 2016), 90(4)
Law Institute Journal
https://www.liv.asn.au/Staying-Informed/LIJ/LIJ/April-2016/Technology-in-mediation
3 Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
Online Tool to Help Tenants
and Landlords at VCAT
(Web Page, 17 November 2015)
www.vcat.vic.gov.au/news/online-tool-to-help-tenants-and-landlords-at-vcat
4 See, eg, Civil Resolution Tribunal,
How the Dispute Resolution Process
(Web Page, 2019) <https://civilresolutionbc.ca/
how-the-crt-works/how-the-process-ends/#what-if-i-dont-agree-with-the-decision>.
• Accessibility. People in non-metro areas, or without access to a
physical court or tribunal may find it easier to interact
with online tools and
processes. ODR tools may also be available around the clock, meaning that
parties need not be in the same
place at the same time to participate in
resolving their dispute.
• Physical separation of parties. In some cases, being in a room
together can exacerbate the problem. In ODR, there is no need
to meet or speak
with the other party.
• Lower cost. The cost to the user (parties) is generally much lower
than in traditional adjudication processes. The successful
resolution of matters
with ODR prior to hearing may also represent significant savings in costs.
• Ease of use. Assuming a certain level of technological literacy, ODR
systems are generally simple and user-friendly.
• Secure and documented communications. Conducting negotiations online
provides better opportunities to accurately record and
document each stage of
the process.5
Other jurisdictions and pilot programs
13.7 An ODR pilot program was conducted in the NSW Civil and
Administrative Tribunal (NCAT) in 2014. The pilot focused on
single-issue consumer disputes under the value of $5000.6 Analysis of the
uptake of matters included in the pilot
showed an increase in finalisations
before hearing, an increase in resolutions at hearing, a reduction of
adjournments at hearing,
and an overall projected saving of 12 hearing days
per month.7
13.8 ODR is currently in use in Victoria for resolving some Worksafe
disputes.8 For example, the Accident Compensation Conciliation
Service9 (ACCS)
acts as a first step online conciliator for injured workers and their employers
to resolve disputes.10 The ACCS uses
ODR to ‘encourage workers and
employers participation where those participants would otherwise not be able to
be involved in
the conference’.11 ODR is generally seen to supplement
rather than replace face-to-face conferencing.12
13.9 In 2017, following the
Access to Justice
Review, the Victorian
Government pledged nearly
$800,000 to establish an online dispute resolution pilot led by the
Department of Justice and Regulation Victoria and a $1.98 million
investment to
gauge the suitability of the broader
introduction of ODR in Victoria.14 The
review also recommended the establishment of an online dispute resolution
advisory panel.
13.10 VCAT has recently concluded its ODR pilot for small civil claims.15 The
pilot ran for four weeks from September 2018 and tested
whether ODR was suitable
for people involved in disputes about goods and services under $10,000.16 VCAT
heard 65 cases using ODR
technology, with 71 parties participating in online
hearings. A total of 21 cases
5 See generally Michael Legg, ‘The Future of Dispute Resolution: Online
ADR and Online Courts’
(2016) 27(4)
Australasian Dispute
Resolution Journal
–35; see also National Alternative Dispute
Resolution Advisory Council,
On-line ADR Background Paper
www.ag.gov.au/LegalSystem/AlternateDisputeResolution/Pages/NADRACPublications-A-Z.aspx
6 NSW Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
Annual Report 2014–2015
(Report, 2015) 79.
7 Louise Clegg, ‘Achieving Efficiency—NCAT Online Dispute
Resolution Pilot’ (Speech, COAT National Conference, 4–5
https://coat.asn.au/events/2015-coat-national-conference/
8 Accident Compensation Conciliation Service,
Online Dispute Resolution
(Web Page, 2013) <
https://www.conciliation.vic.gov.au/
conciliation-process/conferences/online-dispute-resolution
9 The ACCS is an independent statutory body corporate established under
section 52A of the
Accident Compensation Act 1985
and continues in
force under
section 519
Workplace Injury Rehabilitation and
Compensation Act 2013
to provide conciliation services for worker’s
compensation disputes in Victoria.
10 Accident Compensation Conciliation Service,
Conciliation—Video
(Web Page, 2013) <
https://www.conciliation.vic.gov.au/about-
us/preparing-for-conciliation
11 Accident Compensation Conciliation Service,
Online Dispute Resolution
(Web Page, 2013) <
https://www.conciliation.vic.gov.au/
conciliation-process/conferences/online-dispute-resolution
13 Now the Department of Justice and Community Safety. Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal,
Access to Justice Funding to Enhance Services
(Web Page, 24 May 2017) <https://
www.vcat.vic.gov.au/news/access-to-justice-funding-to-enhance-services
14 Department of Justice and Regulation (Vic),
Access to Justice Review
Report and Recommendations
(2016) vol 1, 277.
15 The pilot was funded by the then Department of Justice and Regulation and
delivered on a recommendation from the Access to Justice
16 Information provided by VCAT to the Commission, 26 March 2019.
settled beforehand, demonstrating the
‘indirect result of online dispute resolution case management’.17
The ODR pilot
shows ‘exciting potential benefits’ for the Victorian
community.18
13.11 VCAT explained that ODR requires VCAT members or the Registry to
administer the process behind the online platform to ensure
parties progress
through the system. VCAT notes that establishing ODR at the Tribunal would
require significant resourcing.19
13.12 One of the most successful examples of ODR is the Civil Resolution
Tribunal (CRT) in British Columbia, Canada, which deals
with matters including
debts, personal property disputes, strata title disputes, and some personal
injury disputes.20 The CRT uses
a cumulative model of ODR, offering different
levels of support if disputes cannot be resolved.21 This program has been
because of the user-friendly nature of CRT’s online services
and the professionalism of CRT staff to assist with dispute resolution.
Community responses—online dispute
13.13 The consultation paper asked the community whether an online dispute
resolution platform dedicated to neighbourhood tree disputes
introduced in Victoria. If so, community members were asked to comment on what
tools should be made available on this platform
and who should administer
13.14 A large number of responses were received on this issue, with most
people supportive of introducing an ODR platform in Victoria
to help resolve
neighbourhood tree disputes.22 Some community members questioned whether ODR
platforms would have the capacity to
adjudicate disputes in the same way as
faceto-face dispute resolution forums.23
13.15 Overall, community members suggested that the platform should be
administered through councils,24 VCAT25 or DSCV.26 One community
suggested that ‘tools should include a facility to present photographs of
troublesome trees’.27
13.16 DSCV has also been considering how the use of ODR could increase
accessibility and efficiency for some types of dispute.28
The Commission’s conclusions—online
dispute resolution
13.17 The Commission is generally supportive of the use of ODR to help
resolve neighbourhood tree disputes. ODR is likely to provide
parties with
greater flexibility about how they participate in negotiations, provide targeted
advice about resolution options and
establish a seamless way of communicating
formally with the Tribunal. ODR may also improve regional access to VCAT
processes. ODR
may also assist VCAT to deliver affordable and efficient justice
and to make the most efficient use of its resources. To this end,
Michelle Quigley, VCAT President, is ‘determined to champion the online
revolution that
19 Supplementary Consultation 1 (Victorian Civil and Administrative
20 Civil Resolution Tribunal,
What Kinds of Disputes Can the CRT Help
(Web Page, 2019) <https://civilresolutionbc.ca/resources/crt-
Civil Resolution Tribunal,
Participant Satisfaction Survey—January 2019
<https://civilresolutionbc.ca/participant-satisfaction-survey-january-2019/>.
21 The CRT process can be divided into four main stages: 1) Solution
Explorer: self-help tools to help parties understand
their rights and
obligations and to explore solutions before hearing; 2) Negotiations: tools and
guidance for party-to-party negotiations;
management: a CRT case manager facilitates negotiation between the parties.
Agreements can then be referred to a Tribunal member
to be converted into a
binding order of the CRT; 4) Adjudication: if a matter has not resolved it can
be transferred to hearing
(usually on the papers) by a tribunal member with
relevant specialist expertise: See Civil Resolution Tribunal,
How the CRT
(Web Page, 2019)
<https://civilresolutionbc.ca/how-the-crt-works/>.
22 Submissions 4 (Name withheld), 5 (Name withheld), 9 (Dr Karen Smith), 11
(Name withheld), 19 (Name withheld), 21 (Pointon Partners
Lawyers), 23 (Name
withheld), 27 (Name withheld).
23 Submissions 6 (Name withheld), 20 (Name withheld).
24 Submission 4 (Name withheld).
25 Submission 23 (Name withheld).
26 Submissions 11 (Name withheld), 23 (Name withheld).
27 Submission 19 (Name withheld).
28 Information provided by DSCV as part of a data request from the
Commission, November 2018 and clarification of data provided in
has started at the tribunal’.29 ODR tools
could make use of the new website and public information sources recommended in
13.18 While ODR provides some clear benefits for tree disputes, it may not
be appropriate for all cases or for all steps in the
VCAT adjudication
process. The remote nature of the
ODR hearing process and the distance this creates between the parties will be
will be better suited to
face-to-face resolution. Face-to-face negotiation may encourage parties to
negotiate a solution that
they can all ‘live with’ because of the
proximity of neighbours and their ongoing relationship. This is important.
13.19 Chapter 7 identified the important role that on-site final hearings
play in the resolution of tree disputes in New South Wales
and in the success of
the NSW scheme. The Commission has heard that physically viewing the tree and
the problem in context greatly
assists the court to deliver practical and robust
solutions to the problem. It was recommended that VCAT conduct on-site final
for tree disputes or on-site
inspections modelled on the Queensland approach. End-to-end ODR may be
better suited to less hostile and less complex tree disputes.
In other cases it
will be important that
on-site hearings or inspections are able to feed into any future ODR
framework for tree disputes.
Other options for law reform
13.20 The community was invited to propose alternative options for reform to
those proposed by the Commission in the consultation
paper. Ideas were received
• addressing problems with local laws and increasing councils’
role in the management of vegetation on private land30
• the creation of binding obligations about significant trees that run
with the land31
• valuing trees to recognise them as community assets32 and providing
rate deductions to property owners to compensate them
for tree-related
maintenance expenses.33
13.21 The Commission acknowledges the contribution of those who submitted
alternative options for reform. Each of them gave thoughtful
consideration to
how neighbourhood tree disputes may be resolved in simpler, clearer and fairer
Improving local laws and a greater role for
13.22 Several reform ideas were proposed about improving the operation of
local tree protection laws by:
• increasing penalties for damage or harm caused to trees in breach of
local tree protection laws34
• enabling applicants to appeal decisions made under local laws to an
external body (that is, independent of the responsible
authority administering
the local law).35
13.23 Chapter 10 makes recommendations about how the new Act should interact
with local law permit requirements. The Commission concludes
that the new Act
should limit the operation of local laws subject to safeguards designed to
mirror processes
contained in local laws. It is outside the scope of the current inquiry to
review and make recommendations about the broader utility
of local laws.
29 Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
Annual Report
(Report, 2018).
30 Submissions 5 (Name withheld), 6 (Name withheld), 17 (Name withheld), 37
(Ian Hundley), 38 (L. Barry Wollmer); Survey Respondents
3, 19, 57, 83, 88, 108,
31 Consultation 4 (Participants in facilitated discussion at VTIO
ArborCamp2018).
32 Submission 12 (Dr Gregory Moore OAM); Consultation 6 (Ben Kenyon); Survey
Respondents 2, 13, 55, 89.
33 Submission 12 (Dr Gregory Moore OAM).
34 Submission 37 (Ian Hundley).
35 Submission 17 (Name withheld); Survey Respondents 83, 108.
13.24 The Commission acknowledges the concerns
raised by community members about not having any external right of review under
laws. An internal review process may be available to applicants who are
aggrieved by the initial decision made by council. For example,
the City of
Boroondara advised ‘it is not uncommon for appeals to result in different
outcomes to the original decision, especially
in cases where the applicant has
provided more comprehensive evidence’.36
13.25 The Commission observes that penalties imposed under local laws have
remained the same since 1991 and as a consequence are
likely to be
inadequate as a deterrent.37 The
Local Government Act 1989
recently undergone an extensive review process, including consideration of the
value of penalty units under local laws,
with Local Government Victoria
finding ‘there are grounds for considering indexation of penalty
units if breaches
of local laws are to be rigorously enforced’.38 This
was reflected in the
Local Government Bill 2018
, now lapsed, which put
forward consequential amendments to the
Sentencing Act 1991
These amendments would have dispensed with the fixed penalty amount of $100
in favour of annual determinations to be
made by the Treasurer under the
Monetary Units Act 2004
(Vic). However, the Bill has now lapsed and the
Local Government Act 1989
(Vic) continues to form the basis of the
legal framework for Victorian councils.
13.26 The Commission has been informed that the application of local tree
protection laws adds complexity to the resolution of tree
disputes and it is not
always clear how these laws apply.40 Chapter 12 recommends that councils provide
clear and accessible information
private land in council areas. This should include information about how these
laws operate.
13.27 Another reform proposal was the introduction of council-approved tree
contractors to help residents to understand council vegetation
policies and
objectives and to help them to manage vegetation on private land.41 The
Commission is cautious about recommending that
councils take on additional
responsibilities when the new Act will not apply to public land. The Commission
is aware, however, that
Whitehorse City
Council, as an example, has a Tree Education Program to raise awareness of
the benefits of trees in an urban environment and to educate
the community about
trees.42 The Commission is supportive of such programs but is also mindful of
resourcing limitations. Recommendations
in Chapter 12 encourage local councils
to develop tree planting guidelines to disseminate to residents to help to avoid
tree disputes
Greater recognition of the benefits of
13.28 In Chapter 2 the Commission identified that the community is becoming
increasingly aware of the importance of vegetation and
the need to retain it.
Another source outlining the benefits of trees to the community can be found in
the thesis of Andrew Simpson.43
36 Consultation 8 (City of Boroondara).
37 Submission 37 (Ian Hundley). They are governed by both the
(Vic) and the
Local Government Act 1989
(Vic). Penalty units
for local laws have been capped at $100 per unit since 1991 (
Sentencing Act
The maximum penalty under a local law is 20
penalty units ($2000):
Local Government Act 1989
(Vic) s 115. The
Commission also understand that councils can elect to
prosecute an offence under local law in the Magistrates’ Court; this is
an infringement offence within the meaning of the
Infringements Act 2006
Local Government Act 1989
(Vic) s 117(1A).
38 See, eg, Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
for The Future: Directions for a New
Local Government Act
(Paper, 2016)
www.localgovernment.vic.gov.au/council-governance/local-government-act-review
Local Government Victoria, part of the Department of Environment, Land, Water
and Planning (Vic), has carried out a comprehensive
review of the
Government Act 1989
(Vic), with contributions from councils and the
community. The review resulted in the
Local Government Bill 2018
introduced into Parliament on 23 May 2018. However, the Bill has now lapsed and
Local Government Act 1989
(Vic) continues to form the basis of the
legal framework for Victorian councils.
39 Explanatory Memorandum,
Local Government Bill 2018
(Vic) cl 74 sch 1 item
92. 40 Survey Respondents 3, 19, 57, 83, 88, 110.
41 Confidential submission.
42 City of Whitehorse,
Whitehorse Tree Education Program
http://www.whitehorse.vic.gov.au/Tree-Education-Program.html
43 Andrew Simpson, ‘Alternate Dispute Resolution for Neighbour Tree
Conflicts and the Role of Local Government’ (Masters
Thesis, University of
Technology Sydney, 2018).
13.29 Another reform idea was to legally recognise the significance of trees
in a way that runs with the land to bind future owners.
It was also emphasised
that there needs to be a more holistic approach to resolving tree disputes
where the law and aboriculture
work together to protect significant trees that
may live through multiple owners.44
13.30 The current law provides some scope for trees to be regulated into the
future through section 173 Agreements, Trust for Nature
covenants or land
management agreements under section 69 of the
Conservation, Forests and Land
(Vic).45 These are discussed in Chapter 10. Recommendations to bind
future purchasers of land to the legal outcomes of tree dispute
hearings subject
to certain safeguards are discussed in Chapter
11. The aim is to provide certainty about the management of trees that cause
damage or are likely to cause damage or harm.
13.31 Some community members suggested that a new Act should provide more
protection for trees by recognising trees as community assets.46
respondent stated ‘trees are an essential part of the urban environment
and their value is underestimated in most
cases’.47 Another community
member informed the Commission that there should be an industry-accepted
standard to place a monetary
value on trees.48 Arborist Ben Kenyon noted
because trees are not viewed as assets, many people believe they can deal
with them however they like and view their protection as
cumbersome or
unnecessary.49
13.32 In addition to the environmental and amenity benefits of trees, the
Commission has learnt that there are numerous tree valuation
methodologies based
on amenity that are used worldwide.50 For example, Dr Gregory Moore OAM advised
that in Germany the Koch method
of calculating the monetary value of ornamental
trees is a common and universally recognised method.51 Dr Moore commented that
simplifies the process, reduces the elements in dispute and lowers costs.52
Applying a dollar amount to trees can discourage interference
with trees of high
retention value while enabling tree works to be undertaken on trees of low
retention value.53
13.33 However, there is no consensus on a standard method to assess the
monetary value of trees within Australia.54 Therefore, the
Commission does not
recommend placing a monetary amount on trees as part of the decision-making
process under the new
Act. This approach is reflected in the explanatory notes preceding the
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
No financial value or carbon trading value may be placed on a tree. The
process for valuing trees in the urban environment is unsettled
and subject to
controversial valuing methods. This clause ensures that the object of the
Bill, to provide a statutory remedy for a nuisance caused
by trees growing in
the neighbourhood, is not affected or frustrated by unsettled methods of
calculating the monetary value of trees
for natural asset purposes or carbon
44 Consultation 4 (Participants in facilitated discussion at VTIO
ArborCamp2018).
Planning and Environment Act 1987
Conservation Trust Act 1972
Conservation, Forests and Lands
(Vic). These Acts are discussed in Ch 10.
46 Submission 12 (Dr Gregory Moore OAM); Consultation 6 (Ben Kenyon); Survey
Respondents 2, 13, 55, 89.
47 Survey Respondent 2.
48 Survey Respondent 55.
49 Consultation 6 (Ben Kenyon).
50 See, eg, Gary Watson, ‘Comparing Formula Methods of Tree
Appraisal’ (2002) 28(1)
Journal of Aboriculture
51 Submission 12 (Dr Gregory Moore OAM). The Koch method is often employed
in cases of ‘destruction, damage or expropriation’
of trees and is
‘based on interest paid on costs invested in woody plants growing up to
their maturity stage minus deductions
for age, defects and damage incurred prior
to the determining event: P. Bulí, ‘Testing of Koch Method Applied
For Evaluation
of Ornamental Trees in The Czech Republic’ (2009) 36(4)
Horticultural Science
(Prague) 154–61, 154.
52 Submission 12 (Dr Gregory Moore OAM).
54 Submission 12 (Dr Gregory Moore OAM). Different methods will produce
varying results, and different practitioners applying
the same method will
also produce varying results: Gary Watson, ‘Comparing Formula Methods of
Tree Appraisal’ (2002)
Journal of Aboriculture
55 Explanatory Notes,
Neighbourhood Disputes Resolution Bill 2010
13.34 Dr Gregory Moore OAM also suggested a scheme to offer rate remissions
or tax deductions for tree-related expenses to ensure
that owners were more
invested in the management and maintenance of trees and in recognition of the
benefit that trees provide to
the community. Dr Moore explained:
There is an issue that trees provide community benefits to all, but costs
are borne by the owner of the tree. If the community
benefits are of such
significance then there needs to be some community contribution to costs. While
subsidies or grants are often
suggested, I tend to prefer some sort of
concession over the longer term such as a remission in rates or tax
deductibility for tree
related expenses. This would allow proper
maintenance of the tree over the longer term of its lifespan and give the
owner a greater stake in its proper management. In short
the tree becomes
recognised as the asset that it is.56
13.35 The Commission acknowledges Dr Moore’s suggestion but notes that
it is beyond the scope of the review to report more broadly
of vegetation in our communities. These broader considerations are included in
planning schemes in the Victorian
community and environmental protection
legislation at the state and Commonwealth level.57
13.36 Chapter 8 recommends that VCAT consider the broader benefits of the
tree, including its historical, cultural, social or scientific
value, as well
as the value of the tree as a benefit to the community when determining a
private tree dispute. Other recommendations
aim to ensure that VCAT decisions
are underpinned by evidence-based decision-making that draws on the experience
of arborists.
13.37 The Commission observes that councils are increasingly leading the way
with modern and evolving urban forest policies. For example,
the City of Greater
Bendigo has a significant tree register and an Urban Tree Management Policy that
states ‘the protection
of existing trees and enhancement of
Bendigo’s urban forest is pivotal to ... realising its vision:
‘Greater Bendigo
– creating the world’s most liveable
community’.58 The City
of Stonnington has developed an Urban Forest Strategy 2017–2022 to
‘help enable the protection and enhancement of the
urban forest in the
face of many challenges that affect urban trees’.59
13.38 The City of Ballarat has adopted an Exceptional Tree Register that
lists trees on public and private land within the municipality
because these
trees are ‘an important and integral community and heritage asset to
Ballarat’.60 Moreover, South
Gippsland Shire Council has a Tree
Management Plan in recognition of the fact that ‘trees are a
significant asset that
are of high value to the community and contribute
greatly to the amenity of built environments within the Shire’.61
13.39 HVP Plantations suggested that where rural land is subdivided so that a
remaining rural land holder has many new neighbours
and potentially new
obligations to maintain trees on boundary lines and associated costs ‘it
would be just for a rural landowner
to be able to claim compensation from a
developer for the imposition of these costs as a lump sum at the time of
subdivision’.62
This is a matter that is outside the scope of this inquiry
and could be considered when the Act is reviewed as recommended later
56 Submission 12 (Dr Gregory Moore OAM).
57 See, eg,
Planning and Environment Act 1987
Conservation Trust Act 1972
Conservation, Forests and Lands
Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act
(Cth). The Commission notes that if the preservation of land subject to
a conservation covenant is not economically feasible and preservation
endangered, the Minister may remit the
whole or any part of the tax payable by the owner under the
Land Tax Act
(Vic) that is attributable to the land concerned:
Conservation Trust Act 1972
58 City of Greater Bendigo,
Urban Tree Management Policy
2017) 4; see also City of Melbourne,
Urban Forest Strategy—Making a
Great City Greener 2012–2032
www.melbourne.vic.gov.au/community/parks-open-spaces/urban-forest/Pages/urban-forest-
strategy.aspx>.
59 City of Stonnington,
Urban Forest Strategy 2017–2022
2017) 4 <https://
www.stonnington.vic.gov.au/Live/Urban-Forest/Urban-
Forest-Strategy>.
60 City of Ballarat, ‘Exceptional Tree Register’,
(Web Page, 2019)
http://www.ballarat.vic.gov.au/city/parks-and-outdoors/ tree-management
61 South Gippsland Shire Council,
Tree Management Plan 2017
62 Submission 28 (HVP Plantations).
Issues beyond the scope
of this inquiry
13.40 In performing its functions in relation to this inquiry, the Commission
has not considered other matters that have been identified
by members of the
community including:
• trees located on public land63 (for example, trees on a nature strip
or reserve);
• trees blocking access to sunlight and views (including high
• the illegal removal of vegetation.
13.41 These issues are beyond the scope of the Terms of Reference that govern
this inquiry. Nonetheless, preliminary views on these
issues are provided
because they will be important considerations if the new Act is implemented.
Trees on public land
13.42 Disputes involving trees on public land are beyond the scope of this
13.43 Disputes about trees on public land trigger a separate resolution
process.64 For example, councils have a duty of care to all
members of the
public on land vested in or owned
by them. Councils can therefore be found liable under the common law if a
tree causes damage to property or injury to persons on land
owned or managed by
13.44 The NSW Act does not apply to any land that is vested in, or managed
by, a council.66 The Department of Justice and Attorney
General review of the
NSW Act did not recommend an expansion on the Act to cover disputes about trees
on council land. This conclusion
was reached because ‘of the significant
resource and risk-management implications of such a change’ and ‘the
that Councils (unlike private landholders) employ professional tree
management staff and already have procedures in place to respond
to concerns
13.45 Similar to New South Wales, neither the Queensland nor Tasmanian Acts
captures trees situated on council-managed land. In the
statutory review of the
Queensland Act, the Queensland Law Reform Commission (QLRC) recommended that the
Act not be extended to encompass
trees on land controlled by the state and local
governments. It expressed concern about the significant impact on local
if it became responsible for all trees adjoining and overhanging the
boundaries of all the land under its control.68 Similarly, the
Tasmanian scheme
excludes land that is owned or managed by a council and is used as a public park
or garden, or a reserve or public
open space or for the purposes of
conservation.69
13.46 The Municipal Association of Victoria considered it ‘important
that trees on public land not be included’ in this
inquiry because it
could impede the responsibilities of councils in relation their responsibilities
under other Acts.70
63 Public land is not defined in the Victoria Planning Provisions or the
Planning and Environment Act 1987
(Vic), but it is commonly accepted
that public land comprises: Crown land; land vested in or owned by a
Minister, government
department, public authority or municipal council;
land otherwise used for a public purpose: Department of Environment, Land,
and Planning (Vic),
A Practitioner’s Guide
to Victorian Planning Schemes
(Version 1.1, October 2018) 31–3;
See also Department of Environment,
Land, Water and Planning
Planning Practice Note 2: Public Land Zones (Practice Document, January 2018)
www.planning.vic.gov.au/resource-library/
planning-practice-notes>.
64 For, eg, the role of local councils in tree management is particularly
complicated. Their obligations in a particular case will
be affected in part
by where the tree is located—for example on a road, council property and
Crown land—and which
laws apply in each case, whether it be the
Local Government Act 1989
Crown Land (Reserves) Act 1978
(Vic) , the
Road Management Act 2004
Country Fire
Authority Act 1958
(Vic) (where an emergency has occurred) and/or the common
law duty of care: Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic)
Review of the
Local Government Act
(Discussion Paper, 2015) 113.
65 See, eg,
Timbs v Shoalhaven City Council
[2004] NSWCA 81
(2004) 132 LGERA
—this case illustrates how death may be caused by falling trees,
although it is not a neighbourhood dispute as defined
by the terms of
reference of this inquiry. In this case, a subject tree protected by council
fell on the tree owner’s
own land, killing him in the process. See
also Coroners Court of New South Wales,
Finding into Death with Inquest of
Bridget Wright
(2014/56521) (20 November 2015) and Coroners Court of
Finding into Death with Inquest of Patiya May Schreiber
(2013/6032) (10 September 2015), where the deceased persons were each killed by
a falling branch.
Trees (Disputes Between Neighbours) Act 2006
67 Department of Justice and Attorney General (NSW),
Review of the
(Disputes Between Neighbours) Act 2006
(NSW) (Report, 2009) 3.
68 Queensland Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Neighbourhood Disputes
(Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
(Report No 72, December 2015)
Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants Act 2017
70 See, eg,
Road Management Act 2004
(Vic); Submission 32 (Municipal
Association of Victoria).
13.47 Although there are many trees on public land
that may potentially cause damage or harm, the Commission is of the view that it
would place an undue administrative and cost burden on local councils to
incorporate public land into the new Act. The Commission
is mindful of the
QLRC’s comments that there is confusion in the Queensland community about
whether the Queensland Act applies
to public land or not and the QLRC’s
recommendation that this should be remedied by including a provision in the
Act that states that it does not apply to public land.71 This
approach may also be helpful for the new Act.
Access to sunlight and views
13.48 Some community members suggested that a new Act should consider trees
that block access to sunlight and views.72 One submission
and two survey
respondents specifically addressed the issue of trees blocking sunlight to solar
panels.73 One submission raised the
issue of cypress hedges blocking sunlight.74
Another survey respondent pointed out that there was no legislation to govern
13.49 Trees blocking access to sunlight and views are covered in different
ways under the interstate statutory schemes discussed
throughout this report.
place to resolve disputes
13.50 The NSW Act allows an affected neighbour to bring legal action in
relation to high hedges that severely obstruct sunlight or
views.78 The Act is
concerned with the obstruction of sunlight to a window of a dwelling and the
obstruction of views from a dwelling.
The NSW scheme was expanded to allow the
NSWLEC to make orders to interfere with trees on the sole ground of access to
view following statutory
review of the Act in 2009 by the NSW Department of Justice and Attorney
General.79 It concluded:
the most frequent and most serious concerns raised in submissions to the
review related to high, dense hedges on immediately adjoining
properties, where the hedge is wall-like, and severely obstructs solar access
to, or views from, a dwelling.
It appears feasible to create a strictly limited avenue in the Land and
Environment Court for seeking orders in relation to such hedges.
This would be
consistent with the accepted practice of regulating the height of fences and
other built barriers between neighbours.80
13.51 The 2009 review by the NSW Act noted that it was not appropriate for
views or solar access to override privacy and other concerns
hedge-owner, or the broader community benefits of maintaining the hedge.81 It
follows that the NSWLEC is unable to make an
order with respect to a hedge
unless it is satisfied that the obstruction is severe and outweighs ‘any
undesirability of disturbing
or interfering with the trees’.82
71 Queensland Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Neighbourhood Disputes
(Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
(Report No 72, December 2015)
Recommendation 3-3.
72 Submissions 19 (Name withheld); Survey Respondents 43, 72, 111.
73 Submission 22 (Name withheld); Survey Respondents 43, 72.
74 Submission 19 (Name withheld).
75 Survey Respondent 75.
Anti-social Behaviour Act 2003
(UK) c 38. pt 8;
High Hedges
(Scotland) Act 2013
(Scot) asp 6;
High Hedges Act (Northern Ireland)
2011(NI) c 21.
Property Law Act 2007
(NZ) ss 332–338.
Trees (Disputes Between Neighbours) Act 2006
applies only to groups of two or more trees that: (a) are planted (whether in
the ground or otherwise) so as to form a
hedge, and (b) rise to a height of at
least 2.5 metres (above existing ground level). The Act also allows an
affected neighbour
to bring action for obstruction of sunlight to a window of a
dwelling and views from a dwelling: s 14B. NB: Not obstruction
sunlight to a roof of a dwelling.
79 Department of Justice and Attorney General (NSW),
Review of the
(Disputes Between Neighbours) Act 2006
(NSW) (Report, 2009). This review
received 127 submissions concerned about high hedges, 125 of which argued that
trees that block
light should be covered, and 115 of which argued that a blocked
view should also be a ground for interfering with a tree.
80 Ibid 34.
81 Ibid 37.
Trees (Disputes Between Neighbours) Act 2006
s 14E(2)(b).
13.52 The high hedges provisions were reviewed in 2013.83 The review
concluded that
of the NSW scheme was a ‘limited but
effective’ jurisdiction in the NSWLEC to hear hedge disputes.84 The 2013
concluded that there was insufficient evidence to support a significant
policy shift to broaden the existing provisions to cover
solar access.85
Thirty-two per cent of tree disputes finalised in the NSWLEC in 2017 were
applications concerning a hedge severely
obstructing sunlight or views.86
13.53 The Queensland scheme differs from the NSW scheme as it includes severe
obstruction of sunlight to a roof of a dwelling. It
enables QCAT to make orders
in relation to a tree that causes substantial, ongoing and unreasonable
interference with the use and
enjoyment of the neighbour’s land.87 This
applies to interference that is an obstruction of sunlight or a view only
• the tree rises at least 2.5m above the ground, and
• the obstruction is—
i) severe obstruction of sunlight to a window or roof of a dwelling on the
neighbour’s land, or
ii) severe obstruction of a view, from a dwelling on the neighbour’s
land, that existed when the neighbour took possession of
the land.88
13.54 Unreasonable interference may include blocking of sunlight to solar
panelling, blocking of light which causes mould growth in
the home, or
interruption to satellite reception.89
13.55 The 2015 statutory review of the Queensland Act recommended that the
Act be amended to limit its scope to sunlight that existed
when the neighbour
took possession of the land, as is now provided for in section 66(3)(ii) of the
Act. It also recommended placing
a time limit of six years on an applicant to
remedy the obstruction of sunlight or views.90 These recommendations were in
to concerns raised by QCAT, namely:
a neighbour should not be able to install solar panels and be entitled to
apply to QCAT to have trees removed that shaded the roof
at the time the
neighbour installed the panels.91
13.56 QCAT informed the Commission that the obstruction of sunlight and view
is one of the most common reasons for tree disputes brought
13.57 Similarly, in Tasmania, substantial, ongoing and unreasonable
interference with the use and enjoyment of land captures sunlight
being severely
obstructed from reaching:
• a window (including a window in a door) of a building on the affected
• a solar photovoltaic panel, a solar collector for a solar hot water
system, or a skylight, situated on a roof of a building
on the affected
13.58 This legislative reform arose from the Tasmania Law Reform
Institute’s examination of the dispute resolution mechanisms
available to
neighbours who have issues with high hedges as well as hazardous trees.94 The
Institute agreed with the majority
of submissions that any legislative
scheme implemented to deal with problem trees or hedges should include
obstruction of both
sunlight and views.95 The submissions to the Institute
confirmed that
83 Department of Attorney General and Justice (NSW),
Trees (Disputes Between Neighbours) Act 2006
(NSW) (High Hedge
Provisions) (Report, 2013).
84 Ibid 10.
85 Ibid 16.
86 Land and Environment Court of New South Wales,
Class 2: Tree Disputes
and Local Government Appeals
(Web Page, 22 November 2018)
http://www.lec.justice.nsw.gov.au/Pages/types_of_disputes/class_2/class_2.aspx
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
89 Explanatory Notes,
Neighbourhood Disputes Resolution Bill 2010
90 Queensland Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Neighbourhood Disputes
(Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
(Report No 72, December 2015) 143.
91 Ibid 139, 143.
92 Consultation 15 (Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal).
Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants Act 2017
94 Tasmania Law Reform Institute,
Problem Trees and Hedges: Access to
Sunlight and Views
(Report No 21, January 2016) 2.
95 Ibid 50.
both sunlight and views are important amenity
considerations for many people in the community and that their obstruction can
significantly
affect a person’s enjoyment of their property.96
13.59 Disputes about access to sunlight and vegetation are not uncommon
within Victoria97 and may increase as more suburban dwellings
acquire roof-top
solar panels.98 These
disputes can be particularly contentious and emotive because they can affect
the property value of homes.99 They can involve the illegal
vegetation without an owners’ permission (sometimes through poison) and
involve trespass.100 While these issues
are beyond the scope of this inquiry,
the Commission believes that further consultation on these issues and detailed
consideration
by Government may be needed at the five-year review recommended
later in this chapter (as occurred in the NSW Act).
13.60 The Commission also notes that the Victoria Planning Provisions and all
planning schemes have been recently amended to require
new developments to
consider their impact on any existing solar energy facility mounted on the roof
of an adjoining
dwelling.101 Moreover, a home owners guide encourages landowners to carefully
consider overshadowing risks at the surrounding site,
including the existence of
tall trees planted on adjoining lots of land and their growth potential, prior
to installing roof solar
systems.102 It advises ‘where shading from trees
is likely, examine alternative locations for solar system
placement’.103
Illegal removal of vegetation
13.61 The City of Boroondara expressed concern about a new Act providing
scope for trees to be removed to facilitate development on
neighbouring land.104
Other community members also raised concern about the illegal removal of
vegetation by developers or neighbours
on adjoining land,105 with community
members suggesting that the current penalties for such actions were not acting
as a deterrent.106
13.62 The new Act is not intended to facilitate tree removal for the
development of land. As discussed in Chapter 5, only trees that
have caused, are
causing or are likely to cause damage or harm to neighbouring property, land or
people will fall within the scope
of a new Act. In addition, the Commission has
recommended that the decision maker consider whether a tree should be replanted
cases where tree removal is considered necessary. The Commission is of the
view that VCAT’s existing experience in planning
matters will assist it to
identify and appropriately manage any applications that seek to use the new Act
to circumvent existing
legal obligations to retain vegetation.
97 Information provided by DSCV as part of a data request from the
Commission, November 2018 and clarification of data provided in
98 As of April 2017, 1.6 million properties around Australia had photovoltaic
solar panels and new figures from the Australian Photovoltaic
Institute show the
country’s solar power capacity is expected to double over the next few
years: Damien Carrick and Tegan Osborne,
‘Solar Panels and The Law: Can
You Stop Your Neighbour From Blocking Your Sunlight?’,
The Law Report
(ABC Radio National, 18 May 2017)
https://www.abc.net.au/news/2017-05-16/solar-panels-and-the-law-is-there-a-right-to-sunlight/8526752
see also Department of Premier and Cabinet (Vic),
Thousands of Victorian
(Web Page, 18 January 2019) <https://
www.premier.vic.
gov.au/thousands-of-victorian-homes-save-millions-on-solar/>.
99 See, eg, Gregory Moore, ‘Economic Value of Trees’,
Sustainable Gardening Australia
(Web Page) <
https://www.sgaonline.org.au/economic-
value-of-trees/
>; see also Ram Pandit et al ‘The Effect of Street
Trees on Property Value in Perth, Western Australia’ (2013) 110
Landscape and Urban Planning
100 See, eg, Order of Magistrate J Lesser (Magistrates Court of Victoria,
H13012408, 14 February 2018) referred to in Khaleda Rahman,
Neighbour’s Worst Nightmare: Family Comes Home to Find Beloved Trees
Destroyed by Chainsaw Wielding Man’,
Daily Mail Australia
online,11 May 2017) <https://
www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-4494582/Family-returns-home-backyard-trees-CHOPPED-down.html
101 Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
Residential Rooftop Dwellings
(Web Page, 11 October 2018)
https://www.planning.vic.gov.au/policy-and-strategy/reducing-overshadowing-on-rooftop-solar-panels
See also Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
Practice Note 88: Planning Considerations for Existing Residential Rooftop Solar
Energy Facilities,
October 2018 <https://
www.planning.vic.gov.au/policy-and-strategy/reducing-overshadowing-on-rooftop-solar-panels
102 Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
Overshadowing Risk When Installing a Rooftop Solar System: A Home Owners Guide
(Document, October 2018) <
https://www.planning.vic.gov.au/policy-and-strategy/reducing-overshadowing-on-
rooftop-solar-panels
104 Submission 25 (City of Boroondara).
105 Submissions 12 (Dr Gregory Moore OAM), 37 (Ian Hundley); Consultation 6
(Ben Kenyon).
106 Submission 37 (Ian Hundley); Survey Respondent 83.
13.63 The native vegetation removal regulations107
have recently been reviewed to ensure that native vegetation is being
by better accounting for the environmental value of large scattered
trees, endangered vegetation types and sensitive wetlands
and coastal areas
in decision making as well as improving monitoring and reporting on the
implementation of native vegetation
removal and offsets.108 There are a range
of enforcement responses available to authorities when native vegetation is
removed without
a permit, including ‘requiring environmental rectification
and remediation for
unauthorised removal of native vegetation’ or applying for an
enforcement order through VCAT to achieve compliance.109
Review of the new Act
13.64 The NSW Act has an inbuilt statutory review mechanism in section 23,
which required the Attorney General to review the Act two
years from the date of
its assent on 6 December 2006. The comprehensive statutory review was conducted
by the NSW Department of Justice
and Attorney General in November 2009.110
13.65 Similarly, the Queensland Act required a statutory review of the Act to
be undertaken within three years of its commencement
to determine whether the
objects of the Act remained valid and whether the Act was meeting its
objectives, and to investigate other
issues.111 The statutory review of the Act
was published by the QLRC in December 2015.112
13.66 Under section 39(1) of the Tasmanian Act ‘the Minister is to
cause an independent review of the operation of this Act
to be carried out as
soon as practicable after the fourth anniversary of the commencement of this
section’.113
13.67 All statutory reviews stipulate that a copy of the written review is to
be tabled in Parliament.114
13.68 The Commission considers that the reviews conducted pursuant to the NSW
and Queensland Acts have been valuable and in some cases
have resulted in
legislative amendments to better reflect community views and the evolving nature
of tree disputes between neighbours.115
The Commission is of the view that the
new Act should also include a statutory review mechanism. This would ensure that
objectives of the new Act remain valid and that amendments can be
made to improve the Act in a timely manner. It would be appropriate
review to be conducted within five years of the date of commencement of the new
13.69 A statutory review would also provide an opportunity to consider the
matters discussed earlier in this report including:
• the effectiveness of the zoning provisions in the Act. At review
Government should consult with farming and agricultural users
of land to obtain
specific input from rural communities about the application of the Act (see
107 The native vegetation removal regulations govern the removal of
native vegetation in Victoria. They require landholders
to obtain a
planning permit to remove, destroy or lop native vegetation. The
‘Guidelines for the Removal, Destruction or
Lopping of Native
Vegetation’ is now an incorporated document in all planning
schemes in Victoria.
108 Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
The Native Vegetation Clearing Regulations
(Web Page) 29 October 2018)
www.environment.vic.gov.au/native-vegetation/review-of-native-vegetation-clearing-regulations
109 Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
Vegetation Removal Regulations— Compliance and Enforcement Strategy
(December 2017) 15–17 <https://
www.environment.vic.gov.au/native-vegetation/native-vegetation
110 Department of Justice & Attorney General (NSW),
Review of the
Trees (Disputes Between Neighbours) Act 2006
(NSW) (Report, 2009) 9.
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
112 Queensland Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Neighbourhood Disputes
(Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
(Report No 72, December 2015).
Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants 2017
(Tas) 39(1).
Trees (Disputes Between Neighbours) Act 2006
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants Act 2017
115 For example, the NSW Act was expanded to allow NSWLEC to make orders to
interfere with trees for access to sunlight and views:
See Department of Justice
and Attorney General (NSW),
Review of the
Trees (Disputes Between Neighbours)
(NSW) (Report, 2009).
• whether to expand the definition of adjoining land to include
irregularly shaped parcels of land. Such an expansion could
apply to neighbours
who do not share a common boundary but are separated by no more than two metres
of public land, or separated
by an easement on public land. This distance allows
some flexibility while being narrow enough to capture only immediate neighbours.
At review Government should consult with Land Use Victoria (see Chapter 5)
• whether there is a need to include a formal branch removal notice
process in the Act and how useful it would be to do so.
Consultation should
occur with the Queensland Government, dispute resolution centres, community
legal centres and the Tasmanian Government
(see Chapter 6)
• whether to expand the application of the Act to include trees
blocking access to sunlight and views.
Appendix A: Submissions
Appendix B: Consultations
Appendix C: Online survey
Appendix A: Submissions
Ian Collier
Name withheld
Confidential
Name withheld
Name withheld
Name withheld
Ben Kenyon, Principal Consulting Arborist, Homewood Consulting
Victoria Thieberger
Dr Karen Smith
Professor Phillip Hamilton
Name withheld
Dr Gregory Moore OAM, Senior Research Associate, The University of
Mandy Collins
Confidential
Confidential
Magistrates’ Court Victoria
Name withheld
ENSPEC, Arboricultural and Environmental Consultants, Craig Hallam,
Managing Director, and Craig Hinton, Senior Consultant
Name withheld
Name withheld
Pointon Partners Lawyers
Name withheld
Name withheld
Name withheld
City of Boroondara
Confidential
Name withheld
28 Warwick Williams, Corporate Counsel, HVP Plantations
29 David Galwey, Consulting Arborist, Tree Dimensions Pty Ltd, Acting
Commissioner, Land and Environment Court of New South Wales
30 Law Institute of Victoria
31 Barwon Community Legal Service
32 Municipal Association of Victoria
33 Annette Neville
34 Allan Day
35 Confidential
36 Monique Onezime
37 Ian Hundley
38 L. Barry Wollmer
Appendix B: Consultations
1 Aldo Taranto
2 Dr Gregory Moore OAM, Senior Research Associate, The University of
3 Warwick Williams, Corporate Counsel, HVP Plantations
4 Participants in facilitated discussion at VTIO ArborCamp 2018
(approximately 40 arborists)
5 Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal
6 Ben Kenyon, Principal Consulting Arborist, Homewood Consulting
7 Dispute Settlement Centre of Victoria
8 City of Boroondara
9 Nillumbik Shire Council
10 Baw Baw Shire Council
11 Land and Environment Court of New South Wales
12 City of Port Phillip
13 Aboriginal Victoria
14 Robert Mineo, Coordinator Arboriculture Services at Monash City
15 Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal
16 Heritage Victoria
Supplementary consultation
1 Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal
Appendix C: Online survey questions
Have you been involved in a tree dispute with a neighbour?
2 Did the dispute relate to a tree on your property, or on your
neighbour’s property? My tree
My neighbour’s tree Other (please specify)
What, in your view, were the main issues in dispute? Choose all options
that apply.
Branches encroaching over boundary lines Roots encroaching over boundary
lines Falling trees
The spread of weeds or creeping plants
Damage to property (including drains, concrete and foundations) Leaf litter
causing damage or creating a hazard
Harm or injury to people Other (please specify)
Did you or your neighbour make attempts to resolve the dispute
yourselves? Choose all options that apply.
We trimmed back the tree/plant to the boundary line to remedy the issue
(abatement)
We negotiated informally: we discussed or corresponded about the problem We
attended mediation through the Dispute Settlement Centre
of Victoria We attended
mediation with a private mediator
We did not make any attempts to resolve the dispute ourselves
Comments (For example, who initiated these attempts, or any other details you
think are relevant)
Were you able to successfully resolve the dispute yourselves?
In part (please explain)
What further support or information do you think would have made it
possible to resolve the dispute between yourselves?
Did you go to court to resolve the dispute?
If yes, please provide any comments. You may wish to explain who initiated
the legal action, the cause(s) of action that were pursued,
which court you went
to, whether you had legal representation or were self-represented, the outcome
of the legal action and any
orders made, and any comments about the court
process including court-ordered mediation, etc
Was the dispute eventually resolved in another way (eg moving away,
illegal action, change in ownership), or did the situation improve?
Please provide any comments or information about your experience.
Would further support or information have made it possible to resolve
the dispute or improve the outcome?
Please provide any comments (eg, you can specify the types of support or
information you would have found helpful or explain why they
would not have
improved the outcome)
Did the court resolve the dispute effectively (regardless of whether
you won or lost)?
Please provide any comments about your experience in court.
Have you ever assisted other people to resolve a tree dispute (in a
professional capacity)?
If yes, what is/was your role and how did you assist? For example, as a legal
representative, an ADR practitioner, a council officer
or by directing to
information resources.
Do you think the current law and process for resolving tree disputes in
Victoria is satisfactory as it is?
If not, why not and what changes should be made?
Is there anything else you would like to share about your experience or
your views on the current law?
What is your post code?
If you are happy for us to contact you in relation to your responses,
please provide your email address or other contact details below.
Bibliography
Bibliography
2013) Aboriginal Victoria,
Heritage Tools
(Web Page) <https://
www.vic.gov.au/aboriginalvictoria/heritage/heritage-tools-
and-publications/heritage-tools.html>
Registered Aboriginal Parties
(Web Page) <https://
www.vic.gov.au/aboriginalvictoria/heritage/
registered-aboriginal-parties.html>
Accident Compensation Conciliation Service,
Guide to Conciliation—Video
(Web Page, 2013) <https://
www.conciliation.vic.gov.au/about-us/
preparing-for-conciliation>
Online Dispute Resolution
(Web Page, 2013) <https://
www.conciliation.vic.gov.au/conciliation-
process/conferences/online-dispute-resolution>
Agriculture Victoria,
(Web Page, 23 January 2019)
http://agriculture.vic.gov.au/about-us
Invasive Plant Classifications
(Web Page, 5 December 2018)
http://agriculture.vic.gov.au/ agriculture/pests-diseases-and-weeds/weeds/invasive-plant-classifications
Property Management and the Environment
(Web Page, 3 August 2017)
http://agriculture. vic.gov.au/agriculture/farm-management/business-management/new-landholders/property- management-and-the-environment
Resolving Disputes
(Web Page, 8 May 2017)
http://agriculture.vic.gov.au/agriculture/farm- management/business-management/new-landholders/resolving-disputes
Rural Zones Explained
(Web Page, 8 May 2017)
http://agriculture.vic.gov.au/agriculture/ farm-management/business-management/planning-applications-in-rural-areas/rural-zones- explained
Tips Before Purchasing Rural Land
(Web Page, 3 August 2017)
http://agriculture.vic.gov.au/ agriculture/farm-management/business-management/new-landholders/tips-before-purchasing- rural-land
Ainsworth, Nussen and Meghann Clark, ‘Technology in Mediation’ (1
April 2016), 90(4)
Law Institute Journal
Aitken, Richard and Michael Looker (eds),
The Oxford Companion to
Australian Gardens
(Oxford University Press, 2002)
American Law Institute,
Restatement (Second) of the Law of Torts 2d
Arboriculture Australia,
Australian Arborist Industry Licence
(Information Brochure, Version
http://arboriculture.org.au/License
Australian Qualification Framework (AQF) and Australian Training
http://arboriculture.org.au/Qualification
ectory Listing (Web Page)
http://arboriculture.org.au/listings.aspx
Australian Qualification Framework (AQF) and Australian Training
http://arboriculture.org.au/Qualification
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Traditional Rights and
Freedoms—Encroachments by Commonwealth Laws
(Final Report No 129,
Australian National Botanic Gardens, Australian Government,
Plant—Surviving Harsh Conditions
(Information Resource, 2004)
Australian Qualifications Framework,
What is the AQF?
www.aqf.edu.au/what-is-the-
Australian Securities and Investments Commission (ASIC),
’MoneySmart’,
(Web Page, 19 December 2018) <https://
www.moneysmart.gov.au/insurance/home-insurance
Bagaric, Mirko and Sharon Erbacher, ‘Causation in Negligence: From
Anti-jurisprudence to Principle—Individual Responsibility
Cornerstone for Attribution of Liability’
Journal of Law
and Medicine
Banyule City Council,
Native Plant Vouchers
(Web Page) <https://
www.banyule.vic.gov.au/Council/
Environment-and-Sustainability/Trees-and-Plants/Native-Plant-Vouchers>
Barker, Kit, Peter Cane, Mark Lunney and Francis Trindade,
Torts in Australia
(Oxford University Press, 5th ed, 2012)
Bayside City Council,
Significant Tree Register
(Web Page, 2019)
www.bayside.vic.gov.au/
significant-tree-register>
Beazley, Margaret ‘Damage’ in Carolyn Sappideen and Prue Vines
Fleming’s The Law of Torts
(Lawbook Co., 10th ed, 2011)
Bell, Justice Kevin,
One VCAT—President’s Review of VCAT
(Report, 30 November 2009)
Bergin, Justice P A, ‘The Objectives, Scope and Focus of Mediation
Legislation in Australia’ (Speech, Mediate First, 11
Blackstone, William,
Commentaries on the Laws of England, Book III
(Cadell and Davies, 15th ed, 1809)
Blow, Chief Justice Alan, ‘Planning, Environment and Heritage
Litigation and Legislation in Tasmania’ (Speech, Australasian
Conference of Planning and Environment Courts and Tribunals, 5 March 2014) <
www.supremecourt.tas.gov.au/publications/speeches-articles/
Brisbane City Council,
(Web Page, 24
January 2019) Buckley, RA,
The Law of Negligence and Nuisance
Nexis UK, 5th ed, 2011)
Bulíř, P, ‘Testing of Koch Method Applied for Evaluation of
Ornamental Trees in The Czech Republic’, (2009)
Horticultural
Butler, Susan (ed),
Macquarie Dictionary
(Macquarie Dictionary
Publishers, 6th ed, 2013) Butt, Peter (ed)
Butterworths’ Concise
Australian Legal Dictionary
(Lexis Nexis, 3rd ed, 2004)
Buttigieg, Mel, ‘Neighbourhood Tree-son! Family’s CCTV Catches
Man Next Door Cutting Down Their Tree’,
Yahoo7 News
(online, 11 May
2017) <https://au.news.yahoo.com/geelong-man-
catches-neighbour-on-cctv-hacking-trees-with-chainsaw-35448374.html>
Carrick, Damien and Tegan Osborne, ‘Solar Panels and The Law: Can You
Stop Your Neighbour From Blocking Your Sunlight?’
The Law Report
(ABC Radio National, 18 May 2017)
www.abc.net.au/news/2017-05-16/solar-panels-and-the-law-is-there-a-right-to-
sunlight/8526752>
Cheshire, Lynda and Robin Fitzgerald, ‘From Private Nuisance to
Criminal Behaviour: Neighbour Problems and Neighbourhood Context
Australian City’ (2015) 30(3)
Housing Studies
Citizens Advice Bureau (WA),
Mediation Service
(Web Page, 2019)
http://www.cabwa.com.au/
Ballarat, ‘Exceptional Tree Register’
, Tree Management
Page, 2019)
http://www.ballarat.vic.gov.au/city/parks-and-outdoors/tree-management
City of Boroondara,
Arboricultural Report Writing Guide: Guide for the Preparation of
Preliminary Arboricultural Reports, Arboricultural Impact Assessments,
Investigation/ Mapping Reports, Tree Management and Protection Plans and
Transplant Method Statements
(Guidelines, June 2017)
Choosing Suitable Trees
(Web Page, 2019) <https://
www.boroondara.vic.gov.au/waste-
environment/trees-and-naturestrips/choosing-suitable-trees>
Landscape Plan Guidelines
(Web Page, 2019) <https://
www.boroondara.vic.gov.au/planning-
building/planning-permit-applications/landscape-plan-guidelines>
Neighbouring Trees
(Web Page, 2019) <https://
www.boroondara.vic.gov.au/waste-
environment/trees-and-naturestrips/neighbouring-trees>
City of Casey and Cardinia Shire Council,
Indigenous Plant Guide
Page) <https://www.casey. vic.gov.au/indigenous-plants>
City of Gold Coast, ‘City Plan Version 6’,
Page) <https://cityplan.goldcoast.qld.gov.
au/Pages/Plan/Book.aspx?exhibit=GCCC_CityPlan>
City of Greater Bendigo,
Urban Tree Management Policy
City of Kingston,
Arboricultural Reporting Guidelines for Planning and
Developments
(25 June 2013)
City of Melbourne,
Urban Forest Strategy—Making a Great City Greener 2012-2032
(Report, 2012)
Australia’s First Urban Forestry School Announced
(Web Page, 6
September 2018)
www.melbourne.vic.gov.au/news-and-media/pages/australias-first-urban-forestry-
school-announced.aspx>
City of Port Phillip,
City Permits
Fact Sheet Significant Tree Permits
November 2017)
http://www.portphillip. vic.gov.au/significant-tree-permit.htm
Tree Protection Fact Sheet
(February 2019)
http://www.portphillip.vic.gov.au/tree_ maintenance.htm
City of Stonnington,
New Tree Protection Process
(Web Page, 14 June 2018) <https://
www.stonnington.vic.gov.au/
Development/Planning/Planning-News/New-Tree-Protection-Process>
Urban Forest Strategy 2017–2022
(Report, June 2017) City of
Whitehorse,
Whitehorse Landscape Guidelines: How to Prepare A Landscape Plan
(July 2012)
Whitehorse Tree Education Program
http://www.whitehorse.vic.gov.au/Tree- Education-Program.html
Civil Resolution Tribunal,
How the CRT Works
(Web Page, 2019)
<https://civilresolutionbc.ca/how-the-crt-works/>.
Participant Satisfaction Survey—January 2019
(Web Page, 2019)
<https://civilresolutionbc.ca/
participant-satisfaction-survey-january-2019/>
Clark Boardman Callaghan,
Nichols Cyclopedia of Legal Forms Annotated
vol 1 (at November 2016)
Clegg, Louise, ‘Achieving Efficiency—NCAT Online Dispute
Resolution Pilot’ (Speech, COAT National Conference, 4–5
<https://coat.asn.au/events/2015-coat-national- conference/>.
Community Justice Centre (NT),
Resolving Disputes without Going to Court
(Web Page, 2019)
<https://nt.gov.au/law/processes/resolving-disputes-without-going-to-court>
Community Justice Centres, Government of New south
(Web Page (5 July 2018)
http://www.cjc.justice.nsw.gov.au/Pages/cjc_whatis_ mediation/cjc_common_disputes/com_justice_neighbours.aspx
(Web Page, 13 March 2019)
http://www.cjc.justice.nsw.gov.au/Pages/com_ justice_aboutus/com_justice_aboutus.aspx
Community Law (NZ),
Trees—Overview
(Web Page, 2019)
http://communitylaw.org.nz/ community-law-manual/chapter-25-neighbourhood-life/trees/
Community Legal Centres Queensland,
Writing to Your Neighbour
www.qldneighbourhoods.com/writing-to-your-neighbour.html
Conflict Resolution Centre,
Resolving Conflict in Canberra
www.crs.org.au/
> Consumer Affairs
Conveyancing and Contracts for Sellers
(Web Page, 8 January 2019)
<https://www.consumer.
vic.gov.au/housing/buying-and-selling-property/selling-property/conveyancing-and-contracts-
for-sellers>
Due Diligence Checklist—for Home and Residential Property Buyers
(Web Page, 15 January 2019) <https://
www.consumer.vic.gov.au/housing/buying-and-selling-property/checklists/due-
Property Settlement—Selling a Property
(Web Page, 13 January
www.consumer.vic.gov.au/housing/buying-and-selling-property/selling-property/
property-settlement>
Consumer New Zealand,
Trees and Neighbours
(Web Page) <https://
www.consumer.org.nz/
articles/trees-and-neighbours>
Coroners Court of New South Wales,
Finding into Death with Inquest of
Bridget Wright
(2014/56521) (20 November 2015)
Coroners Court of Victoria,
Finding into Death with Inquest of Patiya May
(2013/6032) (10 September 2015)
Cortes, Pablo, ‘Online Dispute Resolution Services: A Selected Number
of Case Studies’ (2014) 6
Computer and Telecommunications Law Review
Cotter, Peter, ‘Neighbour Disputes’ in Naomi Saligari (ed),
The Law Handbook 2019: Your Practical Guide to the Law in Victoria
(Fitzroy Legal Service, 41st ed, 2019)
Council Arboriculture Victoria,
Arboricultural Reporting Guidelines for
Developments
(Version 2.0, November 2009)
Country Fire Authority,
Who Does What
(Web Page, 2019) <https://
www.cfa.vic.gov.au/about/
who-does-what>
County Court of Victoria,
Court Divisions
(Web Page, 2019) <https://
www.countycourt.vic.gov.au/learn-about-court/
court-divisions>
Fees and Costs for Civil Proceedings
(2019) <https://
www.countycourt.vic.gov.au/forms-and-
fees/fees-and-costs-civil-proceedings>
Court Network,
(Web Page, 2019)
<https://courtnetwork.com.au/about/what-we- do/>
Courts of New Zealand,
(Web Page) <https://
www.courtsofnz.govt.nz/about-the-
judiciary/structure-of-the-court-system>
Court Services Victoria,
Victorian Courts and Tribunals
www.courts.vic.gov.au/court-system/victorian-courts-and-tribunals
Davies, Margaret and Kynan Rogers, ‘Tale of a Tree’ (2014) 16
Flinders Law Journal
43 Davis, Julie R, ‘Contempt in the
Foleys List
(Research Paper,
23 May 2014)
www.foleys.com.au/mobile/CpdResources.aspx
Department of Attorney General and Justice (NSW),
Trees (Disputes Between Neighbours) Act 2006
(NSW) (High Hedge Provisions)
(Report, 2013)
Department of Education and Training (Vic),
Diploma of Arboriculture
(Web Page, 2017)
www.skills.vic.gov.au/victorianskillsgateway/Students/Pages/CourseSearchDescription.aspx
?type=course&CourseId=12920&new=1>
Department of Environment and Primary Industries,
Land Protection Under
the Biodiversity Conservation Strategy—Melbourne Strategic Assessment
(Report, May 2014)
Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (Vic),
A Practitioner’s Guide to Victorian Planning Schemes
1.1, October 2018)
Act for The Future: Directions for a New
Local Government Act
(Directions Paper, 2016)
- ‘Information for Owners’,
Bushfire Management Overlay
(Fact Sheet, 2017) <https://
planning.vic.gov.au/policy-and-strategy/bushfire-protection/bushfire-management-overlay>
Environmental Assessment Bilateral Agreement
(Web Page, 10 April
2019) <https://
planning.vic.gov.au/environment-assessment/environmental-assessment-bilateral-agreement>
Exemptions From Requiring a Permit to Remove, Destroy or Lop Native
(Guidance, December 2017)
General Information on the Reformed Residential Zones
(Fact Sheet,
March 2017)
www.planning.vic.gov.au/policy-and-strategy/planning-reform/reformed-zones-for-
victoria/reformed-residential-zones>
Get a Planning Report Anytime, Anywhere (
Web Page, 27 April
www.planning.vic.gov.au/schemes-and-amendments/get-information-about-your-
planning-scheme/planningvic-planning-property-report-mobile-app>
Guidelines for the Removal, Destruction or Lopping of Native Vegetation
(Report, December 2017)
Heritage Victoria
(Web Page, 9 July 2018) <https://
www.heritage.vic.gov.au/about-heritage-in-
victoria/heritage-in-victoria>
I Need to Secure an Offset
(Web Page, 2 May 2019) <https://
www.environment.vic.gov.au/
native-vegetation/native-vegetation/offsets-for-the-removal-of-native-vegetation/i-need-to-
secure-an-offset>
Land.vic.gov.au
(Web Page, 2017)
<https://services.land.vic.gov.au/landchannel/content/ addressSearch>
Managing Overshadowing Risk When Installing a Rooftop Solar System: A
(Report, October 2018) <https://
www.planning.vic.gov.au/policy-and-strategy/reducing-
overshadowing-on-rooftop-solar-panels>
- ‘Minimum Construction Standard’,
Building in Bushfire Prone
(Web Page, 4 April 2019)
www.planning.vic.gov.au/policy-and-strategy/bushfire-protection/building-in-bushfire-
prone-areas>
Native Vegetation Credit Register: Process to Establish a Native
Vegetation Credit Site on Private Land
(Register) <https://
www.environment.vic.gov.au/native-vegetation/native-vegetation/
offsets-for-the-removal-of-native-vegetation/i-want-to-establish-a-native-vegetation-credit-site>
Native Vegetation Removal Regulations—Compliance and Enforcement
(Report, December 2017) <https://
www.environment.vic.gov.au/native-vegetation/native-vegetation
Overarching Report—Residential Zones State Of Play
(Report, 28
November 2017)
www.planning.vic.gov.au/panels-and-committees/previous-panels-and-committees/
managing-residential-development-advisory-committee/residential-zones-state-of-play-reports>
Permits—Apply for a Permit
(Web Page, 15 March 2019)
www.heritage.vic.gov.au/
permits/apply-for-a-permit>
Planning Practice Notes
(Web Page, May 2018) <https://
www.planning.vic.gov.au/resource-
library/planning-practice-notes>
- ‘Protected Flora Controls’,
Conserving Threatened Species
(Web Page, 22 February 2019)
www.environment.vic.gov.au/conserving-threatened-species/flora-and-fauna-
guarantee-act-1988/protected-flora-controls>
Protecting Residential Rooftop Dwellings
(Web Page, 11 October 2018)
<https://www.planning.
vic.gov.au/policy-and-strategy/reducing-overshadowing-on-rooftop-solar-panels>
- ‘Review of the
Flora and Fauna Guarantee Act
<https://engage.vic.gov.au/review-flora-and-fauna-guarantee-act-1988>
Review of the
Flora and Fauna Guarantee Act 1988
: Consultation,
Submission and Response Summary
(Report, 2017)
<https://engage.vic.gov.au/review-flora-and-fauna-guarantee-
Review of the
Local Government Act
(Discussion Paper, 2015)
Review of the Native Vegetation Clearing Regulations
(Web Page, 29
October 2018)
www.environment.vic.gov.au/native-vegetation/review-of-native-vegetation-clearing-
regulations>
Using Victoria’s Planning System
(Guide, 28 May 2015) <
www.planning.vic.gov.au/guide-home/
using-victorias-planning-system>
- ‘VicSmart— A Simpler Planning Permit Process’,
and Applications
(Web Page, 20 March 2019) <https://
www.planning.vic.gov.au/permits-and-applications/vicsmart
Victoria Planning Provisions
(11 April 2019)
http://planningschemes.dpcd.vic.gov.au/schemes/ vpps
What are Green Wedges?
(Web Page, 5 April 2019) <https://
www.planning.vic.gov.au/policy-
and-strategy/green-wedges>
Department of Justice and Attorney General (NSW), Review of the
(Disputes Between Neighbours) Act 2006
(Report, 2009)
Department of Justice and Attorney-General (Qld),
Form 3: Notice For Removal of Particular Overhanging Branches
(Version 3, 29 October 2015)
Resolving Neighbourhood Disputes’
(Discussion Paper, July
Review of Neighbourly Relations: Dividing Fences
(Discussion Paper,
Review of Neighbourly Relations: Resolving Neighbourhood Disputes
(Discussion Paper, May 2007)
Review of Neighbourly Relations: Trees
(Discussion Paper, July 2008)
Department of Justice and Community Safety (Vic),
Courts and Tribunals
(Web Page, 9 August 2018) <https://
www.justice.vic.gov.au/justice-
system/courts-and-tribunals>
Fencing Law in Victoria
(Web Page, 31 January 2019) <https://
www.justice.vic.gov.au/justice-
system/laws-and-regulation/civil-law/fencing-law-in-victoria>
Penalties and Values
(Web Page, 14 August 2018) <https://
www.justice.vic.gov.au/justice-
system/fines-and-penalties/penalties-and-values>
Department of Justice and Regulation (Vic),
Access to Justice Review Background Paper—Self-Represented
(Report, 2015)
Access to Justice Review Background Paper —VCAT Small Civil Claims
<https://engage.vic.gov.au/accesstojustice>
Access to Justice Review
(Report, 2016)
<https://engage.vic.gov.au/accesstojustice>
Department of Justice (NSW),
(Web Page, 5 July 2018)
http://www.cjc.justice.nsw. gov.au/Pages/cjc_whatis_mediation/cjc_common_disputes/com_justice_neighbours.aspx
Department of Justice (Tas),
Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants
(Web Page) <https://
www.justice.tas.gov.au/mediation_
and_dispute_resolution/neighbourhood-disputes-about-plants>
Tasmanian Planning Reform—An Overview (F
act Sheet 1, December
www.planningreform.tas.gov.au/
Value of Indexed Amounts in Legislation
(Web Page) <https://
www.justice.tas.gov.au/about/
legislation/value_of_indexed_units_in_legislation>
Department of Planning and Community Development,
Guidelines for Local
(Manual, February 2010) <https://
www.localgovernment.vic.gov.au/strengthening-councils/local-laws
Department of Planning and Environment (NSW),
Guide to the updated
Environmental Planning and Assessment Act 1979
(Web Page) <https://
www.planning.nsw.gov.au/Policy-and-Legislation/Environmental-Planning-and-Assessment-
Act-updated/Guide-to-the-updated-Environmental-Planning-and-Assessment-Act-1979>
Local Planning and Zoning
(Web Page, 18 February 2019)
www.planning.nsw.gov.au/
Plans-for-your-area/Local-Planning-and-Zoning>
The Planning System
(Web Page, 26 May 2018) <https://
www.planning.nsw.gov.au/Assess-
and-Regulate/Development-Assessment/Your-guide-to-the-DA-process/Getting-started/The-
planning-system>
Deputy Premier and Attorney-General, Minister for Local Government and
Special Minister of State (Qld),
Neighbourhood Disputes Resolution Bill 2010
Results of Consultation Process
<https://cabinet.qld.gov.au/monthly.aspx?date=2010-Nov>
Department of Premier and Cabinet (Vic), ‘Thousands of Victorian Homes
Save Millions on Solar’ (Media Release, 18 January
2019) <https://
www.premier.vic.gov.au/thousands-of-victorian-homes-
save-millions-on-solar/>
Department of State Development, Manufacturing, Infrastructure and Planning
Queensland’s New Planning System
(Document, 2018)
<https://planning.dsdmip.qld.gov.au/ planning/our-planning-system>
State Planning Policy
(Web Page, 2019)
<https://planning.dsdmip.qld.gov.au/planning/better-
planning/state-planning/state-planning-policy-spp>
The Framework: The ‘What’ of Planning—State and Local
Planning Instruments
(Web Page, 2019)
<https://planning.dsdmip.qld.gov.au/planning/our-planning-system/the-framework>
Department of Sustainability and Environment (Vic),
Cutting Red Tape in Planning—15 Recommendations For a Better
Victorian Planning System
(Report, August 2006)
Writing Planning Permits
(2nd ed, Report, February 2007) Department
of the Environment and Energy (Cth),
EPBC Act—Frequently Asked Questions
(Web Page, 2013)
http://www.environment.gov.au/ epbc/publications/factsheet-epbc-act-frequently-asked-questions
Conservation Covenants
http://www.environment.gov.au/biodiversity/ conservation/covenants
Controlled Actions—What Next?
http://www.environment.gov.au/heritage/ management/referrals/controlled-actions
Significant Impact Guidelines 1.1— Matters of National
Environmental Significance
http://www.environment.gov.au/epbc/publications/significant-impact-guidelines-11-matters- national-environmental-significance
Victorian Assessment Bilateral Agreement
(27 October 2014)
http://www.environment.gov. au/protection/environment-assessments/bilateral-agreements/vic
Dispute Settlement Centre of Victoria,
(Web Page, 4 January 2019) <https://
www.disputes.vic.gov.au/about-us
Case Study—Tree Dispute
(Web Page, 3 June 2019) <https://
www.disputes.vic.gov.au/
information-and-advicetrees/case-study-tree-dispute>
Civil Claims Program
(Web Page, 24 April 2019) <https://
www.disputes.vic.gov.au/about-us/
civil-claims-program>
Civil Mediation at VCAT Program
(Web Page, 7 June 2019)
www.disputes.vic.gov.au/
Community Engagement Workshops
(Web Page, 21 March 2019)
www.disputes.vic.
gov.au/training-and-room-hire/community-engagement-workshops>
Dispute Advice
(Web Page, 4 April 2019) <https://
www.disputes.vic.gov.au/about-us/dispute-
(Web Page, 3 June 2019) <https://
www.disputes.vic.gov.au/information-and-
advice/dscv-faqs>
Frequently Asked Questions—Fences
(Web Page, April 2017)
www.disputes.vic.gov.
au/information-and-advice/fencing/frequently-asked-questions-fences>
(Web Page, 3 June 2019) <https://
www.disputes.vic.gov.au/about-us/mediation-0
Notice to Fence
(Web Page, 12 April 2019) <https://
www.disputes.vic.gov.au/information-and-
advice/fencing/notice-to-fence>
(Web Page, 24 April 2019) <https://
www.disputes.vic.gov.au/information-and-advice/
Disputes Tribunal of New Zealand,
(Web Page, 2 April 2019) <https://
www.disputestribunal.govt.nz/about-2/
What the Tribunal Can Help With
(Web Page, 29 June 2016)
<https://www.disputestribunal. govt.nz/can-help-with/>
Visual and Hazard Tree Assessments
(Web Page, 2019)
http://www.enspec.com/ Consultancy/VisualTreeAssessments.aspx
Fishburn, Talitha ‘If NCAT is Not a Court it Has No Standing to Hear
Interstate Party Disputes’ [2018] (Spring
), The Journal of the NSW Bar
Association
Financial Rights Legal Centre, If a Tree Falls in a Storm Who Pays for its
(Factsheet, 2018)
<https://insurancelaw.org.au/factsheets/>
Friends of Drouin’s Trees,
Drouin Tree Walks
(Booklet, 2018)
Garling, Justice Peter, ‘Concurrent Expert Evidence: Reflections and
Development’ (2011) 49(10)
Law Society Journal
Giliker, Paula, ‘Nuisance’ in Carolyn Sappideen and Prue Vines
Fleming’s The Law of Torts
(Lawbook Co., 10th ed, 2011) 487
Goodman, Joanna,
Chatbot Pioneer Builds Free Tool for Law
Firms’ (17 October 2016)
The Law Society Gazatte
www.lawgazette.co.uk/news/chatbot-pioneer-builds-free-tool-
for-law-firms/5058339.article>.
Goudkamp, James ‘Defences to Negligence’ in Carolyn Sappideen and
Prue Vines (eds),
Fleming’s The Law of Torts
(Lawbook Co, 10th ed,
Griffiths, Howard and Jamie Males, ‘Succulent Plants’ (2017)
Current Biology
Growth Areas Authority, Growth Area Model Planning Permit
Conditions—A Manual for Implementation
(October 2011)
Hanks, Patrick,
Collins Dictionary of the English Language
Harris, Richard W, ‘Summer Branch Drop’ (1983) 9(4)
Arboriculture
111 Harty, Chris, Robin Crocker and Lyn Denison,
Report—Monash Planning Scheme
Amendment C115—Vegetation Protection Overlay Schedule 1—Tree
Protection Area
(Panel Report, 13 August 2013)
Heritage Council Victoria,
The Victorian Heritage Register
<https://heritagecouncil.vic.gov.au/heritage-protection/
levels-of-protection/>
Policy Guideline for Heritage Permit Exemptions: Matters to be
Considered in Determining Permit Exemptions under
Heritage Act 2017
(7 September 2017)
Victoria’s Significant Heritage Places and Objects
<https://vhd.heritagecouncil.vic. gov.au/>
Hayman-Reber, Madeleine, ‘Djab Wurrung Protestors Continue Their
Fight for Sacred Trees’,
(online, 23 March 2019)
www.sbs.com.au/nitv/article/2019/03/23/djab-wurrung-
protesters-continue-their-fight-sacred-trees>
Illinois Legal Aid Online,
Who Owns the Tree on Both My and My
Neighbour’s Property?
(Web Page, 2019) <
www.illinoislegalaid.org/legal-information/who-owns-tree-both-my-and-my-
neighbors-property>
International Society of Arboriculture,
Credentials
www.isa-arbor.com/
Credentials/ISA-Tree-Risk-Assessment-Qualification>
Jones, A M & M A Dugdale (eds),
Clerk & Lindsell on Torts
(Sweet & Maxwell, 19th ed, 2006)
Judicial College of Victoria, ‘8.7 Sentencing in Contempt Cases’,
Victorian Criminal Proceedings Manual
(26 February 2018)
http://www.judicialcollege.vic.edu.au/eManuals/VCPM/index. htm#48747.htm
Justice Connect,
How We Help
<https://justiceconnect.org.au/how-we-help/> Justice Iain Ross,
Transforming VCAT Three Year Strategic Plan 2010/11–2012/13
Kelly, Andrew H (2013) ‘Tree Preservation Orders: A New Vision?’
in Kajewski, S, K Manley and K Hampson (Eds),
Proceedings of the 19th CIB
World Building Congress, Brisbane 2013: Construction and Society
(Queensland
University of Technology, 2013)
Knox City Council,
Landscape Plan Guidelines—How to Prepare a
Landscape Plan for Planning Applications
(Fact Sheet, 2017)
Land and Environment Court (NSW),
(Web Page, 29 April 2015)
http://www.lec.justice.nsw.gov.au/Pages/about/about. aspx
Annual Review
(Report, 2017)
Class 2: Tree Disputes and Local Government Appeals
(Web Page, 22
November 2018)
http://www.lec.justice.nsw.gov.au/Pages/types_of_disputes/class_2/class_2.aspx
Decisions Involving Applications Under
–Damage to Property
or Injury to Persons
(Case Study, 27 April 2015)
http://www.lec.justice.nsw.gov.au/Pages/types_of_disputes/class_2/ Trees-hedge-disputes-process/Treedisputes-helpfulmaterials/treedisputes_helpfulmaterial.aspx
Enforcement
(Web Page, 2 May 2015)
http://www.lec.justice.nsw.gov.au/Pages/coming_to_ the_court/end_of_a_case/enforcement.aspx
Form C: Tree Dispute Application
(Version 3)
http://www.lec.justice.nsw.gov.au/Pages/types_ of_disputes/class_2/Trees-hedge-disputes-process/treedisputes_how.aspx
Form H: Tree Dispute Claim Details (Damage to Property or Injury to a
(Version 1)
http://www.lec.justice.nsw.gov.au/Pages/types_of_disputes/class_2/Trees-hedge-disputes- process/treedisputes_how.aspx
(Web Page, 22 November 2018)
http://www.lec.justice.nsw.gov.au/Pages/ types_of_disputes/class_2/Trees-hedge-disputes-process/Treedisputes-helpfulmaterials/ treedisputes_helpfulmaterial.aspx#Legislation
Schedule A. Usual Directions on the Preliminary Hearing for Tree
Applications
(November 2018)
http://www.lec.justice.nsw.gov.au/Pages/types_of_disputes/class_2/Trees-hedge-disputes- process/treedisputes_prelimhearing.aspx
Tree Dispute Principles
(Web Page, 25 September 2017)
http://www.lec.justice.nsw.gov.au/ Pages/practice_procedure/principles/tree_principles.aspx
Tree Disputes: Understanding the Law
(Fact Sheet)
http://www.lec.justice.nsw.gov.au/ Pages/types_of_disputes/class_2/Trees-hedge-disputes-process/Treedisputes-helpfulmaterials/ treedisputes_helpfulmaterial.aspx#Information_material
Landata (Vic),
(Web Page, 27 October 2017) <https://
www.landata.vic.gov.au/tpc_help_
general.aspx>
Law Institute of Victoria,
(Online Database) <https://
www.liv.asn.au/mediators
Reform Committee, Parliament of Victoria,
Review of the
Fences Act 1968
(Report, 1998)
Legal Aid Commission of Tasmania (Online Directory, 2019) <https://
www.legalaid.tas.gov.au/
referral-list>
Legg, Michael,
The Future of Dispute Resolution: Online ADR and Online
(2016) 27(4)
Australasian Dispute Resolution Journal
Lensink, Michelle, ‘Tree Protection Laws in Australian States and
Territories’,
<https://treenet.org/resources/tree-protection-laws-in-australian-states-and-territories/>
Lexis Nexis,
Butterworths’ Concise Legal Dictionary
(3rd ed, 2004)
Encyclopaedic Australian Legal Dictionary
(online at 15 April
Halsbury’s The Laws of Australia
(online at 21 March 2018)
Lucas, Clay, ‘Appalling Display of Incompetence: Council Lashed in
Stinging VCAT Ruling’,
(online, 23 May 2016) <https://
www.theage.com.au/national/victoria/appalling-display-of-
incompetence-council-lashed-in-stinging-vcat-ruling-20160522-gp10o5.html>
Magistrates’ Court of Victoria,
Annual Report 2014–2015
(Report, 2015)
Annual Report 2015–2016
(Report, 2016)
Early Neutral Mediation
(Web Page, 3 December 2018) <https://
www.mcv.vic.gov.au/civil-
matters/resolving-dispute/early-neutral-evaluation>
Fees and Costs Ready Reckoner
(effective 1 January 2019)
Fencing Disputes Information Guide
(9 January 2019) <https://
www.mcv.vic.gov.au/news-and-
resources/publications>
Interpreters
(Web Page, 14 November 2018) <https://
www.mcv.vic.gov.au/find-support/
interpreters>
(Web Page, 14 January 2019) <https://
www.magistratescourt.vic.gov.au/
Pre-Hearing Conferences
(Web Page, 13 December 2018) <https://
www.mcv.vic.gov.au/civil-
matters/resolving-dispute/pre-hearing-conferences>
Resolving a Dispute
(Web Page, 13 December 2018)
<https://mcv.vic.gov.au/civil-matters/ resolving-dispute>
Single List of External Mediators
(Fact Sheet, May 2018) <
www.magistratescourt.vic.gov.
au/jurisdictions/civil/procedural-information/mediation-process-2011-single-list-external-
Matheny, Nelda P & James R Clark,
A Photographic Guide to the
Evaluation of Hazard Trees in Urban Areas
(International Society of
Arboriculture, 1 December 1993)
Matthews, Karen, ‘Geelong Court—Couple Pleads Guilty to Poisoning
Neighbours’ Trees’,
Geelong Advertiser
(online, 20 January
www.geelongadvertiser.com.au/news/crime-court/geelong-
court-lovely-banks-couple-pleads-guilty-to-poisoning-neighbours-trees/news-story/e65a9b00bdf9
8c5f7938c4e88ce2d2ba>
McDonald, Barbara ‘Standard of Care’ in Carolyn Sappideen and
Prue Vines (eds),
Fleming’s The Law of Torts
(Lawbook Co., 10th ed,
Mediation SA,
Preventing Conflicts in the Modern Neighbourhood: Tips on
Being a Good Neighbour
(Guide, 2015)
Melbourne Water,
Overlays Explained
(Web Page, 26 September 2017)
www.melbournewater.com.au/planning-and-building/flooding-information-and-advice/
overlays-explained>
Mildura Rural City Council and Sustainable Gardening Australia,
Sustainable Gardening in the Mildura Region
(Booklet, 2011)
Ministry of Culture, Community and Youth (Singapore),
Community Dispute
Management Framework
(Web Page, 15 February 2019) <https://
www.mccy.gov.sg/sector/initiatives/
community-dispute-management-framework>
Moore, Greg M, ‘The Importance and Value of Urban Forests as Climate
Changes’ (2012) 129(5)
The Victorian Naturalist
Moore, Gregory,
- ‘Acts of Arborial Violence: Tree Vandals Deprive Us All’,
The Conversation
(online, 2 June 2015)
http://theconversation.com/acts-of-arborial-violence-tree-vandals-deprive-us-all-41342
onomic Value of Trees’,
Sustainable Gardening Australia
www.sgaonline.org.au/economic-value-of-trees/
Moreland City Council,
Gardening with Indigenous Plants
www.moreland.vic.
gov.au/environment-bins/gardening-and-food/gardening-indigenous-plants/>
Morning Peninsula Shire,
Shire (Briars) Nursery
(2019) <https://
www.mornpen.vic.gov.au/Activities/
The-Briars/Shire-Nursery>
Municipal Association of Victoria,
Public Health and Wellbeing Act
— Guidance Manual for Local Government Authorised Officers
Munro, Kelsey ‘Houses on Leafier Streets in Three Sydney Suburbs Worth
$50,000 More: Analysis’,
The Sydney Morning Herald
(online, 27
April 2017) <https://
www.smh.com.au/national/nsw/
houses-on-leafier-streets-in-three-sydney-suburbs-worth-50000-more-analysis-20170427-gvtkex.
National Alternative Dispute Resolution Advisory Council,
On-line ADR
Background Paper
(January 2001) <https://
www.ag.gov.au/LegalSystem/AlternateDisputeResolution/Pages/
NADRACPublications-A-Z.aspx>
National Register on Vocational Education and Training (VET) in Australia,
Unit of Competency Details: AHCARB501A—Examine and Assess Trees
(Release 2, 21 December 2017)
<https://training.gov.au/Training/Details/AHCARB601>
Neighbourhood Justice Centre,
What Happens at VCAT
(Web Page, 22 June
www.neighbourhoodjustice.vic.gov.au/attend-court/going-to-vcat/what-happens-at-vcat
New South Wales Civil and Administrative Tribunal,
Annual Report
(Report, 2015)
http://www.ncat.nsw.gov.au/Pages/about_us/publications_and_resources/annual_reports.aspx
New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Neighbour and Neighbour Relations
(Report No 88, 1998)
Nillumbik Shire Council,
Nillumbik Tree Management Guidelines
(September 2015)
www.nillumbik.vic.gov.au/Council/Council-publications/Strategies-policies-and-
legislation>
Nygh, Peter E and Peter Butt,
Butterworths Australian Property Law
(Butterworths, 1997)
O’Connor, Pamela,
Tribunal Independence
(The Australasian
Institute of Judicial Administration Incorporated, 2013)
Office of Environment and Heritage (NSW),
Local Government Information and Resources
(Web Page, 23 November
www.environment.nsw.gov.au/biodiversity/localgovernment.htm
Native Vegetation
(Web Page, 21 September 2018) <https://
www.environment.nsw.gov.au/
vegetation/>
Native Vegetation Act 2003
(Web Page, 17 August 2018) <https://
www.environment.nsw.gov.
au/vegetation/nvact.htm>
Local Government Information and Resources
(Web Page, 23 November
www.environment.nsw.gov.au/biodiversity/localgovernment.htm
Otway Agroforestry Network,
Agroforestry: Multi-Purpose Tree Growing
http://www.oan.org.au/
Who are OAN?
http://www.oan.org.au/Main.asp?_=About%20Us
Parliament of Victoria,
(Web Page) <https://
www.parliament.vic.gov.au/57th-
parliament/lawreform>
Pandit, Ram et al ‘The Effect of Street Trees on Property Value in
Perth, Western Australia’ (2013) 110
Landscape and Urban Planning
Pepper, Justice Rachel, ‘Expert Evidence in the Land and Environment
Court’ (Speech, Australian Property Institute, 21
January 2013)
Preston, Justice Brian and Commissioner Tim Moore, ‘The
Trees (Disputes
Between Neighbours) Act 2006
—Background and Operation’
Local Government Law Journal
Quantified Tree Risk Assessment,
Training in Quantified Tree Risk
(Web Page, 2019)
www.qtra.co.uk/cms/index.php?section=124
Queensland Arboricultural Association,
Page, 2018)
<https://qaa.net.au/approved-arborist/> Queensland Civil and
Administrative Tribunal,
Application Checklist: Tree Dispute Resolution
(Form, version 3, 3
March 2017)
www.qcat.qld.gov.au/matter-types/tree-disputes
Decision About a Minor Civil Dispute
(Web Page, 15 February 2019)
www.qcat.qld.
gov.au/qcat-decisions/appealing-a-qcat-decision/decision-about-a-minor-civil-dispute>
(29 February 2019)
http://www.qcat.qld.gov.au/matter-types/tree-disputes
Enforcing a QCAT Decision
(Web Page, 13 November 2018)
www.qcat.qld.gov.au/
qcat-decisions/enforcing-a-qcat-decision#Non-monetary%20decisions>.
Form 51: Application for Tree Dispute—
Neighbourhood Disputes
(Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
www.qcat.qld.gov.au/matter-types/tree-disputes/tree-dispute-application
Frequently Asked Questions–Tree Disputes
(Web Page, 21
February 2019)
www.qcat.qld.gov.au/matter-types/tree-disputes/faq-tree-disputes
Information Kit: Tree Assessors Expression of Interest (EOI)
Matter Types
(Web Page, 29 November 2017) <
www.qcat.qld.gov.au/matter-types
(Web Page, 12 April 2017) <https://
www.qcat.qld.gov.au/going-to-the-tribunal/
Minor Civil Disputes—Appeals
(Factsheet, version 3, May
Organisational Structure
(Web Page, 24 September 2018)
www.qcat.qld.gov.au/
QCAT Welcomes SANDI to the Team!
(Web Page, 12 February 2019)
www.qcat.qld.
gov.au/about-qcat/sandi>
Renewal of QCAT’s Final Decision
(Web Page, 26 May 2017)
www.qcat.qld.gov.au/
qcat-decisions/enforcing-a-qcat-decision/renewal-of-qcats-final-decision>
Tree Dispute Resolution
(Fact Sheet, version 4, March 2017)
Tree Disputes
(Web Page, 29 February 2019)
http://www.qcat.qld.gov.au/matter-types/tree- disputes
Tree Orders Register
(Database, 21 February 2019) <
www.qcat.qld.gov.au/matter-types/tree-
disputes/tree-order-register>
Queensland Government,
Disputes about Fences, Trees and Buildings
(Web Page) <https://
www.qld.gov.au/law/housing-
and-neighbours/disputes-about-fences-trees-and-buildings>
How to Resolve Neighbourhood Disputes
(Web Page, 2 September
www.qld.gov.au/law/housing-and-neighbours/resolve-disputes
Neighbourhood Mediation
(Web Page, 2019) <https://
www.qld.gov.au/law/legal-mediation-
and-justice-of-the-peace/settling-disputes-out-of-court/neighbourhood-mediation>
Sentencing Fines and Penalties for Offences
(Web Page, 5 July 2018)
www.qld.gov.au/
law/fines-and-penalties/types-of-fines/sentencing-fines-and-penalties-for-offences>
Step-by-step Guide to Resolving Tree and Fence Disputes
14 July 2017)
www.qld.gov.au/law/housing-and-neighbours/disputes-about-fences-trees-and-
buildings/resolving-tree-and-fence-disputes/step-by-step-guide-to-resolving-tree-and-fence-
Ways to Approach Your Neighbour
(Web Page, 17 January 2018)
www.qld.gov.au/
law/housing-and-neighbours/disputes-about-fences-trees-and-buildings/ways-to-approach-
your-neighbour>
What to Do if a Neighbour’s Tree is Affecting You
(Web Page, 8
January 2019)
www.qld.gov.au/law/housing-and-neighbours/disputes-about-fences-trees-and-
buildings/resolving-tree-and-fence-disputes/what-to-do-if-a-neighbours-tree-is-affecting-you>
Queensland Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act
(Qld) (Report No 72, December 2015)
Review of the
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act
(Qld) (Discussion Paper No 72, June 2015)
, Home Insurance Product Disclosure Statement and Policy Booklet
(29 September 2017)
Rahman, Khaleda ‘Every Neighbour’s Worst Nightmare: Family Comes
Mail Australia (
online, 11 May 2017) <https://
dailymail.co.uk/news/article-4494582/Family-returns-home-backyard-trees-CHOPPED-down.html>
Resource Management and Planning Appeal Tribunal,
Application under
Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants Act 2017
www.rmpat.tas.gov.au/forms#application
Neighbourhood Disputes About Plants Act 2017
www.rmpat.tas.gov.au/
neighbourhood-disputes-about-plants>
Resource Management & Planning Appeal Tribunal
(Web Page, 2
January 2019)
www.rmpat.tas.gov.au/
Roberts, John, Nick Jackson and Mark Smith,
Tree Roots in the Built
Environment
(Arboricultural Association, UK, 2005)
Rowley, Stephen,
The Victorian Planning System–Practice, Problems
and Prospects
(The Federation Press, 2017)
SAI Global, ‘Store’,
(Web Page, 2019)
<https://infostore.saiglobal.com/>
Silver, Joel,
Nuisance by Tree—Who’s the Guilty Tree?
(Paper, Owen Dixon Chambers, 18 May 2015)
Simpson, Andrew, ‘Alternate Dispute Resolution for Neighbour Tree
Conflicts and the Role of Local Government’ (Masters
Thesis, University of
Technology Sydney, 2018).
Skene, Loane and Harold Luntz, ‘Effects of Tort Law Reform on Medical
Liability’ (2005) 79
Australian Law
Skills Impact, ‘Arboriculture Project’,
Amenity Horticulture,
Landscaping, Conservation & Land Management Industry Reference Committee
(Web Page, 2019) <https://
www.skillsimpact.com.au/
horticulture-conservation-and-land-management/training-package-projects/arboriculture-project/>
South Gippsland Shire Council,
Tree Management Plan 2017
Standards Australia,
Protection of Trees on Development Sites
4970-2009) (Sydney, NSW: Standards Australia, 2009)
Standards Australia,
Pruning of Amenity Trees
(AS 4373-2007) (Sydney,
NSW: Standards Australia, 2007)
Sugarman, Stephen, ‘Damages’ in Carolyn Sappideen and Prue Vines
Fleming’s The Law of Torts
(Lawbook Co, 10th ed, 2011)
Supreme Court of Victoria,
Costs Court
(Web Page, 2019) <https://
www.supremecourt.vic.gov.au/law-and-practice/areas-
of-the-court/costs-court>
How the Court Works
(Web Page, 2019) <https://
www.supremecourt.vic.gov.au/about-the-
court/how-the-court-works>
Sustainable Gardening Australia,
Gardening Booklets for Local Areas
(Web Page, 2019)
www.sgaonline.org.au/sustainable-gardening-booklets/
Tasmanian Government,
Tasmanian Planning Reform—The Policies
(Web Page, 17 December 2018)
www.planningreform.tas.gov.au/policies
Tasmania Law Reform Institute,
Neighbours’ Hedges as Barriers to Sunlight and a View
No 19, 2014)
Problem Trees and Hedges: Access to Sunlight and Views
21, January 2016)
Tasmanian Planning Commission,
State Planning Provisions
www.planning.tas.
gov.au/planning_our_future/state_planning_provisions>
The Law Society (UK),
Property Information Form (TA6)—Explanatory
Notes for Sellers and Buyers
Thomas, Peter,
Trees—Their Natural History
(Cambridge University
Press, 2000) Trust for Nature,
Conservation Covenants
(Web Page) <https://
www.trustfornature.org.au/land-services
What is a Conservation Covenant?
(2017) <https://
www.trustfornature.org.au/landowner-
Uniting Communities Mediation Service in South Australia,
(Web Page, 2019)
www.unitingcommunities.org/services/financial-legal-services/mediation-services/
Victoria Law Foundation,
‘Neighbours, the Law and You: Your Guide to Neighbourhood Laws in
Victoria’ Victoria Legal Aid
(Brochure, March 2015) <https://
www.legalaid.vic.gov.au/find-legal-answers/free-
publications-and-resources/neighbours-law-and-you>
- ‘Nuisance Laws, Including Pollution’,
Neighbours, the Law
(Web Page, 26 May 2017)
www.victorialawfoundation.org.au/nuisance-laws-including-pollution
Victoria Legal Aid,
12—Means Test
VLA Handbook for Lawyers
(28 September
<https://handbook.vla.vic.gov.au/handbook/12-means-test>
Disputes With Neighbours
(Web Page, 25 March 2019) <
www.legalaid.vic.gov.au/find-legal-
answers/disputes-with-neighbours>
- ‘High Court Decision Affecting Your Practice in VCAT’,
(Web Page, 30 May 2018)
www.legalaid.vic.gov.au/about-us/news/high-court-decision-affecting-your-practice-
Victoria’s Courts and Tribunals
(Web Page, 13 December 2018)
www.legalaid.vic.gov.
au/find-legal-answers/courts-and-legal-system/victorias-courts-and-tribunals>
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal (VCAT),
(Web Page) <https://
www.vcat.vic.gov.au/about-vcat
Access to Justice Funding to Enhance Services
(Web Page, 24 May
www.vcat.vic.gov.au/news/access-to-justice-funding-to-enhance-services
Annual Report 2016–17
(Report, 2017)
Annual Report 2017–18
(Report, 2018)
Appeal a VCAT Decision
(Web Page) <https://
www.vcat.vic.gov.au/steps-to-resolve-your-case/
what-to-expect-after-the-final-hearing/appeal-a-vcat-decision>
Application Forms
(Web Page) <https://
www.vcat.vic.gov.au/resources/application-forms
Application for Review of a Decision
(Web Page) <https://
www.vcat.vic.gov.au/get-started/
review-and-regulation/application-for-review-of-a-decision>
- ‘Application to Reopen An Order (Application for Review Section
Forms, Guides and Resources
(Online Form, 26 July 2016)
www.vcat.vic.gov.au/resources/application-to-
reopen-an-order-application-for-review-section-120>
- ‘Application to VCAT to Make an Original Jurisdiction
Review and Regulation
(Web Page) <https://
www.vcat.vic.gov.au/case-types/review-and-regulation/application-to-
vcat-to-make-an-original-jurisdiction-decision>
- ‘Apply to Join Someone as a Party’,
When VCAT Opens a Case
www.vcat.vic.gov.au/steps-to-resolve-your-case/when-vcat-opens-a-case/apply-to-
join-someone-as-a-party>
Building A Better VCAT: Strategic Plan 2014–17
Civil Mediation Program
(Web Page) <https://
www.disputes.vic.gov.au/about-us/civil-
mediation-at-vcat-program>
Compulsory Conferences
(Web Page) <
www.vcat.vic.gov.au/steps-to-resolve-your-case/resolve-
a-case-by-agreement/compulsory-conferences>
Consent Orders
(Web Page) <https://
www.vcat.vic.gov.au/steps-to-resolve-your-case/resolve-a-
case-by-agreement/consent-orders>
(Web Page) <
www.vcat.vic.gov.au/contact-us
(Web Page) <https://
www.vcat.vic.gov.au/decisions
Ending a Case by Dismissal or Strikeout
(Web Page) <https://
www.vcat.vic.gov.au/steps-to-
resolve-your-case/when-vcat-opens-a-case/ending-a-case-by-dismissal-or-strikeout>
Enforcing VCAT Orders
(Web Page) <https://
www.vcat.vic.gov.au/steps-to-resolve-your-case/
what-to-expect-after-the-final-hearing/enforcing-vcat-orders>
Fast Track Mediation and Hearing
(Web Page) <https://
www.vcat.vic.gov.au/resources/fast-
track-mediation-and-hearing>
Fee Categories
(Web Page, 9 May 2017) <https://
www.vcat.vic.gov.au/resources/fee-
categories>
(Web Page) <https://
www.vcat.vic.gov.au/steps-to-resolve-your-case/fees-at-vcat/
fee-relief>
Forms, Guides and Resources
(Web Page) <https://
www.vcat.vic.gov.au/resources
Future of Online Dispute Resolution
(Web Page) <https://
www.vcat.vic.gov.au/resources/
future-of-online-dispute-resolution>
Goods and Services Fees
(Web Page, 1 July 2018) <https://
www.vcat.vic.gov.au/resources/
goods-and-services-fees>
How Long a VCAT Case Takes
(Web Page) <https://
www.vcat.vic.gov.au/about-us/how-long-a-
vcat-case-takes>
List of VCAT Members
(Web Page, 1 February 2019) <https://
www.vcat.vic.gov.au/about-us/
list-of-vcat-members>
(Web Page) <https://
www.vcat.vic.gov.au/steps-to-resolve-your-case/resolve-a-
case-by-agreement/mediations>
Online Tool to Help Tenants and Landlords at VCAT
(Web Page, 17
November 2015)
www.vcat.vic.gov.au/news/online-tool-to-help-tenants-and-landlords-at-vcat
Other Languages
(Web Page) <https://
www.vcat.vic.gov.au/other-languages
Our Commitment to You
(Web Page) <https://
www.vcat.vic.gov.au/about-us/our-commitment-
Our Leadership
(Web Page) <https://
www.vcat.vic.gov.au/about-us/our-leadership
Owners Corporations Fees
(Web Page, 1 July 2018) <https://
www.vcat.vic.gov.au/resources/
owners-corporations-fees>
Permit Applicant—Review of A Decision
www.vcat.vic.gov.au/get-started/
planning-and-environment/permit-applicant-review-of-a-decision>
Planning and Environment List Guidelines Cancellation & Amendment of
Permits (sections 87 & 89
Planning and Environment Act 1987
Document, 20 July 2016) <https://www.vcat.
vic.gov.au/get-started/planning-and-environment/apply-to-cancel-or-amend-a-permit>
Renting a Home Fees
(Web Page, 1 July 2018) <https://
www.vcat.vic.gov.au/resources/renting-
a-home-fees>
Resolving Disputes Between Residents of Different Australian States
(Web Page, 13 June 2018) <https://
www.vcat.vic.gov.au/news/resolving-disputes-between-residents-of-different-
australian-states>
Steps to Resolve Your Case
www.vcat.vic.gov.au/steps-to-resolve-your-case
- Submission No 34 to Government of Victoria,
Access to Justice Review
Submissions
(Web Page) <https://
www.vcat.vic.gov.au/steps-to-resolve-your-case/how-to-
prepare-for-your-hearing/submissions>
Submission to the Department of Justice and Community Safety,
Residential Tenancies Act Review
<https://engage.vic.gov.au/fairersaferhousing>
VCAT Accessibility Action Plan 2018-2022
(Report, November 2017)
www.vcat.vic.gov.au/AccessibleVCAT
VCAT Annual Report 2017-18
(Report, 2018)
VCAT Annual Report 2016-2017
(Report, 2017)
VCAT Decisions and Orders
(Web Page) <https://
www.vcat.vic.gov.au/steps-to-resolve-your-
case/what-to-expect-after-the-final-hearing/vcat-decisions-and-orders>
VCAT For the Future: Strategic Plan 2018–22 (Report)
(Web Page) <https://
www.vcat.vic.gov.au/resources/videos
Who Pays for My Legal Costs?
(Web Page) <https://
www.vcat.vic.gov.au/steps-to-resolve-your-
case/on-hearing-day/who-pays-for-my-legal-costs>
(Web Page) <
www.vcat.vic.gov.au/about-us/who-we-are
(January 2019) <https://
www.youtube.com/channel/UCc73nMfBWIiAc0w_
Victorian Government,
‘Aboriginal Scarred Trees’, Aboriginal Victoria
(Brochure, June 2008)
www.vic.gov.au/aboriginalvictoria/heritage/aboriginal-cultural-heritage-of-victoria/
aboriginal-places-objects-and-land-management.html>
- ‘Boroondara City’,
Know Your Council
http://knowyourcouncil.vic.gov.au/ councils/boroondara
Government Response to the Victorian Law Reform Committee Review of the
Fences Act 1968
Guide to Councils
http://knowyourcouncil.vic.gov.au/guide-to-councils/how- councils-work/local-government-in-victoria
Know Your Council
<https://knowyourcouncil.vic.gov.au/home> Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Civil Justice Review
(Report No 14, 2008)
Easements and Covenants
(Final Report No 22, 2010)
Guardianship
(Final Report 24, 2012)
Neighbourhood Tree Disputes Survey
Review of the
Property Law Act 1958
(Final Report No 20, 2010)
Submission Policy
(Web Page) <
www.lawreform.vic.gov.au/about-us/policies/submissions-
Victorian Planning Authority, Growth Areas Authority,
Growth Area Model
Planning Permit Conditions—A Manual for Implementation
Vines, Prue, ‘Negligence: Introduction’ in Carolyn Sappideen and
Prue Vines (eds),
Fleming’s The Law of Torts
(Lawbook Co., 10th ed,
Watson, Gary, ‘Comparing Formula Methods of Tree Appraisal’
(2002) 28(1)
Journal of Arboriculture
Westlaw AU,
Lawyers Practice Manual Vic
(online at 11 June 2019) ‘7
Administrative Law’
The Laws of Australia
(online at 11 June 2019) 33 Torts, ‘2
Negligence’
The Laws of Australia
(online at 11 June 2019) 33 Torts, ‘7
The Laws of Australia
(online at 11 June 2019) 33 Torts, ‘8
Trespass and Intentional Torts’
The Laws of Australia
(online at 11 June 2019) 33 Torts, ‘9
The Laws of Australia
(online at 11 June 2019) 33 Torts, ‘16
Possession’
The Laws of Australia
(online at 11 June 2019) 28 Real Property,
‘2 Possession’
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal
www.youtube.com/channel/
UCc73nMfBWIiAc0w_Gb4vAEw>
Reports published by the Victorian Law Reform Commission
1 Criminal Liability for Workplace Death and Serious Injury in the Public
Sector (2002)
2 Disputes between Co-owners (2002)
3 Failure to Appear in Court in Response to Bail (2002)*
4 People with Intellectual Disabilities at Risk:
A Legal Framework for Compulsory Care (2003)
5 Sexual Offences (2004)
6 Defences to Homicide (2004)
7 Workplace Privacy (2005)
8 Implementing the
Evidence Act 1995
9 Uniform Evidence Law (2006)
10 Review of Family Violence Laws (2006)
11 Residential Tenancy Databases (2006)*
12 Assisted Reproductive Technology and Adoption (2007)
13 Review of the
Bail Act 1997
14 Civil Justice Review (2008)
15 Law of Abortion (2008)
16 Assistance Animals (2008)*
17 Jury Directions (2009)
18 Surveillance in Public Places (2010)
19 Protection Applications in the Children’s Court (2010)
20 Review of the
Property Law Act 1958
21 Supporting Young People in Police Interviews (2010)*
22 Easements and Covenants (2010)
23 Sex Offenders Registration (2011)
24 Guardianship (2012)
25 Birth Registration and Birth Certificates (2013)*
26 Succession Laws (2013)
27 Jury Empanelment (2014)
28 Review of the
Crimes (Mental Impairment and Unfitness to be Tried) Act
29 The Forfeiture Rule (2014)
30 Trading Trusts—Oppression Remedies (2015)
31 Photographing and Filming Tenants’ Possessions for Advertising
Purposes (2015)*
32 Medicinal Cannabis (2015)
33 Use of Regulatory Regimes in Preventing the Infiltration of Organised
Crime into Lawful Occupations and Industries (2016)
34 The Role of Victims of Crime in the Criminal Trial Process (2016)
35 Funeral and Burial Instructions (2016)*
36 Review of the
Adoption Act 1984
37 Access to Justice—Litigation Funding and Group Proceedings
38 Review of the
Victims of Crime Assistance Act 1996
39 Neighbourhood Tree Disputes (2019)*
* Community law reform project.
For a full list of publications, and to access the above reports, see
www.lawreform.vic.gov.au
Neighbourhood Tree Disputes
A COMMUNITY LAW REFORM PROJECT
GPO Box 4637
Melbourne Victoria 3001 Australia
333 Queen Str Melbourne Victoria 3000 Australia
+61 3 8608 7
1300 666 555
+61 3 8608 7
law.reform@l www.lawrefo
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (4.71 MB)
PDF format (3.85 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter