URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/lawreform/NSWLRCIP/2000/17.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:36:45
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Guaranteeing Someone Else's Debts - Issues Paper [2000] NSWLRCIP 17
Issues Paper 17 (2000) - Guaranteeing Someone Else's Debts
Table of Contents
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
1. INTRODUCTION
WHY THIS REVIEW?
Other reviews
Increasing awareness of issue
Consumer protection
Small business
OUTLINE OF ISSUES PAPER
2. THE CURRENT LAW
OUTLINE OF THIS CHAPTER
WHAT IS A THIRD PARTY GUARANTEE?
The parties to a transaction
Setting aside/varying guarantees
THE COMMON LAW
Unconscionable conduct
Other common law issues
Misrepresentation
Undue influence
A special rule for wives?
STATUTORY PROVISIONS
Contracts Review Act 1980
Trade practices legislation
Unconscionable conduct
Misleading or deceptive conduct
Remedies available
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Code
Unjust contracts
Specific requirements
Farm Debt Mediation Act 1994
OTHER APPROACHES
Abstract control
European Community directive on unfair terms in contracts
Provisions in Australia
3. OPERATION OF GUARANTEES
OUTLINE OF THIS CHAPTER
BACKGROUND TO ENTERING A GUARANTEE
The role of relationships
Commercial stability and certainty
SOURCES OF LAW AND PRACTICE
Consumer Credit Code
Industry practice
PROCESS OF ENTERING A GUARANTEE
Provision of information about the principal loan
Consumer Credit Code
Industry codes of practice
Unjust circumstances surrounding the signing of a guarantee
The place where a guarantee is signed
Pre-contractual advice on the nature and effect of guarantees
“Independent legal advice”: The Solicitors’ Practice Rules
The value of independent legal advice
THE GUARANTEE DOCUMENT
Legibility and plain English
“All moneys” clauses
LATER OPERATION OF A GUARANTEE
Ongoing advice and information
Consumer Credit Code
Industry practice
Unilateral variations to the loan
Consumer Credit Code
Discharging the guarantor from a guarantee
Consumer Credit Code
Enforcement through the courts
Consumer Credit Code
Industry practice
Alternative dispute resolution
4. ISSUES TO CONSIDER
THE NEED FOR MORE INFORMATION
How prevalent is the use of third party guarantees?
In what circumstances are guarantees required by lenders?
THE BUSINESS/CONSUMER DISTINCTION
INFORMATION AND ADVICE
FORMALITIES
ENFORCEMENT ISSUES
RELATIONSHIPS: CONTRACT LAW AND RELATIONSHIP
LIMITING THE USE OF GUARANTEES?
OTHER ISSUES
TABLE OF LEGISLATION
TABLE OF CASES
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Issues Paper 17 (2000) - Guaranteeing Someone Else's Debts
Terms of Reference
History of this Reference (Digest)
Link to Summary
On 2 March 1999, the Attorney General, the Honourable Jeff Shaw QC MLC, asked the Law Reform Commission to inquire into and report
on the legal framework for the protection of guarantors of small business and other loans and in particular, to consider:
(i) whether the present legal framework adequately protects the interests of personal guarantors of small business and other loans;
(ii) whether there is a reasonable level of satisfaction in the community with the operation and application of the existing laws
protecting guarantors of small business and other loans, in particular, whether those guarantors, financiers and principal borrowers
are satisfied with the present legal framework;
(iii) whether there are more practical and effective strategies for the provision of personal guarantees of small business and other
loans that would enhance the development of conscientious lending practices while not placing undue constraints on small business
lending; and
(iv) any related matters.
In carrying out its review, the Commission is to have regard to:
The report of the Expert Group on Family Financial Vulnerability “Good Relations: High Risks – Financial Transactions
Within Families and Between Friends” released by the Commonwealth Attorney General in February 1996, and any other relevant
The effectiveness of current New South Wales legislation with particular reference to the
Contracts Review Act 1980
Fair Trading Act 1987
The need to ensure that any legal framework governing this issue adequately and effectively protects the interests of personal guarantors;
promotes commercial stability and certainty; and does not unduly restrain small business lending.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
Issues Paper 17 (2000) - Guaranteeing Someone Else's Debts
Participants
History of this Reference (Digest)
Link to Summary
Pursuant to
Law Reform Commission Act
(NSW) the Chairperson of the Commission constituted a Division for the purpose of conducting the reference. The members of the Division
Justice Michael Adams
Ms Andrea Durbach
Professor Reg Graycar*
Master Joanne Harrison
Justice David Hodgson
Ms Ruth McColl SC
(* denotes Commissioner-in-Charge)
Officers of the Commission
Executive Director
Mr Peter Hennessy
Legal Research and Writing
Ms Robyn Johansson
Ms Amy Veitch
Mr Joseph Waugh
Ms Rachel Way
Ms Aferdita Kryeziu
Desktop Publishing
Ms Rebecca Young
Administrative Assistance
Ms Wendy Stokoe
Reference Group
Ms Catherine Carney, Women’s Legal Resources Centre
Mr Robert Drake, Department of Fair Trading
Mr Michael Funston, Consumer Credit Legal Centre
Professor David Harland, Faculty of Law, University of Sydney
Ms Jenni Millbank, Faculty of Law, University of Sydney
Mr Ben Slade, Legal Aid Commission of NSW
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
Issues Paper 17 (2000) - Guaranteeing Someone Else's Debts
Submissions
History of this Reference (Digest)
Link to Summary
The Commission invites submissions on the issues relevant to this review, including but not limited to the issues raised in this
Issues Paper.
All submissions and enquiries should be directed to:
Mr Peter Hennessy
Executive Director
NSW Law Reform Commission
GPO Box 5199
Sydney NSW 1044
[DX 1227 Sydney]
Email: nsw_lrc@agd.nsw.gov.au
Phone: (02) 9228 8230
Fax: (02) 9228 8225
There is no special form required for submissions. If it is inconvenient or impractical to make a written submission you may telephone
the Commission and either direct your comments to a Legal Officer over the telephone, or else arrange to make your submission in
The closing date for submissions is 31 August 2000.
Use of submissions and confidentiality
If you would like your submission to be treated as confidential, please indicate this in your submission. Submissions made to the
Commission may be used in two ways:
Since the Commission’s process of law reform is essentially public, copies of submissions made to the Commission will normally
be made available on request to other persons or organisations. However, if you would like all or part of your submission to be treated
as confidential, please indicate this in your submission. Any request for a copy of a submission marked “confidential”
will be determined in accordance with the
Freedom of Information Act 1989
In preparing further papers on this reference, the Commission will refer to submissions made in response to this Issues Paper. However,
requests for confidentiality will be respected by the Commission in relation to the publication of submissions.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
Guaranteeing someone else's debts: Summary of Issues Paper 17
Table of Contents
Submissions
1 Introduction
Why this review?
Other reviews
Increasing awareness of issue
Consumer protection
Small business
Outline of Issues Paper 17 and Summary
2 The current law
3 Guarantees in practice
4 Issues to consider
The need for more information
How prevalent is the use of third party guarantees?
In what circumstances are guarantees required by lenders?
The business/consumer distinction
Information and advice
Formalities
Enforcement issues
Relationships: contract law and relationship debt
Limiting the use of guarantees?
Other issues
Appendix A: Terms of reference
Appendix B: Participants
Submissions
The Commission invites submissions on the issues relevant to this
review, including but not limited to the issues raised in this Issues
All submissions and enquiries should be directed to:
Mr Peter Hennessy
Executive Director
NSW Law Reform Commission
GPO Box 5199, Sydney NSW 1044
DX 1227 Sydney
nsw_lrc@agd.nsw.gov.au
(02) 9228 8230
(02) 9228 8225
There is no special form required for submissions. If it is
inconvenient or impractical to make a written submission you may
the Commission and either direct your comments to a Legal
Officer over the telephone, or else arrange to make your submission in
The closing date for submissions is 31 August 2000.
Use of submissions and confidentiality
If you would like your submission to be treated as confidential,
please indicate this in your submission. Submissions made to the
Commission may be used in two ways:
Since the Commission’s process of law reform is essentially
public, copies of submissions made to the Commission will normally
made available on request to other persons or organisations. However,
if you would like all or part of your submission to be treated
confidential, please indicate this in your submission. Any request for
a copy of a submission marked “confidential”
determined in accordance with the
Freedom of Information Act 1989
In preparing further papers on this reference, the Commission
will refer to submissions made in response to this Issues Paper.
requests for confidentiality will be respected by the
Commission in relation to the publication of submissions.
INTRODUCTION
[1] On 2 March 1999, the Attorney General asked the Law Reform
Commission to undertake a review of the law relating to third party
guarantees. The terms of reference for this review are set out at page
20 of this summary.
Why this review?
[2] For some years, there has been growing concern about the
consequences of the widespread use of third party guarantees to secure
loan transactions. In cases where a lender will only provide money if
the loan is secured, and a borrower has no acceptable security,
lender may agree to lend the money if it is secured against some
property or other interest of a third party. These “third
parties” are often spouses, close family members or friends who
may not otherwise be involved in, or receive any benefit from,
transaction. It is not uncommon for the guarantees to be enforced
against such people, often with serious consequences such
as the loss
of their home. This is a particular problem in the context of
guarantees to secure loans for the purpose of financing
businesses.
Other reviews
[3] In recent years, a number of organisations have undertaken a
range of inquiries and research as increasing awareness of, and
as the Trade Practices Commission (1992), the Martin Committee (a 1991
federal parliamentary committee on banking) and a variety of community
organisations such as consumer credit services and legal centres.
Australian Law Reform Commission and a number of credit advice bodies
and legal services focussed particular attention on what
widely known as “sexually transmitted debt”. Following the
1994 report of the Access to Justice Advisory Committee,
Expert Group on Family Financial Vulnerability was established and its
Good Relations, High Risks: Financial Transactions within Families and Between Friends,
released in February 1996, pointed out that the range of relationships
affected by these issues extends beyond spouses. There is
evidence to
suggest that the problem particularly affects borrowers and guarantors
from non-English speaking backgrounds.
Increasing awareness of issue
[4] Over the same period, there has been unprecedented academic
as well as community interest in these issues, while at the same time,
some litigated cases (such as
Garcia v National Australia Bank
1998) have received considerable media attention. The legal issues are
by no means new ones, involving the common law doctrines
unconscionability and the separate rule in
Yerkey v Jones
(1936) as well as a range of statutory regimes. Yet what is new is the
increasing awareness of the fact that every year, numbers
and family members fall victim to failed loans they have guaranteed.
[5] There are a number of possible reasons for this heightened awareness. The 1983 decision of the High Court in
Commercial Bank of Australia v Amadio
to light the vulnerability of elderly parents who want to assist their
children, and in particular, people whose first language
English. Increasing awareness of the legal disadvantages experienced by
women, particularly as spouses of borrowers, led community
the emerging women’s legal services to draw attention to
“sexually” or “emotionally transmitted
(or, as it has recently come to be known, “relationship
debt”). There have also been changes to the economic
including major restructuring and changes in the banking and finance
industry. Specifically, a small number of long established
been supplemented by foreign banks, building societies, credit unions,
finance companies and other forms of financial
institution that provide
credit (for example, home mortgage providers and insurance companies).
Consumer protection
[6] With these developments, there has also been increasing
recognition of the vulnerability of consumers when borrowing from large
financial institutions. A national network of consumer credit
organisations (including financial counselling services and specialist
community legal centres) has been established. As long ago as 1980, New
South Wales broke new ground in Australia by enacting the
Contracts Review Act
, which remains unique to this State
Act gives courts a broad power to vary contracts that are unjust as
well as allowing for a measure of “abstract control”
prescribing or otherwise restricting “the terms upon which [a]
person may enter into contracts of a specified class”.
Contracts Review Act
was described as “revolutionary” when enacted nearly 20
years ago, there has been no research into its operation or
effectiveness.
Other consumer protection legislation, such as the
Fair Trading Act 1987
(NSW) has also been enacted, and in 1996 new national consumer credit legislation (the
Consumer Credit Code
came into force as a cooperative arrangement involving all States and Territories.
Small business
[7] While these developments show increasing recognition of the
rights and interests of consumers, a widening gulf has developed
consumer laws and those laws that regulate the financing of
small business, as the new credit laws apply only to consumers. For
relief under the
Contracts Review Act 1980
not available to corporations, leading to a situation where “the
small family company may not be granted relief whereas the
individual may be”. Nor does that Act deal with contracts that
“are entered into or in the course of or for the
purpose of a
trade, business or profession”. Similarly, until July 1998, the
unconscionable conduct provisions of the
Trade Practices Act
(Cth) were limited and applied only to consumers, though these have
been extended by
to apply to some small business dealings.
[8] The policy behind regulating transactions involving
consumers more strictly than those involving business seems based on
the premise
that consumers have less power in their dealings with, say,
finance providers than do business people. But rather than being two
diametrically opposed categories, the categories “consumer”
and “business” operate along a continuum. That
individual consumers might be financially secure, wealthy and well
informed professionals, while “business”
includes all kinds
of small family undertakings such as the corner shop and the newspaper
or milk run. The transactions at issue
in well known cases such as
and the more recent
Garcia v National Australia Bank
borrowing for business purposes. Situations involving guarantees for
business loans, which are increasingly common, have
just as much
capacity to cause personal as well as business losses. It is therefore
timely to review the maintenance of this distinction
in the regulatory
OUTLINE OF ISSUES PAPER 17 AND SUMMARY
[9] Issues Paper 17 has four chapters. After an introduction,
Chapter 2 outlines the current law, both common law and statute. It
discusses the variety of legal doctrines that operate on these issues
thereby illustrating the uncertainty that surrounds the legal
framework. Chapter 2 also outlines some alternative approaches to
regulation from other jurisdictions. Chapter 3 addresses current
practices in the finance industry after considering the social context
in which many guarantees or sureties are sought, as well as
industry-based forms of regulation (such as the Code of Banking
Practice and analogous codes adopted by Credit Unions
and Building
Societies). The Chapter also considers the legal profession’s
involvement in the provision of independent legal
advice, and the role
of such advice in the use of guarantees. Chapter 4 summarises the
issues raised and outlines a list of matters
on which further research
will be undertaken and on which the Commission is keen to receive
submissions.
[10] This summary follows the same structure as the Issues
Paper. It is also divided into four parts. The summary of chapter 2 is
a brief outline of the legal framework, while the summary of chapter 3
sketches some of the practice issues that surround the day-to-day
operation of guarantees. Chapter 4 of the summary contains the same
questions that are included in the Issues Paper.
[11] The Commission is interested in information or views on
any of the matters raised in this paper. Chapter 4 is designed to make
it easier for people wanting to make submissions by providing a brief
list of questions. The Commission welcomes responses to any
one or more
of these questions or on any other related issue. The deadline for the
receipt of submissions is 31 August 2000.
2 THE CURRENT LAW
[12] The law that regulates third party guarantees is largely
common law, that is, judge-made law developed by the courts in cases
where guarantors have argued that the guarantee they have signed is
unjust. There are also various statutory laws that apply.
Who are the three parties?
A lender, creditor or
credit provider is someone who lends money. This can be a bank, finance
company, credit union or building society,
but it needn’t be an
institution that is in the business of providing credit: it can also be
any individual who lends money.
A borrower or debtor is the person to
whom a loan is made. A third party guarantor is a person who promises
to pay the loan if the
borrower cannot (or will not) repay it, but who
is generally not otherwise involved. They are a “third
party” because
they are not a party to the actual loan contract
which is between the borrower and the lender. Sometimes, the guarantor
will provide
some kind of mortgage over their property as further
security for the loan.
Grounds for setting aside (or varying) contracts of guarantee:
common law, there are a number of different defences that can be raised
when a lender tries to enforce a guarantee that the guarantor
unjust. While there is some degree of overlap between them, each of
these has different technical criteria that govern
when they can be
used and what remedies are available (for example, setting aside the
contract or limiting the amount owed). These
categories include
unconscionability (or unconscionable conduct), mistake,
misrepresentation, undue influence and duress.
A “special rule” for wives?
ground for setting aside guarantees applies only to cases where wives
guarantee the debts of their husbands. This category
was established by
the High Court of Australia in 1936 in a case called
Yerkey v Jones.
came to be considered obsolete by a number of courts and commentators
(including the New South Wales Court of Appeal). However,
in 1998, the
High Court applied it in a case involving a wife (
Garcia v National Australia Bank
and left open the possibility that the rule might be extended to a
broader category of cases that involve a relationship of trust
confidence between the borrower and the guarantor.
Statutory law:
There are a number of statutes
(acts) that can be used by people seeking to have a guarantee set aside
or varied. Some of these provide
alternatives to the common law; some
extend the law; while others fill gaps in the existing common law. Each
statute is limited in
some way. For example, there are various time
limits in each of the acts, and they generally distinguish between
business loans and
consumer loans.
Contracts Review Act 1980
(NSW) gives courts
power to set aside or vary contracts that are found to be unjust on one
or more of the grounds specified in the
Act. It excludes contracts
entered into “in the course of or for the purpose of a trade,
business or profession” other
than a “farming
undertaking”. Even so, it has occasionally been used successfully
in cases involving a personal guarantee
of a business loan.
Fair Trading Act 1987
Trade Practices Act 1974
both prohibit certain kinds of unconscionable conduct and misleading
and deceptive conduct. These generally don’t apply
to business
transactions. A new section of the
Trade Practices Act 1974
which was added in July 1998, extends some of its provisions to
transactions involving “business consumers” and
“small business suppliers” where the amount at issue is
$1,000,000 or less.
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Code
full name of national uniform credit legislation that applies in New
South Wales. The “Consumer Credit Code” (sometimes
the “uniform Consumer Credit Code”) has been adopted by all
the Australian States and Territories. The Code contains
general provisions about unjust contracts similar to those in the
Contracts Review Act 1980
(NSW) and the trade practices legislation
Importantly,
it also includes a number of specific requirements that must be met if
a guarantee is to be enforced. However, the Code
only applies to
consumer credit and therefore doesn’t apply to guarantees that
secure business loans.
An alternative approach?
Challenging individual
guarantees through the courts, often many years after they have been
entered into, may not necessarily be the
best means of achieving
justice. Not only is the process of taking matters to court costly and
time consuming, but only the parties
to that particular case are bound
by the result. Therefore even where the guarantor “wins”,
this may not affect day-to-day
practices. An alternative approach to
the problem of unfair guarantees is “abstract control”,
that is, preventing lenders
from using guarantees that have unfair
terms. The focus is on ensuring the contract is fair from the outset.
Chapter 2 of Issues
Paper 17 includes examples of abstract control,
such as the European Community
Directive on Unfair Terms in Consumer Contracts
(EC Directive 93/13) which applies in England and
Contracts Review Act 1980
(NSW) which has not been used much in this State.
3 GUARANTEES IN PRACTICE
[21] There are a number of day-to-day practice issues that
affect the use of guarantees. These are considered against the
of the social context in which guarantees are used.
The social context: “relationship debt”:
most commercial decisions, the decision to be a guarantor is often not
made out of financial self-interest but for other non-commercial
reasons. Many guarantors get no financial benefit at all from the loan.
Recently, there has been considerable attention given to
“relationship debt” and to the social and economic context
in which this occurs. In a 1999 report, the Australian Banking
Ombudsman described “relationship debt” as “a
shorthand expression for the assumption by one person of
responsibility
for a debt owed by another person to whom they are related in some
[23] There is a clear contrast between the emotional
underpinnings of many transactions secured by third parties and the
imperatives
of commercial stability and certainty. Lenders are engaging
in a commercial profit-based enterprise and they need to be able to
within a defined legal and commercial framework. Yet the legal
and commercial framework – the common law, statutory law and
voluntary industry codes of practice – reveals a lack of clarity
and certainty in relation to guarantees.
Advice and information issues:
There is only a
limited legal obligation on lenders to disclose information to
guarantors before they sign guarantees. It is now relatively
people to be urged to obtain “independent legal advice”,
although there is no formal legal requirement that
they do so. It is
sometimes, though less commonly, suggested that borrowers might also
obtain independent financial advice. The New
South Wales rules about
the provision of legal advice changed early in 2000 following concerns
by the Law Society that lenders have
tended to use independent legal
advice as a means of shifting responsibility from themselves to
solicitors.
The “fine print”:
There are also a
number of practical issues that surround the signing of a guarantee,
such as who is present when the guarantee is
being signed, the location
where it is signed, and the readability of the documents. Guarantees
are sometimes hard to read and can
be written in very complex language.
There are only limited situations (mostly to do with consumer credit
lending) where the law
requires that they be in clear, simple English.
This may cause particular difficulty for people whose first language is
not English.
“All moneys” clauses:
Sometimes called
“all accounts” clauses, these have the potential to create
an open-ended liability for a guarantor who
is, in effect, agreeing to
secure any future loans that the borrower may enter into. There is
nothing to prevent the use of such
clauses at common law, although the
courts sometimes limit their operation in disputed cases.
Ongoing information:
At common law, there is no
general obligation on a lender to supply a guarantor with ongoing
information about the status of a loan,
such as whether the repayments
are being regularly made by the borrower. In these circumstances,
guarantors have no way of knowing
how vulnerable they are, unless they
are being kept informed by the person whose loan they have guaranteed.
Enforcement:
A lender need not inform the
guarantor that the borrower has defaulted under the principal loan
before commencing proceedings to enforce
the guarantee. And, a lender
doesn’t have to sue the borrower first, unless the contract
expressly says so. Some informal dispute
resolution processes have been
established by the industry groups as part of their codes of practice,
for example, the scheme administered
by the Australian Banking Industry
4 ISSUES TO CONSIDER
[29] Although there is a detailed (if complex) legal framework
and various other forms of regulation (such as the voluntary industry
codes of practice) concerning third party guarantees, most of the many
transactions that take place on a daily basis do not come
before courts
for scrutiny, nor do they come to the attention of bodies such as the
Australian Banking Industry Ombudsman. As part
of this reference, the
Commission will be undertaking empirical research to assist in
developing a clearer picture of the use of
guarantees, particularly
those given to secure small business lending.
[30] The Commission has been awarded a research grant with the
University of Sydney’s Faculty of Law as part of the Australian
Research Council’s Strategic Partnership with Industry for
Research and Training (SPIRT) scheme. The grant will be used to
a detailed empirical study that will include surveying lenders,
solicitors, borrowers and guarantors as well as observing
court and tribunal hearings.
[31] The Commission is interested in hearing from members of
the public as well as from relevant organisations (including legal,
welfare and finance industry groups) about their experiences
with the use of third party guarantees. Submissions are sought on any
of the matters raised by the terms of reference (these are set out at
page 20 of this Summary). The following paragraphs list a number
issues, some of which have already been raised, in addition to those
matters upon which the Commission is seeking further information.
list can be used by those interested in participating in this reference
to guide their responses. The issues are grouped loosely
categories, though there is considerable overlap between some of them.
THE NEED FOR MORE INFORMATION
How prevalent is the use of third party guarantees?
[32] As the Australian Banking Industry Ombudsman pointed out in
its recent report on relationship debt, there is a lack of information
The number of third-party guarantees given to financial institutions;
The proportion of guarantees given which are actually called upon; and
What amounts guarantors, on average, have to pay
The Commission is particularly keen to collect such data. It is
also often suggested that the majority of guarantees are provided
family members, but detailed information on this is also scarce.
What proportion of guarantees are provided in the context of family and other close relationships?
What proportion of guarantees are provided in support of a business loan?
In what circumstances are guarantees required by lenders?
[33] It has been suggested to the Commission that the use of third
party guarantees has increased since the mid 1980s, along with
in banking and credit provision practices, and the Commission will be
attempting to get a clear sense of the circumstances
in which third
party security is used. There has also been particular concern
expressed about the continued use of “all moneys”
What is the current prevalence of the use of “all
moneys” or “all accounts” clauses in contracts of
Has the increase in competition arising from deregulation of the financial sector led to a greater use of guarantees?
How effective are the lending practices of creditors
in the assessment of risk? Does the widespread use of third party
move the emphasis away from effective risk assessment by
THE BUSINESS/CONSUMER DISTINCTION
[34] With minor exceptions, transactions in the course of business
are excluded from the scheme of regulation that governs consumer
transactions (for example, the uniform
Consumer Credit Code
[35] A key question is:
Should third party guarantees for small business lending
continue to be regulated separately from guarantees for consumer loans?
[36] This distinction has always been a matter of some contention. At the time of the introduction of the
Contracts Review Act 1980
(NSW), implementing the 1976 Peden Report on
Harsh and Unconscionable Contracts,
the then Minister for Consumer Affairs, the Hon Syd Einfeld, noted that
an earlier version, not limited to consumer transactions,
had received
a strongly negative response – in some cases (in his words) one
that “bordered on the hysterical”
and the Bill was
subsequently limited in its application. He noted:
Encouraged by this widespread concern for the consumer faced by harsh
or unjust contracts, the Government has decided that the Contracts
Review Bill before this House will be confined to consumer and
unincorporated farming transactions. In effect, the only persons having
access will be the commonly-termed traditional consumer, that is, a
consumer of goods, services or land for personal, domestic or
use only, and the unincorporated farmer>
[37] Other questions to consider include:
Contracts Review Act 1980
(NSW) was hailed as
“revolutionary legislation whose evident purpose is to overcome
the common law’s failure to provide
a comprehensive doctrinal
framework to deal with “unjust” contracts.” Has it
achieved this aim? If not, why has
it not done so?
Do the provisions of the
Contracts Review Act 1980
(NSW) sufficiently cover third party guarantees? Should the Act be
amended so that it applies expressly to all situations where a
party provides a personal guarantee for a loan?
Should the unconscionable conduct provisions in
Fair Trading Act 1987
(NSW) be amended so that they apply expressly to all contracts of
guarantee provided by third parties and not just those given with
respect to loans for “personal, domestic or household use or
consumption”?
Is it appropriate to maintain the clear regulatory
distinction between consumer guarantors and those who provide personal
for small business loans?
Are the 1998 small business amendments to the
Trade Practices Act 1974
(Cth) effective in dealing with guarantees of small business loans? Should similar provisions be included in the
Fair Trading Act 1987
Should self-regulation (via the industry codes of practice) be the main way of regulating small business lending?
Should there be a uniform credit industry code of practice (and should any such code also apply to finance companies)?
INFORMATION AND ADVICE
What information should lenders be required to disclose to
prospective guarantors in relation to the financial situation of the
Should the limited common law duty to disclose only
“unusual” facts be modified and supplemented by rules that
a third party guarantor to be provided with all information
been sought) that will enable her/him to evaluate the risks involved in
giving the guarantee?
In what circumstances should prospective guarantors
be required to seek independent legal advice? Should lenders be
required to ensure
that this has occurred before being able to finalise
a guarantee? If so, what form should that advice take? What issues must
guarantor be advised about? Should additional requirements be
imposed where the relationship between guarantor and borrower is a
close personal relationship? Should proof that a person has received
independent legal advice ever be a precondition of a guarantee’s
enforceability?
Are there any circumstances in which a prospective
guarantor should be required to seek independent financial advice on
the commercial
aspects of the transaction being guaranteed?
Is the information that must be provided to the
guarantor during the life of a contract of guarantee clear to all
parties, and sufficient?
What information should be provided to a
guarantor during the life of a loan?
Should the industry codes of practice require, so
far as practicable, the same pre-contractual information to be provided
the Consumer Credit Code?
Are vulnerable members of the community, such as
women guaranteeing partners’ loans and people of non-English
speaking background,
effectively targeted by community education
programs about guarantees?
FORMALITIES
[38] Assuming guarantees continue to be used, are there technical or
formal matters that should be regulated to minimise some of the
of guarantors failing to understand the nature of the obligation they
are entering into? The Commission is interested in submissions
following matters:
Should the law regulate the manner in which guarantees are
entered into? For example, should there be specified formalities for
into all guarantees (including guarantees of business loans)
so that failure to comply with those formalities (such as not signing
in the presence of the borrower) renders the agreement unenforceable?
If so, what other formalities or processes should be required?
Should all guarantees, including those for business
loans, be subject to technical specifications such as minimum font size
and be required to be comprehensible, clear and concise?
What steps should be required to ensure that people
from non-English speaking backgrounds are fully informed about the
the obligation they are undertaking?
Should there be a cooling off period during which a
person who has signed a personal guarantee can change his or her mind?
how long should this period be?
Should these kinds of regulation be a matter of
statute law, or should they be left to the industry organisations to
regulate by
way of their voluntary codes of practice?
ENFORCEMENT ISSUES
Are the processes followed by lenders when borrowers default on their loans adequate?
Should a lender be required to notify a guarantor about a default by the borrower as soon as the default occurs?
Are there effective processes for resolving disputes involving guarantors?
RELATIONSHIPS: CONTRACT LAW AND RELATIONSHIP DEBT
[39] One of the key difficulties in this area of law is that normal
contractual principles designed to operate upon arms-length commercial
transactions are being imposed upon factual situations that may have
more in common with what is traditionally considered to be
law than “commercial” law. How can the
law best respond to this intertwining of family and commercial
considerations?
What effect, if any, should be given to the fact that a
guarantee is provided in the context of a close personal relationship,
than by way of an arms length contractual arrangement? Have
common law attempts to take that relationship into account, such as the
“special rule” for wives (
Yerkey v Jones
Garcia v National Australia Bank Ltd
been successful? Should there continue to be such a “special
rule” and if so, should its application be broadened to
a wider range of relationships?
What obligations, if any, should a lender owe to a third party guarantor in a close personal relationship with the borrower?
In some overseas jurisdictions, there are laws known as
“homestead” laws that impose limits on the extent to which
residential property can be used as security for debts. These laws vary
from place to place. Some protect all or part of the value
property; some apply to sole owners while others only apply where
family members or spouses also live in the property; and
limited to situations where the security over the property has been
entered without the consent of the other spouse. Some
of these laws
apply automatically; others require some form of written notification.
Should the family home continue to be used as security for business loans or should its use be limited?
How effective is independent legal advice in offsetting
emotional/family/other pressures on a guarantor to enter a guarantee?
other pre-contractual advice (such as independent financial
advice) also be required?
LIMITING THE USE OF GUARANTEES?
[41] There have also been some suggestions that personal guarantees
should not be permitted in any circumstances. For example, the
Committee on Banking and Finance questioned “the appropriateness
of guarantees as commonly used financial instruments”.
the Australian Trade Practices Commission (now the Australian
Competition and Consumer Commission) in its 1992 discussion
Guarantors: Problems and Perspectives
refers to suggestions by the National Consumer Affairs Consultative
Council and the Australian Financial Counselling and Credit Reform
Association that all guarantees be prohibited. The Trade Practices
Commission, while not agreeing that all guarantees should be banned,
did support the Martin Committee’s recommendation that unlimited
consumer guarantees should be proscribed.
Should all third party guarantees be prohibited?
Should legislation and industry codes of practice
generally prohibit particular provisions such as “all
moneys” or “all
accounts” clauses from all contracts
of guarantees?
OTHER ISSUES
[42] It has been suggested that other forms of joint debts, such as credit cards, are equally problematic.
This is a particular issue for women separating from partners whose
debts they have secured. The Commission is interested in receiving
submissions about difficulties experienced by third parties in other
“relationship
debt” that come within the terms of
Australian Banking Industry Ombudsman Ltd,
Report on Relationship Debt
(Bulletin No 22, 1999) at 3.
New South Wales,
Parliamentary
Legislative Assembly, 19 March 1980 at 5533.
New South Wales, Department for Women and Department of Fair Trading,
Separating Joint Finances: An Opportunity for Reform
(Background Paper, 1999).
Appendix A:
Terms of Reference
On 2 March 1999, the Attorney General, the Honourable Jeff Shaw QC
MLC, asked the Law Reform Commission to inquire into and report
legal framework for the protection of guarantors of small business and
other loans and in particular, to consider:
(i) whether the present legal framework adequately protects the
interests of personal guarantors of small business and other loans;
(ii) whether there is a reasonable level of satisfaction in the
community with the operation and application of the existing laws
protecting guarantors of small business and other loans, in particular,
whether those guarantors, financiers and principal borrowers
satisfied with the present legal framework;
(iii) whether there are more practical and effective strategies
for the provision of personal guarantees of small business and other
loans that would enhance the development of conscientious lending
practices while not placing undue constraints on small business
lending; and
(iv) any related matters.
In carrying out its review, the Commission is to have regard to:
The report of the Expert Group on Family Financial Vulnerability
“Good Relations: High Risks – Financial Transactions
Families and Between Friends” released by the Commonwealth
Attorney General in February 1996, and any other relevant
The effectiveness of current New South Wales legislation with
particular reference to the
Contracts Review Act 1980
Trading Act 1987
The need to ensure that any legal framework governing this
issue adequately and effectively protects the interests of personal
guarantors;
promotes commercial stability and certainty; and does not
unduly restrain small business lending.
Appendix B:
Participants
Pursuant to
Law Reform Commission Act
(NSW) the Chairperson of the Commission constituted a Division for the
purpose of conducting the reference. The members of the Division
Justice Michael Adams
Ms Andrea Durbach
Professor Reg Graycar (Commissioner-in-Charge)
Master Joanne Harrison
Justice David Hodgson
Ms Ruth McColl SC
Officers of the Commission
Executive Director
Mr Peter Hennessy
Legal Research and Writing
Ms Robyn Johansson
Ms Amy Veitch
Mr Joseph Waugh
Ms Rachel Way
Ms Aferdita Kryeziu
Desktop Publishing
Ms Rebecca Young
Administrative Assistance
Ms Wendy Stokoe
Reference Group
Ms Catherine Carney, Women’s Legal Resources Centre
Mr Robert Drake, Department of Fair Trading
Mr Michael Funston, Consumer Credit Legal Centre
Professor David Harland, Faculty of Law, University of Sydney
Ms Jenni Millbank, Faculty of Law, University of Sydney
Mr Ben Slade, Legal Aid Commission of NSW
Issues Paper 17 (2000) - Guaranteeing Someone Else's Debts
1. Introduction
History of this Reference (Digest)
Link to Summary
1.1 On 2 March 1999, the Attorney General asked the Law Reform Commission to undertake a review of the law relating to third party
guarantees. The terms of reference for this review are set out at
of this Issues Paper.
WHY THIS REVIEW?
1.2 For some years, there has been growing concern about the consequences of the widespread use of third party guarantees to secure
loan transactions.
In cases where a lender will only provide money if the loan is secured, and a borrower has no acceptable security, the lender may
agree to provide the money if it is secured against some property or other interest of a third party. These “third parties”
are often spouses, close family members or friends who may not otherwise be involved in, or receive any benefit from, the loan transaction.
It is not uncommon for the guarantees to be enforced against such people, often with serious consequences such as the loss of their
Other reviews
1.3 In recent years, a number of organisations have undertaken a range of inquiries and research as increasing awareness of, and discussion
the Martin Committee (a federal parliamentary committee on banking)
and a variety of community organisations such as consumer credit services and legal centres.
The Australian Law Reform Commission and a number of credit advice bodies and legal services focussed particular attention on what
came to be widely known as “sexually transmitted debt”.
Following the report of the Access to Justice Advisory Committee, a national Expert Group on Family Financial Vulnerability was established
and its report,
Good Relations, High Risks: Financial Transactions Within Families and Between Friends,
released in February 1996, pointed out that the range of relationships affected by these issues extends beyond spouses. There is
evidence to suggest that the problem particularly affects borrowers and guarantors from non-English speaking backgrounds.
Increasing awareness of issue
1.4 Over the same period, there has been unprecedented academic as well as community interest in these issues,
while at the same time, some litigated cases have received considerable media attention.
The legal issues are by no means new ones, involving the common law doctrines of unconscionability and the somewhat separate rule
Yerkey v Jones
as well as a range of statutory regimes (these are all discussed in detail in Chapter 2)
Yet what is new is the increasing awareness of the fact that every year, numbers of friends and family members fall victim to failed
loans they have guaranteed.
1.5 There are a number of possible reasons for this heightened awareness. The 1983 decision of the High Court in
Commercial Bank of Australia Ltd v Amadio
brought to light the vulnerability of elderly parents who want to assist their children, and in particular, people whose first language
is not English. Increasing awareness of the legal disadvantages experienced by women,
particularly as spouses of borrowers, led community groups and the emerging women’s legal services to draw attention to “sexually”
or “emotionally transmitted debt”
(or, as it has recently come to be known, “relationship debt”).
There have also been changes to the economic landscape, including major restructuring and changes in the banking and finance industry.
Specifically, a small number of long established banks have been supplemented by foreign banks, building societies, credit unions,
finance companies and other forms of financial institution that provide credit (for example, home mortgage providers and insurance
companies).
Consumer protection
1.6 With these developments, there has also been increasing recognition of the vulnerability of consumers when borrowing from large
financial institutions. A national network of consumer credit organisations (including financial counselling services and specialist
community legal centres) has been established. As long ago as 1980, New South Wales broke new ground in Australia by enacting the
Contracts Review Act
, which remains unique to this State
The Act gives courts a broad power to vary contracts that are unjust as well as allowing for a measure of “abstract control”
by prescribing or otherwise restricting “the terms upon which [a] person may enter into contracts of a specified class”.
Contracts Review Act
(NSW) was described as “revolutionary”
when enacted nearly 20 years ago, there has been no research into its operation or effectiveness. A range of other consumer protection
legislation, such as the
Fair Trading Act 1987
(NSW), has also been enacted, and in 1996 new national consumer credit legislation (the
Consumer Credit Code)
came into force as a cooperative arrangement involving all States and Territories.
Small business
1.7 While these developments show increasing recognition of the rights and interests of consumers, a widening gulf has developed between
consumer laws and those laws that regulate the financing of small business, as the new credit laws apply only to consumers. For example,
relief under the
Contracts Review Act 1980
is not available to corporations, leading to a situation where “the small family company may not be granted relief whereas the
wealthy individual may be”.
Nor does that Act deal with contracts that “are entered into or in the course of or for the purpose of a trade, business or
profession”.
Similarly, until July 1998, the unconscionable conduct provisions of the
Trade Practices Act
(Cth) were limited and applied only to consumers, though these have been extended by
to apply to some small business dealings.
1.8 The policy behind regulating transactions involving consumers more strictly than those involving business seems based on the premise
that consumers have less power in their dealings with, say, finance providers than do business people. But rather than being two
diametrically opposed categories, the categories “consumer” and “business” operate along a continuum. That
is, some individual consumers might be financially secure, wealthy and well informed professionals, while “business”
includes all kinds of small family undertakings such as the corner shop and the newspaper or milk run. The transactions at issue
in well known cases such as
Commercial Bank of Australia Ltd v Amadio
and the more recent
Garcia v National Australia Bank Ltd,
involved borrowings for business purposes. Situations involving guarantees for business loans, which are increasingly common, have
just as much capacity to cause personal, as well as, business losses. It is therefore timely to review the maintenance of this distinction
in the regulatory systems.
OUTLINE OF ISSUES PAPER
1.9 The remainder of this Issues Paper is divided into three chapters. Chapter 2 outlines the current law, both common law and statute.
It discusses the variety of legal doctrines that operate on these issues, thereby illustrating the uncertainty that surrounds the
legal framework. Chapter 2 also outlines some alternative approaches to regulation from other jurisdictions. Chapter 3 addresses
current practices in the finance industry after considering the social context in which many guarantees or sureties are sought, as
well as looking at industry-based forms of regulation (such as the Code of Banking Practice and analogous codes adopted by the Credit
Union and Building Society sectors). The chapter also considers the legal profession’s involvement in the provision of independent
legal advice, and the role of such advice in the use of guarantees. Previous inquiries and other related research are also referred
to in this chapter. As both Chapters 2 and 3 are quite detailed, brief summaries of their contents are provided at the beginning
1.10 Chapter 4 summarises the issues raised and outlines a list of matters on which further research will be undertaken and on which
the Commission is keen to receive submissions. The Commission is interested in information or views on any of the matters raised
in this paper. Chapter 4 is designed to make it easier for people wanting to make submissions by providing a brief list of questions.
The Commission welcomes responses to any one or more of these questions or on any other related issue. The deadline for the receipt
of submissions is 31 August 2000.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
. For recent newspaper discussions see A Lampe, “Avoid the Guarantor Trap”
Sydney Morning Herald
(28 April 1999) Money Section at 17, and A Lampe, “Sexually Transmitted Debt: Many Women Guarantors are Guaranteed to Lose
Sydney Morning Herald
(9 February 2000) Money Section at 7.
. Australia, Trade Practices Commission,
Guarantors: Problems and Perspectives
(Discussion Paper, 1992).
. Australia, House of Representatives Standing Committee on Finance and Public Administration,
A Pocket Full of Change: Banking and Deregulation
(AGPS, Canberra, 1991).
. See eg: R Jukic,
Till Debt us do Part
(Consumer Credit Legal Service, Melbourne, 1994); S Singh,
For Love Not Money: The Stories of Women in Family Business
(Consumer Advocacy and Financial Counselling Association of Victoria Inc, Melbourne, 1995); S Singh,
For Love Not Money: Women, Information and the Family Business
(Consumer Advocacy and Financial Counselling Association of Victoria Inc, Melbourne, 1995).
. Australian Law Reform Commission,
Equality Before the Law: Women’s Equality
(Report 69,
) at ch 13.
. For some illustrative cases see
Commercial Bank of Australia Ltd v Amadio
[1983] HCA 14
(1983) 151 CLR 447
Esanda Finance Corporation Ltd v Tong
(1997) 41 NSWLR 482
(NSW CA) (and the related action in
Muggleton v Tong
[1999] NSWCA 10)
National Australia Bank v Nobile
[1988] FCA 72
(1988) 100 ALR 227
(Federal Court, FC).
. Perhaps the key example is B Fehlberg,
Sexually Transmitted Debt: Surety Experience and English Law
(Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1997). This includes a discussion of the empirical research Dr Fehlberg undertook in England toward her
. There was much discussion in the press following the decision of the High Court in
Garcia v National Australia Bank Ltd
[1998] HCA 48
(1998) 194 CLR 395.
See, for some examples, “Women Can Still Trust in Their Husbands”
The Canberra Times
(12 August 1998) at 11; B Lane, “Wife Keeps House on 59-Year-Old Legal Precedent”
(7 August 1998) at 3; F Metcalf, “Borrowers May Face Personal Intrusion”
Courier Mail
(9 October 1998). See also P Tyndale, “Money – Till Debt Us Do Part”
Sydney Morning Herald
(30 June 1999) Money Section at 8.
Yerkey v Jones
[1939] HCA 3
(1939) 63 CLR 649.
[1983] HCA 14
(1983) 151 CLR 447.
. This has generated a wealth of literature in the past quarter century. For a general overview, see Australian Law Reform Commission,
Equality Before the Law: Justice for Women
(Report 69,
. See B Fehlberg,
Sexually Transmitted Debt: Surety Experience and English Law
(Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1997) and S Singh,
For Love Not Money: Women, Information and the Family Business
(Consumer Advocacy and Financial Counselling Association of Victoria Inc, Melbourne, 1995) and S Singh,
For Love Not Money: The Stories of Women in Family Business
(Consumer Advocacy and Financial Counselling Association of Victoria Inc, Melbourne, 1995)
There is an extensive literature on “sexually transmitted debt”: see for some examples, N Howell, “Sexually Transmitted
Debt: A Feminist Analysis of Laws Regulating Guarantors and Co-Borrowers” (1995) 3
Australian Feminist Law Journal
93; M Kaye, “Equity’s Treatment of Sexually Transmitted Debt”
Feminist Legal Studies
; J Dodds Streeton, “Feminist Perspectives on the Law of Insolvency” in J Dodds Streeton and R Langford,
Aspects of Real Property and Insolvency Law
(Adelaide Law Review Research Paper No 6, 1994). Some commentators, notably Paula Baron, prefer the term “emotionally transmitted
debt”: see P Baron “The Free Exercise of Her Will: Women and Emotionally Transmitted Debt” (1995) 13
Law in Context
. Australian Banking Industry Ombudsman Ltd,
Report on Relationship Debt
(Bulletin No 22, September 1999) at 2.
Contracts Review Act 1980
. See eg A L Terry, “Unconscionable Contracts in New South Wales: The
Contracts Review Act 1980
Australian Business Law Review
; and J Goldring, J L Pratt and D E J Ryan, “The Contracts Review Act (NSW)” (1981) 4(2)
University of New South Wales Law Journal
. See A J Duggan and E V Lanyon,
Consumer Credit Law
(Butterworths, Sydney, 1999).
. See J W Carter and D J Harland,
Contract Law in Australia
(3rd edition, Butterworths, Sydney, 1996) at 503.
. Farming contracts are
included in the “trade or business” exemption: see s 6(2). But see
Farm Debt Mediation Act 1994
It has been suggested that this exemption has been very broadly interpreted: see J W Carter and D J Harland,
Contract Law in Australia
(3rd edition, Butterworths, Sydney, 1996) at 504; and N C Seddon and M P Ellinghaus,
Cheshire and Fifoot’s Law of Contract
(7th Australian edition, Butterworths, Sydney, 1997) at 567.
. From July 1998, the jurisdiction of the Australian Banking Industry Ombudsman was also extended to apply to banking transactions
involving small business. See J Pascoe, “The Effect of the Federal Government’s Small Business Package on Guarantees
of Business Debts”
(1998) 12(3)
Commercial Law Quarterly
[1983] HCA 14
(1983) 151 CLR 447.
[1998] HCA 48
(1998) 194 CLR 395.
Issues Paper 17 (2000) - Guaranteeing Someone Else's Debts
2. The Current Law
History of this Reference (Digest)
Link to Summary
OUTLINE OF THIS CHAPTER
This chapter outlines the law that regulates third party guarantees. That law is largely common law, that is, judge-made law developed
by the courts in cases where guarantors have argued that the guarantee they have signed is unjust. The chapter also outlines the
various statutory laws that apply, and gives examples from some of the cases of how the common law and the statute law works in practice.
Who are the three parties? (
para 2.2-2.9
A lender, creditor or credit provider is someone who lends money. This can be a bank, finance company, credit union or building society,
but it need not be an institution that is in the business of providing credit: it can also be any individual who lends money. A borrower
or debtor is the person to whom a loan is made. A third party guarantor is a person who promises to pay the loan if the borrower
cannot (or will not) repay it, but who is generally not otherwise involved. They are a “third party” because they are
not a party to the actual loan contract which is between the borrower and the lender (credit provider). Sometimes, the guarantor
will provide some kind of mortgage over their property as further security for the loan.
Grounds for setting aside (or varying) contracts of guarantee (
para 2.10-2.38
At common law, there are a number of different defences that can be raised when a lender tries to enforce a guarantee that the guarantor
considers unjust. While there is some degree of overlap between them, each of these has different technical criteria that govern
when they can be used and what remedies are available (for example, setting aside the contract or limiting the amount owed). These
categories include unconscionability (or unconscionable conduct), mistake, misrepresentation, undue influence and duress.
A “special rule” for wives? (
para 2.39-2.51
Another ground for setting aside guarantees applies only to cases where wives guarantee the debts of their husbands. This category
was established by the High Court of Australia in 1936 in a case called
Yerkey v Jones.
It came to be considered obsolete by a number of courts and commentators (including the New South Wales Court of Appeal). However,
in 1998, the High Court applied it in a case involving a wife (
Garcia v National Australia Bank)
, and left open the possibility that the rule might be extended to a broader category of cases that involve a relationship of trust
and confidence between the borrower and the guarantor.
Statutory law (
para 2.52-2.107
There are a number of statutes (acts) that can be used by people seeking to have a guarantee set aside or varied. Some of these provide
alternatives to the common law; some extend the law; while others fill gaps in the existing common law. Each statute is limited in
some way. For example, there are various time limits in each of the acts, and they generally distinguish between business loans and
consumer loans.
Contracts Review Act 1980
(NSW) gives courts power to set aside or vary contracts that are found to be unjust on one or more of the grounds specified in the
Act. It excludes contracts entered into “in the course of or for the purpose of a trade, business or profession” other
than a “farming undertaking”. Even so, it has occasionally been used successfully in cases involving a personal guarantee
of a business loan.
Fair Trading Act 1987
Trade Practices Act 1974
(Cth) both prohibit certain kinds of unconscionable conduct and misleading and deceptive conduct. These generally do not apply to
business transactions. A new section of the
Trade Practices Act 1974
(Cth) which was added in July 1998 extends some of its provisions to transactions involving “business consumers” and “small
business suppliers” where the amount at issue is $1,000,000 or less.
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Code
is the full name of the national uniform credit legislation that applies in New South Wales. The “Consumer Credit Code”
(sometimes called the “uniform Consumer Credit Code”) has been adopted by all the Australian States and Territories.
The Code contains a set of general provisions about unjust contracts similar to those in the
Contracts Review Act 1980
(NSW) and the trade practices legislation
Importantly, it also includes a number of specific requirements that must be met if a guarantee is to be enforced. However, the Code
only applies to consumer credit and therefore does not apply to guarantees that secure business loans.
An alternative approach? (
para 2.108-2.113
Challenging individual guarantees through the courts, often many years after they have been entered into, may not necessarily be
the best means of achieving justice. Not only is the process of taking matters to court costly and time consuming, but only the parties
to that particular case are bound by the result. Therefore even where the guarantor “wins”, this may not affect day-to-day
practices. An alternative approach to the problem of unfair guarantees is “abstract control”, that is, preventing lenders
from entering into guarantees that have unfair terms. The focus is on ensuring the contract is fair from the outset. Chapter 2 includes
examples of abstract control, such as the European Community
Directive on Unfair Terms in Consumer Contracts
(EC Directive 93/13) which applies in England and
Contracts Review Act 1980
(NSW) which has not been used much in this State.
2.1 This chapter outlines the law that regulates third party guarantees. That law is largely common law, that is, judge-made law developed
by the courts in cases where guarantors have argued that the guarantee they have signed is unjust. The chapter also outlines the
various statutory laws that apply, and gives examples (from some of the cases) of how the common law and the statute law works in
WHAT IS A THIRD PARTY GUARANTEE?
The parties to a transaction
2.2 A third party guarantee involves a situation where a person borrows money from a lender but, in order to secure repayment the
lender also enters into an agreement with a third party (a guarantor) who guarantees to repay the debt in case the borrower fails
2.3 A lender (or “creditor” or “credit provider”) is someone to whom a debt is owed. A lender could be virtually
anybody. Most commonly the lender will be a bank or other financial institution, but it could also be a different type of lender
such as a solicitor, accountant, or even a wealthy (or not so wealthy) individual. The lender could be owed the debt for any number
of reasons, including the fact that the lender had advanced money to the borrower or another person, or had provided goods or services.
2.4 A borrower (or “debtor”) is simply someone who owes money to a lender. A borrower could be an individual, or could
be a trading concern, such as a sole trader, partnership or limited liability company (with one or more directors).
2.5 A guarantor is someone who agrees to be responsible for paying the amount owing in place of a borrower where the borrower, for
whatever reason, is unwilling or unable to pay the lender. A third party guarantor can be any entity that is not the borrower or
lender and may even include an individual who is a director of a debtor company or a member of a debtor partnership. The guarantor
may have to pay everything the original borrower owed (plus the costs of recovery) or may only be liable to pay up to a certain amount,
for example, a fixed sum of money. The type of agreement the guarantor has entered into with the lender will determine the extent
of the guarantor’s liability.
2.6 A guarantee from a third party needs to be distinguished from a joint debt. However, joint borrowers may be treated as guarantor
and borrower if one of the joint borrowers receives no benefit under the credit contract.
2.7 A form of agreement closely related to a third party guarantee is a third party mortgage. Third party mortgages are the means
by which a third party guarantees the debts of a borrower without strictly entering a contract of guarantee. Third party mortgages
are, in substance, guarantees even if not strictly so in form or name. Accordingly, third party mortgages are treated by the courts
as if they were third party guarantees.
2.8 A guarantee also needs to be distinguished from an indemnity. With a guarantee, there are three parties involved so that the borrower
remains primarily liable for the debt and the guarantor only becomes liable to the lender if and when the borrower defaults. By contrast,
a contract of indemnity creates an independent obligation to the lender, and therefore an indemnity is characterised as a “primary”
rather than “secondary” liability.
2.9 The courts have adopted two approaches in construing contracts of guarantee. The first approach is to construe the guarantee,
in cases of ambiguity, in favour of the guarantor. The second has been to construe the guarantee as any other business document,
that is, “the guarantee should be given a reasonable, business meaning and should not be construed so as to render the guarantee
ineffective or illusory.”
In recent years, the High Court has tended to favour the first approach.
Setting aside /varying guarantees
2.10 There are many options available for someone seeking to have a guarantee set aside or varied. Often, when a guarantee is the
subject of legal proceedings, the guarantor will seek to have the guarantee set aside by pleading a number of these options in his
or her defence. In the first part of this chapter we deal with the common law grounds available, while the second part deals with
the relevant statutory provisions, some of which reflect what the common law already provides.
THE COMMON LAW
Unconscionable conduct
2.11 Courts have traditionally set aside, in whole or in part, contracts held to be unconscionable. Unconscionable conduct applies
in situations where the guarantor is under a special disadvantage or disability in relation to the other parties to the transaction
so that there is “an absence of any reasonable degree of equality between them”.
Certain relationships are considered more likely to give rise to unconscientious dealing. One of the classic statements is that of
Justice Fullagar of the High Court:
The circumstances adversely affecting a party ... are of great variety and can hardly be satisfactorily classified. Among them are
poverty or need of any kind, sickness, age, sex, infirmity of body or mind, drunkenness, illiteracy or lack of education, lack of
assistance or explanation where assistance or explanation is necessary. The common characteristic seems to be that they have the
effect of placing one party at a serious disadvantage vis-�-vis the other.
2.12 However, personal characteristics are not the only indicators of special disadvantage. Other factors relating to the contract
and its formation may be relevant. These include:
the form and content of the contract;
the characteristics and relative positions of all parties to the transaction; and
the circumstances surrounding the formation of and entry into the contract.
The disability must be evident to the other party and must be taken advantage of in circumstances where it is prima facie unfair
This usually requires proof that the lender knew of the disability or could infer it from the facts available.
2.13 Despite the existence of a disability that might indicate unconscionability, a contract can be saved if the party seeking to
enforce the guarantee shows that the contract was in fact “fair, just and reasonable”.
For a contract to be set aside, some detriment to the guarantor, or an absence of benefit, must usually be shown. In more recent
times the notion of benefit has been construed strictly.
It is not sufficient to assume that a guarantor stands to benefit merely because of a close relationship with the borrower. The cases
involving husbands and wives perhaps raise this issue most clearly. It is sometimes assumed that a benefit to one member of a married
couple (in this context, usually a benefit to the husband by way of his business) will automatically flow through to the benefit
of the wife. But the incidence of cases in which litigation occurs after the parties have separated or divorced, combined with research
questioning those assumptions about intra-familial transfers, shows that the issue of “benefit” is more complex and warrants
close consideration.
2.14 The contract may also be enforced, even where prima facie it might appear to be unconscionable, if it is shown that adequate
advice was provided to the guarantor by the borrower or some other independent person. There are many issues to be considered concerning
the adequacy of advice. The issues of what type of advice will have this effect, and the policy implications that follow, are dealt
with further in Chapter 3.
2.15 Remedies available to the court include setting aside the contract completely or rescinding the contract in whole or in part,
for example, where the guarantor clearly agreed to guarantee up to a certain limit but no further. Because relief for unconscionable
dealing is an equitable remedy, the court can also look to the conduct of the guarantor and decline relief in some cases where it
might otherwise be warranted.
2.16 The leading case on unconscionability in relation to guarantees is
Commercial Bank of Australia Ltd v Amadio
The case involved an elderly Italian couple, Mr and Mrs Amadio, who signed guarantees in relation to debts incurred by their son.
They were not familiar with written English and had no relevant business experience. Their son lied to them about the viability of
his business and the bank was also found to have contributed to the deception by selectively dishonouring cheques. The son also misled
them about the extent of the guarantee, saying it was limited to $50,000 and to a period of six months (whereas the guarantee was
unlimited in both amount and time). Neither Mr nor Mrs Amadio received independent advice before signing the guarantee. The bank
brought the guarantee documents to the parents’ home for execution. The son defaulted and the bank sought to enforce the guarantee,
which was set aside unconditionally.
Other common law issues
2.17 This section deals with other relevant common law issues, namely mistake, misrepresentation and undue influence. These can all
be said to be a species of unconscionable conduct.
The distinctions can sometimes be fine and the legal categories are not necessarily mutually exclusive. For example, Justice Mason
has summarised unconscionable conduct as being where:
the will of the innocent party, even if independent and voluntary, is the result of the disadvantageous position in which he is placed
and of the other party unconscientiously taking advantage of that position,
and has summarised undue influence as arising where:
the will of the innocent party is not independent and voluntary because it is overborne.
2.18 A contract may be set aside when the guarantor is (unilaterally) mistaken as to the facts surrounding the guarantee. That is,
the guarantor is “mistaken as to the nature and extent” of the contract, for example, by believing that the contract
was for funds to be advanced by a bank rather than guaranteeing funds already owed.
2.19 For this remedy to be available the guarantor must show that the party benefiting from the guarantor’s mistake knew of
it and must also show that it would be unconscionable for that party to retain the benefit in the circumstances.
The benefiting party’s knowledge may be actual or constructive, that is, they must either know in fact, or the circumstances
must be such that they would be presumed to know of the other party’s mistake.
2.20 Because setting aside a contract for unilateral mistake is an equitable remedy, there are restrictions on its exercise.
2.21 Closely related to mistake is the plea of
non est factum
(literally “it is not his/her deed”) which, if successful, renders a contract void. It was traditionally available for
those unable to read (because of blindness or illiteracy) who signed documents on the basis of wrong advice by others and then came
to be extended to those who are unable “through no fault of their own” to understand the effect of a contract they have
been asked to sign. It is, in modern times, very limited in application.
The High Court has held that to be successful in a plea of
non est factum
a person must show:
that he or she signed the document believing that “it was radically different from what it was in fact”; and
that the failure to understand was not the result of carelessness (for example, not bothering to read the document).
The High Court has also made it clear that there is a “heavy onus” on a person who pleads
non est factum
Misrepresentation
2.22 There are many types of misrepresentation. Misrepresentation for the purposes of this Paper is a false statement of a material
fact which successfully induces entry into a contract.
This section deals with misrepresentation at common law. A statutory remedy for misrepresentation is also available under the misleading
and deceptive conduct provisions of the
Trade Practices Act 1974
Fair Trading Act 1987
(NSW) which are discussed later in this chapter.
2.23 There are many types of misrepresentation that do not amount to representations of fact, for example, promises, some statements
of opinion or law, and assurances.
So, for example, an assurance that a guarantee will not be enforced would not be treated as a representation of fact. Non-disclosure
also does not usually amount to a representation of fact unless there are exceptional circumstances
or the contract is one of utmost good faith
– like an insurance contract. Contracts of guarantee do not generally fit into this category.
2.24 Where a contract has been entered into on the basis of a false understanding because of a misrepresentation of a material fact,
the person misled can choose to avoid the contract. This is the case with innocent, fraudulent or negligent misstatements. However,
an innocent misrepresentation, that is, where the person making the representation believed the statement was accurate, usually allows
for rescission only where the contract has not already been carried out.
It also allows for a defence to a claim for damages or specific performance of the contract. By contrast, fraudulent and negligent
misrepresentations permit the person misled to seek not only to rescind the contract but also to recover damages that have arisen
as a result of the misrepresentation.
2.25 A misrepresentation at the pre-contractual stage may also amount to the formation of a contract of guarantee that is “unjust
in the circumstances” under the
Contracts Review Act 1980
Undue influence
2.26 The equitable doctrine of undue influence is mainly concerned with the quality of the consent of a guarantor who enters a contract
of guarantee.
Relief is available where the guarantor, because of actual influence on his or her mind, does not bring an independent or voluntary
will to the decision to enter the contract of guarantee. Normally there is a pre-existing relationship between the borrower and guarantor
involving trust, confidence or some form of power imbalance.
In these circumstances the guarantor’s will is treated as not being voluntary because it has been overborne.
2.27 For relief to be granted it must be shown that the borrower or lender exploited the guarantor’s disadvantage. It is this
unconscientious behaviour that equity protects against.
2.28 Because guarantee situations usually involve the borrower (rather than the lender) exercising undue influence over the guarantor,
some form of responsibility for the borrower’s behaviour must be fixed on the lender before the agreement between the lender
and the guarantor can be overturned. Undue influence between a borrower and a guarantor will usually be fixed on a lender in two
circumstances:
where the obtaining of the guarantee has been entrusted to the borrower in such a way that the borrower is treated as the agent of
the lender;
where the lender becomes aware of facts that suggest the possibility of undue influence.
Actual dealing by the lender with the guarantor will not protect the lender – only independent advice or removal from the influence
of the borrower will suffice.
Establishing undue influence.
The courts establish undue influence in two ways, by finding actual or presumed undue influence:
With actual undue influence, the nature and extent of the undue influence must be proved by evidence.
With presumed undue influence, a presumption of undue influence, rebuttable by evidence, arises from a particular relationship between
the parties.
2.30 The class of presumed undue influence is divided into two further categories:
Where the pre-existing relationship is one of a class traditionally held to give rise to a presumption of undue influence, for example,
where the parties are: parent and child,
guardian and ward, trustee and beneficiary, solicitor and client, physician and patient, and in a relationship of religious influence.
All of these may be, and often are, rebutted by evidence.
Where the facts of the relationship, even if not within one of the traditional categories, give rise to a relationship susceptible
to undue influence.
There is a fine line between this category and the class of actual undue influence.
2.31 The relationship between husband and wife has been held not to fall into the first category of established relationships.
This particular category is discussed in detail below in relation to the recent High Court decision in
Garcia v National Australia Bank
The result of a successful plea of undue influence is that the contract of guarantee may be set aside in equity. The principal remedy
granted by the court is rescission of the contract with consequential orders aimed at restitution in favour of all parties.
2.33 A situation which a court held constituted actual undue influence can be seen in
Bank of Credit and Commerce International SA v Aboody
Mrs Aboody was taken by the bank to a solicitor to receive independent legal advice concerning a guarantee she was about to sign
in relation to her husband’s business. While the solicitor was giving the advice her husband “burst into the room uninvited
and in a high state of excitement”. The husband was rude and overbearing and a shouting match developed between him and the
solicitor. Mrs Aboody became quite distressed. The solicitor made no further attempt to advise Mrs Aboody and she signed the documentation.
2.34 There are some similarities in application between actual undue influence and duress which is discussed under the next heading.
It has been suggested that maintaining these as separate categories is no longer justified.
2.35 It has also been suggested that because of the development of the doctrine of unconscionability, “undue influence has assumed
a secondary role in litigation involving applications seeking to set aside guarantees”:
Indeed, ... it is difficult to envisage any case where a case of unconscionability will fail and a claim of undue influence succeed.
2.36 A guarantee may be set aside if the guarantor, in entering the agreement, has been subject to duress. Duress involves illegitimate
pressure being exerted on a person with the result that the person is induced to enter into the agreement.
In the past the pressure was usually limited to threats involving physical force against the victim or another person or property.
In more recent times economic duress has been accepted by courts as amounting to duress,
but there is a fine line between this and acceptable commercial practice. According to the New South Wales Court of Appeal:
Pressure will be illegitimate if it consists of unlawful threats or amounts to unconscionable conduct. But the categories are not
closed. Even overwhelming pressure, not amounting to unconscionable or unlawful conduct, however, will not necessarily constitute
economic duress. ... Once the evidence establishes that the pressure exerted on the victim was illegitimate, the onus lies on the
person applying the pressure to show that it made no contribution to the victim entering into the agreement.
2.37 Despite similarities in application, duress has traditionally been treated as different from undue influence. The distinction
has been summarised as follows:
whereas ‘duress’ signifies a procuring of contractual assent by an illegitimate threat, ‘undue influence’
signifies an influence which may fall short of that ‘compulsion’, ‘coercion’, ‘extortion’, ‘exaction’
or ‘force’ inherent in a threat, but which is deemed ‘undue’ nonetheless.
Trade Practices Act 1974
provides that “a corporation shall not use physical force or undue harassment or coercion in connection with the supply or
possible supply of goods or services to a consumer”. There has been no judicial interpretation of this provision to date.
A special rule for wives?
2.39 The rule in
Yerkey v Jones
is a particular equitable doctrine which applies where a married woman, regardless of other characteristics, guarantees her husband’s
loan. The decision in
Yerkey v Jones
was handed down in 1939. Its authority came to be doubted in recent years, but it was reaffirmed in 1998 by the High Court in
Garcia v National Australia Bank.
2.40 There are two limbs to the rule:
The first allows a wife to have a guarantee set aside if her consent was obtained by undue influence, unless she has received independent
The second gives a wife the prima facie right to have a guarantee set aside if she failed to understand the effect of the guarantee
or its significance, unless the lender took steps to inform her of these matters.
2.41 The lender need only be aware of the marriage relationship for the rule to be invoked since the lender is “taken to have
understood that, as a wife, the [guarantor] may repose trust and confidence in her husband in matters of business” and this
trust and confidence may mean that there has not been an adequate explanation of the effect of the guarantee.
In light of this, and given that the undue influence necessary for the first limb may not be easily detectable by the lender, it
will always be in the interests of the lender to ensure that wives receive independent advice before entering into a guarantee. This
situation differs from that in relation to unconscionable conduct: in the latter case, the special disability must be sufficiently
evident to the other party.
2.42 The transaction must also be voluntary, that is, the wife must show that she obtained no benefit from the undertaking which is
the subject of the guarantee.
As noted above, this can give rise to some difficulty where it is assumed that benefits to one party to a marriage automatically
flow to the other.
2.43 The rule has been criticised on numerous grounds
including that it is discriminatory in that it applies only to married women in relation to their husbands regardless of vulnerability
and on the more general economic grounds that it may render matrimonial assets “economically sterile”.
2.44 The rule in
Yerkey v Jones
was disapproved by the House of Lords in 1994
and also by New South Wales courts,
including the Court of Appeal which had held that the special position of wives had been overtaken by the general doctrine of unconscionable
2.45 While the rule in
Yerkey v Jones
is limited to wives at present, the High Court in
left open the possibility that it may be extended to other relationships involving “trust and confidence”.
2.46 The fact situation in
Garcia v National Australia Bank
illustrates the operation of the rule. In 1979 Mrs Garcia entered a mortgage with her husband to secure a $5,000 loan in relation
to his business. The mortgage secured all moneys they might owe including moneys secured by future guarantees. Mrs Garcia later entered
several guarantees relating to loans made to the business. She was a director and shareholder of the company but the court found
that she was not directly involved in its operations over which her husband had “complete control”.
The couple separated in 1988 and divorced in 1989. An order was made for the winding up of the company in 1989. Following the divorce
Mrs Garcia sought to have the guarantees set aside. The bank then sought to enforce one of the guarantees (entered in November 1987)
and the mortgage demanding a sum of $327,189.69. When signing the November 1987 guarantee the bank took no steps to inform Mrs Garcia
of the nature of the transaction she was entering. She claimed that she did not understand the transaction, in particular that the
guarantee was secured by the mortgage over the family home. She argued that she entered the guarantee relying on representations
by her husband that it would be safe to do so. A claim of actual undue influence on the part of the husband and another based on
Contracts Review Act 1980
(NSW) both failed at first instance.
However, a claim based on
Yerkey v Jones
succeeded at first instance, was overturned by the Court of Appeal and then was ultimately upheld by the High Court.
2.47 In England the House of Lords has rejected the “special equity” doctrine for wives who stand as guarantors, claiming
that it was not necessary for the proper protection of a wife’s financial interest. In
Barclays Bank plc v O’Brien
the House of Lords initially considered situations where a wife is induced to be guarantor of her husband’s debt by undue influence
or misrepresentation on the part of the husband. The House of Lords held that a guarantor who is subject to, say, undue influence
or misrepresentation has an equity allowing her to set aside the transaction as against the borrower. This equity can also be enforced
against the lender in either of the following circumstances:
where the borrower is found to have acted as an agent of the lender in getting the guarantor’s consent; or
where the lender is found to have had actual or constructive notice of the facts giving rise to the equity.
2.48 A lender is taken to be put on enquiry when a wife stands as guarantor for her husband’s debts when:
the financial advantage to the wife is not, at first, apparent; and
when there is a substantial risk that in such transactions the husband will have committed a legal or equitable wrong (for example,
undue influence or misrepresentation) which would allow his wife to have the transaction set aside.
2.49 The House of Lords considered that a lender could, in all but exceptional circumstances, avoid being fixed with constructive
notice if it had a private meeting with the wife (without her husband being present) at which the wife is advised of the extent of
her liability, warned of the risk and urged to get independent legal advice.
2.50 These requirements were also held to apply in the case of cohabiting couples. A lender would then be fixed with notice if that
lender is aware that a guarantor simply cohabits with the borrower. It was also considered that a lender would similarly be put on
enquiry when it becomes aware that a guarantor reposes trust and confidence in a borrower in relation to their financial affairs,
without the need for them to live together. Again, a lender can, in most cases, avoid being fixed with notice by following the procedures
outlined above.
2.51 However,
Barclays Bank plc v O’Brien
has been applied by the English Court of Appeal in such a way as to reduce the opportunities for relief under its doctrines. The Court
of Appeal considered a number of cases relating to the effect of legal advice on wives who act as guarantors
which, it said, established a number of propositions. These propositions were to the effect that a lender will not usually be put
on enquiry so long as it urges the wife to obtain independent legal advice and that the lender will usually not be required to satisfy
itself that the advice is actually independent or, indeed, that it was given at all. One of the reasons given for this approach was
that the practice of requiring such guarantees was so widespread and the “efficient funding” of small businesses was
so dependent on the validity of the process that the parties “must be entitled to proceed in accordance with a settled practice
which is effective to secure the validity of the transaction while at the same time affording the wife the protection of proper legal
STATUTORY PROVISIONS
2.52 Various statutory provisions may be relied upon by those seeking to have a guarantee set aside or modified. Some provide alternatives
to the common law remedies, some extend the law, while others fill gaps in the existing common law. Each provision is limited in
some way. For example, there are various time limits placed on the seeking of relief,
and most statutes distinguish between business loans and consumer loans.
Contracts Review Act 1980
Contracts Review Act 1980
(NSW) allows a court to grant relief in relation to a contract or part of a contract that is “unjust in the circumstances ...
at the time it was made”.
The term “unjust” is not restricted and its definition includes “unconscionable, harsh or oppressive”.
However, there are some restrictions. The most notable is that relief is not generally available to corporations
or in respect of contracts entered into “in the course of or for the purpose of a trade, business or profession” other
than a “farming undertaking”.
This restriction to consumer transactions was included as a result of concerns raised by legal and business interests about the certainty
of commercial transactions.
Even though the Act is restricted chiefly to consumer transactions, it has been held in some cases to apply to personal guarantees
of businesses.
2.54 When a court finds a contract or a provision in a contract to be unjust the court may do a number of things to avoid the unjust
consequences, including:
refuse to enforce any or all of the provisions of the contract;
declare the contract void in whole or in part; and
vary, in whole or in part, any provision of the contract.
2.55 In reaching its conclusion, a court may have regard to the public interest and to “all the circumstances of the case”.
The Act provides a list of more particular matters which the court may look to when considering all the circumstances of the case.
In broad terms these matters focus on the characteristics and circumstances of the parties and the nature of the relationship between
them, the nature and characteristics of the contract and the circumstances surrounding its negotiation and formation as well as the
commercial context of the transaction. Specific examples from the list are:
whether there was “material inequality in bargaining power between the parties”;
the “relative economic circumstances, educational background and literacy of the parties”;
whether “independent legal or other expert advice was obtained by the party seeking relief”;
whether “any undue influence, unfair pressure or unfair tactics” were used on the party seeking relief.
2.56 An example of the Act’s sometimes limited application can be illustrated by
Esanda Finance Corporation Ltd v Tong.
This case involved a guarantee given in relation to a joint venture between four Australians of Vietnamese origin. Their company
entered an equipment lease with Esanda (the lender). Joint and several guarantees were given to Esanda by the venturers and one venturer
(Tran) and his wife gave a mortgage over their home, limited to $105,000. Tran pulled out of the venture and sought a discharge of
the mortgage. One of the remaining venturers approached Tong, a long-standing friend who agreed to mortgage the property he owned
jointly with his wife. Tong and his wife, who were not fluent in written or spoken English, with their three daughters (all under
8 years of age) attended a solicitor’s office and were interviewed by a solicitor who spoke Vietnamese. The Tongs had no interest
in the fortunes of the company and Tong’s wife merely complied with her husband’s request and looked to him to take care
of her interests. While the Court accepted that the Tongs did not understand the nature of the mortgage (for example, there is no
word for “mortgage” in Vietnamese)
it was held by the Court of Appeal (reversing the trial judge) that they nonetheless understood that they were incurring some form
of personal liability. The Court decided they were not entitled to relief under the
Contracts Review Act 1980
(NSW) on this particular aspect of the facts. However, the security executed by the Tongs was unlimited, unlike the Trans’ which
was limited to $105,000. This was considered substantively unjust because Esanda’s legitimate interest was to replace the Trans’
limited security with the Tongs’.
The circumstances surrounding this aspect of the contract were sufficient to allow the court to grant relief under
of the Act. The Court of Appeal granted relief by limiting the Tongs’ liability to $105,000 – the limitation that originally
applied to the Trans’ mortgage.
Trade practices legislation
Trade Practices Act 1974
(Cth) and the
Fair Trading Act 1987
(NSW) both prohibit certain kinds of unconscionable conduct and misleading and deceptive conduct. The limitations on their provisions
are dealt with below. Both statutes expand upon the common law, particularly with respect to remedies. The remedies available are
discussed at the end of this section.
Unconscionable conduct
2.58 Unconscionable conduct is dealt with by
Trade Practices Act 1974
Fair Trading Act 1987
Commonwealth provisions.
The provisions of the
Trade Practices Act 1974
apply in New South Wales to the extent permitted by the
Constitution
. They are dealt with here first because some provisions were the model for the
Fair Trading Act 1987
(NSW) though others have since gone further than the New South Wales Act.
Section 51AB.
Section 51AB prohibits corporations, in trade and commerce, from engaging in “conduct that is, in all the circumstances, unconscionable”
in relation to “the supply or possible supply of goods or services to a person”. This applies to guarantees because they
are given “in connection with” the supply of goods and services, namely the provision of credit to a borrower.
Since s 51AB is limited to goods and services “of a kind ordinarily acquired for personal, domestic or household use or consumption”
it may only protect guarantors who guarantee loans for “personal, domestic or household use or consumption”
and would not extend to situations involving business loans. This is seen by some as inconsistent with the original intention of
the section, which was to cover situations involving individuals guaranteeing business loans.
2.61 Section 51AB(2) provides a list of matters the court may consider in determining if there has been unconscionable conduct, including
the relative strengths of the parties to the transaction, the understanding of the party seeking relief and general commercial practice
in relation to similar transactions.
2.62 Remedies for unconscionable conduct in breach of this section are injunctions and other orders under
Trade Practices Act 1974
Section 51AC.
Section 51AC
Trade Practices Act 1974
(Cth), which commenced in July 1998, makes similar provision to
in relation to “business consumers” and “small business suppliers”. That is, it applies in relation to both
the supply and acquisition or possible supply and acquisition of goods or services:
by a person to a corporation (other than a listed public company); or
by a corporation to a person or corporation (other than a listed public company)
in a situation where the goods or services are “for the purpose of trade or commerce”
and are supplied or acquired at a price of $1,000,000 or less.
Since guarantees could be taken to be supplied “in connection with” the supply of services,
may apply in the case of guarantees given in relation to loans of $1,000,000 or less.
2.64 Matters the court may consider in determining if there has been unconscionable conduct are also listed. These are similar to
except that some additional matters are included, relating chiefly to questions of commercial conduct and practice.
2.65 These provisions are thought to expand considerably the concept of unconscionability.
Similar provision is made with respect to transactions between suppliers and business consumers.
2.66 Remedies for conduct in breach of this section are available under
Trade Practices Act 1974
2.67 There has been some judicial consideration of
since it commenced,
but to date there has been no consideration in the context of third party guarantees.
Section 51AA.
Section 51AA
Trade Practices Act 1974
prohibits a corporation, in trade or commerce, from engaging in unconscionable conduct within the meaning of the common law. However,
does not apply to unconscionable conduct that is prohibited by
Trade Practices Act 1974
2.69 The provision applies where other
Trade Practices Act
unconscionability provisions are excluded, and makes available the remedies under
Trade Practices Act 1974
if it can be established that a corporation in trade and commerce engaged in unconscionable conduct at common law. In this respect
it also provides a basis for intervention by the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission in cases not coming within
2.70 While it appears to take the content of unconscionable conduct no further than the existing law, some have suggested that it
may provide a “separate and more extensive liability”.
New South Wales provisions.
Fair Trading Act 1987
(NSW) is in similar terms to
Trade Practices Act 1974
(Cth). However, it is not limited to suppliers who are corporations. Like the Commonwealth Act it applies only to “goods or
services of a kind ordinarily acquired for personal, domestic or household use or consumption”.
2.72 Remedies for conduct in breach of this section are injunctions and other orders under s 65 and
Fair Trading Act 1987
(NSW), but not damages under
Fair Trading Act 1987
2.73 The same limitations with respect to guarantees as apply to
Trade Practices Act 1974
(Cth) must apply to the New South Wales provisions (and without the benefit of
Misleading or deceptive conduct
2.74 Misleading or deceptive conduct is covered by
Trade Practices Act 1974
Fair Trading Act 1987
Section 52(1)
Trade Practices Act 1974
(Cth) states:
A corporation shall not, in trade or commerce, engage in conduct that is misleading or deceptive or is likely to mislead or deceive.
2.75 While this provision is limited to corporations in trade or commerce, unlike the unconscionable conduct provisions of the
Trade Practices Act 1974
(Cth), it is not limited to consumer and certain “small business” transactions. There is, therefore, greater potential
for it to apply to guarantees given by third parties.
2.76 These provisions cover both deceptive conduct (a party to the transaction intending to deceive) and misleading conduct (a party
to the transaction objectively misleading another, without necessarily intending to do so).
As fraud is not a necessary element, the misrepresentation need only be innocent in order for the provisions to apply.
2.77 Common examples of misrepresentations by lenders include:
(1) attempts to reassure the guarantor by saying that the document is only a formality;
(2) mis-statements about the debtor’s financial situation;
(3) false statements about aspects of the guarantee, in particular the limits of the guarantor’s liability.
Silence may also constitute misleading or deceptive conduct,
even when there is no duty to disclose otherwise imposed by law.
2.78 Where a guarantor seeks to set aside the guarantee, it must be shown that the representations induced the guarantor to enter
the guarantee.
2.79 In some cases it will be the borrower who makes the representation to the guarantor, so to overturn the guarantee as against
the lender the guarantor not only has to prove that the representations were misleading and deceptive, but also that the borrower
was acting for the lender in making the representations to the guarantor.
2.80 Remedies available include damages
and others, such as rescission, variation, restitution
and partial enforcement of a guarantee are also available.
2.81 An illustration of misleading or deceptive conduct under the
Trade Practices Act 1974
(Cth) can be found in
National Australia Bank Ltd v Nobile.
Mr and Mrs Nobile guaranteed the debts of their daughter and son-in-law’s building company. At the time of entering the guarantee
there were signs that the company might be in serious financial trouble, yet the Nobiles, who had no involvement or personal interest
in the company, were assured by the branch manager of the bank that the business was “going well”. In fact this was not
the case since the bank’s regional lending manager had only recently adversely commented upon the branch manager’s decision
to increase the company’s overdraft. It was held that the Nobiles signed in reliance upon the branch manager’s misrepresentation.
Within less than twelve months the company was wound up, and the daughter and son-in-law became bankrupt a short time after. In these
circumstances the court made an order, the effect of which was that the guarantee entered into by the Nobiles was void from the beginning.
Remedies available
Injunctions.
The Court may grant injunctions
against those involved in unconscionable conduct and misleading and deceptive conduct.
Any person may apply for an injunction, not only those directly affected by conduct in breach of the Act. The injunction may be “in
such terms as the Court determines to be appropriate”.
2.83 An injunction could, for example, restrain a lender from seeking to enforce or retain the benefit of a mortgage used to secure
Action for damages.
The Commonwealth and State Acts allow a person who suffers loss or damage as a result of some breaches of the Acts to recover from
the person in breach “the amount of the loss or damage”.
Those entitled to recover include persons suffering loss or damage as a result of misleading and deceptive conduct
or unconscionable conduct in relation only to business consumers and small business suppliers.
Damages are not available under the Commonwealth provisions in relation to unconscionable conduct affecting consumers who are not
business consumers or small business suppliers.
They are also not available at all in respect of unconscionable conduct under the New South Wales
Fair Trading Act 1987
(NSW) provisions. The fact that damages are not available in relation to most instances of unconscionable conduct under the Acts is
considered anomalous, especially in light of the possibility of a court ordering compensation for unconscionable conduct in its discretion
under the “Other Orders” provisions of the Acts.
Other orders.
The Court may also make “such orders as it thinks appropriate” to compensate a person who suffers loss or damage by a
person engaging in misleading and deceptive conduct and unconscionable conduct.
2.86 Orders the Court may make include:
declaring part or all of a contract void from the beginning;
varying the contract;
refusing to enforce any or all of the provisions of the contract;
directing the refund of money or the return of property;
directing the payment of the amount of the loss or damage suffered.
These provisions in no way limit the scope of an injunction otherwise granted by the Court.
2.87 An example of the operation of the trade practices provisions can be seen in the Federal Court case of
Gregg v Tasmanian Trustees Ltd
which involved a joint mortgage entered by Mr and Mrs Gregg guaranteeing the liability to Tasmanian Trustees Ltd of a company of
which Mr Gregg was a director. Mrs Gregg was a secondary teacher who was suffering from multiple sclerosis. The Greggs’ home
had been modified because of her increasing physical disability. The house had become free of debt in June 1993 owing chiefly to
the contribution of Mrs Gregg to the mortgage payments.
2.88 In May 1993 Mr Gregg became a director of the company, a small computer firm. The company restructured its loans with Tasmanian
Trustees and secured its debt of $261,000 by mortgages over the properties of the three company directors. The total of $261,000
represented 60% of the value of the properties. Mr Gregg and another director came to believe that their liability was limited to
60% of the valuation of their properties ($82,000 in the case of Mr Gregg). In fact each mortgage made each director independently
liable for the whole of the $261,000.
2.89 Mrs Gregg was told by Mr Gregg that the mortgage secured only $82,000 and that the other directors had secured a similar amount.
Mrs Gregg entered the mortgage on the basis of information she had received solely from her husband both in relation to the terms
of the mortgage and the need for it (ie the viability of the business). The very complex documentation for the loan was signed by
Mrs Gregg in a car outside the office of the company’s solicitor in the presence of the solicitor (who was also found to be
an agent of Tasmanian Trustees) and Mr Gregg, and no explanation was made of its effect.
2.90 The Greggs’ divorce proceedings commenced in June 1994 and Mr Gregg became bankrupt in July 1995.
2.91 In the first half of 1995, unknown to the Greggs, two directors discharged the mortgages over their homes, by paying 60% of the
1993 valuations of their properties, and the remaining debt was reduced accordingly. This left the Greggs’ house and some land
of another director to secure the remaining loan. In May 1996 Tasmanian Trustees demanded repayment of the remaining principal sum
($113,100) plus interest ($15,303).
2.92 The Court found that the representations made to Mrs Gregg by her husband were misleading and deceptive under
Trade Practices Act 1974
(Cth) but that Mr Gregg had not acted as an agent for Tasmanian Trustees in making these representations. However, it was found that
Tasmanian Trustees had objectively engaged in misleading and deceptive conduct through the company’s solicitor who had prepared
the mortgage documentation, had been present in the car when Mr Gregg made some of the representations about the mortgage and had
failed to point out that the documentation was in fact different to what had been agreed.
2.93 The conduct of Tasmanian Trustees was also found to have been unconscionable in that Mrs Gregg met the requirement of special
disadvantage, Tasmanian Trustees knew or ought to have known of the circumstances and Mrs Gregg’s position had been prejudiced.
Tasmanian Trustees’ conduct was therefore in breach of
Trade Practices Act 1974
2.94 The Court’s orders included a partial setting aside of the mortgage in so far as it imposed obligations on Mrs Gregg under
Trade Practices Act 1974
(Cth). Further, under
the Court limited Mr Gregg’s liability to $82,000 and reduced the amount secured by the mortgage proportionately to his interest
in the property owned with Mrs Gregg. The Court also granted an injunction under
Trade Practices Act 1974
(Cth) restraining Tasmanian Trustees from engaging in conduct which sought “to enforce or retain the benefit of the mortgage”
other than in relation to Mr Gregg’s interest.
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Code
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Code
is the title adopted for the
Consumer Credit Code
as it applies in New South Wales.
Consumer Credit Code
is a generic description of the national uniform credit legislation which was first passed by Queensland
in 1994 and has either been adopted by the other States,
or been the subject of similar consistent legislation.
2.96 The Code and its regulations (the
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Regulations
) apply to guarantors who are individuals or strata corporations
and where the guarantee supports a consumer credit contract.
A consumer credit contract is a contract entered by an individual or strata corporation that is “wholly or predominantly for
personal, domestic or household purposes”.
Therefore, the Code will not apply where the loan is entered into by a corporation or is for predominantly business purposes.
2.97 The Code does two things of particular relevance to third party guarantees. First, it provides a set of general remedial provisions
in relation to unjust contracts similar to those contained in the
Contracts Review Act 1980
(NSW) and trade practices legislation
Secondly, it includes more specific requirements that must be met for a guarantee to be enforced.
Unjust contracts
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Code
includes provision for the re-opening of unjust transactions. A court
may, on application by any party to the transaction, decide that a guarantee was “at the time it was entered into or changed
... unjust”.
As with the
Contracts Review Act 1980
(NSW) “unjust” includes “unconscionable, harsh or oppressive”.
Under these provisions, a guarantor can apply to have a transaction re-opened on the grounds that the credit contract or mortgage
are unjust as well as the guarantee.
2.99 In deciding whether a term in a contract is unjust, the Court or Tribunal may have regard to “the public interest and to
all the circumstances of the case” and also to a list of considerations expressed in similar terms to those in the
Contracts Review Act 1980
including “any other relevant factor”.
The interpretation of the relevant parts of the
Contracts Review Act 1980
(NSW) will, therefore, be of interest.
2.100 Two provisions not found in the
Contracts Review Act 1980
(NSW), are:
(l) whether at the time the contract, mortgage or guarantee was entered into or changed, the credit provider knew, or could have ascertained
by reasonable inquiry of the debtor at the time, that the debtor could not pay in accordance with its terms or not without substantial
(n) the terms of other comparable transactions involving other credit providers and, if the injustice is alleged to result from excessive
interest charges, the annual percentage rate or rates payable in comparable cases.
2.101 In re-opening a transaction under the Code, the Court or Tribunal may do a number of things to relieve the parties to the transaction
relieve a guarantor from paying more than the court considers reasonable; and
vary or set aside in part or in full any agreement made.
2.102 The provisions as they currently stand apply only to consumers, and do not protect individuals who guarantee loans relating
to a business, even when the guarantors have no direct interest in the business.
Specific requirements
2.103 The Code also includes more specific requirements that must be met before a guarantee can be enforced. For example, a guarantee
cannot be enforced if:
it is not in writing and signed by the guarantor;
the lender has not given the guarantor a copy of the credit contract;
it fails to comply with any regulations with respect to the form of the guarantee made under s 50(2) of the Code.
Further, a guarantee that contains an “all accounts” (or “all moneys”) clause cannot be enforced in respect
of further credit unless certain notice and consent provisions are complied with.
So too, if a guarantee is secured by an “all accounts” mortgage, that mortgage will be unenforceable with respect to
further credit unless certain notice and consent provisions are met.
2.104 There are also restrictions on the total amount for which a guarantor can be liable so that a guarantee is void to the extent
that the amount for which the guarantor is liable exceeds the total liabilities of the borrower under the principal contract (plus
the “reasonable expenses of enforcing the guarantee”).
The Code also contains detailed provisions about the form and content of information that must be provided to guarantors when entering
contracts of guarantee. These provisions are discussed in the next chapter.
Farm Debt Mediation Act 1994
Farm Debt Mediation Act 1994
(NSW) applies in situations where a lender is owed money by a farmer under a “farm mortgage”
and the lender seeks to enforce the debt against a farmer either as a borrower or guarantor. When the farmer is a guarantor, the
guarantee must be secured by farm property for the Act to apply.
2.106 When the lender seeks to enforce the guarantee against the farmer guarantor, the Act has the effect of delaying the enforcement
by requiring that 21 days’ notice be given to the guarantor.
During the notice period the farmer guarantor may request mediation concerning the farm debt
and enforcement cannot continue until the Rural Assistance Authority has issued a certificate that it is satisfied that certain processes
have been carried out.
Farm Debt Mediation Act 1994
(NSW) is simply a means of delaying enforcement against farmers, either as borrowers or guarantors, in the hope that a better solution
can be found through mediation. A contract of guarantee could not be overturned under the Act unless the lender and the guarantor
agreed. The Act does not affect any rights to have the contract of guarantee reviewed under other relevant legislation such as the
Contracts Review Act 1980
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Code
or “any other Act or law that deals with the granting of relief in respect of harsh, oppressive, unconscionable or unjust contracts
or on the grounds of hardship”.
OTHER APPROACHES
Abstract control
European Community directive on unfair terms in contracts
2.108 Using the legal doctrines outlined above to overturn contracts of guarantee often many years after they have been entered may
not necessarily be the best means of achieving justice in most cases. Not only is the process of taking matters to court costly,
but the result is that only the parties to the litigation are bound by the result. An alternative approach to the problem of unfair
contracts of guarantee may be by means of “abstract control”,
that is, some way of preventing lenders from entering contracts using terms that are unfair to guarantors. The focus is chiefly on
the substantive terms of agreements.
2.109 An example of abstract control is the implementation of the European
Directive on Unfair Terms in Consumer Contracts
(EC Directive 93/13) in the United Kingdom. This is currently achieved by the
Unfair Terms in Consumer Contracts Regulations 1999
The Regulations, which are limited to consumer transactions, essentially do two things:
First, they provide that a term found to be “unfair” is not binding. A term will be considered unfair if “contrary
to the requirement of good faith, it causes a significant imbalance in the parties’ rights and obligations arising under the
contract, to the detriment of the consumer”.
An “illustrative and non-exhaustive list of terms which may be regarded as unfair” is provided and includes, for example,
a term having the effect of “irrevocably binding the consumer to terms with which he had no real opportunity of becoming acquainted
before the conclusion of the contract”.
Secondly, they allow the Director General of Fair Trading or other prescribed organisation to apply for an injunction to prevent the
use of a particular unfair term, any similar term, or a term having similar effect.
It seems the regulations may apply to certain financial transactions.
There appears to have been no use of the Regulations in respect of guarantees by third parties.
Provisions in Australia
2.110 Another example of abstract control is
Contracts Review Act 1980
(NSW) which allows the Attorney General (or Minister for Fair Trading) to apply for a court order restricting the terms on which a
person may enter into a contract of a specified class if the person “has embarked, or is likely to embark, on a course of conduct
leading to the formation of unjust contracts”. There have been few reported instances of the use of
and none appears to have been in relation to contracts of guarantee.
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Code
also provides that, when a guarantee or notice is not easily legible, does not conform to requirements regarding print and type or
is not clearly expressed, a court may, on application by the Director-General of the Department of Fair Trading, prevent the lender
using a provision “in the same or similar terms in future ... guarantees or notices”.
2.112 It is also possible that a similar result may be achieved by a broad power to grant injunctions to prevent conduct in breach
of provisions under the trade practices legislation relating to unconscionable conduct and misleading and deceptive conduct.
The provisions, however, remain untested in this regard.
2.113 In addition to “all accounts” clauses, it has been suggested that one of the types of provision that could be examined
with a view to preventing its further use is a “conclusive evidence” clause. The example provided here featured in a
recent case before the Victorian Court of Appeal:
For the purposes of this Guarantee a certificate stating all or any of the following:
(i) the amount of the moneys hereby secured or any part thereof;
(ii) that such an amount falls within a particular paragraph or sub-paragraph of the definition of the moneys hereby secured;
(iii) that such an amount is owing or payable to the Bank by the guarantor or any other person whose indebtedness to the Bank is intended
to be hereby secured;
(iv) that the Bank is entitled to payment thereof on demand,
given to the guarantor by or on behalf of the Bank is conclusive evidence of the truth of its contents and binding on the guarantor.
The Commission is interested in hearing about the current incidence of “conclusive evidence” clauses, or about others
that might also be considered “unfair”.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
Permanent Trustee Co of NSW Ltd v Hinks
(1934) 34 SR(NSW) 130.
. See, for example,
AGC (Advances) Ltd v West
(1984) 5 NSWLR 590
at 602-603. See also generally
Jowitt v Callaghan
(1938) 38 SR (NSW) 512
at 516 (Jordan CJ); and J O’Donovan and J Phillips,
The Modern Contract of Guarantee
(3rd edition, LBC Information Services, Sydney, 1996) at 18-20.
Citicorp Australia Ltd v Hendry
(1984) 4 NSWLR 1
at 14-20 (Clarke J); and J O’Donovan and J Phillips,
The Modern Contract of Guarantee
(3rd edition, LBC Information Services, Sydney, 1996) at 25-31.
. J O’Donovan and J Phillips,
The Modern Contract of Guarantee
(LBC Information Services, Sydney, 1996) at 217.
Ankar Pty Ltd v National Westminster Finance (Australia) Ltd
[1987] HCA 15
(1987) 162 CLR 549
at 561; and
Chan v Cresdon Pty Ltd
[1989] HCA 63
(1989) 168 CLR 242
Commercial Bank of Australia Ltd v Amadio
[1983] HCA 14
(1983) 151 CLR 447
at 474 (Deane J).
Blomley v Ryan
[1956] HCA 81
(1956) 99 CLR 362
at 405. See also Kitto J at 415; and
Familiar Pty Ltd v Samarkos
(1994) 115 FLR 443
at 457-458.
. For a more detailed summary of factors, see J Phillips, “Grounds for Avoiding Guarantees” in J Phillips, B Horrigan
and B Collier,
Guarantees and Solicitors’ Certificates: Guidelines for Lawyers, Financiers and Guarantors
(Queensland University of Technology, Centre for Commercial and Property Law, 1999) at 4. See also J W Carter and D J Harland,
Contract Law in Australia
(3rd edition, Butterworths, Sydney, 1996) at para 1513; and N C Seddon and M P Ellinghaus,
Cheshire and Fifoot’s Law of Contract
(7th Australian edition, Butterworths, Sydney, 1997) at para 15.8.
Commercial Bank of Australia Ltd v Amadio
[1983] HCA 14
(1983) 151 CLR 447
at 474 (Deane J).
. This position can be compared with that under the
Contracts Review Act 1980
(NSW) which permits a court to intervene where the disability was not known to the other party.
Commercial Bank of Australia Ltd v Amadio
[1983] HCA 14
(1983) 151 CLR 447
Garcia v National Australia Bank Ltd
[1998] HCA 48
(1998) 194 CLR 395
at para 43; and
Commercial Bank of Australia Ltd v Amadio
[1983] HCA 14
(1983) 151 CLR 447
. See Australian Banking Industry Ombudsman Ltd,
Report on Relationship Debt
(Bulletin No 22, 1999); B Fehlberg,
Sexually Transmitted Debt: Surety Experience and English Law
(Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1997); M Trebilcock and S Elliott, “The Scope and Limits of Legal Paternalism: Altruism and Coercion
in Family Financial Arrangements” (Unpublished paper, revised 23 February 1999); Australian Banking Industry Ombudsman Ltd,
Report on Relationship Debt
(Bulletin No 22, 1999); S Singh,
For Love Not Money: Women, Information and the Family Business
(Consumer Advocacy and Financial Counselling Association of Victoria Inc, Melbourne, 1995); S Singh,
For Love Not Money: The Stories of Women in Family Business
(Consumer Advocacy and Financial Counselling Association of Victoria Inc, Melbourne, 1995); S Singh,
Marriage Money: The Social Shaping of Money and Marriage in Banking
(Allen & Unwin, Sydney, 1997); and more broadly, J Pahl,
Money and Marriage
(St Martin’s Press, New York, 1989); J Pahl,
Invisible Money: Family Finances in the Electronic Economy
(The Policy Press, Bristol, 1999); and M Edwards,
Financial Arrangements Within Families
(National Women’s Advisory Council, Canberra, 1981).
[1983] HCA 14
(1983) 151 CLR 447.
Commercial Bank of Australia Ltd v Amadio
[1983] HCA 14
(1983) 151 CLR 447
at 461 (Mason J).
Commercial Bank of Australia Ltd v Amadio
[1983] HCA 14
(1983) 151 CLR 447
at 461 (Mason J).
Commercial Bank of Australia Ltd v Amadio
[1983] HCA 14
(1983) 151 CLR 447
at 461 (Mason J).
Royal Bank of Canada v Oram
(1978) 1 WWR 564.
Taylor v Johnson
[1983] HCA 5
(1983) 151 CLR 422
at 432 (Mason ACJ, Murphy and Deane JJ); and J W Carter and D J Harland,
Contract Law in Australia
(3rd edition, Butterworths, Sydney, 1996) at para 1264.
. See J W Carter and D J Harland,
Contract Law in Australia
(3rd edition, Butterworths, Sydney, 1996) at para 1255; D Wright, “Rectification” in P Parkinson (ed),
The Principles of Equity
(LBC Information Services, Sydney, 1996) at para 2712; and R P Meagher, W M C Gummow and J R F Lehane,
Equity: Doctrines and Remedies
(3rd edition, Butterworths, Sydney, 1992) at para 2615.
Petelin v Cullen
[1975] HCA 24
(1975) 132 CLR 355
; and J W Carter and D J Harland,
Contract Law in Australia
(3rd edition, Butterworths, Sydney, 1996) at para 1267-1275.
Petelin v Cullen
[1975] HCA 24
(1975) 132 CLR 355
at 359-360.
. J W Carter and D J Harland,
Contract Law in Australia
(3rd edition, Butterworths, Sydney, 1996) at para 1002; and N C Seddon and M P Ellinghaus,
Cheshire and Fifoot’s Law of Contract
(7th Australian edition, Butterworths, Sydney, 1997) at 378-381.
. See J W Carter and D J Harland,
Contract Law in Australia
(3rd edition, Butterworths, Sydney, 1996) at para 1008-1009; and N C Seddon and M P Ellinghaus,
Cheshire and Fifoot’s Law of Contract
(7th Australian edition, Butterworths, Sydney, 1997) at para 11.9-11.16.
. Treated as a separate category by A J Duggan,
A Financier’s Guide to the Law of Guarantee in Australia
(4th edition, Australian Finance Conference and Australian Equipment Lessors Association, 1998) at para 5.4.
. See para 3.17 and 3.18. On matters requiring and not requiring disclosure see also J Phillips, “Grounds for Avoiding Guarantees”
Guarantees and Solicitors’ Certificates: Guidelines for Lawyers, Financiers and Guarantors
(Queensland University of Technology, Centre for Commercial and Property Law, 1999) 22-29; and N C Seddon and M P Ellinghaus,
Cheshire and Fifoot’s Law of Contract
(7th Australian edition, Butterworths, Sydney, 1997) at para 11.18.
Uberrimae fidei
Westpac v Robinson
(1993) 30 NSWLR 668
at 690 (Clarke JA).
. Although there are some difficulties if there has been part performance. Partial rescission is now also possible:
Vadasz v Pioneer Concrete (SA) Pty Ltd
(1995) 184 CLR 102.
See below at para 2.53-2.56.
Commercial Bank of Australia Ltd v Amadio
[1983] HCA 14
(1983) 151 CLR 447
at 474 (Deane J).
. See, for example,
Johnson v Buttress
[1936] HCA 41
(1936) 56 CLR 113
Commercial Bank of Australia Ltd v Amadio
[1983] HCA 14
(1983) 151 CLR 447
at 461 (Mason J). See also
Garcia v National Australia Bank Ltd
[1998] HCA 48
(1998) 194 CLR 395
at para 26. This should be distinguished from situations where guarantors simply lack information.
. J W Carter and D J Harland,
Contract Law in Australia
(3rd edition, Butterworths, Sydney, 1996) at para 1405; A J Duggan, “Undue Influence” in P Parkinson (ed),
The Principles of Equity
(LBC Information Services, Sydney, 1996) at para 1120; and R P Meagher, W M C Gummow and J R F Lehane,
Equity: Doctrines and Remedies
(3rd edition, Butterworths, Sydney, 1992) at para 1530.
Alderton v Prudential Assurance Company Ltd
[1993] FCA 127
(1993) 41 FCR 435
at para 40-50 and the cases cited there.
. See, for example,
Bank of New South Wales Ltd v Rogers
[1941] HCA 9
(1941) 65 CLR 42.
Yerkey v Jones
[1939] HCA 3
(1939) 63 CLR 649
at 684. See also
Garcia v National Australia Bank Ltd
[1998] HCA 48
(1998) 194 CLR 395
at para 25.
Allcard v Skinner
(1887) 36 ChD 145
at 171. See also J W Carter and D J Harland,
Contract Law in Australia
(3rd edition, Butterworths, Sydney, 1996) at para 1404.
. J W Carter and D J Harland,
Contract Law in Australia
(3rd edition, Butterworths, Sydney, 1996) at para 1406; and N C Seddon and M P Ellinghaus,
Cheshire and Fifoot’s Law of Contract
(7th Australian edition, Butterworths, Sydney, 1997) at para 14.3.
. But there is no automatic presumption of influence on the part of an adult child: see
George v Paul George Pty Ltd
(NSW SC, No 2575/1993, Santow J, 29 February 1996, unreported).
Johnson v Buttress
[1936] HCA 41
(1936) 56 CLR 113
at 119 (Latham CJ) and at 134 (Dixon J); and also
Jenyns v Public Curator
[1953] HCA 2
(1953) 90 CLR 113
. See the statement in
Johnson v Buttress
[1936] HCA 41
(1936) 56 CLR 113
at 119 (Latham CJ).
. See, for example,
Yerkey v Jones
[1939] HCA 3
(1939) 63 CLR 649
at 675 (Dixon J).
. Affirming the rule in
Yerkey v Jones
. See J W Carter and D J Harland,
Contract Law in Australia
(3rd edition, Butterworths, Sydney, 1996) at para 1402; N C Seddon and M P Ellinghaus,
Cheshire and Fifoot’s Law of Contract
(7th Australian edition, Butterworths, Sydney, 1997) at para 14.13; and A J Duggan, “Undue Influence” in P Parkinson (ed),
The Principles of Equity
(LBC Information Services, Sydney, 1996) at para 1128.
. [1990] 1 QB 923. However, in this case the guarantee was not set aside for other reasons.
. J Phillips, “Grounds for Avoiding Guarantees” in
Guarantees and Solicitors’ Certificates: Guidelines for Lawyers, Financiers and Guarantors
(Queensland University of Technology, Centre for Commercial and Property Law, 1999) at 11.
. J Phillips, “Grounds for Avoiding Guarantees” in
Guarantees and Solicitors’ Certificates: Guidelines for Lawyers, Financiers and Guarantors
(Queensland University of Technology, Centre for Commercial and Property Law, 1999) at 8.
Crescendo Management Pty Ltd v Westpac Banking Corporation
(1988) 19 NSWLR 40
at 45-46 (McHugh JA).
Hawker Pacific Pty Ltd v Helicopter Charter Pty Ltd
(1991) 22 NSWLR 298
at 301-302; and J W Carter and D J Harland,
Contract Law in Australia
(3rd edition, Butterworths, Sydney, 1996) at para 1311-1313.
Crescendo Management Pty Ltd v Westpac Banking Corporation
(1988) 19 NSWLR 40
. J W Carter and D J Harland,
Contract Law in Australia
(3rd edition, Butterworths, Sydney, 1996) at para 1301. But see
Farmers’ Co-operative Executors & Trustees Ltd v Perks
(1989) 52 SASR 399
Fair Trading Act 1987
which applies to persons instead of corporations.
. Although the issue of the definition of “supply”, “services” and “consumer” was raised in interlocutory
proceedings in relation to the NSW equivalent,
Fair Trading Act 1987
Campbell v Metway Leasing Ltd
(1998) 20 ATPR 41-630
at 40,915-40,917 and 40,923.
[1939] HCA 3
(1939) 63 CLR 649.
[1998] HCA 48
(1998) 194 CLR 395.
Yerkey v Jones
[1939] HCA 3
(1939) 63 CLR 649
at 684 (Dixon J).
Yerkey v Jones
[1939] HCA 3
(1939) 63 CLR 649
at 683 (Dixon J).
Garcia v National Australia Bank Ltd
[1998] HCA 48
(1998) 194 CLR 395
at para 31.
Garcia v National Australia Bank Ltd
[1998] HCA 48
(1998) 194 CLR 395
at para 43.
. This appears to have been the basis upon which the High Court refused special leave to appeal from the decision of the NSW Court
of Appeal in
Akins v National Australia Bank Ltd
(1994) 34 NSWLR 155:
Akins v National Australia Bank Ltd
(High Court of Australia, No S131/1994, Application for special leave to appeal, transcript of proceedings, 12 May 1995, unreported).
. See J Phillips, “Grounds for Avoiding Guarantees” in
Guarantees and Solicitors’ Certificates: Guidelines for Lawyers, Financiers and Guarantors
(Queensland University of Technology, Centre for Commercial and Property Law, 1999) at 15-16.
Garcia v National Australia Bank Ltd
[1998] HCA 48
(1998) 194 CLR 395
at para 19-20.
Barclays Bank plc v O’Brien
[1994] 1 AC 180 at 188. See also
Garcia v National Australia Bank Ltd
[1998] HCA 48
(1998) 194 CLR 395
at para 66 (Kirby J) and para 108 (Callinan J).
Barclays Bank plc v O’Brien
[1994] 1 AC 180.
. See the cases discussed in
National Australia Bank Ltd v Garcia
(1996) 39 NSWLR 577
at 593-598;
European Asian of Australia Limited v Kurland
(1985) 8 NSWLR 192
Warburton v Whiteley
(1989) NSW Conv R 55-453
Akins v National Australia Bank Ltd
(1994) 34 NSWLR 155
Teachers Health Investments Pty Ltd v Wynne
(1994) 6 BPR 97480.
National Australia Bank Ltd v Garcia
(1996) 39 NSWLR 577
at 597 (Sheller JA); and
Teachers Health Investments Pty Ltd v Wynne
(1996) ASC 56-356.
Garcia v National Australia Bank Ltd
[1998] HCA 48
(1998) 194 CLR 395
at para 22 (Gaudron, McHugh, Gummow and Hayne JJ) and at para 109 (Callinan J).
. This factual finding illustrates how difficult it is to make determinations about whether a woman in this situation “benefits”
from a transaction or not, since on the face of it, she was a participant not only in the marriage but also in the business. Compare
For Love Not Money: The Stories of Women in Family Business
(Consumer Advocacy and Financial Counselling Association of Victoria Inc, Melbourne, 1995).
Garcia v National Australia Bank Ltd
(1993) 5 BPR 11,996.
. [1994] 1 AC 180.
. [1994] 1 AC 180 at 195.
. [1994] 1 AC 180 at 196.
. The approach in
Barclays Bank plc v O’Brien
[1994] 1 AC 180 was favoured, with some qualifications, by Kirby J in his separate judgment in
Garcia v National Australia Bank Ltd
[1998] HCA 48
(1998) 194 CLR 395
at para 73.
. [1994] 1 AC 180.
. The leading authorities were cited in
Royal Bank of Scotland plc v Etridge (No 2)
[1998] 4 All ER 705 at 720:
Bank of Baroda v Shah
[1988] 3 All ER 24;
Massey v Midland Bank plc
[1995] 1 All ER 929;
Banco Exterior Internacional v Mann
[1995] 2 FCR 631;
Midland Bank plc v Serter
[1995] 3 FCR 711
Bank Melli Iran v Samadi-Rad
[1995] 3 FCR 735
Halifax Mortgage Services Ltd v Stepsky
[1997] 1 WLR 221;
Barclays Bank plc v Thomson
[1997] 4 All ER 816; and
National Westminster Bank plc v Beaton
(1997) 30 HLR 99.
Royal Bank of Scotland plc v Etridge (No 2)
[1998] 4 All ER 705 at 720.
. See, for example,
Contracts Review Act 1980
Trade Practices Act 1974
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Code
Contracts Review Act 1980
Contracts Review Act 1980
Contracts Review Act 1980
Contracts Review Act 1980
. New South Wales,
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Assembly, 19 March 1980, the Hon S Einfeld, Minister for Consumer Affairs at 5532. See also J W Carter and D J Harland,
Contract Law in Australia
(3rd edition, Butterworths, Sydney, 1996) at para 1518; J Goldring, J L Pratt and D E J Ryan, “The Contracts Review Act (NSW)”
(1981) 4(2)
University of New South Wales Law Journal
1 at 3; and A L Terry, “Unconscionable Contracts in New South Wales: The
Contracts Review Act 1980
” (1982) 10
Australian Business Law Review
311 at 312 and 319-324.
. At least where a person guarantees debts of a corporate entity:
Australian Bank Ltd v Stokes
(1985) 3 NSWLR 174.
Ring Tread Systems Australasia Pty Ltd v Tubb
(NSW CA, 40830/1996, 30 October 1998, unreported) at 7-8 (Mason P).
Contracts Review Act 1980
Contracts Review Act 1980
Contracts Review Act 1980
Contracts Review Act 1980
Contracts Review Act 1980
Contracts Review Act 1980
Contracts Review Act 1980
(1997) 41 NSWLR 482.
Esanda Finance Corporation Ltd v Tong
(1997) 41 NSWLR 482
Contracts Review Act 1980
. This was different to the relief granted at first instance which was to relieve the Tongs of all liability under the mortgage.
Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act 1989
(Cth) s 12CB which deals with conduct in relation to financial services. “Financial services” does not appear to include
contracts of guarantee: See
Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act 1989
(Cth) s 12BA(1).
Section 51AB
Trade Practices Act 1974
(Cth) was renumbered in 1992 having been originally s 52A: see K E Lindgren, “The Fair Trading and Consumer Protection Provisions”
Trade Practices Act
– Its Impact in the First 25 Years
(University of Sydney, Faculty of Law, Continuing Legal Education, 1999) at 11-12.
. J Phillips, “Grounds for Avoiding Guarantees” in
Guarantees and Solicitors’ Certificates: Guidelines for Lawyers, Financiers and Guarantors
(Queensland University of Technology, Centre for Commercial and Property Law, 1999) at 32-33.
Trade Practices Act 1974
. Both the Federal Court and Supreme Court have held that regard must be had to the purpose of the transaction as well as its nature:
Begbie v State Bank of New South Wales Ltd
[1993] FCA 579
[1994] ATPR 41-288
at para 55; and
State Bank of New South Wales Ltd v Sullivan
[1999] NSWSC 596
at para 239-248.
. For example, situations like that in
: see M Sneddon, “Banking and Finance: Guarantees and the
Trade Practices Act
Section 51AB
Australian Business Law Review
Trade Practices Act 1974
Trade Practices Act 1974
. However, because the price of the loan is taken to include the “capital value of the loan” (
Trade Practices Act 1974
s 51AC(11)(e))
it has been suggested that the capital value must be added to interest and other charges: A J Duggan,
A Financier’s Guide to the Law of Guarantee in Australia
(4th edition, Australian Finance Conference and Australian Equipment Lessors Association, 1998) at 36. This would mean that many loans
between $500,000 and $1,000,000 will be excluded once interest and other charges have been added.
. J Phillips, “Grounds for Avoiding Guarantees” in
Guarantees and Solicitors’ Certificates: Guidelines for Lawyers, Financiers and Guarantors
(Queensland University of Technology, Centre for Commercial and Property Law, 1999) at 33.
Trade Practices Act 1974
. The first action brought by the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission in relation to an aspect of
was concluded in August 1999:
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission v Leelee Pty Ltd
(Federal Court of Australia, No
, Mansfield J, 20 August 1999, unreported). See also
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission v Simply No-Knead (Franchising) Pty Ltd
[1999] FCA 1842.
Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act 1989
(Cth) s 12CA which deals with conduct in relation to financial services. “Financial services” does not appear to include
contracts of guarantee: See
Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act 1989
(Cth) s 12BA(1).
. That is, injunctions under s 80 and other orders the court considers appropriate, including compensation, under s 87.
. J Phillips, “Grounds for Avoiding Guarantees” in
Guarantees and Solicitors’ Certificates: Guidelines for Lawyers, Financiers and Guarantors
(Queensland University of Technology, Centre for Commercial and Property Law, 1999) at 32. See also W Pengilley, “Unconscionability:
Are the Litigation Floodgates Opening in Relation to Commercial Transactions?” (1997) 13
Australia and New Zealand Trade Practices Law Bulletin
Fair Trading Act 1987
does not relate to the “supply, or possible supply, of services that are financial services”:
Trade Practices Act 1974
Fair Trading Act 1987
is in almost identical terms, except that it extends to individuals as well as corporations.
. See, for example,
Fraser v NRMA Holdings Ltd
(1995) 55 FCR 452
. A J Duggan,
A Financier’s Guide to the Law of Guarantee in Australia
(4th edition, Australian Finance Conference and Australian Equipment Lessors Association, 1998) at 23. See also J Phillips, B Horrigan
and B Collier,
Guarantees and Solicitors’ Certificates: Guidelines for Lawyers, Financiers and Guarantors
(Queensland University of Technology, Centre for Commercial and Property Law, 1999) at 29.
Demagogue Pty Ltd v Ramensky
[1992] FCA 557
(1992) 39 FCR 31
at 32 and 40-41 (Gummow J).
. The representations need not have induced the guarantor for the purposes of the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission applying
for an injunction under
Trade Practices Act 1974
Trade Practices Act 1974
Fair Trading Act 1987
Trade Practices Act 1974
Fair Trading Act 1987
[1988] FCA 72
(1988) 100 ALR 227.
. In accordance with
Trade Practices Act 1974
s 87(2)(a).
. Under the
Trade Practices Act 1974
Fair Trading Act 1987
Trade Practices Act 1974
Fair Trading Act 1987
Trade Practices Act 1974
Fair Trading Act 1987
. See, for example,
Gregg v Tasmanian Trustees Ltd
(1997) 73 FCR 91
at 127-128.
Trade Practices Act 1974
Fair Trading Act 1987
Trade Practices Act 1974
Fair Trading Act 1987
Trade Practices Act 1974
Trade Practices Act 1974
Trade Practices Act 1974
Fair Trading Act 1987
s 72(5)(e).
See Australian Law Reform Commission,
Compliance with the
Trade Practices Act 1974
(Report 68, 1994) at para 7.28.
Trade Practices Act 1974
Fair Trading Act 1987
Trade Practices Act 1974
s 87(2)(a).
Trade Practices Act 1974
s 87(2)(b).
Trade Practices Act 1974
s 87(2)(ba).
Trade Practices Act 1974
s 87(2)(c).
Trade Practices Act 1974
s 87(2)(d).
Trade Practices Act 1974
Trade Practices Act 1974
Under the NSW provisions the Director-General of the Department of Fair Trading stands in the place of the Australian Competition
and Consumer Commission.
(1997) 73 FCR 91.
. See, generally, A J Duggan and E V Lanyon,
Consumer Credit Law
(Butterworths, Sydney, 1999).
Consumer Credit (Queensland) Act 1994
Consumer Credit Act 1995
Consumer Credit (Northern Territory) Act 1995
Consumer Credit (South Australia) Act 1995
Consumer Credit (Victoria) Act 1995
Consumer Credit (Tasmania) Act 1996
(Tas). Tasmania requires a proclamation approved by both houses of Parliament for amendments to the Queensland Code to take effect
in Tasmania:
Consumer Credit (Tasmania) Act 1996
Consumer Credit (Western Australia) Act 1996
. Applying the regulations enacted under Part 4 of the
Consumer Credit (Queensland) Act 1994
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Code
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Code
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Code
. In New South Wales this includes the Fair Trading Tribunal:
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Act 1995
Fair Trading Tribunal Act 1998
(NSW) Sch 5 cl 6.
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Code
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Code
Contracts Review Act 1980
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Code
s 70(2)(o).
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Code
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Code
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Code
s 51(1)(a).
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Code
s 50(3). The
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Regulations
(NSW) s 20 requires that a guarantee document include a warning the form of which is specified in Form 4 of the Regulations.
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Code
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Code
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Code
. Defined in
Farm Debt Mediation Act 1994
Farm Debt Mediation Act 1994
Farm Debt Mediation Act 1994
Farm Debt Mediation Act 1994
Farm Debt Mediation Act 1994
. J W Carter and D J Harland,
Contract Law in Australia
(3rd edition, Butterworths, Sydney, 1996) at para 1529.
. The 1999 Regulations replace the
Unfair Terms in Consumer Contracts Regulations 1994
Unfair Terms in Consumer Contracts Regulations 1999
(UK) reg 5(1).
Unfair Terms in Consumer Contracts Regulations 1999
(UK) Sch 2 cl 1(i).
Unfair Terms in Consumer Contracts Regulations 1999
(UK) reg 12.
. In addition to requirements under the
Consumer Credit Act
(UK): United Kingdom, Office of Fair Trading,
Non-Status Lending: Guidelines for Lenders and Brokers
(OFT 192, revised November 1997) at 4.
. See, for example,
Minister for Consumer Affairs v W W Vallack Real Estate Pty Ltd
(1986) ASC 55-478.
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Code
s 162(2). See A J Duggan and E V Lanyon,
Consumer Credit Law
(Butterworths, Sydney, 1999) at para 14.2.1-14.2.3.
Trade Practices Act 1974
Fair Trading Act 1987
See J W Carter and D J Harland,
Contract Law in Australia
(3rd edition, Butterworths, Sydney, 1996) at para 1530.
Jenkins v National Australia Bank Ltd
(1999) VConvR 54-602
at para 11.
Issues Paper 17 (2000) - Guaranteeing Someone Else's Debts
3. Operation of Guarantees
History of this Reference (Digest)
Link to Summary
OUTLINE OF THIS CHAPTER
While Chapter 2 was concerned with the law that applies when there is a dispute about a guarantee, this chapter focusses on some of
the day-to-day practice issues that affect the use of guarantees. First, however, it looks at the social context in which guarantees
The social context: “relationship debt” (
para 3.2-3.7
Unlike most commercial decisions, the decision to be a guarantor is often not made out of financial self-interest, but for other non-commercial
reasons. Many guarantors get no financial benefit at all from the loan. Recently there has been considerable attention given to “relationship
debt” and to the social and economic context in which this occurs. In a 1999 report, the Australian Banking Industry Ombudsman
described “relationship debt” as “a shorthand expression for the assumption by one person of responsibility for
a debt owed by another person to whom they are related in some way”.
There is a clear contrast between the emotional underpinnings of many transactions secured by third parties and the imperatives of
commercial stability and certainty. Lenders are engaging in a commercial profit-based enterprise and they need to be able to operate
within a defined legal and commercial framework. Yet the legal and commercial framework – the common law, statutory law and
the voluntary industry codes of practice – reveals a lack of clarity and certainty in relation to guarantees.
Advice and information issues (
para 3.16-3.47
There is only a limited legal obligation on lenders to disclose information to guarantors before they sign guarantees. It is now relatively
common for people to be urged to obtain “independent legal advice”, although there is no formal legal requirement that
they do so. Less commonly, it is sometimes suggested that people also obtain independent financial advice. The New South Wales rules
legal advice as a means of shifting responsibility from themselves to solicitors.
The “fine print” (
para 3.48-3.52
There are also a number of practical issues that surround the signing of a guarantee, such as who is present when the guarantee is
being signed, the location where it is signed, and the readability of the documents. Guarantees are sometimes hard to read and can
be written in very complex language. There are only limited situations (mostly to do with consumer credit lending) where the law
requires that they be in clear, simple English. This may cause particular difficulty for people whose first language is not English.
“All moneys” clauses (
para 3.53-3.57
Sometimes called “all accounts” clauses, these have the potential to create an open-ended liability for a guarantor who
is, in effect, agreeing to secure any future loans that the borrower may enter into. There is nothing to prevent the use of such
clauses at common law, although the courts sometimes limit their operation in disputed cases.
Ongoing information
para 3.60-3.69
At common law, there is no general obligation on a lender to supply a guarantor with ongoing information about the status of a loan,
such as whether the repayments are being regularly made by the borrower. In these circumstances, guarantors have no way of knowing
how vulnerable they are, unless they are being kept informed by the person whose loan they have guaranteed.
Enforcement (
para 3.70-3.74
A lender need not inform the guarantor that the borrower has defaulted under the principal loan before commencing proceedings to enforce
the guarantee. And, a lender does not have to sue the borrower first, unless the contract expressly says so. Some informal dispute
resolution processes have been established by the industry groups as part of their codes of practice, for example, the scheme administered
by the Australian Banking Industry Ombudsman.
3.1 The previous chapter outlined the common law and statutory framework that governs third party guarantees and noted that the relevant
law has developed largely in response to litigation about whether guarantees that have been entered into unfairly can be set aside.
By contrast, this chapter looks at some of the concerns that have been raised about the use of guarantees in day to day practice.
The chapter examines what happens when a guarantee is entered into, the types of information or advice available to people who sign
guarantees, and provides an overview of enforcement and alternative dispute resolution. Where necessary this chapter refers to the
present law and in addition, to the voluntary industry codes of practice that deal with guarantees. The chapter also endeavours to
locate some of these issues within the social context in which people often enter guarantees.
BACKGROUND TO ENTERING A GUARANTEE
3.2 As noted in Chapter 1, there has been increasing attention paid to the phenomenon of lenders securing loans by obtaining guarantees
from third parties who may not otherwise be involved in, or receive any benefit from, the loan transactions. These third party guarantors
are often spouses, close family members or friends. Unlike most commercial decisions, the decision to be a guarantor is often not
made out of financial self interest, but instead may be made for other, non-commercial reasons. Where a guarantee is called upon,
there can be serious consequences such as the loss of the guarantor’s home. Guarantors who are not directly involved in the
transaction for which they provide security often have much to lose and little, if anything, to gain from their action. Why would
a third party undertake so onerous an obligation as a guarantee? To answer this question requires some attention to the social and
economic context in which this practice continues to operate.
The role of relationships
3.3 Several studies and published reports have illustrated that a close emotional relationship (usually, but not necessarily, a familial
relationship) between a guarantor and borrower is pivotal to why people enter third party guarantees.
The nature of the relationship, rather than an appreciation of the responsibility for the debt, is often the reason for the guarantor
accepting liability.
3.4 For many guarantors, often women
(particularly wives) or parents, the sole or most significant “benefit” gained from entering a guarantee may be an emotional
one – the maintenance of harmonious relations with the borrower.
If the husband, partner or son cannot or will not repay the debt, the debt is often “transmitted” to the guarantor, notwithstanding
in many cases separation, divorce, bankruptcy (or a combination of these).
Various terms have been used to describe such results, most commonly “sexually transmitted debt”, “emotionally
transmitted debt”
and, more recently, “relationship debt”.
In a recent report by the Australian Banking Industry Ombudsman Limited (“ABIO”), relationship debt was described as
“a shorthand expression for the assumption by one person of responsibility for a debt owed by another person to whom they are
related in some way”.
3.5 An in-depth research study of “surety wives” undertaken at the Centre for Socio-Legal Studies, University of Oxford
(the “Fehlberg study”), for which guarantors, borrowers, lenders and lawyers were interviewed, observed that the typical
scenario in the case law is that of a wife who:
under some emotional pressure or misunderstanding caused by her husband, signs a charge over the family home in order to provide financial
assistance to a business, usually conducted by her husband, but often providing the family’s income.
3.6 The Fehlberg study found that “due to emotional pressure (ranging from physical abuse to more subtle forms of pressure)
and economic reasons, sureties viewed themselves as having no real choice about providing security”.
A central theme emerging from that research, and from other similar studies, is that third party guarantees often sit at the intersection
between the “private” sphere of the family and its internal emotional pressures, agendas and ethics (including cultural)
and the “public” sphere of the business world of bankers, lawyers, contract law, commerce and its ethics.
While the problem extends to a broader range of relationships than marriage, it has been recognised as having a much greater impact
on women than on men.
The problem is compounded because title to the family home is increasingly jointly held by husbands and wives and as the main significant
asset, it is often used as security for a loan for a business over which the husband has the predominant control.
3.7 A research study by the Consumer Advocacy and Financial Counselling Association of Victoria (the “Singh study”)
was concerned with how women inform themselves in the family business. This study observed that in Australia in the mid-1990s nearly
half a million women ran small businesses with their husbands and that women were nearly always partners or directors in the family
Some central observations emerging from this study and other recent studies are:
Approximately four out of ten women in a family business (41.3%) believe that a woman can be informed but may not have the power to
make decisions in the family business.
The husband’s often greater knowledge and skill in the business, as well as the wife’s fear of placing the marriage or
the relationship at risk,
is an important barrier in preventing the wife converting information into the power to decide.
Another factor is the division of labour in the home, especially when the wife assumes child-rearing and home-making responsibilities,
with the husband becoming the more regular income earner.
Women have greater decision-making power in relation to the household budget. They do not manage the money in the family business
to the same extent.
Earning the money gives a family member “ownership” of that money, despite the marriage.
Consequently, women who consider “they own the money seek more comprehensive information about the family business than the
women who feel that the business is their husband’s, and that he has first claim to the money he ‘earns’”.
The issue of whether a guarantee is binding or not is often precipitated by difficult family circumstances, either on separation or
divorce and consequential property settlement, or on the failure of the business. The reported cases show these circumstances often
occur around the same time.
Particular difficulties can be caused by the interaction of guarantee and debt problems with proceedings in the Family Court of Australia
arising out of the breakdown of a relationship. As the Fehlberg study found:
Divorced and separated wives were especially disadvantaged when the on-going contractual obligation involved in providing a security
outlasted the intimate relationship between debtor and surety. Terminating liability to the lender was far less negotiable than terminating
the surety’s relationship with the debtor.
This is a matter to which the ABIO drew attention in its recent report on relationship debt.
Commercial stability and certainty
3.8 A large gap can exist between the emotional underpinnings of many loans secured by third parties and the imperatives of commercial
stability and certainty. Lenders are generally engaged in a commercial profit-based enterprise and need to be able to operate within
a defined legal and commercial framework. Therefore, lenders need to ensure that they advance money on terms that are sufficient
to ensure that the loan is repaid. Those terms may include ensuring that the loan is secured and, if the borrower has no security
available, the lender may seek some form of security from a third party. Lenders operating in the sphere of commercial practice and
commercial risk may either be unaware of the relationship between the borrower and the guarantor or may not consider the “private”
aspects of that relationship relevant to the transaction. Yet, as noted above, a significant proportion of these loan arrangements
secured by third parties take place within familial relationships quite distinct from the archetypal arms-length contractual arrangement.
This is where the issue requires a fine balance between what the Australian Law Reform Commission in its report
Equality Before
described as the “competing claims for justice: on the one hand, the protection of the commercial interests of lenders and
their shareholders against, on the other hand, the injustice that would be suffered by the woman”.
It is clear that all those involved – borrowers, lenders and guarantors – would benefit from more certainty in both the
law and practice surrounding the provision of third party guarantees.
SOURCES OF LAW AND PRACTICE
Consumer Credit Code
3.9 As Chapter 2 explained, the
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Code
(the “Credit Code”) and its Regulations
(the “Credit Code Regulations”) provide a range of legislative protections for guarantors in consumer credit situations.
The Credit Code does not apply to the common situation of guarantees involving small business debts, including personal guarantees
of loans to, for example, a family company, where husband and wife are the secretary/directors.
3.10 As noted in Chapter 1, the regulatory framework has, with minor exceptions,
maintained the distinction between “consumer” transactions on the one hand, and those involving business (including small
business). However, a number of reviews by law reform and related bodies have drawn attention to the limited protection provided
both by legislation and industry codes of practice to guarantors of small business loans.
Industry practice
3.11 In November 1993 the Australian Bankers Association released its Code of Banking Practice.
The Code is not law, but rather a self-regulatory voluntary code promoting “good banking practice”
for the Association’s member banks. While aspects of the Code detail processes to be followed in relation to guarantees, the
Code is generally concerned with the Bank/Customer relationship.
Unlike the borrower, the guarantor may not be a customer of the bank.
3.12 The Code of Banking Practice was followed in 1994 by the adoption of similar codes of industry practice for building societies
and credit unions (the three codes are collectively referred to as “the codes of practice”).
These are also voluntary codes and are binding on a member building society or credit union once it has agreed to be bound in the
same way as banks under their code of practice.
Finance companies have yet to adopt such a code of practice.
3.13 Where there is a conflict between the Credit Code and the codes of practice, the Credit Code (being legislation) prevails.
3.14 However, like the Credit Code, the codes of practice are generally limited to consumer situations. The codes of practice apply
to guarantees signed by individuals (not companies) who secure the liabilities of a borrower.
The borrower cannot be a (public) corporation,
or a corporation where the guarantor is a director or secretary,
or a trustee of a trust (including a discretionary trust) where the guarantor is a beneficiary.
Nor will the codes apply where the borrower is a partner,
co-owner, agent, consultant or associate of the guarantor at this time.
3.15 Thus, the provisions in the codes of practice covering guarantors do not generally apply to the very common situation of a family
business, where the wife is both guarantor and secretary/director of the borrowing family company, or is both guarantor and a beneficiary
of the discretionary family trust for which a loan is made.
PROCESS OF ENTERING A GUARANTEE
Provision of information about the principal loan
3.16 Prior to signing a guarantee, what information and advice must a lender provide to the prospective guarantor about the principal
loan with the borrower?
3.17 Generally, at common law, the lender is not required to disclose information to the prospective guarantor about the principal
where the transaction has what the case law describes as “unusual features”.
The main rationale provided for this rule is a potential breach of the duty of confidentiality owed by the lender to the borrower
(who, unlike the guarantor, is the lender’s customer).
The notion of “unusual facts” can, as the Martin Committee pointed out, leave a lender in a situation where it has to
balance between deciding whether to disclose what may be an “unusual fact” to the prospective guarantor as against maintaining
its duty of confidentiality to its customer, the borrower.
3.18 A number of government reports
and research studies
have observed that the common law approach is ill founded from both the lender’s and guarantor’s perspectives on two
separate counts. First, there is no basis for common law assumptions about a prospective guarantor’s independence, nor about
their ability to inform themselves of the borrower’s financial position. Secondly, there is no guidance provided as to what
facts are sufficiently “unusual” so as to require their disclosure. In day-to-day commercial discourse, how does a lender
know when it has come across an “unusual fact” which consequently places a legal obligation on it to notify the potential
3.19 The following outlines the current legislative requirements as to the information which a lender must make known about the borrower
to a prospective guarantor
he or she signs the guarantee. Of course, these requirements apply only to consumer contracts and do not apply to guarantees of small
business loans. The voluntary codes of practice are also referred to where relevant and are similarly limited to consumer contracts.
Consumer Credit Code
3.20 Section 51 of the Credit Code requires a lender (called a “credit provider”
) to give a prospective guarantor (of a consumer loan) a copy of the credit contract
or proposed contract and a prescribed information statement
explaining the rights and obligations of a guarantor. Failure to provide a copy of the credit contract renders the guarantee unenforceable.
3.21 There is also a requirement for a boxed warning notice to appear immediately above the place on the guarantee where the guarantor
is to sign.
The boxed warning notice includes a statement that before the guarantor signs the guarantee he or she should obtain independent legal
advice and consider obtaining independent financial advice.
Failure to include the boxed warning notice renders the guarantee unenforceable.
Within 14 days of signing the guarantee, a copy of the credit contract
must be provided to the guarantor by the lender (if a copy of the credit contract has not been previously given to the guarantor).
3.22 These provisions (as for the Credit Code generally) apply only to consumer credit contracts.
Industry codes of practice
3.23 The codes of practice require a bank, building society or credit union that has adopted the relevant code to provide a prospective
guarantor with a written warning about the liabilities of a guarantor.
However, they do not require the boxed warning notice and a copy of the prescribed information statement.
3.24 The codes of practice also require a copy or summary
of the primary loan contract to be provided to the prospective guarantor. The Credit Union and Building Society Codes do not require
the borrower’s consent to the handing over of the principal loan contract to the prospective guarantor.
However, the Code of Banking Practice provides that a copy or summary of the principal loan contract may only be provided to the
prospective guarantor with the consent of the borrower.
In practice, this may mean that some guarantors, especially people guaranteeing business loans who are subject to familial or relationship
pressure, sign guarantees without ever having seen the principal loan contract.
3.25 Although
finance companies
commonly use guarantees, they do not have an industry code of practice. They are not subject to disclosure provisions similar to
those contained in the codes of practice discussed above.
The Expert Group on Family Financial Vulnerability recommended that finance companies develop a code of conduct containing provisions
relating to, among other things, the disclosure of information,
but to date this has not occurred.
3.26 There have been a number of proposals concerning the type of information that should be provided to guarantors by a lender. The
Expert Group on Family Financial Vulnerability recommended that, rather than a prescriptive list of matters that must be disclosed
or provided, the needs of the particular guarantor should determine what information should be provided in any given situation. This
is because the circumstances in which guarantees are provided vary enormously.
The types of information that might be provided include relevant information held by the financier, such as the loan application
or offer, and Credit Reference Association of Australia reports. In the case of personal loans, it would include information such
as the borrower’s statements of assets and liabilities, and income and expenditure while for business loans, corporate balance
sheets, profit and loss statements and cash flow projections might be relevant.
In its report on
Multiculturalism,
the Australian Law Reform Commission suggested that the lender should be obliged to give the guarantor the financial information on
which it has based its assessment of the risk of default by the borrower.
3.27 However, existing legislation does not extend as far as these recommendations in regard to the information to be provided to
the prospective guarantor by the lender about the credit contract.
Unjust circumstances surrounding the signing
of a guarantee
3.28 There are a number of grounds, both common law and statutory, upon which guarantees that have been entered into in unjust circumstances
may be set aside.
These unfair circumstances can arise from a wide variety of situations around the signing of the guarantee, including, who is present
when the guarantee is signed by the guarantor, inequality of bargaining power prior to the guarantee being signed, and the location
where the guarantee is signed.
3.29 Chapter 2 provides details of many of these unfair circumstances as elucidated by the common law. It also provides details of
Contracts Review Act 1980
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Code
Trade Practices Act 1974
(Cth) and the
Fair Trading Act 1987
(NSW). All four statutes provide non-exhaustive lists of the matters to be taken into account in determining whether the situation
is unfair or unconscionable.
Generally speaking, these include the following considerations:
inequality of bargaining power;
difficult or harsh terms;
intelligibility of the contractual documents;
unfair tactics or pressure exerted by another person;
comparable conduct in similar contracts or transactions;
standard form contracts, or whether the parties negotiated the provisions of the contract
or were willing to do so;
acting in good faith;
ability of guarantor to protect his or her own interests;
relative financial circumstances, educational background, literacy;
whether or not independent legal advice or other expert advice was obtained;
accurate explanation of the legal and practical effect of the contract;
whether the provisions of the transaction are understood;
terms of comparable transactions, including rates of interest or charges.
However, with the exception of those in the
Trade Practices Act
(Cth), most of these statutory provisions are limited to consumer lending rather than to business lending.
3.30 Two of the matters that appear in these statutory lists are considered in further detail. These are the circumstances surrounding
the signing of the guarantee (and in particular, the location where the guarantee is signed) and the effect of independent pre-contractual
advice (legal and/or financial) on the nature and effect of the guarantee.
The place where a guarantee is signed
3.31 Although the legislation does not specify where a guarantee is to be signed, it seems clear from judicial decisions that it is
not considered appropriate for lenders to leave it to the borrower to have the documentation executed by a related prospective guarantor
at their home.
3.32 Following a number of cases where guarantees were set aside after lenders left it to the borrower/husband to arrange for the
guarantor/wife’s signature, this practice is said to have become rarer. Instead, the wife is more likely to attend the lender’s
office to sign the guarantee. The lender would then explain the legal documents to her in general terms and most likely recommend
that she seek independent legal advice.
The guarantee could then be signed at the solicitor’s office or alternatively, at the lender’s office after the solicitor’s
advice has been received. The Expert Group on Family Financial Vulnerability proposed that legislation should require a financier
to take all reasonable steps to advise a potential guarantor directly to sign a guarantee in the absence of the borrower.
Beneficial Finance Corporation Ltd v Comer
Justice Rogers, in considering an application under the
Contracts Review Act 1980
(NSW) to set aside
a guarantee signed by Mrs Comer for a loan relating to her husband’s business, noted that the mortgage documents were signed
in the office of the finance company’s solicitor. Her evidence was that she had not understood the nature of the documents
she was signing, there had been no discussions between the finance company and herself, and no consideration was given to her financial
circumstances. Her sole involvement was as guarantor because the two properties involved were held in the joint names of her and
her husband. Justice Rogers commented:
Mrs Comer says that whatever [the solicitor] may have said, or may not have said, she was completely distracted from paying any attention
to what was being said by the activities of her son … who at that stage was … about two and a half years old. Like any
little boy of that age he was doing things which required the attention of his mother to ensure that he did not damage or spoil any
of the articles of furniture or documents in [the] office.
Pre-contractual advice on the nature and effect of guarantees
3.34 In recent years, it has become more common for lending institutions to recommend that people who agree to provide third party
guarantees should obtain independent legal advice before doing so. While such advice is not legally required, at common law the fact
that independent legal advice has been obtained can be used by lenders to defend themselves against allegations of unconscionable
Independent legal advice can also assist in countering claims that the guarantee was affected by undue influence.
Consequently, banks and other lenders often advise potential third party guarantors to confirm that such advice has been sought and
3.35 The Credit Code requires that a boxed warning notice appear on the page of the guarantee immediately above where the guarantor
is to sign, urging the guarantor to obtain independent legal advice and also to consider obtaining independent financial advice.
Under the Credit Code and the
Contracts Review Act 1980
(NSW), in deciding whether a guarantee is unjust, one of the statutory factors to which the court is directed is whether independent
legal advice was received by the person seeking relief from the guarantee.
If the guarantor has received independent legal advice, it is less likely that he or she will be able to rely successfully upon some
statutory defences. However, the Credit Code does not apply to guarantees over small business debts. The
Contracts Review Act 1980
(NSW) excludes corporate guarantors, but probably covers a guarantee by a private individual of a company’s debts.
3.36 The codes of practice all require that a lender recommend that a prospective guarantor obtain independent legal advice.
None of the codes of practice specifically refers to independent financial advice, by contrast with the boxed warning required by
the Credit Code. It is much less common for financial advice to be recommended or obtained before a guarantee is signed.
3.37 In summary, there is no direct requirement or necessary pre-condition under legislation for independent legal advice (or financial
advice) to be obtained before a guarantee can be validly executed. Furthermore, those statutory provisions that require prospective
guarantors to be advised to seek independent legal (or financial) advice are, in most cases,
limited to consumer loans and do not extend, for example, to small business loans.
3.38 Although it is obviously a good idea for a prospective guarantor to obtain independent financial and legal advice as to the merits
of entering a particular guarantee, in practice, as the case law demonstrates, this has not (at least until recently) tended to be
the case, especially in intra-family business lending.
3.39 In its 1992 report on
Multiculturalism
, the Australian Law Reform Commission observed that many people enter into contracts of guarantee they do not understand while “under
family or social pressure and without enough information to make an informed decision.”
It recommended that lenders should be required to inform guarantors as to the reasons why a guarantee is required.
Other reviews and reports have recommended that lenders should be required to advise potential guarantors about the legal nature
of guarantees, about the financial risks involved in a guarantee, and that the prospective guarantor should be advised to seek independent
advice about these matters.
Other practices that that have been suggested include requiring private meetings between appropriately trained lenders and the prospective
guarantors (ie, in the absence of the borrower),
providing that prospective guarantors be given a separate copy of the security documentation at least one week before they sign,
and requiring that prospective guarantors receive not only independent legal advice, but also independent financial advice.
3.40 The Fehlberg study found that a number of the respondents to the study thought that the solicitor’s role was to witness
the documents, rather than provide advice:
The term ‘independent legal advice’ thus proved a misnomer in the case of the surety sample. Sureties at most received
a basic explanation of their legal obligations in an atmosphere which left them feeling intimidated and uncomfortable about reading
the complicated legal documentation presented for signature, or asking questions. … The minority of sureties who took matters
into their own hands and sought truly independent advice received the only advice that the solicitor could responsibly provide given
the solicitor’s lack of information about the business or lack of skills in financial analysis: ‘Don’t sign’.
“Independent legal advice”: The Solicitors’ Practice Rules
3.41 A solicitor may be asked to provide a guarantor with a certificate confirming that independent legal advice has been provided.
In New South Wales, when a solicitor has been asked to provide such a certificate to a guarantor, whether or not the Credit Code
applies, Rule 45 of the Solicitors’ Practice Rules governs the issuing of such a certificate, and until recently, set out detailed
provisions governing the form that such certificates were required to take.
These certificates have been the subject of considerable controversy and as a result, the Law Society Council has revised Rule 45
with effect from January 2000. As the Law Society pointed out:
Since 1980, the Law Society has been made aware of an increase in the number of solicitors who have provided independent certificates
of explanation of loan documents being joined in proceedings arising out of default on the part of borrowers, mortgagors or guarantors,
making them virtual ‘parties of last resort’. In 1998-99 claims on LawCover relating to the provision of such certificates
rose to 15 per cent of total claims made during the year.
3.42 For some time, there has been concern that lenders have tended to use the exhortation to seek independent legal advice as a
means of shifting responsibility from themselves to solicitors.
While the previous Rule 45 set out the criteria and processes to be followed by solicitors in providing certificates of independent
legal advice, the effect of the 2000 Rule 45 is to do away with such certificates altogether and instead, set up a process for the
provision of legal advice that, in the view of the Law Society, “should forestall any subsequent claims [against solicitors]
based on a faulty or feigned recollection of the advice given”.
As the Law Society notes, in a covering memorandum to the new rule:
The critical decision of the High Court in
Garcia v National Australia Bank Limited
... is that a creditor should either take steps to explain the transaction to the surety or “know” that the surety has
received “competent independent and disinterested” advice from a third party to protect its right to enforce the transaction.
The Law Society considers that the requirement of “knowledge” referred to by the High Court in
can be satisfied by the guarantor providing the lender with a statutory declaration in the form prescribed in the new rule and that
a solicitor’s certificate “should not form part of the security for a loan”. Instead, the solicitor’s advice
to a guarantor is “entitled to the protection of confidentiality within the retainer between solicitor and client”.
3.43 A number of matters upon which a solicitor is required to advise a proposed signatory are set out in Rule 45. These include:
the legal consequences of a guarantor’s failure to remedy a borrower’s default;
whether the guarantor’s liability is limited to a specific amount or not;
any additional obligations, rights and remedies of the guarantor if the
Consumer Credit Code
The solicitor must make it clear to the proposed guarantor that the solicitor is offering only legal, and not financial advice (which
should be sought elsewhere prior to signing the guarantee, such as the advice of an accountant or other financial counsellor).
3.44 A guarantor is required to sign a statutory declaration (Schedule 2) to the effect that he or she has signed the relevant documents
after receiving independent legal advice. In addition, under Schedule 4 Part 2, a proposed guarantor must also declare that the advice
covered a number of matters set out there. These include that in the event of any failure by the borrower to comply with the terms
of the loan, the lender can sue the guarantor personally. Furthermore the lender can take possession of any property secured and,
if that property is sold but the proceeds are insufficient to cover the debt, the guarantor can be sued for the deficit. The guarantor
must also certify that he or she understands a number of other matters, including that the lender can pursue its remedies against
the guarantor even if it has not done so against the borrower, and that the guarantor understands that the solicitor does not profess
any qualification to give financial advice.
3.45 While the general tenor of the rule is that a solicitor should not act for more than one party in such cases, there is a recognition
of the difficulties this can cause, particularly in rural and regional areas.
Schedule 5 provides for the written consent of a borrower/guarantor to a solicitor advising more than one party where the borrower/guarantor
acknowledge that the solicitor has explained the circumstances and the potential conflict of interest and the person being advised
has agreed.
The value of independent legal advice
3.46 As noted in the introduction to this chapter, a common impetus for people signing guarantees can be the existence of a relationship
of some kind of emotional interdependence rather than an arms-length business decision. This is particularly the case where people
provide guarantees to other family members. Given this background, doubt has been cast on the effectiveness of independent legal
advice in protecting guarantors. For example, it has been suggested that independent advice in these circumstances might amount to
no more than a “futile endeavour”
and may be of benefit only to lenders in terms of the certainty it provides to them in transactions with guarantors.
However, some solicitors believe that independent legal advice may serve an important function for prospective guarantors in tenuous
relationships.
3.47 In summary, independent legal advice is primarily an educative process to enhance a guarantor’s freedom to make informed
decisions in relation to whether to provide a guarantee, and to educate the guarantor about the nature, obligations and consequences
of signing a guarantee. This would appear especially valuable for potential guarantors of loans to “redeem” a failing
family business. The process of consulting a solicitor and being required to attest to a clear understanding of the consequences
of the transaction can also serve as a “speed bump” in slowing down the rush to get a guarantee signed. This then gives
the parties an opportunity for reflection. However, the case law and research studies demonstrate that independent legal advice does
not necessarily prevent people from entering high-risk guarantees, often for emotional reasons, particularly family pressure.
THE GUARANTEE DOCUMENT
Legibility and plain English
3.48 Contract documents securing loans, such as guarantees and mortgages, are sometimes hard to read and can be written in complex
language with “fine print”. This has been the subject of comment in a number of judgments. For example, Justice Sully
Commonwealth Bank of Australia v Gough
commented on the contract signed by Mrs Gough as follows:
I am satisfied that the mortgage is cumbersome in form and unintelligible to any person who is not a trained lawyer. Indeed, I would
not be surprised to find many a trained lawyer unable to come to grips easily with the convoluted language of portions of the mortgage
3.49 In another case where it was held that the form of the contract constituted unfairness under the
Contracts Review Act 1980
(NSW), Acting Justice Spender commented:
The mortgage she executed is expressed in characteristically complex, convoluted, and legalistic language. By way of example, the
first clause or covenant runs to over six hundred words and is entirely bereft of any form of punctuation. … The mortgage contains
41 covenants which extend over 5 pages of cramped printing. The introductory words which are to be found on page 1 of the mortgage,
are in these terms: “In consideration of all or any loans advances credits or banking accommodation whether made created or
given on the signing hereof or that may hereafter be made created or given in its discretion by the Bank to for or on account of
the Mortgagor and/or to for or on account of Stenace Pty Ltd ... (hereinafter referred to as ‘the Customer’) or at the
request of either the Mortgagor or the Customer by any means whatsoever and/or for forbearance on the part of the Bank to immediately
demand and sue for payment of any moneys now owing by the Mortgagor and/or the Customer to the Bank and/or for other valuable consideration
moving from the Bank to the Mortgagor and/or the Customer (as the Mortgagor doth hereby admit) and for the consideration aforesaid
the Mortgagor hereby covenants and agrees with the Bank in manner hereafter appearing:” Then follows the 41 covenants.
... Had the Bank set out to create a document which was intended to achieve a high degree of confusion in the mind of the ordinary
but intelligent lay reader, and to be largely incomprehensible to most members of the public, it has achieved that objective.
It is possible that the stylistic practices described in the case law above no longer reflect current contracts securing loans among
many sectors of the finance industry. The Commission would welcome further information on current contracts of guarantee.
3.50 Not only are the provisions in contracts of guarantee sometimes difficult to understand, but they may cause considerable difficulty
for non-English speaking people as many technical legal terms may have no counterpart in other languages and will therefore be very
difficult to translate.
3.51 The Credit Code requires that terms in a guarantee must be easily legible with a print or typeface of at least 10 points
and that the guarantee must be clearly expressed.
If the terms are not expressed as the Credit Code requires, a Court may prevent the lender from using terms that are the same or
similar to the offending provision in future.
3.52 More generally, various statutes allow a Court when determining whether a guarantee is unjust or unconscionable, to take into
account factors including the objective intelligibility of the language in which the document is expressed
or the ability of a person to understand the document.
“All moneys” clauses
3.53 A common term in a contract of guarantee is an “all moneys” or “all accounts” clause. These clauses extend
a guarantor’s liability to secure future credit contracts between the lender and the borrower. These clauses are considered
contentious because they create an open-ended liability for the guarantor.
3.54 The common law does not prevent the use of such clauses in guarantees or mortgages, although courts will limit their operation
in some cases. For example, in
Australian and New Zealand Banking Group Ltd v Volmensky
the Bank, relying on an all moneys clause, claimed from Mrs Volmensky $272,500 plus interest accruing at $566 per day in relation
to debts incurred for her husband’s business. However, it was found that the mortgage was intended to serve a specific purpose,
namely, the original loan of a total of $60,000 and that “nothing else was in contemplation.” The judge confined the
operation of the mortgage to the $60,000 originally envisaged.
3.55 The Credit Code permits guarantees to extend to future credit contracts providing certain procedures are complied with. In particular,
a lender must give the guarantor a copy of the future credit contract and obtain the written acceptance of the guarantor to any extension
of the guarantee.
3.56 In regard to the industry codes of practice, the Code of Banking Practice proscribes “all moneys” provisions (at
least to the extent that it applies);
while the Building Society
and Credit Union
Codes permit certain extensions of guarantees to future credit contracts
specific procedures are followed.
3.57 In 1991 the Martin Committee Enquiry recommended that the use of unlimited guarantees no longer be permitted.
LATER OPERATION OF A GUARANTEE
3.58 While much emphasis has been given to the provision of pre-contractual information to potential guarantors, including in the
case law, there is less discussion of the rights and ongoing information needs of guarantors once a guarantee has been signed.
3.59 Two examples of situations where a guarantor’s obligations might significantly change are:
the guarantee may enable the borrower to access monetary advances beyond the original sum drawn. The guarantor may be unaware that
the original debt has increased thereby increasing his/her possible debt obligation; and
the guarantor’s risk may be increased if the borrower’s initial security decreases in value – that is, the borrower
may sell his/her home for a lesser value than originally agreed.
The first the guarantor may know about the risk of default by the borrower is when the lender calls upon the guarantee.
Ongoing advice and information
3.60 At common law there appears to be no general obligation on the lender to supply the guarantor with ongoing information about
the loan to the borrower; for example, whether loan repayments are being regularly made.
Consumer Credit Code
3.61 The Credit Code requires a lender to provide, at the request of a guarantor within specified time limits,
in writing or orally,
a statement of the current balance of the borrower’s account, amounts credited or debited, any amounts currently overdue, or
any amounts currently payable.
The Credit Code also requires a lender to provide, at the written request of a borrower, mortgagor or guarantor within specified
time limits,
a copy of the credit contract, mortgage or guarantee, or any credit-related insurance contract in the lender’s possession,
or any notice previously given to the borrower, mortgagor or guarantor under the Code.
Industry practice
3.62 The Code of Banking Practice and Building Society Code state that, subject to the borrower’s consent, a bank or building
society (respectively) must send to the guarantor a copy of any formal demand that is sent to the borrower; and on the guarantor’s
request, a copy of the latest relevant statements of account provided to the borrower (if any).
3.63 The Credit Union Code contains similar requirements but does not specify that it requires the borrower’s consent.
Unilateral variations to the loan
3.64 At common law, any variation to the principal loan that could be detrimental to the guarantor will discharge the guarantee.
However this equitable rule can be overcome if the guarantor consents to the proposed variation,
or if the guarantee explicitly provides that the principal loan can be varied from time to time.
Consumer Credit Code
3.65 The Credit Code allows a guarantor, once he or she has signed the guarantee, to withdraw from it (with written notice) at any
time before credit is first provided,
or after credit has been provided
if the credit contract differs in some material respect from the proposed credit contract given to the guarantor before the guarantee
was signed.
3.66 When a lender varies an agreement with a borrower so as to increase the liabilities of the guarantor,
the lender must notify the guarantor in writing and the guarantor will only be liable for the increased liabilities if he or she
agrees to the variation in writing.
3.67 When the variation is a refinancing, the Credit Code requires the guarantor to enter a new guarantee, unless the original guarantee
provides for an extension to any future credit contract (that is, an “all moneys” clause). The guarantor is then only
bound if he or she has been given a copy of the future credit contract and has accepted it in writing.
Discharging the guarantor from a guarantee
3.68 At common law
and under the legislation, if the credit contract and guarantee are valid and binding, a guarantor can be discharged from his or
her obligations under the guarantee by paying out the total amount of the guaranteed debt plus the costs of recovery.
The industry codes of practice have a similar approach.
Consumer Credit Code
3.69 The Credit Code also provides that at the written request of a guarantor, the lender must, within seven days of the request,
provide a written statement of the amount required to pay out a credit contract
at the date specified and indicate how it is calculated.
Enforcement through the courts
3.70 At common law, the lender does not need to inform the guarantor of the borrower’s default under the principal loan before
commencing proceedings to enforce the guarantee, unless the contract of guarantee provides otherwise.
Furthermore, at common law, the lender does not need to proceed against the borrower first,
or make a demand on the guarantor before enforcing the guarantee, unless the contract of guarantee states otherwise.
Consumer Credit Code
3.71 Under the Credit Code the lender does not have to provide notice of the borrower’s default to the guarantor before initiating
proceedings to enforce the guarantee. However, the lender can only
a judgment against a guarantor under the guarantee if:
a judgment debt against the borrower has remained unsatisfied for 30 days after the lender has made a written demand for payment of
the Court has relieved the lender from obtaining a judgment for the debt against the borrower, because recovery is unlikely;
the lender has tried but cannot locate the borrower; or
the borrower is insolvent.
Industry practice
3.72 Under the codes of practice (and subject to the borrower’s consent in the case of banks and building societies, but not
in the case of credit unions) the lender must send to the guarantor a copy of any formal demand that is sent to the borrower.
Alternative dispute resolution
3.73 The industry codes of practice provide for internal and external dispute resolution processes for members and their customers.
Internally, the dispute resolution processes must be accessible and free, and details of the procedure and time frame must be provided
with the lender giving reasons for any outcome. All three codes of practice provide for an external and impartial process to hear
and deal with any dispute that remains unresolved after the internal process.
3.74 The largest and longest established of these is the Australian Banking Industry Ombudsman (ABIO). The ABIO is an independent
mediation, conciliation and investigative body for customer complaints against banks, including small business customers. It was
established in 1990, to provide banking customers with a free, external and independent process for resolving disputes. The Ombudsman
scheme was extended in mid 1998 to cover complaints about guarantees given over certain loans to small companies.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
. B Fehlberg,
Sexually Transmitted Debt: Surety Experience and English Law
(Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1997); S Singh,
For Love Not Money: Women, Information and the Family Business
(Consumer Advocacy and Financial Counselling Association of Victoria Inc, Melbourne, 1995); Australian Law Reform Commission,
Equality Before the Law: Women’s Equality
(Report 69, Part 2, 1994); and Australia, Expert Group on Family Financial Vulnerability
, Good Relations, High Risks: Financial Transactions Within Families and Between Friends
(Report, 1996).
. G McDonald “Women and Credit in the Australian Banking Industry” paper presented at the Women and Credit Conference
(Melbourne, 6 March 1991).
. Most are women: Australian Law Reform Commission,
Equality Before the Law: Women’s Equality
(Report 69, Part 2, 1994) at 243-244.
. See for some discussions M Trebilcock and S Elliott, “The Scope and Limits of Legal Paternalism: Altruism and Coercion in
Family Financial Arrangements” (Unpublished paper, revised 23 February 1999) and B Fehlberg,
Sexually Transmitted Debt: Surety Experience and English Law
(Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1997). For discussion of “benefit” see para 2.13.
. Australian Law Reform Commission,
Equality Before the Law: Women’s Equality
(Report 69, Part 2, 1994) at 240; and B Fehlberg,
Sexually Transmitted Debt: Surety Experience and English Law
(Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1997) at 10.
. Australian Law Reform Commission,
Equality Before the Law: Women’s Equality
(Report 69, Part 2, 1994) at 240 – drawing upon Paula Baron’s coining of that term: see P Baron “The Free Exercise
of Her Will: Women and Emotionally Transmitted Debt” (1995) 13
Law in Context
. Australian Banking Industry Ombudsman Ltd,
Report on Relationship Debt
(Bulletin No 22, 1999)
. Australian Banking Industry Ombudsman Ltd,
Report on Relationship Debt
(Bulletin No 22, 1999) at 2.
. B Fehlberg,
Sexually Transmitted Debt: Surety Experience and English Law
(Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1997) at 2.
. B Fehlberg,
Sexually Transmitted Debt: Surety Experience and English Law
(Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1997) at 267.
. For the added complexities of ethnicity and the experiences of recent immigrants and some Aboriginal communities, see Australian
Law Reform Commission,
Multiculturalism and the Law
(Report 57, 1992) at 247.
. B Fehlberg,
Sexually Transmitted Debt: Surety Experience and English Law
(Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1997) at 9-10 and 271.
. Australian Law Reform Commission,
Equality Before the Law: Women’s Equality
(Report 69, Part 2, 1994) at 239;
Garcia v National Australia Bank Ltd
[1998] HCA 48
(1998) 194 CLR 395
Barclays Bank plc v O’Brien
[1994] 1 AC 180 at 188 (Lord Browne-Wilkinson).
. B Fehlberg,
Sexually Transmitted Debt: Surety Experience and English Law
(Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1997) at 9-10.
Barclays Bank plc v O’Brien
[1994] 1 AC 180 at 188 (Lord Browne-Wilkinson). Equity in owner-occupied housing accounts for more than 50 per cent of total women’s
wealth in Australia and New Zealand – notably more than for men: Yann Campbell Hoare Wheeler,
Women’s Economic Status: “Equal Worth” – Final Report: output 4
(Job No 32056, for the Australian Commonwealth/State and New Zealand Standing Committee of Advisers for the Status of Women, 1999)
at ch 1; Executive Summary at 27.
For Love Not Money: Women, Information and the Family Business
(Consumer Advocacy and Financial Counselling Association of Victoria Inc, Melbourne, 1995).
For Love Not Money: Women, Information and the Family Business
(Consumer Advocacy and Financial Counselling Association of Victoria Inc, Melbourne, 1995) at 3-4. Note, however, that the
Corporations Law
(Cth) no longer requires proprietary companies to have two directors which may make some difference to companies established after
Corporations Law
(Cth) s 221(2).
For Love Not Money: Women, Information and the Family Business
(Consumer Advocacy and Financial Counselling Association of Victoria Inc, Melbourne, 1995) at 71.
. This also raises issues of the need for “trust” in a marriage conflicting with the demands of business information,
and cultural assumptions about the appropriate way to behave within relationships: S Singh,
For Love Not Money: Women, Information and the Family Business
(Consumer Advocacy and Financial Counselling Association of Victoria Inc, Melbourne, 1995) at 7; B Fehlberg,
Sexually Transmitted Debt: Surety Experience and English Law
(Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1997) at 283.
For Love Not Money: Women, Information and the Family Business
(Consumer Advocacy and Financial Counselling Association of Victoria Inc, Melbourne, 1995) at 6. See also B Fehlberg,
Sexually Transmitted Debt: Surety Experience and English Law
(Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1997) at 10. Professors Michael Trebilcock and Steven Elliott show how this fear of endangering the marriage
has a significant economic basis, as it is well established that following divorce, women’s standard of living declines, while
men’s increases: M Trebilcock and S Elliott, “The Scope and Limits of Legal Paternalism: Altruism and Coercion in Family
Financial Arrangements” (Unpublished paper, revised 23 February 1999). For Australian data on this phenomenon, see P McDonald
Settling Up: Property and Income Distribution on Divorce in Australia
(Prentice Hall/AIFS, 1986); and K Funder, M Harrison and R Weston,
Settling Down: Pathways of Parents after Divorce
(AIFS, 1993). Trebilcock and Elliott refer to
Teachers Health Investments Pty Ltd v Wynne
(1996) ASC 56-356
(NSWCA) as an example of a case involving an explicit threat of this nature.
. B Fehlberg,
Sexually Transmitted Debt: Surety Experience and English Law
(Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1997) at 9. See also Australian Law Reform Commission,
Equality Before the Law: Women’s Equality
(Report 69, Part 2, 1994) at 244. Work undertaken by the Australian Bureau of Statistics and others shows that women still overwhelmingly
carry the burden of work in the home, no matter what their workforce participation status: see Australian Bureau of Statistics,
How Australians Use Their Time 1997
(ABS Cat No 4153.0, 1998).
For Love Not Money: Women, Information and the Family Business
(Consumer Advocacy and Financial Counselling Association of Victoria Inc, Melbourne, 1995) at 62; B Fehlberg,
Sexually Transmitted Debt: Surety Experience and English Law
(Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1997) at 79, 146-147 concurs. As the Australian Law Reform Commission,
Equality Before the Law: Women’s Equality
(Report 69, Part 2, 1994) at 240 observed, the woman “… may be a silent partner or silent director in a family business
or a family company while having no effective control over the business and being excluded from participating in it.”: See
also S Singh,
Marriage Money: The Social Shaping of Money in Marriage and Banking
(Allen & Unwin, Sydney, 1997).
For Love Not Money: Women, Information and the Family Business
(Consumer Advocacy and Financial Counselling Association of Victoria Inc, Melbourne, 1995) at 7.
For Love Not Money: Women, Information and the Family Business
(Consumer Advocacy and Financial Counselling Association of Victoria Inc, Melbourne, 1995) at 7.
. B Fehlberg,
Sexually Transmitted Debt: Surety Experience and English Law
(Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1997) at 10. Examples from the well known cases include
Garcia v National Australia Bank Ltd
[1998] HCA 48
(1998) 194 CLR 395
Akins v National Australia Bank
(1994) 34 NSWLR 155.
. B Fehlberg,
Sexually Transmitted Debt: Surety Experience and English Law
(Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1997) at 270-271.
. Australian Banking Industry Ombudsman Ltd,
Report on Relationship Debt
(Bulletin No 22, 1999) at 16-17.
. Australian Law Reform Commission,
Equality Before the Law: Women’s Equality
(Report 69, Part 2, 1994) at 244.
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Regulations
. See also Australian Law Reform Commission,
Equality Before the Law: Women’s Equality
(Report 69, Part 2, 1994) at 252.
Trade Practices Act 1974
and Banking Industry Ombudsman Ltd,
Terms of Reference
(effective from 6 July 1998), para 19A. See J Pascoe “The Effect of the Federal Government’s Small Business Package on
Guarantees of Business Debts”
(1998) 12(3)
Commercial Law Quarterly
. For example, Australian Law Reform Commission,
Multiculturalism and the Law
(Report 57, 1992) at 253-254; Australian Law Reform Commission,
Equality Before the Law: Women’s Equality
(Report 69,
) at 252-254 and Recommendation 13.2; Australia, Expert Group on Family Financial Vulnerability
, Good Relations, High Risks: Financial Transactions Within Families and Between Friends
(Report, 1996) at 35-36.
. This was in response to the Martin Committee Enquiry. The code may be viewed at the Australian Bankers’ Association website:
www.bankers.asn.au/3_level/bankcode.htm
�. The Code is currently under review. For a recent discussion see M Funston, “Wanted: A Code We Can Bank On” (1999) 4(1)
Consumer Rights Journal
. Code of Banking Practice, Preamble.
. “Customer” and other relevant terms are defined in Code of Banking Practice s 1.1.
. The Australian Law Reform Commission,
Equality Before the Law: Women’s Equality
(Report 69, Part 2, 1994) at 253 cautions on the limited contractual force of the Code: “As a guarantor may not be a ‘customer’
and may not be receiving a ‘banking service’ from the bank, the principles relating to guarantees in s 17 of the Code
may not be binding between the guarantor and the bank.” The Commission consequently recommended (Recommendation 13.1): “Section
1.3 of the Code of Banking Practice should be amended to ensure that (a) s 17 of the Code will be binding between a guarantor and
a bank from the date on which the bank publicly announces that it adopts the Code (b) the dispute resolution principles set out in
s 20 of the Code will also be binding between the bank and the guarantor as if the guarantor were a ‘Customer’ for the
purposes of that section.”
. The Building Society Code of Practice (released in October 1994) and the Credit Union Code of Practice (released in July 1994).
. Building Society Code of Practice s 1.3; and Credit Union Code of Practice s 1.3.
. Code of Banking Practice s 1.2; Building Society Code of Practice s 1.2; and Credit Union Code of Practice s 1.2 each state: “This
Code is to be read subject to any Commonwealth, State or Territory legislation.”
. Code of Banking Practice s 17.1; Building Society Code of Practice s 16.1; and Credit Union Code of Practice s 17.1.
. As defined in s 9 of the
Corporations Law
(Cth): Code of Banking Practice s 17.1; Building Society Code of Practice s 16.1; and Credit Union Code of Practice s 17.1. Code
of Banking Practice s 17.1(i) and Credit Union Code of Practice s 17.1(i) refer to a “public corporation or any of its Related
Entities”, whereas Building Society Code of Practice s 16.1(i) refers to “a corporation or any of its Related Bodies
Corporate”.
. Code of Banking Practice s 17.1(ii); Building Society Code of Practice s 16.1(ii); and Credit Union Code of Practice s 17.1(ii).
. Code of Banking Practice s 17.1(iii); Building Society Code of Practice s 16.1(iii); and Credit Union Code of Practice s 17.1(iii).
. At least in the case of the Code of Banking Practice s 17.1(iv) and the Building Society Code of Practice s 16.1(iv). The Credit
Union Code of Practice, however, does not refer to “partner” in this context: Credit Union Code of Practice s 17.1(iv).
. Code of Banking Practice s 17.1(iv); Building Society Code of Practice s 16.1(iv); Credit Union Code of Practice s 17.1(iv).
. This is the situation in a number of the cases: see for example, the facts of
Garcia v National Australia Bank Ltd
[1998] HCA 48
(1998) 194 CLR 395.
See also Australian Law Reform Commission,
Equality Before the Law: Women’s Equality
(Report 69, Part 2, 1994) at 254 and Recommendation 13.2; S Singh,
For Love Not Money: Women, Information and the Family Business
(Consumer Advocacy and Financial Counselling Association of Victoria Inc, Melbourne, 1995) Recommendation 9.
Commercial Bank of Australia Ltd v Amadio
[1983] HCA 14
(1983) 151 CLR 447
at 455 and 457 (Gibbs CJ). Unusual features include not only the loan itself, but also the circumstances surrounding it: see J O’Donovan
and J Phillips,
The Modern Contract of Guarantee
(3rd edition, LBC Information Services, Sydney, 1996) at 127.
Commercial Bank of Australia Ltd v Amadio
[1983] HCA 14
(1983) 151 CLR 447
at 457. The provisions of the three industry codes of practice reflect this view.
. Australia, House of Representatives Standing Committee on Finance and Public Administration,
A Pocket Full of Change: Banking and Deregulation
(AGPS, Canberra, 1991) at 417-418.
. See for example, Australia, House of Representatives Standing Committee on Finance and Public Administration,
A Pocket Full of Change: Banking and Deregulation
(AGPS, Canberra, 1991) at 417-419; Australia, Expert Group on Family Financial Vulnerability
, Good Relations, High Risks: Financial Transactions Within Families and Between Friends
(Report, 1996) at 39-40.
. B Fehlberg,
Sexually Transmitted Debt: Surety Experience and English Law
(Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1997) and S Singh,
For Love Not Money: Women, Information and the Family Business
(Consumer Advocacy and Financial Counselling Association of Victoria Inc, Melbourne, 1995).
. “Credit provider” means a person that provides credit, and includes a prospective credit provider:
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Code
Sch 1 Principal Definitions.
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Code
. The prescribed information statement is a statement set out in Form 5A of the
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Regulations
explaining the guarantor’s rights and obligations. It can be on a separate document or part of the guarantee document: see
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Code
s 51(1)(b) and
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Regulations
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Code
s 51(2). By contrast, failure to provide an information statement, while constituting an offence, does not render the guarantee unenforceable:
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Code
s 51(2) and s 57. See also A J Duggan and E V Lanyon,
Consumer Credit Law
(Butterworths, Sydney, 1999) at para 6.3.23-6.3.24.
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Code
s 50(3); and
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Regulations
s 20 and Form 4.
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Regulations
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Code
. As well as a copy of the guarantee signed by the guarantor.
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Code
. Code of Banking Practice s 17.4(i); Credit Union Code of Practice s 17.4(i); and Building Society Code of Practice s 16.4(i) which
further states that this written warning can be in the form of an information statement about guarantees as prescribed by the
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Regulations
. Note that although the Code of Banking Practice s 17.4(ii) and Building Society Code of Practice s 16.4(ii) refer to either a “copy
or summary” of the primary loan contract which the guarantee is to cover the Credit Union Code of Practice s 17.4(ii) only
refers to a “copy” of the credit contract.
. Building Society Code of Practice s 16.4(ii); and Credit Union Code of Practice s 17.4(ii). See also
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Code
s 51(1)(a).
. Code of Banking Practice s 17.3 and 17.4(ii).
. Australia, Expert Group on Family Financial Vulnerability
, Good Relations, High Risks: Financial Transactions Within Families and Between Friends
(Report, 1996) at 43.
. Australia, Expert Group on Family Financial Vulnerability
, Good Relations, High Risks: Financial Transactions Within Families and Between Friends
(Report, 1996) Recommendation 9 at 50.
. Australia, Expert Group on Family Financial Vulnerability
, Good Relations, High Risks: Financial Transactions Within Families and Between Friends
(Report, 1996) at 44.
. Australia, Expert Group on Family Financial Vulnerability
, Good Relations, High Risks: Financial Transactions Within Families and Between Friends
(Report, 1996) at 42-43. The information to be provided would exclude any internal assessments prepared by the financier.
. Australian Law Reform Commission,
Multiculturalism and the Law
(Report 57, 1992) at 247 and 251-252.
. See further, Chapter 2.
Contracts Review Act 1980
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Code
Trade Practices Act 1974
Fair Trading Act 1987
Contracts Review Act 1980
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Code
s 70(2)(b);
Trade Practices Act 1974
s 51AB(2)(a)
(4)(a); and
Fair Trading Act 1987
s 43(2)(a).
Contracts Review Act 1980
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Code
s 70(2)(e);
Trade Practices Act 1974
s 51AB(2)(b)
(4)(b); and
Fair Trading Act 1987
s 43(2)(b).
Contracts Review Act 1980
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Code
s 70(2)(g);
Trade Practices Act 1974
s 51AB(2)(c)
(4)(c); and
Fair Trading Act 1987
s 43(2)(c).
Contracts Review Act 1980
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Code
s 70(2)(j);
Trade Practices Act 1974
s 51AB(2)(d)
(4)(d); and
Fair Trading Act 1987
s 43(2)(d).
Contracts Review Act 1980
Trade Practices Act 1974
s 51AC(3)(f)
Contracts Review Act 1980
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Code
s 70(2)(c), (d).
Trade Practices Act 1974
s 51AC(3)(j)
Trade Practices Act 1974
s 51AC(3)(k)
Contracts Review Act 1980
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Code
s 70(2)(f). Although no specific provisions exist in trade practices legislation, this may be subsumed under the concept of relative
strength of bargaining power:
Trade Practices Act 1974
s 51AB(2)(a)
(4)(a); and
Fair Trading Act 1987
s 43(2)(a).
Contracts Review Act 1980
Although no specific provisions exist in trade practices legislation, this may be subsumed under the concept of relative strength
of bargaining power:
Trade Practices Act 1974
s 51AB(2)(a)
(4)(a); and
Fair Trading Act 1987
s 43(2)(a).
Contracts Review Act 1980
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Code
s 70(2)(h), but there is
no direct requirement
for the provision of independent legal or other expert advice. Although no specific provisions exist in trade practices legislation,
this may be subsumed under the concept of generally understanding the documents:
Trade Practices Act 1974
s 51AB(2)(c)
(4)(c); and
Fair Trading Act 1987
s 43(2)(c).
Contracts Review Act 1980
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Code
s 70(2)(i). Although no specific provisions exist in trade practices legislation, this may be subsumed under the concept of generally
understanding the documents:
Trade Practices Act 1974
s 51AB(2)(c)
(4)(c); and
Fair Trading Act 1987
s 43(2)(c).
Contracts Review Act 1980
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Code
s 70(2)(i), (k). Although no specific provisions exist in trade practices legislation, this may be subsumed under the concept of
generally understanding the documents:
Trade Practices Act 1974
s 51AB(2)(c)
(4)(c); and
Fair Trading Act 1987
s 43(2)(c).
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Code
s 70(2)(n);
Trade Practices Act 1974
s 51AB(2)(e)
(4)(e); and
Fair Trading Act 1987
s 43(2)(e).
. As Duggan cautions lenders in A J Duggan,
A Financier’s Guide to the Law of Guarantee in Australia
(4th edition, Australian Finance Conference and Australian Equipment Lessors Association, 1998) at 41. The courts consider it a point
in favour of a lender that it required attendance at its premises to sign the guarantee: see, for example,
Australian and New Zealand Banking Group Ltd v Dunosa Pty Ltd
[1995] ANZConvR 86
. Australia, Expert Group on Family Financial Vulnerability
, Good Relations, High Risks: Financial Transactions Within Families and Between Friends
(Report, 1996) at 14-15.
. Australia, Expert Group on Family Financial Vulnerability
, Good Relations, High Risks: Financial Transactions Within Families and Between Friends
(Report, 1996) Recommendation 2.
(1991) ASC 56-042.
Beneficial Finance Corporation Ltd v Comer
(1991) ASC 56-042
at 56,684-56,685. It was held that the guarantee was unjust and its effect was read down.
. M Sneddon, “Unfair Conduct in Taking Guarantees and the Role of Independent Advice” (1990) 13
University of New South Wales Law Journal
302 at 319.
. J O’Donovan and J Phillips,
The Modern Contract of Guarantee
(3rd edition, LBC Information Services, Sydney, 1996) at 174 and 192.
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Code
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Regulations
s 20 and Form 4.
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Code
s 70(2)(h); and
Contracts Review Act 1980
. See para 2.53
and J O’Donovan and J Phillips, The
Modern Contract of Guarantee
(3rd edition, LBC Information Services, Sydney, 1996) at 185.
. Code of Banking Practice s 17.5; Building Society Code of Practice s 16.5, Credit Union Code of Practice s 17.5.
. Excepting the
Contracts Review Act 1980
. Australian Law Reform Commission,
Multiculturalism and the Law
(Report 57, 1992) at 246.
. Australian Law Reform Commission,
Multiculturalism and the Law
(Report 57, 1992) at 251.
. Australia, Expert Group on Family Financial Vulnerability
, Good Relations, High Risks: Financial Transactions Within Families and Between Friends
(Report, 1996) Recommendation 2. B Fehlberg,
Sexually Transmitted Debt: Surety Experience and English Law
(Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1997) at 276 proposed that borrowers also agree, as a condition of the loan, to the lender giving the guarantor
the commercial information about the borrower and the business collected by the lender to assess the borrower’s creditworthiness.
. B Fehlberg,
Sexually Transmitted Debt: Surety Experience and English Law
(Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1997) at 276; and Australian Law Reform Commission,
Equality Before the Law: Women’s Equality
(Report 69,
) at 258-259 (Recommendation 13.5).
. B Fehlberg,
Sexually Transmitted Debt: Surety Experience and English Law
(Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1997) at 276; and Australian Law Reform Commission,
Equality Before the Law: Women’s Equality
(Report 69,
) Recommendation 13.4.
. B Fehlberg,
Sexually Transmitted Debt: Surety Experience and English Law
(Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1997) at 268.
. See J O’Donovan and J Phillips,
The Modern Contract of Guarantee
(3rd edition, LBC Information Services, Sydney, 1996) at 192-195.
. Law Society of New South Wales,
Revised Professional Conduct and Practice Rules
(1995, amended November 1997).
. Law Society of New South Wales,
(No 207, 30 December 1999) at 1-2. LawCover is the professional indemnity insurance provider for NSW solicitors.
. See generally, the covering memorandum in
(No 207, 30 December 1999). As a result of some actions against solicitors in South Australia, the South Australian Supreme Court
has noted that the South Australian Law Society has advised its members not to provide certificates of legal advice: see
Micarone v Perpetual Trustees
(South Australia, Supreme Court, Judgment No S6438, Duggan J, 19 November 1997, unreported) at 80.
. Law Society of New South Wales,
(No 207, 30 December 1999) at 1.
. Law Society of New South Wales,
(No 207, 30 December 1999) at 1.
. Law Society of New South Wales,
Professional Conduct and Practice Rules
(1995, amended January 2000) Rule 45.6.3.2.
. Law Society of New South Wales,
Professional Conduct and Practice Rules
(1995, amended January 2000) Rule 45.6.3.5.
. Law Society of New South Wales,
Professional Conduct and Practice Rules
(1995, amended January 2000) Rule 45.6.3.6.
. Law Society of New South Wales,
Professional Conduct and Practice Rules
(1995, amended January 2000) Rule 45.6.4.
. See, for example, R Staniland, “Explanation of Loan Documents” (letter to the editor)
(1998) 36(2)
Law Society Journal
. The revised rule spells out the requirement of “independence” by providing that a solicitor advising a guarantor must
not act for the lender; must not advise a proposed signatory in the presence of any other signatory, or in “any circumstances
where the interests of any signatory or proposed signatory … conflict with those of any other …” except in accordance
with a set of principles spelt out in Rule 45.4.4. These principles are drawn from the decision of the Privy Council (on appeal from
the New Zealand Court of Appeal) in
Clark Boyce v Mouat
[1994] 1 AC 428 at 437.
. B Fehlberg,
Sexually Transmitted Debt: Surety Experience and English Law
(Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1997) at 192.
. B Fehlberg,
Sexually Transmitted Debt: Surety Experience and English Law
(Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1997) at 21.
. B Fehlberg,
Sexually Transmitted Debt: Surety Experience and English Law
(Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1997) at 278.
. (1993) ASC 56-247.
. (1993) ASC 56-247 at 58,521. Sully J upheld the guarantee. Mrs Gough’s appeal to the Court of Appeal was dismissed by majority:
Gough v Commonwealth Bank of Australia
(1994) ASC 56-270.
Australian and New Zealand Banking Group Ltd v Volmensky
(NSW, Supreme Court, No 15542/1992, Spender AJ, 14 December 1994, unreported) at 6, reported in part in
(1995) ANZ Conv R 202
. For an example, see
Esanda Finance Corporation Ltd v Tong
(1997) 41 NSWLR 482.
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Regulations
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Code
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Code
Contracts Review Act 1980
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Code
s 70(2)(g).
Contracts Review Act 1980
Fair Trading Act 1987
Trade Practices Act 1974
s 51AB(2)(c)
(4)(c); and
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Code
s 70(2)(i).
Australian and New Zealand Banking Group Ltd v Volmensky
(NSW, Supreme Court, No 15542/1992, Spender AJ, 14 December 1994, unreported).
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Code
s 54(2). Similar requirements apply to all accounts mortgages:
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Code
s 43(2). See also s 56 in relation to conditions to be met before a guarantor is liable for further credit advances under a variation
to an existing credit contract.
. Code of Banking Practice s 17.2.
. Building Society Code of Practice s 16.3.
. Credit Union Code of Practice s 17.3.
. Australia, House of Representatives Standing Committee on Finance and Public Administration,
A Pocket Full of Change: Banking and Deregulation
(AGPS, Canberra, 1991) Recommendation 89 at 417.
. Australia, Expert Group on Family Financial Vulnerability
, Good Relations, High Risks: Financial Transactions Within Families and Between Friends
(Report, 1996) at 38.
. J O’Donovan and J Phillips,
The Modern Contract of Guarantee
(3rd edition, LBC Information Services, Sydney, 1996) at 126 footnote 41. Variations to the principal loan, unanticipated in the
original guarantee, would require the guarantor’s consent to be bound by them:
Ankar Pty Ltd v National Westminster Finance (Australia) Ltd
[1987] HCA 15
(1987) 162 CLR 549
at 559 and 560;
Corumo Holdings Pty Ltd v C Itoh Ltd
(1991) 24 NSWLR 370
at 380 and 403.
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Code
s 34(2). If the information is not provided within the required time limits, the Court may, on the application of the guarantor,
order the lender to provide the statement:
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Code
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Code
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Code
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Code
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Code
s 163(1) and (3).
. Code of Banking Practice s 17.6; and Building Society Code of Practice s 16.6.
. Credit Union Code of Practice s 17.6.
. See generally on this strict equitable rule: J O’Donovan and J Phillips,
The Modern Contract of Guarantee
(3rd edition, LBC Information Services, Sydney, 1996) at 339-340 and 357-358.
. See J O’Donovan and J Phillips,
The Modern Contract of Guarantee
(3rd edition, LBC Information Services, Sydney, 1996) at 353.
. See J O’Donovan and J Phillips,
The Modern Contract of Guarantee
(3rd edition, LBC Information Services, Sydney, 1996) at 350.
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Code
s 53(1)(a). This is irrespective of whether the credit contract differs in some material respect from the proposed credit contract
previously given to the guarantor. There is no equivalent entitlement to withdraw at common law.
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Code
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Code
s 53(1)(b) and s 51(1)(a). Note that information provided to the guarantor which is not included in the proposed credit contract
(for example, oral representations made to the guarantor before the guarantee was signed) would not appear to be caught by s 53(1)(b).
It has also been suggested that s 53 implies that, if the guarantor does not withdraw from the guarantee, the guarantee is valid:
A J Duggan and E V Lanyon,
Consumer Credit Law
(Butterworths, Sydney, 1999) at para 6.3.45.
. Such as by the lender and borrower agreeing to increase the borrower’s credit limit on a continuing credit contract:
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Code
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Code
s 56(1). This statutory requirement to notify and obtain consent does not include specified changes such as: automatic increases
in the amount of repayments as specified under the credit contract, interest rate changes, or changes in credit fees and charges:
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Code
s 56(2), 58(2)(a) and (b), and 61.
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Code
s 54. See further on “all moneys” clauses at para 3.53-3.57.
. See J O’Donovan and J Phillips,
The Modern Contract of Guarantee
(3rd edition, LBC Information Services, Sydney, 1996) at 426.
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Code
. See Code of Banking Practice s 17.7; Building Society Code of Practice s 16.7; and Credit Union Code of Practice s 17.7.
. Excepting a continuing credit contract:
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Code
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Code
s 76. If the lender does not provide a pay out figure, the Court may do so on the application of the guarantor:
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Code
. J O’Donovan and J Phillips,
The Modern Contract of Guarantee
(3rd edition, LBC Information Services, Sydney, 1996) at 483.
. J O’Donovan and J Phillips,
The Modern Contract of Guarantee
(3rd edition, LBC Information Services, Sydney, 1996) at 537-538.
. J O’Donovan and J Phillips,
The Modern Contract of Guarantee
(3rd edition, LBC Information Services, Sydney, 1996) at 487.
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Code
s 82. “Unlike s 80 which restricts enforcement proceedings against debtors and mortgagors by restricting a credit provider’s
right to initiate proceedings, this provision [s 82] does not restrict the commencement of proceedings, but instead restricts the
enforcement of judgments against guarantors”: D McGill and L Willmott,
Annotated Consumer Credit Code
(LBC Information Services, Sydney, 1999) at 590. Thus the lender could commence proceedings and obtain judgment against the guarantor
at the same time as, or even before, it takes action against the borrower.
. Code of Banking Practice s 17.6(i); Building Society Code of Practice s 16.6(i); and Credit Union Code of Practice s 17.6(ii).
. Code of Banking Practice s 20, Building Society Code of Practice s 20, Credit Union Code of Practice s 20.
. Australian Banking Industry Ombudsman Ltd,
Annual Report 1998-1999
Issues Paper 17 (2000) - Guaranteeing Someone Else's Debts
4. Issues to Consider
History of this Reference (Digest)
Link to Summary
4.1 The previous two chapters outlined the legal framework and various forms of regulation (such as the voluntary industry codes
of practice) concerning third party guarantees. However, most of the many transactions that take place on a daily basis do not come
before courts for scrutiny, nor do they come to the attention of bodies such as the Australian Banking Industry Ombudsman. As part
of this reference, the Commission will be undertaking empirical research to assist in developing a clearer picture of the use of
guarantees, particularly those given to secure small business lending.
4.2 The Commission has been awarded a research grant with the University of Sydney’s Faculty of Law as part of the Australian
Research Council’s Strategic Partnership with Industry for Research and Training (SPIRT) scheme.
The grant will be used to support a detailed empirical study that will include surveying lenders, solicitors, borrowers and guarantors,
as well as observing relevant court and tribunal hearings.
4.3 The Commission is interested in hearing from members of the public as well as from relevant organisations (including legal, social
welfare and finance industry groups) about their experiences with the use of third party guarantees. Submissions are sought on any
of the matters raised by the terms of reference (these are set out at page vi of this Issues Paper). This chapter lists a number
of issues that have been raised in the preceding chapters in addition to those matters upon which the Commission is seeking further
information. This list can be used by those interested in participating in this reference to guide their responses. The issues are
grouped loosely into categories, though there is considerable overlap between some of them.
THE NEED FOR MORE INFORMATION
How prevalent is the use of third party guarantees?
4.4 As the Australian Banking Industry Ombudsman pointed out in its recent report on relationship debt, there is a lack of information
The number of third-party guarantees given to financial institutions;
The proportion of guarantees given which are actually called upon; and
What amounts guarantors, on average, have to pay.
The Commission is particularly keen to collect such data.
It is also often suggested that the majority of guarantees are provided by family members, but detailed information on this is also
What proportion of guarantees are provided in the context of family and other close relationships?
What proportion of guarantees are provided in support of a business loan?
In what circumstances are guarantees required by lenders?
4.5 It has been suggested to the Commission that the use of third party guarantees has increased since the mid 1980s, along with changes
in banking and credit provision practices, and the Commission will be attempting to ascertain from lenders a clear sense of the circumstances
in which third party security is used. There has also been particular concern expressed about the continued use of “all moneys”
What is the current prevalence of the use of “all moneys” or “all accounts” clauses in contracts of guarantee?
Has the increase in competition arising from deregulation of the financial sector led to a greater use of guarantees?
How effective are the lending practices of creditors in the assessment of risk? Does the widespread use of third party guarantees
move the emphasis away from effective risk assessment by lenders?
THE BUSINESS/CONSUMER DISTINCTION
4.6 As the previous two chapters make clear, with minor exceptions, transactions in the course of business are excluded from the scheme
of regulation that governs consumer transactions (for example, the uniform
Consumer Credit Code
4.7 A key question is:
Should third party guarantees for small business lending continue to be regulated separately from guarantees for consumer loans?
This distinction has always been a matter of some contention. At the time of the introduction of the
Contracts Review Act 1980
(NSW), implementing the Peden Report,
the then Minister for Consumer Affairs, the Hon Syd Einfeld, noted that an earlier version, not limited to consumer transactions,
had received a strongly negative response – in some cases (in his words) one that “bordered on the hysterical”
and the Bill was subsequently limited in its application. He noted:
Encouraged by this widespread concern for the consumer faced by harsh or unjust contracts, the Government has decided that the Contracts
Review Bill before this House will be confined to consumer and unincorporated farming transactions. In effect, the only persons having
access will be the commonly-termed traditional consumer, that is, a consumer of goods, services or land for personal, domestic or
household use only, and the unincorporated farmer.
4.8 Other questions to consider include:
Contracts Review Act 1980
(NSW) was hailed as “revolutionary legislation whose evident purpose is to overcome the common law’s failure to provide
a comprehensive doctrinal framework to deal with ‘unjust’ contracts.”
Has it achieved this aim? If not, why has it not done so?
Do the provisions of the
Contracts Review Act 1980
(NSW) sufficiently cover third party guarantees? Should the Act be amended so that it applies expressly to all situations where a
third party provides a personal guarantee for a loan?
Should the unconscionable conduct provisions in
Fair Trading Act 1987
(NSW) be amended so that they apply expressly to all contracts of guarantee provided by third parties and not just those given with
respect to loans for “personal, domestic or household use or consumption”?
Is it appropriate to maintain the clear regulatory distinction between consumer guarantors and those who provide personal guarantees
for small business loans?
Are the 1998 small business amendments to the
Trade Practices Act 1974
effective in dealing with guarantees of small business loans? Should similar provisions be included in the
Fair Trading Act 1987
Should self-regulation (via the industry codes of practice) be the main way of regulating small business lending?
Should there be a uniform credit industry code of practice (and should any such code also apply to finance companies)?
INFORMATION AND ADVICE
What information should lenders be required to disclose to prospective guarantors in relation to the financial situation of the borrower?
Should the limited common law duty to disclose only “unusual” facts be modified and supplemented by rules that require
a third party guarantor to be provided with all information about the circumstances of the borrower (including why a guarantee has
been sought) that will enable her/him to evaluate the risks involved in giving the guarantee?
In what circumstances should prospective guarantors be required to seek independent legal advice? Should lenders be required to ensure
that this has occurred before being able to finalise a guarantee? If so, what form should that advice take? What issues must the
guarantor be advised about? Should additional requirements be imposed where the relationship between guarantor and borrower is a
close personal relationship? Should proof that a person has received independent legal advice ever be a precondition of a guarantee’s
enforceability?
Are there any circumstances in which a prospective guarantor should be required to seek independent financial advice on the commercial
aspects of the transaction being guaranteed?
Is the information that must be provided to the guarantor during the life of a contract of guarantee clear to all parties, and sufficient?
What information should be provided to a guarantor during the life of a loan?
Should the industry codes of practice require, so far as practicable, the same pre-contractual information to be provided as does
the Consumer Credit Code?
Are vulnerable members of the community such as women guaranteeing partners’ loans and people of non-English speaking background,
effectively targeted by community education programs about guarantees?
FORMALITIES
4.9 Assuming guarantees continue to be used, are there technical or formal matters that should be regulated to minimise some of the
risks of guarantors failing to understand the nature of the obligation they are entering into? The Commission is interested in submissions
on the following matters:
Should the law regulate the manner in which guarantees are entered into? For example, should there be specified formalities for entering
into all guarantees (including guarantees of business loans) so that failure to comply with those formalities (such as not signing
in the presence of the borrower) renders the agreement unenforceable? If so, what other formalities or processes should be required?
Should all guarantees, including those for business loans, be subject to technical specifications such as minimum font size etc,
and be required to be comprehensible, clear and concise?
What steps should be required to ensure that people from non-English speaking backgrounds are fully informed about the nature of
the obligation they are undertaking?
Should there be a cooling off period during which a person who has signed a personal guarantee can change his or her mind? If so,
how long should this period be?
Should these kinds of regulation be a matter of statute law, or should they be left to the industry organisations to regulate by
way of their voluntary codes of practice?
ENFORCEMENT ISSUES
Are the processes followed by lenders when borrowers default on their loans adequate?
Should a lender be required to notify a guarantor about a default by the borrower as soon as the default occurs?
Are there effective processes for resolving disputes involving guarantors?
RELATIONSHIPS: CONTRACT LAW AND RELATIONSHIP DEBT
4.10 As noted in Chapter 3, one of the key difficulties in this area of law is that normal contractual principles designed to operate
upon arms length commercial transactions are being imposed upon factual situations that may have more in common with what is traditionally
considered to be “family” law than “commercial” law. How can the law best respond to this intertwining of
family and commercial considerations?
What effect, if any, should be given to the fact that a guarantee is provided in the context of a close personal relationship, rather
than by way of an arms length contractual arrangement? Have common law attempts to take that relationship into account, such as the
“special rule” for wives (
Yerkey v Jones
Garcia v National Australia Bank Ltd
been successful? Should there continue to be such a “special rule” and if so, should its application be broadened to those
in a wider range of relationships?
What obligations, if any, should a lender owe to a third party guarantor in a close personal relationship with the borrower?
4.11 In some overseas jurisdictions, there are laws known as “homestead” laws that impose limits on the extent to which
residential property can be used as security for debts. These laws vary from place to place. Some protect all or part of the value
of the property; some apply to sole owners while others only apply where family members or spouses also live in the property; and
some are limited to situations where the security over the property has been entered without the consent of the other spouse. Some
of these laws apply automatically; others require some form of written notification.
Should the family home continue to be used as security for business loans or should its use be limited?
How effective is independent legal advice in offsetting emotional/family/other pressures on a guarantor to enter a guarantee? Should
other pre-contractual advice (such as independent financial advice) also be required?
LIMITING THE USE OF GUARANTEES?
4.12 There have also been some suggestions that personal guarantees should not be permitted in any circumstances. For example, the
Martin Committee on Banking and Finance questioned “the appropriateness of guarantees as commonly used financial instruments”.
Similarly, the Australian Trade Practices Commission (now the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission) in its 1992 discussion
Guarantors: Problems and Perspectives
refers to suggestions by the National Consumer Affairs Consultative Council and the Australian Financial Counselling and Credit Reform
Association that all guarantees be prohibited.
The Trade Practices Commission, while not agreeing that all guarantees should be banned, did support the Martin Committee’s
recommendation that unlimited consumer guarantees should be proscribed.
Should all third party guarantees be prohibited?
Should legislation and industry codes of practice generally prohibit particular provisions such as “all moneys” or “all
accounts” clauses from all contracts of guarantees?
OTHER ISSUES
4.13 It has been suggested that other forms of joint debts such as credit cards are equally problematic.
This is a particular issue for women separating from partners whose debts they have secured. The Commission is interested in receiving
submissions about difficulties experienced by third parties in other types of debt and about some of the broader aspects of “relationship
debt” that come within the terms of reference.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
. The research team is Ms Jenni Millbank, Professor David Harland (both from the Faculty of Law) and from the New South Wales Law
Reform Commission, Professor Reg Graycar, the Commissoner in charge of this reference.
. Australian Banking Industry Ombudsman Ltd,
Report on Relationship Debt
(Bulletin No 22, 1999) at 3. The report noted that without that information, it is difficult to assess whether the complaints received
by the Ombudsman about guarantees are representative of the experience of guarantors.
. In a preliminary submission it has been suggested that while no statistics have been kept, it is estimated that approximately 75%
of files documented at the bank would include third party securities and that approximately 30% of home loan files are secured by
supported guarantees: L E Taylor,
. In 1992 the Trade Practices Commission noted that its survey had disclosed that parents are most frequently used as consumer guarantors
in Australia, whereas according to a US Federal Trade Commission report (1984), spouses and parents are most commonly used, with
other relatives, friends and employers also figuring: Australia, Trade Practices Commission,
Guarantors: Problems and Perspectives
(Discussion Paper, 1992) at 13.
. J R Peden,
Harsh and Unconscionable Contracts
(Report to the Minister for Consumer Affairs and Co-operative Societies and the Attorney General for New South Wales, 1976).
. New South Wales,
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Assembly, 19 March 1980 at 5533.
West v AGC (Advances) Ltd
(1986) 5 NSWLR 610
at 621 (McHugh JA).
[1939] HCA 3
(1939) 63 CLR 649.
[1998] HCA 48
(1998) 194 CLR 395.
. Examples of the different types of homestead laws are – in the United States:
General Laws of Massachusetts
Arizona Revised Statutes
s 33-1101, and
Texas Property Code
Chap 41; in Canada:
The Homesteads Act
, CCSM, c H80 (Manitoba), and
, RSBC 1996, c 197 (British Columbia); and in New Zealand:
Joint Family Home Act 1964
(NZ). See also B Fehlberg,
Sexually Transmitted Debt: Surety Experience and English Law
(Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1997) at 273-274.
. See the concerns of the Martin Committee Enquiry concerning the family home: Australia, House of Representatives Standing Committee
on Finance and Public Administration,
A Pocket Full of Change: Banking and Deregulation
(AGPS, Canberra, 1991) at 414.
. Australia, House of Representatives Standing Committee on Finance and Public Administration,
A Pocket Full of Change: Banking and Deregulation
(AGPS, Canberra, 1991).
. Australia, Trade Practices Commission,
Guarantors: Problems and Perspectives
(Discussion Paper, 1992) at 19-20. For a similar suggestion by a Canadian law professor, see R Hasson, “Darkness at Noon: A
Comment on the Consumer Guarantee Law in Ontario” (1995) 11
Banking and Finance Law Review
141 at 149-150.
. New South Wales, Department for Women and Department of Fair Trading,
Separating Joint Finances: An Opportunity for Reform
(Background Paper, 1999).
Issues Paper 17 (2000) - Guaranteeing Someone Else's Debts
Table of Legislation
History of this Reference (Digest)
Link to Summary
Commonwealth
Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act 1989
Constitution
Corporations Law
Trade Practices Act 1974
1.7, 2.2, 2.57, 2.59,
2.75, 2.81, 3.29,
112"> 2.58,
2.68, 2.93, 2.84
2.59, 2.60, 2.63, 2.68, 2.69, 2.71, 2.73, 2.84
2.61, 2.64, 3.29
s 51AB(2)(a)
s 51AB(2)(b)
s 51AB(2)(c)
s 51AB(2)(d)
s 51AB(2)(e)
2.63, 2.67-2.69, 2.73, 2.84, 3.10
s 51AC(3)(a)
s 51AC(3)(b)
s 51AC(3)(c)
s 51AC(3)(d)
s 51AC(3)(e)
s 51AC(3)(f)
s 51AC(3)(j)
s 51AC(3)(k)
s 51AC(4)(a)
s 51AC(4)(b)
s 51AC(4)(c)
s 51AC(4)(d)
s 51AC(4)(e)
s 51AC(4)(f)
s 51AC(4)(j)
s 51AC(4)(k)
s 51AC(11)(e)
2.74, 2.92, 2.82, 2.84
2.62, 2.66, 2.69, 2.78, 2.82, 2.86, 2.94, 2.112
2.52, 2.66, 2.80, 2.84
2.52, 2.62, 2.66, 2.69, 2.80, 2.85
s 87(2)(ba)
New South Wales
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Act 1995
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Code
2.95, 2.98, 2.107, 2.111, 3.9, 3.13, 3.14, 3.29, 3.43, 4.6
2.103, 3.55
2.103, 3.21
2.103, 3.24, 3.65
2.103, 3.55
2.111, 3.51
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Regulations
2.96, 3.9, 3.23
2.103, 3.21, 3.35
Contracts Review Act 1980
1.6, 1.7, 2.12, 2.25, 2.53, 2.56, 2.97-2.100, 2.107, 3.29, 3.33, 3.37, 3.49, 4.7,
112"> 1.7, 2.53
2.55, 3.29, 3.35
112"> 1.6, 2.110
Fair Trading Act 1987
1.6, 2.22, 2.57, 2.59, 2.84, 3.29,
2.74, 2.82, 2.84
2.58, 2.71, 2.82,
2.72, 2.82, 2.112
2.72, 2.80, 2.84
Fair Trading Tribunal Act 1998
Farm Debt Mediation Act 1994
1.7, 2.105, 2.107
Other Australian States and Territories
Consumer Credit (Northern Territory) Act 1995
Consumer Credit (Queensland) Act 1994 (Qld)
Consumer Credit (South Australia) Act 1995 (SA)
Consumer Credit (Tasmania) Act 1996 (Tas)
Consumer Credit (Victoria) Act 1995
Consumer Credit (Western Australia) Act 1996
Consumer Credit Act 1995 (ACT)
Overseas and international
Arizona Revised Statutes
Consumer Credit Act 1974 (UK)
Directive on Unfair Terms in Consumer Contracts
(EC Directive 93/13)
General Laws of Massachusetts
Joint Family Home Act 1964 (NZ)
Texas Property Code
The Homesteads Act, CCSM, c H80 (Manitoba)
Unfair Terms in Consumer Contracts Regulations 1994 (UK)
Unfair Terms in Consumer Contracts Regulations 1999 (UK)
Sch 2 cl 1(i)
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
Issues Paper 17 (2000) - Guaranteeing Someone Else's Debts
Table of Cases
History of this Reference (Digest)
Link to Summary
TABLE OF CASES
AGC (Advances) Ltd v West (1984)
Akins v National Australia Bank Ltd (1994)
2.42, 2.44, 3.7
Akins v National Australia Bank Ltd (1995)
Alderton v Prudential Assurance Company Ltd (1993)
Allcard v Skinner (1887)
Ankar Pty Ltd v National Westminster Finance (Australia) Ltd (1987)
Australian and New Zealand Banking Group Ltd v Dunosa Pty Ltd (1995)
Australian and New Zealand Banking Group Ltd v Volmensky (1994)
Australian Bank Ltd v Stokes (1985)
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission v Leelee Pty Ltd (1999)
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission v Simply No-Knead (Franchising) Pty Ltd (1999)
Banco Exterior Internacional v Mann (1995)
Bank Melli Iran v Samadi-Rad (1995)
Bank of Baroda v Shah (1988)
Bank of Credit and Commerce International SA v Aboody (1990)
Bank of New South Wales Ltd v Rogers (1941)
Barclays Bank plc v O’Brien (1994)
2.43, 2.44, 2.47, 2.50, 2.51, 3.6
Barclays Bank plc v Thomson (1997)
Begbie v State Bank of New South Wales Ltd (1994)
Beneficial Finance Corporation Ltd v Comer (1991)
Blomley v Ryan (1956)
Campbell v Metway Leasing Ltd (1998)
Chan v Cresdon Pty Ltd (1989)
Citicorp Australia Ltd v Hendry (1984)
Clark Boyce v Mouat (1994)
Commercial Bank of Australia Ltd v Amadio (1983)
1.3, 1.5, 1.8, 2.11-2.13, 2.16, 2.17
Commonwealth Bank of Australia v Gough (1993)
Corumo Holdings Pty Ltd v C Itoh Ltd (1991)
Crescendo Management Pty Ltd v Westpac Banking Corporation (1988)
Demagogue Pty Ltd v Ramensky (1992)
Esanda Finance Corporation Ltd v Tong (1997)
1.3, 2.56, 3.50
European Asian of Australia Limited v Kurland (1985)
Familiar Pty Ltd v Samarkos (1994)
Farmers’ Co-operative Executors & Trustees Ltd v Perks (1989)
Fraser v NRMA Holdings Ltd (1995)
Garcia v National Australia Bank Ltd (1993)
Garcia v National Australia Bank Ltd (1998)
1.4, 1.8, 2.13, 2.26, 2.28, 2.31, 2.39, 2.41-2.43, 2.45, 2.46, 2.50, 3.6, 3.7, 3.15, 3.42,
George v Paul George Pty Ltd (1996)
Gough v Commonwealth Bank of Australia (1994)
Gregg v Tasmanian Trustees Ltd (1997)
Halifax Mortgage Services Ltd v Stepsky (1997)
Hawker Pacific Pty Ltd v Helicopter Charter Pty Ltd (1991)
Jenkins v National Australia Bank Ltd (1999)
Jenyns v Public Curator (1953)
Johnson v Buttress (1936)
Jowitt v Callaghan (1938)
Massey v Midland Bank plc (1995)
Micarone v Perpetual Trustees (1997)
Midland Bank plc v Serter (1995)
Minister for Consumer Affairs v W W Vallack Real Estate Pty Ltd (1986)
Muggleton v Tong (1999)
National Australia Bank Ltd v Garcia (1996)
National Australia Bank v Nobile (1988)
National Westminster Bank plc v Beaton (1997)
Permanent Trustee Co of NSW Ltd v Hinks (1934)
Petelin v Cullen (1975)
Ring Tread Systems Australasia Pty Ltd v Tubb (1998)
Royal Bank of Canada v Oram (1978)
Royal Bank of Scotland plc v Etridge (No 2) (1998)
State Bank of New South Wales Ltd v Sullivan (1999)
Taylor v Johnson (1983)
Teachers Health Investments Pty Ltd v Wynne (1994)
Teachers Health Investments Pty Ltd v Wynne (1996)
Vadasz v Pioneer Concrete (SA) Pty Ltd (1995)
Warburton v Whiteley (1989)
West v AGC (Advances) Ltd (1986)
Westpac v Robinson (1993)
Yerkey v Jones (1939)
1.4, 2.28, 2.31, 2.39, 2.40, 2.44-2.46,
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
Issues Paper 17 (2000) - Guaranteeing Someone Else's Debts
Bibliography
History of this Reference (Digest)
Link to Summary
Bibliography
AUSTRALIA, Expert Group on Family Financial Vulnerability
, Good Relations, High Risks: Financial Transactions Within Families and Between Friends
(Report, 1996)
AUSTRALIA, House of Representatives Standing Committee on Finance and Public Administration,
A Pocket Full of Change: Banking and Deregulation
(AGPS, Canberra, 1991)
AUSTRALIA, Trade Practices Commission,
Guarantors: Problems and Perspectives
(Discussion Paper, 1992)
AUSTRALIAN BANKING INDUSTRY OMBUDSMAN LTD,
Report on Relationship Debt
(Bulletin No 22, 1999)
AUSTRALIAN BUREAU OF STATISTICS,
How Australians Use Their Time 1997
(ABS Cat No 4153.0, 1998)
AUSTRALIAN LAW REFORM COMMISSION,
Compliance with the
Trade Practices Act 1974
(Report 68, 1994)
AUSTRALIAN LAW REFORM COMMISSION,
Equality Before the Law: Justice for Women
(Report 69,
AUSTRALIAN LAW REFORM COMMISSION,
Equality Before the Law: Women’s Equality
(Report 69,
AUSTRALIAN LAW REFORM COMMISSION,
Multiculturalism and the Law
(Report 57, 1992)
BARON, P, “The Free Exercise of Her Will: Women and Emotionally Transmitted Debt” (1995) 13
Law in Context
CARTER, J W and HARLAND, D J,
Contract Law in Australia
(3rd edition, Butterworths, Sydney, 1996)
DODDS STREETON, J, “Feminist Perspectives on the Law of Insolvency” in J Dodds Streeton and R Langford,
Aspects of Real Property and Insolvency Law
(Adelaide Law Review Research Paper No 6, 1994)
DUGGAN, A J and LANYON, E V,
Consumer Credit Law
(Butterworths, Sydney, 1999)
DUGGAN, A J,
A Financier’s Guide to the Law of Guarantee in Australia
(4th edition, Australian Finance Conference and Australian Equipment Lessors Association, 1998)
EDWARDS, M,
Financial Arrangements Within Families
(National Women’s Advisory Council, Canberra, 1981)
FEHLBERG, B,
Sexually Transmitted Debt: Surety Experience and English Law
(Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1997)
FUNDER, K, HARRISON, M and WESTON, R,
Settling Down: Pathways of Parents after Divorce
(AIFS, 1993)
FUNSTON, M, “Wanted: A Code We Can Bank On” (1999) 4(1)
Consumer Rights Journal
GOLDRING, J, PRATT, J L and RYAN, D E J, “The Contracts Review Act (NSW)” (1981) 4(2)
University of New South Wales Law Journal
HASSON, R, “Darkness at Noon: A Comment on the Consumer Guarantee Law in Ontario” (1995) 11
Banking and Finance Law Review
HOWELL, N, “Sexually Transmitted Debt: A Feminist Analysis of Laws Regulating Guarantors and Co-Borrowers”
Australian Feminist Law Journal
‘Till Debt us do Part
(Consumer Credit Legal Service, Melbourne, 1994)
KAYE, M, “Equity’s Treatment of Sexually Transmitted Debt”
Feminist Legal Studies
LINDGREN, K E, “The Fair Trading and Consumer Protection Provisions”
Trade Practices Act
– Its Impact in the First 25 Years
(University of Sydney, Faculty of Law, Continuing Legal Education, 1999)
McDONALD, G, “Women and credit in the Australian banking industry” paper presented at the Women and Credit Conference
(Melbourne, 6 March 1991)
McDONALD, P (ed),
Settling Up: Property and Income Distribution on Divorce in Australia
(Prentice Hall/AIFS, 1986)
McGILL, D and WILLMOT, L,
Annotated Consumer Credit Code
(LBC Information Services, Sydney, 1999)
MEAGHER, R P, GUMMOW, W M C and LEHANE, J R F,
Equity: Doctrines and Remedies
(3rd edition, Butterworths, Sydney, 1992)
NEW SOUTH WALES, Department for Women and Department of Fair Trading,
Separating Joint Finances: An Opportunity for Reform
(Background Paper, 1999)
O’DONOVAN, J and PHILLIPS, J,
The Modern Contract of Guarantee
(3rd edition, LBC Information Services, Sydney, 1996)
Invisible Money: Family Finances in the Electronic Economy
(The Policy Press, Bristol, 1999)
Money and Marriage
(St Martin’s Press, New York, 1989)
PARKINSON, P (ed),
The Principles of Equity
(LBC Information Services, Sydney, 1996)
PASCOE, J, “The Effect of the Federal Government’s Small Business Package on Guarantees of Business Debts”
(1998) 12(3)
Commercial Law Quarterly
PEDEN, J R,
Unconscionable
(Report to the Minister for Consumer Affairs and Co-operative Societies and the Attorney General for New South Wales, 1976)
PENGILLEY, W “Unconscionability: Are the Litigation Floodgates Opening in Relation to Commercial Transactions?” (1997)
Australia and New Zealand Trade Practices Law Bulletin
PHILLIPS, J, HORRIGAN, B and COLLIER, B,
Guarantees and Solicitors’ Certificates: Guidelines for Lawyers, Financiers and Guarantors
(Queensland University of Technology, Centre for Commercial and Property Law, 1999)
SEDDON, N C and ELLINGHAUS, M P,
Cheshire and Fifoot’s Law of Contract
(7th Australian edition, Butterworths, Sydney, 1997)
For Love Not Money: The Stories of Women in Family Business
, (Consumer Advocacy and Financial Counselling Association of Victoria Inc, Melbourne, 1995)
For Love Not Money: Women, Information and the Family Business
(Consumer Advocacy and Financial Counselling Association of Victoria Inc, Melbourne, 1995)
Marriage Money: The Social Shaping of Money and Marriage in Banking
(Allen & Unwin, Sydney, 1997)
SNEDDON, M, “Banking and Finance: Guarantees and the
Trade Practices Act
Section 51AB
Australian Business Law Review
SNEDDON, M, “Unfair Conduct in Taking Guarantees and the Role of Independent Advice” (1990) 13
University of New South Wales Law Journal
STANILAND, R, “Explanation of Loan Documents” (letter to the editor)
(1998) 36(2)
Law Society Journal
TERRY, A L, “Unconscionable Contracts in New South Wales: The
Contracts Review Act 1980
Australian Business Law Review
TREBILCOCK, M and ELLIOTT, S, “The Scope and Limits of Legal Paternalism: Altruism and Coercion in Family Financial Arrangements”
(Unpublished paper, revised 23 February 1999)
UNITED KINGDOM, Office of Fair Trading,
Non-Status Lending: Guidelines for Lenders and Brokers
(OFT 192, revised November 1997)
YANN CAMPBELL HOARE WHEELER,
Women’s Economic Status: “Equal Worth” – Final Report: output 4
(Job No 32056, for the Australian Commonwealth/State and New Zealand Standing Committee of Advisers for the Status of Women, 1999)
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter