URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/lawreform/ALRCIP/2011/39.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:33:25
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Family Violence and Commonwealth Laws - Social Security Law [2011] ALRCIP 39
PDF version
is also available for viewing and download.
Family Violence and Commonwealth Laws-Social Security Law (IP 39)
The Inquiry
Outline of Issues Paper
Definition of family violence
Identifying, informing and collecting information about family violence
Relationships and social security law
Eligibility requirements
Payments and payment arrangements
Income management
Other issues
Family Violence and Commonwealth Laws-Social Security Law (IP 39)
This is the final of four Issues Papers released for the Family Violence and Commonwealth Laws Inquiry.
Submissions closed on 27 April.
Please contact
Virginia Marshall
if you wish to make a late submission.
The Issues Paper deals with the treatment of family violence in Commonwealth social security law, which includes income management.
The Issues Paper further considers a number of issues in relation to social security law, including
The collection and process of information;
The definition of relationships where family violence exists;
Access and compliance with administrative requirements; and
Payment arrangements.
With respect to income management, the following issues, among others, are addressed:
The indicators of vulnerability under the legislation;
Exemptions from income management in cases of family violence;
Payment arrangements and account access; and
Comparatives between compulsory and voluntary income management.
The Inquiry
1. On 9 July 2010, the Attorney-General of Australia, the Hon Robert McClelland MP, asked the Australian Law Reform Commission (ALRC)
to inquire and report on the treatment of family violence in Commonwealth laws, including child support and family assistance
law, immigration law, employment law, social security law and superannuation law and privacy provisions in relation to those experiencing
family violence.
2. The ALRC was requested to consider what, if any, improvements could be made to relevant legal frameworks to protect the safety
of those experiencing family violence.
3. In undertaking the Inquiry, the ALRC was asked to consider legislative arrangements across the Commonwealth that impact on those
experiencing family violence and whether those arrangements impose barriers to supporting effectively those adversely affected
by this type of violence. The ALRC was also asked to consider whether the extent of sharing of information across the Commonwealth
and with state and territory agencies is appropriate to protect the safety of those experiencing family violence.
Issues Papers
4. To form one basis for consultation the ALRC is releasing a series of four Issues Papers covering the treatment of family violence
child support and family assistance law;
immigration law;
employment and superannuation law; and
social security law.
5. These Issues Papers are intended to encourage informed community participation in the Inquiry by providing some background information
and highlighting the issues so far identified by the ALRC as relevant to the Inquiry. The Issues Papers may be downloaded free
of charge from the ALRC's website,
www.alrc.gov.au
6. The Issues Papers will be followed by the publication of a Discussion Paper in mid-2011. The Discussion Paper will contain a more
detailed treatment of the issues, and will indicate the ALRC's current thinking in the form of specific proposals for reform. The
ALRC will then seek further submissions and will undertake a further round of national consultations in relation to these proposals.
Request for submissions
7. With the release of these Issues Papers, the ALRC invites individuals and organisations to make submissions in response to specific
questions, or to any of the background material and analysis provided.
8. There is no specified format for submissions and they may be marked confidential if preferred. The ALRC will accept anything from
handwritten notes to detailed commentary and scholarly analyses on relevant laws and practices. Although not essential, the Commissions
prefer electronic communications and submissions may be made simply by contributing comments online at the ALRC's website.
Submissions using the ALRC's online submission form can be made at:
http://www.alrc.gov.au/inquiries/family-violence-and-commonwealth-laws/r...
In order to inform the content of the Discussion Paper, submissions addressing the questions in this Issues Paper should reach the
ALRC by 27 April 2011.
The full Terms of Reference are available on the ALRC's website at www.alrc.gov.au.
Outline of Issues Paper
9. This Issues Paper,
Family Violence-Social Security Law
, deals with the treatment of family violence in Commonwealth social security law, including under the:
Social Security Act 1991
Social Security (Administration) Act 1999
Social Security (International Agreements) Act 1999
10. Social security law is administered by the Department of Human Services through Centrelink. The
Guide to Social Security Law
provides guidance to decision makers. It is updated monthly to reflect changes in government policy and legislative interpretation.
Although not binding in law, it is a relevant consideration for the decision maker and, as such, is considered in this Issues Paper.
11. Lack of independent financial resources for victims of family violence is a major cause of homelessness.
Access to independent financial resources, such as those provided under social security law, can provide economic security and independence
to facilitate the safety of those experiencing family violence-for example, by enabling victims of family violence to leave a violent
relationship, become financially independent or seek alternate accommodation.
12. Access to income support for victims of family violence is affected by eligibility criteria and by exemptions from participation,
activity or administrative requirements. Without exemptions, such requirements may be too onerous for a victim of family violence
and, as a result, they may have their income support cut off, possibly compromising their safety and ability to leave a violent situation.
13. On the other hand, in certain situations, social security payments may also facilitate economic abuse and duress by family members.
14. The ALRC has identified a number of issues relevant to the safety of victims of family violence in Commonwealth social security
law and practice. Family violence has the potential to affect eligibility for, and rates of payment of, a range of social security
benefits. In particular, family violence may have implications in relation to:
how relationships are defined-for example, whether a person is considered to be a member of a couple, or independent of family support;
compliance with various activity, participation and administrative requirements attached to certain social security payments;
how social security payments are administered; and
whether social security and income management measures can be improved to provide better protection of the interests of victims who
have left, or wish to leave, violent relationships.
15. The Terms of Reference provide a limited lens through which the ALRC can propose reforms-that is, to consider improvements to
Commonwealth laws to protect the safety of victims of family violence.
16. A matter of concern that is consistently raised, in terms of income support for victims of family violence, is the inadequacy
of social security payments. While the amounts received by victims of family violence may be relevant to protecting their safety,
this aspect of social security-and its budgetary and financial implications-is not a focus of this Inquiry. Reforms to address these
issues would be systemic, affecting calculations for different social security payments and, as a result, have an impact on a much
broader range of Centrelink customers than just victims of family violence.
Stevens and Secretary, Department of Family and Community Services
[2004] AATA 1137.
S Tually and others,
Women, Domestic and Family Violence and Homelessness: A Synthesis Report
Definition of family violence
Social Security Act
refers to domestic violence' or domestic or family violence' in a range of contexts. Neither the
Social Security Act
Social Security (Administration) Act
contains a definition of domestic or family violence. The
Guide to Social Security Law
refers to a definition that has now been repealed-s 60D(1) of the
Family Law Reform Act 1995
(Cth)-in stating that:
Domestic and family violence occurs when someone tries to control their partner or other family members in ways that intimidate or
oppress them. Controlling behaviours can include threats, humiliation (put downs'), emotional abuse, physical assault, sexual abuse,
financial exploitation and social isolations, such as not allowing contact with family or friends; AND/OR
Family violence means conduct, whether actual or threatened, by a person towards, or towards the property of, a member of the person's
family that causes that or any other member of the person's family to fear for, or to be apprehensive about, his or her personal
well being or safety.
Domestic violence can include violence to someone who is not a family member, for example co-tenants and people in shared housing
situations.
Guide to Social Security Law
provides further, in relation to Crisis Payment, that domestic and family violence' includes: child abuse; maltreatment; exploitation;
verbal abuse; partner abuse; elder abuse; neglect; sexual assault; emotional abuse; economic abuse; assault; financial coercion;
domestic violence; psychological abuse, or social abuse.
Family Violence-A National Legal Response
, Report 114 (2010) (ALRC Report 114), the ALRC and the NSW Law Reform Commission (NSWLRC) (the Commissions) recommended that state
and territory family violence and criminal legislation, and the
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth), should adopt the following consistent definition of family violence:
violent or threatening behaviour, or any other form of behaviour, that coerces or controls a family member or causes that family member
to be fearful. Such behaviour may include but is not limited to:
(a) physical violence;
(b) sexual assault and other sexually abusive behaviour;
(c) economic abuse:
(d) emotional or psychological abuse;
(e) stalking;
(f) kidnapping or deprivation of liberty;
(g) damage to property, irrespective of whether the victim owns the property;
(h) causing injury or death to an animal irrespective of whether the victims owns the animal; and
(i) behaviour by the person using the violence that causes a child to be exposed to the effects of behaviour referred to in
(a)-(h) above.
20. While the current definition contained in the
Guide to Social Security Law
is already broad, it may be beneficial to have a definition that is consistent with the definition of family violence in other Commonwealth
laws. This would ensure that victims of family violence have some degree of clarity and certainty that the violence that they are
experiencing will be recognised and treated similarly across all Commonwealth laws-a common interpretive framework as suggested by
ALRC Report 114.
21. The Commissions also noted that provisions which affect the lives and safety of particularly vulnerable groups in society may
be more appropriately placed in primary legislation.
Placing the definition of family violence in the
Social Security Act
may afford a measure of stability and visibility to the definition.
Social Security Act 1991
(Cth) and/or the
Social Security (Administration) Act 1999
(Cth) be amended to insert a definition of family violence' consistent with that recommended by the ALRC/NSWLRC in
Family Violence-A National Legal Response
(ALRC Report 114)?
Department of Families, Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs,
Guide to Social Security Law
http://www.fahcsia.gov.au/guides_acts/
at 4 February 2011, [1.1.D.235] (Domestic and/or Family Violence (CrP)).
Ibid, [3.7.4.20] (Qualification for CrP-Extreme Circumstances (Domestic & Family Violence)); [3.7.4.25] (Qualification
for CrP-Remaining in the Home After Removal of Family Member Due to Domestic or Family Violence).
Australian Law Reform Commission and New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Family Violence-A National Legal Response
, ALRC Report 114; NSWLRC Report 128 (2010), Recs 5-1, 6-1, 6-4.
Ibid, Ch 6.
Identifying, informing and collecting information about family violence
22. Family violence may be directly or indirectly relevant to the administration of social security in a number of ways-in particular,
in relation to:
determining whether a person is independent' or a member of a couple';
eligibility for exemptions from activity, participation, residence and administrative requirements;
eligibility for weekly payments;
eligibility for certain social security payments; and
waiver of debt.
23. These matters are considered separately below. Relevant to all, however, is the need for Centrelink staff to:
be able to identify a customer who is experiencing family violence;
inform Centrelink customers about eligibility or exemptions available in circumstances of family violence; and
collect information about family violence where it is claimed by a victim of family violence.
24. Neither the
Guide to Social Security Law
nor the legislation provides much guidance to Centrelink staff on these matters.
Seeking information about family violence
25. Victims of family violence may not be aware of the eligibility criteria for certain social security payments and exemptions. This
makes it important that Centrelink staff be able to identify people who are experiencing family violence so that they can inform
them about such eligibility or related exemptions available to them.
26. Centrelink relies on self-disclosure of family violence. Centrelink staff undertake training to assist them to identify whether
a person is experiencing family violence.
27. Victims of family violence may be reluctant to identify themselves as such for a number of reasons or may not consider themselves
to be a victim due to, for example, traditional notions of domestic violence'.
Further, victims may fail to disclose family violence as they may not be aware that such information is relevant to eligibility criteria
or to exemptions. Other barriers to disclosure may include structural barriers, such as a lack of privacy at Centrelink offices.
It may, therefore, be desirable to inform all Centrelink customers about eligibility criteria and exemptions relevant to people experiencing
family violence.
28. Centrelink does not appear to screen routinely for family violence. Claims for social security payments must generally be made
in writing by completing the relevant Centrelink form either online or in hardcopy.
In some circumstances, claims may be made by telephone or in person.
Application and information forms for various social security payments do not appear to include specific information about family
violence, such as how family violence may form the basis for an exemption from participation, activity or Employment Pathway Plan
requirements, or from providing original proof of identity or tax file numbers.
29. The ALRC is interested in whether Centrelink should screen for family violence, when processing applications or at other stages
of the administration of social security payments. For example, it may be desirable to include certain questions about family violence
in Centrelink forms (including electronic forms) or for Centrelink staff to ask all Centrelink customers questions about family violence
rather than relying on self-disclosure.
Information sharing
30. Centrelink may be the first point of contact a person has with the social welfare system. A person eligible for child support,
for example, may contact Centrelink before being referred to the Child Support Agency. People may not differentiate between various
government agencies and assume that once they have informed one agency about family violence-such as Centrelink-there is no need
to inform another. This confusion may increase in the future due to the federal government's initiative to house offices of Centrelink,
Medicare and the Child Support Agency under one roof.
31. Requiring victims of family violence to repeat their story may have a traumatising effect in re-living' the experience of family
32. Victims of family violence may be referred to another government agency-such as the Child Support Agency-but assume that they
do not need to raise family violence again. As a result, victims of family violence may not be informed about exemptions that may
apply for child support purposes.
33. It may be desirable for Centrelink to share the fact that the customer has reported experiencing family violence with certain
other government agencies. Alternatively, it may be more appropriate for Centrelink and the Child Support Agency to inform all customers
34. ALRC Report 114 recommended the establishment of a national register which should include certain information about protection
orders, family law orders and
Family Law Act
injunctions.
The Commissions recommended that the national register:
be available to federal, state and territory police, federal family courts, state and territory courts that hear matters related to
family violence and child protection, and child protection agencies.
35. It may be desirable to extend access to this register to Centrelink social workers. On the other hand, this may be too far-reaching
and may raise concerns about the protection of privacy.
36. The ALRC is interested in comment about the barriers faced by victims of family violence in disclosing family violence to Centrelink;
whether family violence is appropriately identified by Centrelink and whether victims of family violence are notified about eligibility
criteria and exemptions by Centrelink staff. The ALRC is also interested in comment on information sharing between Centrelink and
the Child Support Agency and/or other agencies such as Job Services Australia.
In what circumstances should Centrelink staff be required to inquire about the existence of family violence when dealing with Centrelink
Should Centrelink application forms (including electronic forms), correspondence and telephone prompts directly seek information about
family violence? For example, should a question about family violence be included on all forms?
Where family violence is disclosed or identified, do Centrelink staff notify victims effectively about eligibility criteria for payments
and exemptions, including any corresponding exemptions and requirements for child support?
In what circumstances, if any, should information about family violence be shared between Centrelink and other government agencies,
such as the Child Support Agency?
Collecting information about family violence
37. In order to verify claims about family violence, it is necessary for Centrelink to collect information about family violence when
it has been identified.
38. Neither the
Guide to Social Security Law
nor legislation provides much guidance to Centrelink staff on these matters. Some guidance is provided in relation to collecting
information about family violence in certain contexts, such as determining whether to contact a partner or a parent, the use of documentary
evidence or independent and third party referees.
39. It is also important that Centrelink customers are aware of how Centrelink collects information about family violence. For example,
there may be concerns that victims of family violence may remain members of a couple because they fear that to claim otherwise may
lead to retaliation from the person using family violence-especially if they assume that their partner' will be contacted.
How does Centrelink collect information about family violence when it is identified?
Are Centrelink staff and social workers able to access information about persons who have identified themselves as a victim of family
violence as to whether they have obtained a protection order or similar? Should Centrelink staff and social workers be able to access
the national register recommended in
Family Violence-A National Legal Response
Report 114 (2010)?
In practice, is the possibility of family violence considered by Centrelink staff before deciding to interview a partner or a parent?
When contact with a partner or a parent is not appropriate due to the possibility of family violence, on what information should family
violence be assessed?
Question 10
Are Centrelink customers aware that Centrelink may decide not to contact partners or parents if the customer is a victim of family
Administration of social security law and family violence
40. There may be concerns about the way in which family violence is taken into consideration by a decision maker. Pre-existing assumptions
of different decision makers may lead to different results. For example, the weight placed on the existence of family violence in
determining whether people are members of a couple can vary and may lead to different determinations.
Question 11
In practice, do decision makers adequately consider the existence of family violence when making determinations about eligibility
criteria or exemptions for certain social security payments?
Ibid, Ch 18.
Social Security (Administration) Act 1999
Department of Families, Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs,
Guide to Social Security Law
http://www.fahcsia.gov.au/guides_acts/
at 4 February 2011, [8.1.1.10] (General Claim Requirements).
Department of Human Services,
More Portfolio Services in One Place,
http://www.dhs.gov.au/
at 7 February 2011.
Australian Law Reform Commission and New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Family Violence-A National Legal Response
, ALRC Report 114; NSWLRC Report 128 (2010), Rec 30-18.
See, eg, Department of Families, Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs,
Guide to Social Security Law
http://www.fahcsia.gov.au/guides_acts/
at 4 February 2011, [2.2.5.10] (Determining a De Facto Relationship); [2.2.5.30] (Determining Separation Under One Roof).
Relationships and social security law
41. Eligibility for social security payments may depend on a person's personal and financial relationships with others. Family violence
may have implications for the way in which these relationships are defined.
Member of a couple'
42. The eligibility for, and rates of, many social security payments differ depending on whether the recipient is a member of a couple'.
For example:
some social security payments may be reduced if a person is a member of a couple;
asset tests often pool the assets of people who are members of a couple. People who claim a social security payment and who are a
member of a couple have their entitlements assessed against their partner's income; and
waiting periods can be affected if a person is deemed to be a member of a couple.
43. This rule is based on the premise that couples can live more cheaply than singles because they share expenses and produce economies
44. A decision that a person is a member of a couple may result in the refusal, cancellation or reduction in social security payments.
It may also lead to a debt being raised against a person and may be pursued through court proceedings.
Social Security Act
provides that in deciding whether a person is a member of couple-that is, in a de facto relationship-the decision maker is to have
regard to all the relevant circumstances of the relationship'. In particular, regard must be had to a detailed range of criteria
which are similar to the criteria contained in
Family Law Act
and s 22C of the
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
(Cth) for defining a de facto relationship'.
These include:
financial aspects of the relationship;
the nature of the household;
social aspects of the relationship (including whether the persons hold themselves out as married to each other);
any sexual relationship between the persons; and
the nature of the commitment to each other.
Guide to Social Security Law
states that important indicators to consider in relation to the nature of the commitment to each other include evidence of domestic
violence, such as court documentation, which may indicate the absence of commitment and/or emotional support'.
Despite this, it is reportedly not unusual for the decision maker's own experiences and values to weigh into the decision-making
47. Concerns have been expressed that underlying assumptions in the de facto relationship' test may disregard family violence and
its potential impact on a victim's decision. There are also concerns that insufficient weight may be placed on the nature of people's
commitment to each other, when this-in the view of some-is considered to be the essence' of a relationship.
48. Reform may be needed to ensure that the effects of family violence can disqualify a person being considered to be a member of
a couple, for example:
economic abuse may obviate consent to the significant pooling of financial resources';
patterns of violence and lack of alternative accommodation may mean that a person has no choice but to remain in the same house;
secrecy associated with family violence may mean that a person continues to hold themselves out as a member of a couple;
violence in a relationship may negate consent for any sexual relationship between the people'; and
there may be a correlation between the length of the relationship and the degree of violence.
Question 12
Should the criteria in
Social Security Act 1991
(Cth) for determining whether a person is a member of a couple' be amended clearly to take into account the existence and effect
of family violence?
Question 13
Should further guidance be provided in the
Guide to Social Security
Social Security Act 1991
Determining separation under one roof
49. A person is considered not to be a member of a couple where he or she is living separately and apart from the other person on
a permanent or indefinite basis.
50. Neither the
Social Security Act
Guide to Social Security Law
provides family violence as an example of where people may be living separately and apart under one roof. Hence, decision makers are
not prompted to consider family violence when making a determination about separation under one roof.
51. There may be situations where victims of family violence have no choice but to remain under the same roof as a person using family
violence. For example, in Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities there are often cultural, kinship and social reasons
to remain under the same roof' but a person may not consider himself or herself to be a member of a couple. In addition, a lack of
transitory and crisis accommodation may mean that a victim of family violence has no choice but to remain under the same roof as
the person using family violence.
Guide to Social Security Law
provides that where a claim is made on the basis of living separately and apart yet remaining under the one roof, an assessment must
be made by Centrelink. This involves receiving evidence from both parties.
Guide to Social Security Law
states that when deciding to interview a partner for additional information, discretion must be exercised to ensure that contact is
appropriate. It provides domestic violence' as an example of where it is not appropriate to interview a partner at all.
54. Independent referees may also be called upon to verify the basis of the claim. The
Guide to Social Security Law
provides that in circumstances where an independent referee is unable to verify a situation, a departmental social worker's report
may be required to assist the decision maker-such as in a situation of domestic violence' where the separation is not public knowledge.
Question 14
In practice, is family violence adequately considered in determining separation under one roof? If not, how should family violence
be taken into consideration?
Question 15
When contact with a partner is not appropriate due to family violence, how should family violence be assessed?
Special reason'
55. The Secretary of the Department of Families, Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs (the Secretary) has a discretion,
Social Security Act
, to rule that, for a special reason' in the particular case, a person should, not be treated as a member of a couple. This discretion
may be-and in at least one case has been-exercised to determine that an abusive relationship was not marriage-like (now de facto').
However, in other cases, a person has been held to be a member of a couple despite being in an abusive relationship.
Guide to Social Security Law
states that the special reason' must be unusual, uncommon or exceptional and that the discretionary power must be exercised for the
purpose for which it was conferred-that is, to make provision for those who are in genuine need.
However, the
Guide to Social Security Law
does not provide family violence as an example of where a person might be considered not to be a member of a couple.
57. Hence the evaluation of whether there is a special reason' that a person should not be treated as a member of a couple may overlook
family violence and its potential impact on the victim's decisions. For example, decision makers may not consider that people may
hold themselves out to be a member of a couple despite violence due to shame or secrecy.
58. There may be arguments that
Social Security Act
should be amended to refer expressly to family violence as a consideration in determining whether to exercise the discretion-especially
Social Security Act
is not amended.
Question 16
In practice, is family violence adequately taken into consideration in the exercise of the discretion under
Social Security Act
not to treat a person as a member of a couple?
Question 17
Should the special reason' discretion in
Social Security Act
be amended expressly to require the existence and effects of family violence to be taken into account? Would this amendment be required
is amended in this way?
Question 18
What, if any, further guidance should be provided in the
Guide to Social Security Law
in relation to exercising the discretion under
to take into account the existence and effect of family violence?
When a person is regarded as independent'
59. Whether a person is independent' can affect his or her eligibility for, or rates of payment of, Youth Allowance, Disability Support
Pension and Pensioner Education Supplement and whether the person is paid the social security payment directly rather than its being
paid to a parent.
Unreasonable to live at home
60. One determinant of independence is when it is unreasonable for the person to live at home. The
Social Security Act
provides that a person is regarded as independent if he or she:
(a) cannot live at the home of either or both of his or her parents:
(i) because of extreme family breakdown or other similar exceptional circumstances; or
(ii) because it would be unreasonable to expect the person to do so as there would be a serious risk to his or
her physical or mental well-being due to violence, sexual abuse or other similar [exceptional or unreasonable] circumstances.
61. In addition, for Youth Allowance and Disability Support Pension, a person is also considered independent if the person cannot
live at home of their parents:
(iii) because the parent or parents are unable to provide the person with a suitable home owing to a lack of stable
accommodation.
Guide to Social Security Law
states that family breakdown must be extreme. The existence of ongoing conflict alone is insufficient grounds to grant independence.
Factors that may indicate extreme family breakdown are said to include evidence that the emotional or physical well-being of the
person or another family member would be jeopardised if the person were to live at home.
63. Examples of other similar exceptional circumstances' are stated to include severe neglect', or where extreme and abnormal demands
are placed on the young person.
64. The assessment of whether a person is independent on this ground is generally conducted by a Centrelink social worker.
Guide to Social Security Law
provides that, in assessing extreme family breakdown and other similar exceptional circumstances, assessment must include personal
child protection agencies.
65. For Youth Allowance and Disability Support Pension, the
Guide to Social Security Law
provides that it is mandatory to contact the parents of a young person, unless the young person refuses permission or if contact with
the parent presents a severe risk to the young person or others, or if there has been no parental concern for at least the past two
Continuous support
66. To be considered independent', the person must not be in receipt of continuous support' from a parent, guardian or income support
(other than a social security benefit) from the Commonwealth or a state or territory.
67. In one case reviewed by the Commonwealth Ombudsman, a young person who had left her home due to family violence was not found
to be independent, because she was receiving continuous support from her father, who resided interstate.
Her Youth Allowance payment was later cancelled because she was unable to provide detail of her father's income or assets. Consequently,
she was left without income support for over two months.
68. The Ombudsman found it unreasonable for Centrelink to put the onus solely on a young person to obtain income and asset details
from a parent the young person is not residing with, or with whom the young person might have had minimal contact. There may be concerns
in other situations of family violence where a person is unable, or it is unsafe for a person, to obtain income and asset details
from a parent.
69. Payment of Youth Allowance is made to the person unless under 18 years of age and not independent, in which case, the payment
is paid to a parent of the young person. The
Guide to Social Security Law
provides that payment may be made to the dependent Youth Allowance customer if authorised by the parent.
The Secretary also has a discretion to direct that payment be made to the young person.
70. In the case considered by the Commonwealth Ombudsman noted above, the Ombudsman considered it unreasonable to expect a young person
who had been forced to leave home, because of violence or untenable living arrangements, to be able to obtain parental agreement
to get paid directly.
This may raise concerns of the safety of a young person who, in a situation of family violence, attempts to obtain parental agreement
to be paid directly.
Question 19
In what ways might access to Youth Allowance, Disability Support Pension and Pensioner Education Supplement be improved for victims
who have left their home because of family violence? For example, does the criterion for a person to be considered independent' adequately
take into account the existence of family violence? Should family violence be expressly referred to in this context?
Question 20
In practice, is the possibility of family violence considered by Centrelink staff before deciding to contact a parent?
Question 21
When contact with a young person's parent is not appropriate, due to the possibility of family violence, how should claims about family
violence be assessed?
Question 22
In what ways, if any, should the
Guide to Social Security Law
be amended in relation to the continuous support' criteria to improve the safety of victims of family violence? For example, should
specific provisions be made for victims of family violence who need to supply asset and income details from a parent?
Question 23
Should the requirement of parental consent for a person under 18 years of age to be paid directly be waived for victims who have left
The reference to de facto relationship' replaced a marriage-like relationship' in November 2008. The test under
remained the same. See
Same-Sex Relationships (Equal Treatment in Commonwealth Laws-General Law Reform Act) 2008
Department of Families, Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs,
Guide to Social Security Law
http://www.fahcsia.gov.au/guides_acts/
at 4 February 2011, [2.2.5.10] (Determining A De Facto Relationship).
Commonwealth Ombudsman,
Marriage-Like Relationships: Policy Guidelines for Assessment Under Social Security Law
Re Pelka and Secretary, Department of Family and Community Services
[2006] FCA 735.
A Dickey, Two Problems Concerning De Facto Relationship Proceedings'
Australian Law Journal
P Easteal and D Emerson-Elliot, Domestic Violence and Marriage-Like Relationships'
[2009] AltLawJl 51
(2009) 34 (3)
Alternative Law Journal
; T Carney, Women and Social Security/Transfer Payments Law' in P Easteal (ed),
Women and the Law in Australia
(2010) 424, 435.
Social Security Act 1991
Department of Families, Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs,
Guide to Social Security Law
http://www.fahcsia.gov.au/guides_acts/
at 4 February 2011, [2.2.5.30] (Determining Separation Under One Roof).
Ibid, [2.2.5.30] (Determining Separation Under One Roof).
Ibid, [2.2.5.30] (Determining Separation Under One Roof).
Patterson and Department of Families, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs
(2006) AATA 689.
Re Watson and Secretary, Department of Family and Community Services
[2002] AATA 311
Re Secretary, Department of Family and Community Services and Perry
[2001] AATA 282.
Re Secretary, Department of Social Security and Porter
(1997) 48 ALD 343.
Social Security Act 1991
ss 1067A(9)
s 1067A(9).
Department of Families, Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs,
Guide to Social Security Law
http://www.fahcsia.gov.au/guides_acts/
at 4 February 2011, [3.2.5.40] (Assessment of Extreme Family Breakdown & Other Similar Exceptional Circumstances).
Ibid, [3.2.5.40] (Assessment of Extreme Family Breakdown & Other Similar Exceptional Circumstances).
Ibid, [3.2.5.70] (Assessment & Mandatory Procedures for YA and DSP-Unreasonable to Live At Home).
Ibid, [3.2.5.40] (Assessment of Extreme Family Breakdown & Other Similar Exceptional Circumstances); [3.2.5.70] (Assessment
& Mandatory Procedures for YA and DSP-Unreasonable to Live At Home).
Ibid, [3.2.5.70] (Assessment and Mandatory Procedures for YA and DSP-Unreasonable to Live At Home).
Social Security Act 1991
ss 1067A(9)
Commonwealth Ombudsman,
Centrelink: Payment of Independent Rate of Youth Allowance to a Young Person
Department of Families, Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs,
Guide to Social Security Law
http://www.fahcsia.gov.au/guides_acts/
at 4 February 2011, [8.4.1.30] (Payments to a Third Party).
Social Security (Administration) Act 1999
Commonwealth Ombudsman,
Centrelink: Payment of Independent Rate of Youth Allowance to a Young Person
Eligibility requirements
71. To receive a social security payment, a low income health care card, or a Commonwealth senior's health card, a person must provide
original proof of identity documents, which are considered by Centrelink sufficient to establish identity. In addition, a person
must provide the full name, date of birth, tax file number and income and asset details of any non-claimant partner.
72. Victims of family violence are not automatically exempt from providing original proof of identity. The
Guide to Social Security Law
states that all efforts must be made to obtain satisfactory proof of identity and that the onus for establishing proof of identity
is on the person.
Guide to Social Security Law
also provides, however, that a departmental form-Questions for Persons with Insufficient Proof of Identity'-can be used if a person
is unable to provide sufficient evidence as to identity. Such persons are listed as including persons experiencing domestic violence'.
However, continuing efforts must still be made to obtain original proof of identity documents.
73. Tax file numbers may be requested from a person who resides in Australia and who makes a claim for, or receives, a social security
payment. A tax file number may also be requested from the person's partner, if a member of a couple.
A person cannot be compelled to provide a tax file number, but the person's social security payment may cease to be payable if not
74. A person may be granted a tax file number exemption-including an indefinite exemption-in relation to providing a tax file number
from their partner, where the person can demonstrate risk of violence to himself, herself, their children or dependants, or where
other concerns for the health and safety of the person, their children or dependants exist.
75. This exemption does not cover cases where there is merely a refusal on the part of the partner to provide the information and
there are no violence or health concerns, or if a person is claiming or receiving payments in his or her own right.
76. Victims of family violence may not be aware of the alternative departmental form for providing proof of identity or of the exemption
from providing a partner's tax file number in situations of family violence. This may jeopardise their safety by requiring them to
attempt to obtain original proof of identity or a tax file number from an abusive family member or to return to a place they have
previously fled due to family violence.
Question 24
Do the provisions regarding the requirement for original proof of identity documents and tax file numbers create barriers for victims
of family violence? Should further measures be put in place to ensure that victims of family violence who have had to leave their
Residence requirements
77. The general principle is that, to qualify for social security payments, a person must be an Australian resident. For this purpose,
Social Security Act
defines Australian resident'
and waiting periods, which are considered necessary to preserve scarce social security resources for those settled' within the Australian
78. In addition to the legislative requirement to be an Australian resident at the time of making a claim, some social security payments-generally,
the pension' type payments that are intended as long-term support-require that a person has been an Australian resident for a certain
period of time. This is called a qualifying residence requirement' for example as follows:
Age Pension (10 years);
Disability Support Pension (10 years);
Widow Allowance (two years); and
Parenting Payment (two years).
79. Some payments-generally, the allowance' type payments which are intended as shorter-term income support-do not have prior residence
requirements, but have a newly arrived resident's waiting period'. A newly arrived resident's waiting period applies to persons who
have not been Australian residents but have resided in Australia for a period of, or periods totalling, 104 weeks. Social security
payments under the newly arrived resident's waiting period include:
Carer Payment;
Youth Allowance;
Austudy Payment;
Newstart Allowance;
Sickness Allowance;
Special Benefit;
Partner Allowance;
Mobility Allowance;
Pensioner Education Supplement;
Commonwealth Seniors Health Care Card; and
Health Care Card.
80. Exemptions from qualifying residence requirements and the newly arrived resident's waiting period may apply to refugees, specified
visa holders, or those claiming under an international social security agreement.
81. For persons who are experiencing hardship, but cannot get any other form of income support, the Special Benefit provides a social
security safety net. Although the Special Benefit has a newly arrived resident's waiting period, it does not apply if the person
has suffered a substantial change in circumstances beyond his or her control.
This includes, for sponsored migrants, where domestic violence' is used by a sponsor.
82. There is no waiting period for Crisis Payment. However, a person must be:
an Australian resident;
a protected special class visa holder; or
the holder of a specified subclass of visa that qualifies the person for Special Benefit.
83. There may be concerns that newly arrived residents who are experiencing family violence cannot access social security payments
due to either two or 10 year waiting periods and, therefore, may have to remain in an abusive relationship because unable to support
themselves financially.
Question 25
What reforms, if any, should be considered in relation to the qualifying residence periods or newly arrived residents' waiting period,
for victims of family violence? For example:
(a) is the 10 year waiting period for the Age Pension and the Disability Support Pension unreasonable or impractical for victims
of family violence; and
(b) should the
Social Security Act 1991
(Cth) be amended so that there is an exemption from waiting periods for newly arrived residents for victims of family violence?
Activity and participation tests
84. To access certain social security payments, activity tests, participation tests or Employment Pathway Plans may be required.
However, victims of family violence may find it difficult to meet these requirements-including various administrative requirements
discussed below-due to a partner's active interference or the impact of family violence on the victim, which may be overwhelming.
If a person fails to meet the activity test, participation test or Employment Pathway Plan, a failure' may apply and payments may
be stopped.
85. A victim of family violence may be relieved, from the relevant participation or activity test, or the requirement to enter into
an Employment Pathway Plan, or may have their Employment Pathway Plan suspended in three circumstances:
a person is a principal carer of one or more children and is subjected to domestic violence' in the 26 weeks prior to making the exemption
determination;
a person is a principal carer of one or more children and there are special circumstances' relating to the person's family that make
it appropriate to make the determination;
there are special circumstances' beyond the person's control and it would be unreasonable to expect compliance.
86. What amounts to special circumstances' is not defined in the
Social Security Act
Guide to Social Security Law
provides that special circumstances in relation to exemptions from activity and participation tests include when a person has been
subjected to domestic violence', and:
the domestic violence specifically affects capacity to both look for work and participation in training activities';
where it is unforeseen (or unavoidable) and causes major disruption and would be unreasonable to expect the person to comply with
the relevant activity or participation test.
87. The length of an exemption period ranges from two to 16 weeks, after which, in some circumstances, a person is required to reapply
for the exemption.
Whether an exemption should be made, and the length of any exemption, is assessed by a Centrelink social worker and any decision
is based on the social worker's report.
Administrative requirements
88. In addition to activity and participation tests, in some cases social security recipients must comply with various administrative
requirements. These may include:
providing certain information;
attending a particular place;
completing a questionnaire; or
undergoing a medical, psychiatric or psychological examination.
89. Failure to comply with such administrative requirements can lead to non-payment, unless the person can demonstrate a reasonable
excuse' for non-compliance. In addition, where a person fails to meet the activity test or the participation requirements and does
not have a reasonable excuse (or an exemption), this may constitute a failure' and a penalty may apply. Such penalties may apply
to Newstart Allowance, Youth Allowance, Parenting Payment, Austudy and Special Benefit.
Penalties range from a reduction in the person's payment to non-payment for eight weeks.
90. The term reasonable excuse' is not defined in the
Social Security Act
Guide to Social Security Law
provides that, in determining whether a person has a reasonable excuse, the decision maker must take into account whether the person
had access to safe, secure and adequate housing, or was using emergency accommodation or a refuge at the time of the failure and
the person was subjected to criminal violence (including domestic violence' and sexual assault). A person is taken not to have access
to safe, secure and adequate housing where such housing threatens or is likely to threaten the person's safety.
91. In addition to these administrative requirements, a 26 week exclusion from Newstart Allowance, Youth Allowance and Special Benefit
applies if a person receiving one of these payments moves to an area of lower employment prospects. An exemption from this exclusion
period applies where the reason for moving is due to an extreme circumstance such as domestic or family violence in the original
place of residence.
92. The penalties scheme for breach of activity, participation or administrative requirements may, however, work against some of the
most vulnerable-including victims of family violence. Decision makers and Centrelink customers may also lack sufficient awareness
of the exemptions available to victims of family violence. As a result, victims of family violence may have their social security
payments cut off if they are unable to meet requirements due to the impact of family violence on their day-to-day lives.
Question 26
What measures, if any, might be taken to address any difficulties faced by victims of family violence when they must comply with activity
and participation tests, Employment Pathway Plans and/or administrative requirements? For example, are the current exemption periods
reasonable for victims of family violence?
Question 27
In practice, are Centrelink customers aware of the exemptions-including reasonable excuse'-available in circumstances of family violence?
If so, are victims of family violence likely to use the exemptions?
Social Security (Administration) Act 1999
; Department of Families, Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs,
Guide to Social Security Law
http://www.fahcsia.gov.au/guides_acts/
at 4 February 2011, [2.2.1.10] (General Procedures for Verifying Identity); [8.1.3.20] (Providing TFN Information).
Department of Families, Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs,
Guide to Social Security Law
http://www.fahcsia.gov.au/guides_acts/
at 4 February 2011, [2.2.1.10] (General Procedures for Verifying Identity).
Ibid, [2.2.1.40] (Persons Experiencing Difficulty with Identity Verification).
Social Security (Administration) Act 1999
; Department of Families, Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs,
Guide to Social Security Law
http://www.fahcsia.gov.au/guides_acts/
at 4 February 2011, [8.1.3.20] (Providing TFN Information).
Department of Families, Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs,
Guide to Social Security Law
http://www.fahcsia.gov.au/guides_acts/
at 4 February 2011, [8.1.3.20] (Providing TFN Information).
Social Security (Administration) Act 1999
; Department of Families, Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs,
Guide to Social Security Law
http://www.fahcsia.gov.au/guides_acts/
at 4 February 2011, [8.1.3.20] (Providing TFN Information).
Department of Families, Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs,
Guide to Social Security Law
http://www.fahcsia.gov.au/guides_acts/
at 4 February 2011, [8.1.3.20] (Providing TFN Information).
Social Security Act 1991
Social Security (Administration) Act 1999
; Department of Families, Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs,
Guide to Social Security Law
http://www.fahcsia.gov.au/guides_acts/
at 4 February 2011, [3.1.1.10] (Residence Requirements).
Waiting for Dignity in Australia: Migrant Rights to Social Security and Disability Support under International Human Rights Law
Social Security Act 1991
(Age Pension);
(Disability Support Pension);
Parenting Payment; s 408BA (Widow Allowance).
(Carer Payment);
(Youth Allowance);
(Newstart Allowance); ss 696B, 696C (Sickness Allowance);
(Special Benefit); ss 771HC, 771HNA (Partner Allowance);
(Mobility Allowance);
(Pensioner Education Supplement);
(Seniors Health Card);
(Health Care Card).
(Age Pension);
s 94(1)(e)(11)
(Disability Support Pension);
s 500(1)(d)(iii)
(Parenting Payment);
(Newstart Allowance); s 771HNA (Partner Allowance);
(Pensioner Education Supplement).
Department of Families, Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs,
Guide to Social Security Law
http://www.fahcsia.gov.au/guides_acts/
at 4 February 2011, [3.7.2.20] (Substantial Change in Circumstances for SpB).
Social Security (Administration) Act 1999
. Department of Families, Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs,
Guide to Social Security Law
http://www.fahcsia.gov.au/guides_acts/
at 4 February 2011, [3.7.4.10] (Qualification for CrP-General Provisions).
Social Security Act 1991
(Cth) ss 500A, 501, 502 (Parenting Payment);
, 541, 544, 544A (Youth Allowance);
, 601, 605 (Newstart Allowance); ss 731A, 731L (Special Benefit).
Ibid, ss 502C, 501E (Parenting Payment);
, 544E (Youth Allowance); ss 602B, 607C (Newstart Allowance).
Ibid, ss 502C, 501E (Parenting Payment); 542, 542F, 544E (Youth Allowance); 602B, 607C (Newstart Allowance);
Social Security (Special Circumstances Regarding a Person's Family) (DEWR) Determination 2006
Social Security Act 1991
(Youth Allowance); s 603A (Newstart Allowance).
Social Security (Special Circumstances Regarding a Person's Family) (DEWR) Determination 2006
(Cth); Department of Families, Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs,
Guide to Social Security Law
http://www.fahcsia.gov.au/guides_acts/
at 4 February 2011, [3.5.1.280] (Participation Requirements Exemption in Special Family Circumstances-Case-by-Case (PP)).
Department of Families, Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs,
Guide to Social Security Law
http://www.fahcsia.gov.au/guides_acts/
at 4 February 2011, [3.7.5.30] (SpB Activity Test Exemptions (Special Benefit)); [3.2.11.40] (Activity Test for NSA/YA Job Seekers-Exemptions-Special
Circumstances (Newstart and Youth Allowance)); [3.5.1.250] (Participation Requirements Exemption-Special Circumstances (PP) (Parenting
Social Security Act 1991
(Cth) s 502C (Parenting Payment);
(Youth Allowance); s 602B (Newstart Allowance); s 731DA (Special Benefit).
Social Security (Administration) Act 1999
Social Security Act 1991
(Parenting Payment);
(Youth Allowance);
(Newstart Allowance);
(Special Benefit).
Department of Families, Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs,
Guide to Social Security Law
http://www.fahcsia.gov.au/guides_acts/
at 4 February 2011, [3.1.13.10] (Types of Failures and Penalties).
Ibid, [3.1.13.90] (Reasonable Excuse);
Social Security (Reasonable Excuse-Participation Payment Obligations) (DEEWR) Determination 2009 (No.1) 2009
(Cth); Explanatory Statement, Social Security (Reasonable Excuse: Participation Payment Obligations) (DEEWR) Determination 2009 No.1
2009 (Cth).
Social Security Act 1991
(Youth Allowance);
(Newstart Allowance);
(Special Benefit).
93. Social security recipients can be subject to economic abuse through duress or undue influence. This Inquiry will examine whether
social security law and practice might be improved to provide better protection for social security recipients from such abuse.
94. Two circumstances in which economic abuse may be manifested-waiver of debt and nominee arrangements-are discussed below.
The ALRC is interested in any other circumstances where economic abuse is known to occur in social security contexts.
Waiver of debt
95. If a person is overpaid a social security pension, allowance or benefit, even when not at fault, the amount overpaid is a debt
to Centrelink. However, the Secretary may decide that a debt should be waived if a person can demonstrate that:
special circumstances' exist; and
he or she or another person did not knowingly' make a false statement or knowingly' omit to comply with the
Social Security Act
, its predecessor, or the
Social Security (Administration) Act
96. In this context, the
Guide to Social Security Law
states that special circumstances' refers to circumstances that are unusual, uncommon or exceptional-special enough circumstances
that make it desirable to waive.
This requires consideration of the person's individual circumstances, but also a consideration of the general administration of the
social security system. A special circumstances waiver would be appropriate only if the person's particular circumstances made it
unjust for the general rule-that is, to repay the debt-to apply.
Guide to Social Security Law
states that it is not possible to set out a complete list of the relevant factors to be taken into account in determining whether
special circumstances exist. However, factors to consider include the person's physical and emotional state and decision-making capacity
and financial circumstances.
Guide to Social Security Law
does not expressly direct the decision maker to consider family violence in determining whether circumstances are special'.
Guide to Social Security Law
states that knowledge must be actual and not merely constructive;
and it does not refer to examples of family violence which may impinge on a person's knowledge.
99. Case law provides that it is open to infer that a person had actual knowledge of their obligations where there were opportunities
for the person to gain that knowledge and where there were no obstacles to acquire the knowledge.
Such obstacles which may be considered as preventing understanding of obligations
may include a person's emotional or mental state. For example, as a result of emotional trauma and concern for family safety, the
person's ability to comprehend obligations and responsibilities may be reduced.
100. The discretion to waive a debt may not be used where a debt is attributable, even in part, to knowingly false statements or failure
to comply with the
Social Security Act
by a third party. In cases of family violence, false statements and/or failure to comply with the
Social Security Act
may be attributable to an abusing partner-for example, where the abusing partner insists that his or her partner does not declare
true income, employment circumstances, or presence in the family home in order to receive a payment.
Question 28
Social Security Act 1991
(Cth) be amended expressly to provide for waiver of debt in situations where a person is subject to duress, undue influence or economic
abuse? What processes should be in place to determine whether such circumstances exist?
Nominee arrangements
Social Security (Administration) Act
provides for the appointment of nominees for both correspondence and payment of social security. A nominee is required to act in the
best interests of the principal.
102. There is no regular review of nominee arrangements by Centrelink. Rather, any reviews of nominee arrangements are conducted as
soon as any allegation of the misuse of a social security payment is received.
103. In addition, the nominee, under Centrelink arrangements, needs not be the person to whom the social security recipient has granted
a power of attorney. There are no checks in place to ensure that a person holding the social security recipient's Power of Attorney
is informed of any nominee arrangement.
104. While nominee arrangements can be useful for protecting the income support of victims of family violence such as those who are
clients. In particular, the following issues have been identified:
Centrelink may have inadequate safeguards to ensure nominees are appropriate in the circumstances;
penalties for nominees who are in breach of their obligations may be inadequate;
provisions to prevent nominee appointments being made under duress, or misuse of pensioner funds by nominees may be inadequate; and
the fact that it is likely that the social security recipient will be unlikely to notify Centrelink of any abuse, including because
the only person aware of the abuse is the nominee authority, may be barrier to any abuse being investigated.
105. The ALRC noted, in
For Your Information: Australian Privacy Law and Practice
, Report 108 (2008), that Centrelink nominee arrangements, despite being subject to some criticism, are generally well received and
widely utilised. However, the ALRC also recognised that the third party nominee has ongoing powers to make decisions on behalf of
a person and that this situation could be subject to abuse.
This may particularly affect disadvantaged and low income recipients living in remote or rural Australian communities, older people,
persons with disability and others.
Question 29
Should social security law or practice be amended in relation to nominee arrangements to minimise the potential for financial abuse
by people holding nominee authority? For example, should the
Social Security Act 1991
(Cth) be amended to recognise other legal authorities of a person nominated by the social security recipient, such as under powers
of attorney or enduring guardianship?
Income management is discussed separately below.
Social Security Act 1991
Davy and Secretary, Department of Employment and Workplace Relations
[2007] AATA 1114
; Department of Families, Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs,
Guide to Social Security Law
http://www.fahcsia.gov.au/guides_acts/
at 4 February 2011, [6.7.3.40] (Waiver of Debt on the Basis of Special Circumstances).
Department of Families, Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs,
Guide to Social Security Law
http://www.fahcsia.gov.au/guides_acts/
at 4 February 2011, [6.7.3.40] (Waiver of Debt on the Basis of Special Circumstances);
Davy and Secretary, Department of Employment and Workplace Relations
[2007] AATA 1114.
Department of Families, Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs,
Guide to Social Security Law
http://www.fahcsia.gov.au/guides_acts/
at 4 February 2011[6.7.3.40] (Waiver of Debt on the Basis of Special Circumstances).
Ibid, [6.7.3.40] (Waiver of Debt on the Basis of Special Circumstances);
Re Callaghan and Secretary, Department of Social Security
[1996] AATA 413
(1996) 45 ALD 435.
RCA Corporation v Custom Cleared Sales Pty Ltd
(1978) 19 ALR 123.
Re Secretary, Department of Family and Community Services and Temesgen
[2002] AATA 1290
Re Woodward and Secretary, Department of Family and Community Services
[2001] AATA 818
Re Nisha and Secretary, Department of Family and Community Services
[2000] AATA 315.
S Ellison and others,
The Legal Needs of Older People in NSW
(2004), prepared for the Law and Justice Foundation of NSW.
Australian Law Reform Commission,
For Your Information: Australian Privacy Law and Practice
, Report 108 (2008), Ch 70.
Payments and payment arrangements
106. Certain payments and payment arrangements are available that may assist victims of family violence under social security law.
The ALRC has identified four such areas-Crisis Payment, Rent Assistance, weekly payments and urgent payments. The ALRC is interested
in whether there are any other payments or payment arrangements that might assist victims of family violence.
Crisis Payment
107. Crisis Payment is a one-off payment that may be paid to social security recipients who are in severe financial hardship including
because of domestic or family violence' and they claim within seven days of the extreme circumstance.
A person cannot be paid more than four payments of Crisis Payment due to family violence in any 12 month period.
One of the following circumstances must apply.
108. First, the person has left home in circumstances where it is unreasonable to return to the home and intend to establish a new
when the person, having left their home, decides that they cannot return home as a result of the extreme circumstance'.
109. Secondly, the person remained in the home after the removal of a family member due to family violence. It must be verified that
the person using family violence actually lived with the victim in the family home immediately before being removed. In some cases,
the abusive family member may leave without police involvement and the violent relationship will need to be verified by a third party.
The claiming period begins when the family member leaves or is removed from the home.
110. Thirdly, the person has used family violence and been removed from their home and legally prevented from returning.
111. For the purposes of Crisis Payment, the meaning of home' is taken to be the person's house or other shelter that is the fixed
residence of a person for the foreseeable future. Fixed residence includes a house, apartment, on-site caravan, long-term boarding
house or moored boat. A home' does not include a refuge, overnight hostel, squat or other temporary accommodation.
A family member' is a person's partner, parent, sister, brother, child or any other person whom the Secretary deems should be treated
as a family member.
112. An apprehended violence or restraining order that is issued for a short time (24-72 hours) may be used as an indicator that an
extreme circumstance has occurred.
While there may no longer be a legal reason preventing the person from returning home, the person may decide to establish a new home
that would be considered safer.
113. Some aspects of the operation of Crisis Payment in the context of family violence may raise concern. For example, there may be
concerns about:
the way in which evidence of family violence is collected, for example by third party verification;
the definitions of family member' and home' that may exclude certain persons and situations of family violence;
requiring claim to be made within seven days after the extreme circumstance', and understanding of when the extreme circumstance is
said to occur may be too onerous given the effects of family violence for victims of family violence;
requiring the person using family violence to have lived with the victim immediately before either the victim leaves to home or the
person using family violence is removed from the home; and
the restriction that only four payments can be made in a 12 month period may be insufficient for victims of family violence.
114. Moreover, where availability of Special Benefit is widely known, access to Crisis Payment may be less so. It may be preferable,
therefore, that Crisis Payment be wrapped up' in a pre-existing payment, such as Special Benefit, and that Centrelink moves towards
a single payment system. On the other hand, this may risk certain advantages of Crisis Payment being lost. Another suggestion is
to increase the visibility of Crisis Payment through brochures and letters to inform Centrelink customers.
Question 30
In what ways, if any, can information about and access to Crisis Payment be improved for victims of family violence? For example,
should Crisis Payment be wrapped up' with Special Benefit?
Question 31
Should Crisis Payment be available to those who are otherwise ineligible for a social security pension or benefit but due to extreme
circumstances of family violence are placed in financial hardship?
Question 32
Do claim periods and eligibility criteria for Crisis Payments adequately reflect the breadth and nature of family violence?
Question 33
What evidence is, or should, be necessary to determine whether family violence amounts to an extreme circumstance for the purpose
of Crisis Payment?
Rent Assistance
115. Rent Assistance is available under the
Social Security Act
to social security recipients who:
are not aged care residents;
are not ineligible homeowners'; or
pay or are liable to pay rent and the fortnightly rent is more than the rent threshold amount'.
116. Rent is defined broadly in the
Social Security Act
. It does not expressly extend to mortgage repayments.
117. While persons on low income who live in rental accommodation may be able to access Rent Assistance, those who have a mortgage
may not and, as such, may be vulnerable to homelessness where the person who has used family violence defaults on rent or mortgage
Question 34
Do the provisions for Rent Assistance in the
Social Security Act 1991
(Cth) adequately address the situation where a person using family violence defaults on mortgage repayments on the house in which
the victim is living? Should the definition of rent' in
Social Security Act 1991
(Cth) expressly include mortgage repayments where family violence is an issue?
Weekly payments
118. Weekly-rather than fortnightly-payments of social security payments can be made to those considered to be most vulnerable',
defined as a person who:
is homeless, or
is at risk of homelessness and has issues of vulnerability and significant disadvantage and would benefit from receiving payments
on a weekly basis, or
has considerable difficulty in managing their finances ... on a fortnightly basis and would benefit from receiving payments on a
weekly basis.
119. Weekly payments are offered in conjunction with other services and referrals, such as family violence counselling. Receiving
income support payments on a weekly basis is voluntary. Centrelink works with people to assess their needs.
120. In determining whether a person is eligible for weekly payments, the
Guide to Social Security Law
provides that a decision maker should take into account, among other things, recent traumatic relationship breakdown, particularly
if domestic or family violence was involved' and whether the person is experiencing financial exploitation'.
There is no guidance as to how such evidence is to be collected.
121. Social security recipients who receive weekly payments are ineligible for Crisis Payment and for urgent payments (see below).
Question 35
In practice, are Centrelink customers aware of, and do Centrelink customers make use of, the option to have their payments made weekly?
In practice, if requested, are victims of family violence provided with weekly payments?
Question 36
Should victims of family violence who are receiving weekly payments be eligible to receive Crisis Payment?
Urgent payments
122. Where a social security recipient is suffering severe financial hardship due to exceptional and unforeseen circumstances, an
urgent payment may be made.
Guide to Social Security Law
does not refer to family violence as an exceptional and unforeseen circumstance.
Guide to Social Security Law
does, however, state that a one-off urgent payment may be made to a third party on behalf of a social security recipient in exceptional
and unforeseen circumstances, where it is necessary to alleviate immediate hardship to the recipient, such as where the recipient
is required to change their place of residence because of family breakdown.
Guide to Social Security Law
does not refer expressly to family violence.
Question 37
Should family violence be an example of exceptional and unforeseen circumstances' in the
Guide to Social Security Law
when considering whether to make an urgent payment? Are the current payment arrangements-such as weekly payments-available to victims
of family violence sufficient?
Social Security Act 1991
Department of Families, Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs,
Guide to Social Security Law
http://www.fahcsia.gov.au/guides_acts/
at 4 February 2011, [3.7.4.20] (Qualification for CrP-Extreme Circumstances-Domestic and Family Violence); [3.7.4.25] (Qualification
for CrP-Remaining in the Home after Removal of Family Member Due to Domestic or Family Violence).
Social Security Act 1991
; Department of Families, Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs,
Guide to Social Security Law
http://www.fahcsia.gov.au/guides_acts/
at 4 February 2011, [3.7.4.20] (Qualification for CrP-Extreme Circumstances-Domestic and Family Violence).
Social Security Act 1991
; Department of Families, Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs,
Guide to Social Security Law
http://www.fahcsia.gov.au/guides_acts/
at 4 February 2011, [3.7.4.25] (Qualification for CrP-Remaining in the Home after Removal of Family Member Due to Domestic or
Family Violence).
Department of Families, Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs,
Guide to Social Security Law
http://www.fahcsia.gov.au/guides_acts/
at 4 February 2011, [3.7.4.25] (Qualification for CrP-Remaining in the Home after Removal of Family Member Due to Domestic or
Family Violence).
Social Security Act 1991
Department of Families, Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs,
Guide to Social Security Law
http://www.fahcsia.gov.au/guides_acts/
at 4 February 2011, [3.7.4.20] (Qualification for CrP-Extreme Circumstances-Domestic and Family Violence).
Ibid, [3.7.4.20] (Qualification for CrP-Extreme Circumstances-Domestic and Family Violence).
Social Security Act 1991
(3). In comparison, New Zealand's
Social Security Act 1964
provides for an Accommodation Supplement' which is a non-taxable and asset-tested income supplement that provides assistance towards
accommodation costs (excluding state housing), but includes rent, board and the costs of owner-occupied homes, including mortgage
repayments.
Social Security (Administration) Act 1999
; Department of Families, Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs,
Guide to Social Security Law
<http://www.fahcsia.
gov.au/guides_acts/> at 4 February 2011, [3.10.3.35] (Weekly Payments for Most Vulnerable People).
Department of Families, Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs,
Guide to Social Security Law
http://www.fahcsia.gov.au/guides_acts/
at 4 February 2011, [3.10.3.35] (Weekly Payments for Most Vulnerable People).
Ibid, [3.10.3.35] (Weekly Payments for Most Vulnerable People).
Ibid, [3.10.3.35] (Weekly Payments for Most Vulnerable People).
Ibid, [3.10.3.35] (Weekly Payments for Most Vulnerable People).
Social Security (Administration) Act 1999
Department of Families, Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs,
Guide to Social Security Law
http://www.fahcsia.gov.au/guides_acts/
at 4 February 2011, [8.4.2.10] (Urgent Payments).
Income management
124. The following part of this Issues Paper discusses the treatment of family violence in the income management of welfare payments
Social Security (Administration) Act
. It briefly explains the nature and history of the income management regime and discusses how income management can work to protect,
or work against, the safety of people experiencing family violence.
125. The part examines the implications of family violence for how individuals may become subject to, or obtain exemptions from, the
application of the income management regime; and the consequences of income management for people experiencing family violence. For
example, issues are raised concerning whether:
family violence should be an indicator of vulnerability for the purposes of administering the vulnerable welfare payment recipients'
provisions;
there should be some express provision allowing people experiencing family violence to seek an exemption from income management in
specified circumstances;
changes could be made to the administration of income management accounts, to assist people who are victims of family violence; and
voluntary, rather than compulsory, forms of income management should be more broadly adopted.
What is income management?
126. Income management' is an arrangement under which 50 to 100% of a person's social security and family payments is quarantined'
to be spent only on priority goods and services', such as food, housing, clothing, education and health care.
127. The objects of the income management legislation are primarily to:
promote socially responsible behaviour, particularly in relation to the care and education of children;
set aside the whole or part of certain welfare payments; and
meet the priority needs of the welfare recipient, the recipient's partner, the recipient's children and any other dependants of the
128. The Department of Families, Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs (FaHCSIA) has the primary responsibility for the
income management system, which is administered by Centrelink.
129. Income management was first introduced in 2007 as part of the Northern Territory Emergency Response (NTER) to allegations of
child abuse in specific Indigenous communities. The NTER scheme imposed income management on Indigenous people in receipt of income
support or family assistance payments in 73 prescribed communities, including associated outstations and 10 prescribed town camp
regions of the Northern Territory.
130. The income management legislation was implemented by the Australian Government as a special measure' for the purposes of the
International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination
Racial Discrimination Act 1975
(Cth) (RDA).
In 2010, the income management regime was amended
following legal challenges to the NTER legislation on the basis of racial discrimination.
Questions about whether past or current income management provisions comply with the RDA are beyond the Terms of Reference of this
131. The NTER legislation was primarily focused on child protection within the environment of family violence among remote and discrete
Indigenous communities. The new income management regime under the
Social Security (Administration)
is intended to focus on categories of the most vulnerable Indigenous people.
While, under the NTER, income management applied to Indigenous people in selected Northern Territory locations, the new regime has
been expanded to include other declared income management areas',
including the whole of the Northern Territory.
132. The Australian Government's Close the Gap' policy under the Northern Territory National Partnership Agreement provides for the
continuation of the income management regime at least until review in 2014.
Who is subject to income management?
133. In outline, a person may become subject to the income management regime where:
a child protection officer of a State or Territory requires the person to be subject to the income management regime;
the Secretary has determined that the person is a vulnerable welfare payment recipient;
the person meets the criteria relating to disengaged youth;
the person meets the criteria relating to long-term welfare payment recipients;
the person, or the person's partner, has a child who does not meet school enrolment requirements;
the person, or the person's partner, has a child who has unsatisfactory school attendance;
the Queensland Commission
requires the person to be subject to the income management regime; or
the person voluntarily agrees to be subject to the income management regime.
134. In the case of vulnerable welfare payment recipients, disengaged youth and long-term welfare payment recipients, the person must
also be residing within a declared income management area.
Income management and family violence
135. The dynamics of family violence are aimed at the exercise and control of a person or persons in a relationship, where violence
includes a range of coercive behaviours.
Indigenous women are 45 times more likely than non-Indigenous women to be the subject of family violence, and more likely to be seriously
136. Income management has the potential both to assist and unintentionally harm victims of family violence. Income management may
be extremely useful in protecting people who remain in violent relationships. For example, there are well-documented links between
alcohol and family violence in some communities
and, when a person is income managed, this may protect victims from increased levels of violence resulting from access excluded goods',
such as alcohol.
137. Income management also ensures that at least 50% of the income is spent on necessities, such as food and housing. If a person's
income is managed, it may provide protection from financial abuse-particularly where the income of the person who uses family violence
is also income managed.
138. On the other hand, lack of control over personal finances can interfere with a person's ability to flee a violent environment
in times of crisis, or to take other actions to change the person's circumstances.
Vulnerable welfare payment recipients
139. One issue that arises under the present income management regime concerns the vulnerable welfare payment recipients. Under the
Social Security (Administration) Act
, the Secretary may determine that a person is a vulnerable welfare payment recipient, which may lead to the imposition of income
management. An indicator of vulnerability is stated, in the
Guide to Social Security Law
, to be one of the following:
financial hardship;
financial exploitation;
failure to undertake reasonable self-care; or
140. There is no express reference to family violence as an indicator of vulnerability in the
Guide to Social Security Law
Social Security (Administration) Act
Guide to Social Security Law
does, however, provide that financial exploitation' is considered to occur when a person is subject to undue pressure, harassment,
violence, abuse, deception or exploitation for resources by another person or people, including other family and community members.
There are other links between the existing indicators and family violence. For example, family violence may lead to homelessness
where the victim is forced to leave the home.
142. Questions may be raised about whether family violence should nevertheless be included as an express indicator of vulnerability-especially
given the widely accepted view that economic abuse should be recognised as a form of family violence.
Family violence could be included more explicitly as an indicator of vulnerability and made subject to additional decision-making
principles.
Guide to Social Security Law
states, for example, that the decision makers should take into account all of the circumstances of the person' when assessing eligibility
for weekly payment. Indicators that weekly payments may be beneficial include homelessness, mental health or drug dependency problems
and recent traumatic relationship breakdown, particularly if domestic violence was involved'.
Under such guidelines, individuals might initially be offered access to weekly payments, rather than immediately being made subject
to income management.
144. Many objections may be raised to including family violence as an indicator of vulnerability. The Australian Human Rights Commission,
for example, has stated that applying family violence as a trigger for the imposition of income management may have unintended consequences
because Indigenous peoples on low incomes who experience family violence require support services, not financial management.
145. Other concerns include that victims of family violence may choose to stay in abusive relationships, rather than leave and claim
Crisis Payment, out of fear that disclosing the existence of family violence to Centrelink will result in them losing control of
their finances.
Imposing income management on people experiencing family violence, who are capable of looking after themselves and their families,
may reduce their ability to take steps to protect their safety.
146. On the other hand, there may be advantages in being able to impose income management on a person who is engaging in family violence,
in order to protect the victims of that person's violent conduct from further physical or economic abuse.
Question 38
Should family violence be included as an indicator of vulnerability for the purposes of administering the vulnerable welfare payment
recipients' income management provisions?
Question 39
If so, what definition of family violence should apply? What additional decision-making principles or guidelines may be desirable-in
particular, taking into account that a person may be a victim or person using family violence (or both)?
Exemption from income management
147. Exemptions from income management can be sought by people under the disengaged youth and long-term welfare payment recipient
measures. The availability of these exemptions is subject to meeting a range of conditions under
, div 2, subdiv BB of the
Social Security (Administration) Act
148. For example, a person on income management with dependent children may qualify for an exemption under
Social Security (Administration) Act
if children who are of school age are enrolled at and attend school, or participate in other prescribed activities, and the Secretary
is satisfied that there were no indications of financial vulnerability in relation to the person during the 12-month period ending
immediately before the test time'.
Guide to Social Security Law
states that the principles for determining that there were no indications of financial vulnerability in relation to a person are:
a person has been applying appropriate resources to meet priority needs,
a person had stable payment patterns and budgeting practices and is meeting priority needs from their income support and family assistance
a person had control over their money and was not subject to financial exploitation,
a person did not regularly require urgent funds to pay for foreseeable costs, or did not frequently change their income support pay
dates and consideration is given to the reason for seeking the urgent payment.
Guide to Social Security Law
sets out some core principles' that should be applied in cases where a person seeks an exemption from income management. These principles,
in part, state that:
It is intended that income management promote personal responsibility and positive social behaviour by providing pathways to evidence
based exemptions for people who have a demonstrated record of responsible parenting, or participation in employment or study.
Exemptions are available in cases where income management is not necessary because a person has met the broad outcomes that comprise
the objectives of income management. That is, the person can demonstrate that they:
- are not experiencing hardship or deprivation and are applying appropriate resources to meet their families' priority needs,
- can budget to meet priority needs,
- are not vulnerable to financial exploitation or abuse, and
- are demonstrating socially responsible behaviour, particularly in the care and education of dependent children 
151. As at March 2009, Centrelink data indicated that 649 clients had applied for and been granted an exemption from income management,
which represented 9.8% of managed clients. Three in five exemptions (58%) were due to clients permanently moving away from their
152. The general approach to exemptions from income management, as reflected in the core principles, would make it hard for most people
experiencing family violence to obtain an exemption.
153. Questions may be raised, however, about whether there should be some express provision allowing people experiencing family violence
to seek an exemption from income management in specified circumstances. Such circumstances might include where a person has been
in contact with family violence counselling or other social services, has demonstrated a desire and capacity to take action to prevent
or reduce the violence, and would benefit from an exemption in order to do so.
Question 40
Should the income management regime include provision for people experiencing family violence to be exempted from income management
in specified circumstances, where to do so would assist them to take steps to prevent or reduce violence?
Accounts and payments
154. Under the income management regime, payments to particular welfare recipients are held in separate, notional, accounts known
as income management accounts'.
When a recipient ceases to be income managed, any residual monies are payable to the recipient.
Section 123B
Social Security (Administration) Act
provides for the Secretary to appoint a payment nominee on behalf of a welfare recipient, after taking into account the wishes of
the recipient. Payments payable to the welfare recipient are paid into the bank account of the payment nominee.
156. A welfare recipient under income management, or a payment nominee, may be issued with a stored value card, vouchers or receive
approved expense and other payments.
Stored value cards, generally known as BasicsCards, may be used at community stores and other approved outlets. Stored value cards,
vouchers or payments may not be used to purchase excluded goods and services, including alcoholic beverages, tobacco products, pornographic
material and gambling.
157. Concerns have been raised, however, about unintended consequences of the income management account system-including for people
who are experiencing family violence. Problems have been identified in relation to:
obtaining access to money for travelling interstate;
delays in the transfer of needed funds;
the increased cost of goods and services through the use of the BasicsCard because of the lack of community stores or merchants;
limits placed on daily expenditure using the BasicsCard are problematic during a crisis of family violence;
restricted access to account balances because of inadequate facilities and technology; and
the assessment and reassessment of priority needs, which can be time consuming, invasive and demeaning, because the recipient must
seek permission to purchase goods and services not covered by the provision.
158. Generally, under the income management regime, access to welfare payments is made subject to a detailed set of rules, which determine
when Indigenous people are granted access to their money and what payments should be spent on. The system has been described as requiring
a micro examination of every aspect of a recipient's financial circumstances that exceeds the rigours of applying for a bank loan'.
159. Under the income management system, Indigenous welfare recipients who receive quarantined payments have minimal control over
their income and are scrutinised on all expenditures or intended purchases. Access to funds in an income management account is based
on narrow criteria that do not take into account the totality of a person's circumstances'.
That is, decision-making principles may not be flexible enough to assist victims of family violence to leave a residence or community
or take other urgent steps to avoid violence. Access to resources to cover an immediate departure is likely to be limited. Travel
or other crisis needs where a person needs to escape family violence may not be priority needs' for the purposes of the income management
160. It has also been observed that the restrictions of the BasicsCard may affect Indigenous cultural sharing practices-in particular,
during sorry business', where cash is contributed to the deceased's family.
Where family members have experienced family violence, an inability to contribute an amount of cash may exacerbate their vulnerability
to the pressures of immediate and extended family, especially where family violence already exists.
161. Further, in remote and discrete Indigenous communities, geographical isolation combined with the lack of transport and accommodation
may inhibit access to a person's income management account funds and the ability to attend Centrelink to apply for an emergency payment.
Question 41
What changes could be made to law or practice relating to the administration of income management accounts to assist welfare recipients
who are victims of family violence? For example, are there alternatives to stored value cards that might provide additional flexibility
or portability, such as food stamps or a streamlined access to cash in periods of crisis?
Question 42
Should travel or other crisis needs, where a person needs to escape family violence, be included in the definition of priority needs'
for the purposes of the income management regime?
Compulsory or voluntary income management?
162. From one perspective, the established principles of social security and family assistance law provide for the inalienability
of social security payments and enshrine a person's legal right to a social security payment.
163. The compulsory element of income management may be seen to hinder access to these basic rights and there are suggestions that
a voluntary approach to income management should be more broadly applied. This issue is discussed below.
164. Indigenous people in declared case management areas must comply with a range of requirements in order to avoid being made subject
to compulsory income management, or to obtain an exemption. These include requiring a person with children of compulsory school age
or younger to demonstrate responsible parenting, by meeting attendance or participation requirements relating to education, health
care and other activities.
165. Indigenous people in remote, discrete, and rural areas face difficulties in complying with such requirements, including because
of lack of access to accessible, affordable, available and culturally appropriate services-for example, limited childcare services,
limited access to children's activities and infrequent transport during the wet season.
Compulsory case management may be too inflexible to take account of the difficulties faced by Indigenous people experiencing family
166. Submissions to the Senate Standing Committees on Community Affairs inquiry into the 2010 amending legislation proposed the introduction
of a broad voluntary system of income management. This would provide unconditional support for victims of family violence, where
financial management is self-determined by the recipient. It was suggested that a voluntary system of income management would encourage
disclosure of family violence and better allow clients to be linked with appropriate service providers. These stakeholders stated
that an opt-in system might avoid the burden of satisfying exemption criteria and encourage self-management among Indigenous communities.
167. The income management regime, since the 2010 amendments, provides for a voluntary form of income management-only available to
eligible persons who are not subject to compulsory income management. Under the
Social Security (Administration) Act
, people who are recipients of welfare payments and live in a declared income management area may enter voluntary income management
agreements'.
168. These voluntary income management agreements may be suited to Indigenous people who are undecided about becoming income managed
but require long-term assistance in managing income-for example, due to the existence of family violence.
169. On the other hand, where a person has other problems such as homelessness, mental health or drug dependency problems, compulsory
management may be more appropriate. People who are experiencing family violence may also prefer that income management be compulsorily
imposed, rather than voluntary, to avoid being pressured by an abusive partner
to terminate a voluntary income management agreement.
170. Voluntary income management was introduced following trials in Indigenous communities in Western Australia.
In a submission to the Senate Standing Committees on Community Affairs inquiry, the National Welfare Rights Network suggested that,
under voluntary income management, welfare recipients should be able to self select the percentage of funds they require to be income
Question 43
Should voluntary income management of people experiencing family violence be adopted more broadly and, if so, how should this done?
For example, what amendments to the compulsory income management provisions would be required?
Criticism of income management
171. There have been arguments for and against the income management system since its implementation, including in relation to its
effect on the incidence of family violence.
172. Income management is commonly referred to as a form of conditional welfare' because it is devised to change behaviour, targeted
at the most disadvantaged members of society. The components of conditional welfare' programs include punitive and rehabilitative
elements. The provisions of the income management regime operate on both these levels.
173. Criticisms of the income management regime have included that:
problems in Indigenous communities may be better addressed through long-term support and increased investment-for example, in improving
financial capacity and self-determination;
the prescriptive and punitive approach of the conditional welfare model may discourage disclosure of family violence;
the prescriptive and punitive approach under the new system may not meet the needs of people with a disability or mental health problems;
people face problems in exercising rights of review of administrative decisions made under the income management regime;
there is a lack of Indigenous interpreters to inform communities about the income management regime.
174. It remains unclear whether income management is effective in addressing problems faced by Indigenous welfare recipients.
In particular, there is little evidence to indicate that income management has reduced family violence.
In any case, a major problem with any evaluation is the lack of a comparison group to measure what would occur in the absence of
income management.
175. In 2009, FaHCSIA conducted interviews with 76 Indigenous people living in declared income management areas in relation to the
state of their family and community wellbeing. Respondents were asked if they had noticed changes with their family since income
management was implemented. Most (46%) indicated they were unsure. Slightly more considered that there had been no changes (30%);
and some (24%) said there had been changes, which were mainly positive, including that their family was happier, they had increased
access to food and experienced less humbugging'.
176. When asked if there had been changes in the community since income management was introduced, 52% thought there had been change
(generally of a positive nature), 21% thought there had not been any change and 27% were unsure.
In relation to family violence specifically, 13% of respondents thought there had been more violence, 37% thought there had been
less, with 50% nominating no change.
Question 44
Is there any evidence that income management has improved the safety of people experiencing family violence?
Social Security (Administration) Act 1999
International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination
, 7 March 1966,
[1975] ATS 40
, (entered into force on 04 January 1969), arts 1(4), 2(2).
Racial Discrimination Act 1975
Social Security and other Legislation Amendment (Welfare Reform and Reinstatement of the
Racial Discrimination Act
For example, in the High Court case of
Wurridjal v Commonwealth
(2009) 237 CLR 309
Kirby J observed that the
Northern Territory National Emergency Response Act 2007
(Cth) expressly removes itself from the protections in the
Racial Discrimination Act 1975
(Cth) and hence, from the requirement that Australia, in its domestic law, adhere to the universal standards expressed in the International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, to which Australia is a party': [213].
Social Policy Research Centre,
Evaluation Framework for New Income Management
(2010), prepared for the Department of Families, Community Affairs, Housing and Indigenous Affairs, apps A, B, C.
Under s 123TFA of the
Social Security (Administration) Act 1999
(Cth), the Minister may declare any specified state, territory or area to be a declared income management area.
Social Security (Administration) (Declared Income Management Areas) Determination 2010
. Aspects of income management are being trialled in Western Australia, in the Kimberly region and in some districts of metropolitan
J Macklin (Minister for Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs), Release of Income Management Evaluation Framework'
(Press Release, 1 February 2011).
Queensland Commission' is defined under
Social Security (Administration) Act 1999
and refers to the Family Responsibilities Commission, established under the
Family Responsibilities Commission Act 2008
(Qld), as part of the Cape York Welfare Reform project.
Simplified outline' set out in Ibid s 123TA.
R Hunter, Narratives of Domestic Violence'
[2006] SydLawRw 31
Sydney Law Review
J Hunyor, Is It Time to Re-think Special Measures under the
Racial Discrimination Act
? The Case of the Northern Territory Intervention'
[2009] AUJlHRights 2
(2009) 14 (2)
Australian Journal of Human Rights
The ALRC recognises that there are many other factors that may constrain people from taking such actions. For example, departure
from a person's community may have serious unwanted consequences for an Indigenous person, arising from physical, emotional and kinship
dislocation from country and identity through extended family. See, eg, R Hunter, Narratives of Domestic Violence'
[2006] SydLawRw 31
Sydney Law Review
Department of Families, Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs,
Guide to Social Security Law
http://www.fahcsia.gov.au/guides_acts/
at 4 February 2011, [11.4.2.20] (Indicators of Vulnerability).
Ibid, [11.4.2.20] (Indicators of Vulnerability).
As discussed above, the definition of family violence' recommended by the ALRC, in ALRC Report 114, included economic abuse':
Australian Law Reform Commission and New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Family Violence-A National Legal Response
, ALRC Report 114; NSWLRC Report 128 (2010), Recs 5-1, 6-1, 6-4.
Department of Families, Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs,
Guide to Social Security Law
http://www.fahcsia.gov.au/guides_acts/
at 4 February 2011, [3.10.3.35] (Weekly Payments for Most Vulnerable People).
Australian Human Rights Commission,
Comment to FaHCSIA's Exposure Draft of the Policy Outlines for Income Management
(2010), 5. The Australian Human Rights Commission also stated that homelessness' or the risk of homelessness' should be removed as
an indicator of vulnerability: 6.
National Welfare Rights Network,
Analysis of the Exposure Drafts of Income Management Policy Outlines, 22 June 2010
The Minister also has discretion to specify a class of welfare payment recipients who are exempt from income management:
Social Security (Administration) Act 1999
Department of Families, Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs,
Guide to Social Security Law
http://www.fahcsia.gov.au/guides_acts/
at 4 February 2011, [11.1.14.30] (Parental Exemptions from Income Management-Financial Vulnerability Test).
Ibid, 2 February 2011, [11.1.14.10] (Overview of Exemptions from Income Management).
Australian Institute of Health and Welfare,
Report on the Evaluation of Income Management in the Northern Territory
(2009) 25. That is, outside the relevant declared income management area' under
Social Security (Administration) Act 1999
(Cth) s 123TFA.
Social Security (Administration) Act 1999
s 123WJ(3).
, div 6, subdiv B.
National Welfare Rights Network,
Submission to Senate Community Affairs Committee Inquiry into Social Security and Other Legislation Amendment (Welfare Reform and
Reinstatement of
Racial Discrimination Act
) Bill 2009
(2010) 26. See
Social Security (Administration) Act 1999
National Welfare Rights Network,
Analysis of the Exposure Drafts of Income Management Policy Outlines, 22 June 2010
Social Security (Administration) Act 1999
Under the income management regime amounts will be debited from a person's income management account for the purposes of meeting
priority needs. Other debits require a special request:
Northern Territory Council of Social Service,
Submission to the Senate Inquiry into Social Security and Other Legislation Amendment (Welfare Reform and Reinstatement of
Racial Discrimination Act
) Bill 2009
National Welfare Rights Network,
Submission to Senate Community Affairs Committee Inquiry into Social Security and Other Legislation Amendment (Welfare Reform and
Reinstatement of
Racial Discrimination Act
) Bill 2009
Australian Human Rights Commission,
Comment to FaHCSIA's Exposure Draft of the Policy Outlines for Income Management
See, eg, submissions to the Senate Standing Committees on Community Affairs: National Welfare Rights Network,
Submission to Senate Community Affairs Committee Inquiry into Social Security and Other Legislation Amendment (Welfare Reform and
Reinstatement of
Racial Discrimination Act
) Bill 2009
(2010), 49; Family Relationship Services Australia,
Submission to the Senate Inquiry into Social Security and Other Legislation Amendment (Welfare Reform and Reinstatement of
Racial Discrimination Act
) Bill 2009
(2010), 1-3; Human Rights Law Resource Centre,
Submission to the Senate Inquiry into Social Security and Other Legislation Amendment (Welfare Reform and Reinstatement of
Racial Discrimination Act
) Bill 2009
(2010), 43.
Social Security (Administration) Act 1999
A voluntary income management agreement must be entered into for a minimum of 13 weeks and may be terminated by a request in writing
to the Secretary. If an agreement is terminated the client must not enter into another agreement until 21 days after the termination:
Social Security (Administration) Act 1999
Nearly half (48.2%) of income managed clients are married or in a de facto relationship: Australian Institute of Health and
Report on the Evaluation of Income Management in the Northern Territory
(2009), 20.
National Welfare Rights Network,
Submission to Senate Community Affairs Committee Inquiry into Social Security and Other Legislation Amendment (Welfare Reform and
Reinstatement of
Racial Discrimination Act
) Bill 2009
(2010), 22. The Indigenous communities were in the Perth metropolitan area, Cannington and the Kimberley.
See Social Policy Research Centre,
Evaluation Framework for New Income Management
(2010), prepared for the Department of Families, Community Affairs, Housing and Indigenous Affairs, [2.1], [2.4].
National Welfare Rights Network,
Submission to Senate Community Affairs Committee Inquiry into Social Security and Other Legislation Amendment (Welfare Reform and
Reinstatement of
Racial Discrimination Act
) Bill 2009
(2010), 31.
Social Policy Research Centre,
Evaluation Framework for New Income Management
(2010), prepared for the Department of Families, Community Affairs, Housing and Indigenous Affairs, app E.
See, eg, Commonwealth Ombudsman,
Review Rights for Income Managed People in the Northern Territory
National Welfare Rights Network,
Submission to Senate Community Affairs Committee Inquiry into Social Security and Other Legislation Amendment (Welfare Reform and
Reinstatement of
Racial Discrimination Act
) Bill 2009
(2010), 10.
Australian Human Rights Commission,
Comment to FaHCSIA's Exposure Draft of the Policy Outlines for Income Management
Australian Institute of Health and Welfare,
Report on the Evaluation of Income Management in the Northern Territory
Other issues
177. The ALRC welcomes comment on any other issues relevant to the treatment of family violence in Commonwealth social security law
and practice, including income management.
Question 45
Are there any other ways in which Commonwealth social security law and practice could be improved to better protect the safety of
people experiencing family violence?
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
PDF format (654 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter