URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/lawreform/ALRCDP/2005/69.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:32:03
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Review of the Uniform Evidence Acts [2005] ALRCDP 69
PDF version
is also available for viewing and download.
ALRC Discussion Paper 69
NSWLRC Discussion Paper 47
VLRC Discussion Paper
Review of the
Uniform Evidence Acts
a submission
of Reference
of Participants
of Proposals and Questions
Sections Considered
Introduction to the Inquiry
Inquiry with other law reform bodies
The scope of the Inquiry
Organisation of this paper
Process of reform
Participating in the Inquiry
2. The Uniform Evidence Acts
Introduction
Relationship with common law, equity and other statutes
The application of the uniform Evidence Acts in federal jurisdiction
The uniform Evidence Acts
Evidentiary provisions outside the uniform Evidence Acts
Policy framework
Evidence, jury and non-jury trials
Application of the
Evidence Act 1995
Scope of the uniform Evidence Acts
3. Understanding the Uniform Evidence Acts
Introduction
Evidence of tendency, coincidence, credibility and character
Probative value, unfair prejudice and unfairness
Facilitating an understanding of the uniform Evidence Acts
4. Competence and
Compellability
Introduction
Compellability
5. Examination and Cross-Examination of Witnesses
Introduction
Examination of witnesses
Cross-examination of witnesses
Other issues
6. Documentary Evidence
Operation of the documentary evidence provisions
Reliability and accuracy of computer-produced evidence
Electronic communications
Evidence of official records
7. The Hearsay Rule and its Exceptions
Introduction
The hearsay rule
Uniform Evidence Acts
Unintended assertions
Evidence relevant to a non-hearsay purpose
Proceedings if maker available
Proceedings if maker not available
Representations 'fresh in the memory'
Business records
Contemporaneous statements about a person's health etc
Hearsay in interlocutory proceedings
Hearsay and children's evidence
Notice where hearsay evidence is to be adduced
Hearsay in civil proceedings
8. The Opinion Rule and its Exceptions
Introduction
Lay opinion
Opinions based on specialised knowledge
Opinion on an ultimate issue
Opinion on matters of common knowledge
Expert opinion regarding children's evidence
Expert opinion regarding other categories of witness
9. Admissions
Introduction
Meaning of 'in the course of official questioning'
The circumstances of the admission
Section 90 discretion
10. Tendency and Coincidence Evidence
Introduction
Tendency evidence
Coincidence evidence
Tendency and coincidence evidence in civil proceedings
The operation of s 101
'Interests of justice' alternative for s 101
11. The Credibility Rule and its Exceptions
Introduction
The credibility provisions
Evidence relevant only to a witness' credibiity
Substantial probative value
Credibility and the character provisions
Leave to cross-examine the defendant
Rebutting denials in cross-examination by other evidence
Credibility of persons making a previous representation
Expert evidence going to credibility
Unsworn statements by a defendant
Credibility issues in sexual offence cases
12. Identification Evidence
Introduction
Identification evidence under the uniform Evidence Acts
Definition of identification evidence
Picture identification
Directions to the jury
In-court identification
13. Privilege
Introduction
Client legal privilege
Privileges protecting other confidential communications
Privilege in respect of self-incrimination in other proceedings
Religious confession
Evidence excluded in the public interest
Exclusion of evidence of settlement negotiations
14. Discretionary and Mandatory Exclusions
Introduction
General discretion to exclude evidence
Exclusion of prejudicial evidence in criminal proceedings
Exclusion of improperly or illegally obtained evidence
General discretion to limit the use of evidence
Discretion to give leave
Advance rulings
15. Judicial Notice
Introduction
Judicial notice of matters of law
Judicial notice of matters of common knowledge
Judicial notice of matters of state
The Commissions' view
16. Comments, Warnings and Directions to the Jury
Introduction
Failure of the accused to give evidence or to call a witness
Warnings about unreliable evidence
Warnings in respect of children's evidence
Other common law warnings
17. Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Traditional Laws and Customs
Introduction
Evidence of traditional laws and customs
Privilege and traditional laws and customs
18. Matters Outside the Uniform Evidence Acts
Introduction
Evidence Act and other legislation
Rape shield laws
Evidence and children witnesses
Family law proceedings
Other evidentiary provisions
Appendix 1. Draft Provisions
Appendix 2. Application of s 398A of the
Crimes Act 1958
3. List of Submissions
Appendix 4. List
of Consultations
Appendix 5.
Abbreviations
© Commonwealth of Australia 2005
This work is copyright. For further information about reproducing this
document - in whole or in part - please refer to the ALRC's
ISBN 0-9750600-9-0
ISSN 0818-7924 (Discussion Paper, NSWLRC)
ALRC Reference: DP 69
NSWLRC Reference: DP 47
info@alrc.gov.au
ALRC homepage:
www.alrc.gov.au
Making a submission
Any public contribution to an inquiry is
called a submission and these are actively sought by law reform bodies from a
broad cross-section
of the community, as well as those with a special interest
in the inquiry. Any submission made to this inquiry will be considered
submission to all of the law reform bodies involved in the inquiry, ie, the
Australian Law Reform Commission, New South Wales Law
Reform Commission,
Victorian Law Reform Commission, Tasmania Law Reform Institute, Queensland Law
Reform Commission, Northern Territory
Law Reform Committee, and Law Reform
Commission of Western Australia.
Submissions are usually written, but there
is no set format and they need not be formal documents. Where possible,
submissions in
electronic format are preferred. It will be helpful if comments
address specific questions or numbered paragraphs in this Paper.
Open inquiry policy
In the interests of informed public debate,
the Commissions maintain an open inquiry policy. As submissions provide
important evidence
to each inquiry, it is common for the Commissions to draw
upon the contents of submissions and quote from them or refer to them in
publications. As part of the open inquiry policy, non-confidential submissions
are made available to any person or organisation upon
request, and also may be
published on the ALRC website.
However, the Commissions also accept
submissions made in confidence. Confidential submissions may include personal
experiences where
there is a wish to retain privacy, or other sensitive
information (such as commercial-in-confidence material). Any request for access
to a confidential submission is determined in accordance with the federal
of Information Act 1982
, which has provisions designed to protect sensitive
information given in confidence.
In the absence of a clear indication
that a submission is intended to be confidential, the Commissions will treat
the submission as
non-confidential.
Submissions to the inquiry should be sent
The Executive
Australian Law Reform
GPO Box 3708
evidence@alrc.gov.au
Submissions may also be made using the
on-line form on the ALRC’s homepage: <
www.alrc.gov.au
The closing date for submissions in
response to
this Discussion Paper is Friday 16 September 2005
Terms of Reference
AUSTRALIAN LAW REFORM
REVIEW OF THE EVIDENCE ACT
I, PHILIP RUDDOCK, Attorney-General of Australia, HAVING REGARD TO:
• the importance of maintaining an efficient and effective justice
system in which clear and comprehensive laws of evidence
play a fundamental
• the experience gained from almost a decade of operation of the
uniform Evidence Act scheme, and
• the desirability of achieving greater clarity and effectiveness and
promoting greater harmonisation of the laws of evidence
in Australia,
REFER to the Australian Law Reform Commission for inquiry and report under
Australian Law Reform Commission Act 1996
, the operation of the
Evidence Act 1995
1. In carrying out its review of the Act, the Commission will have particular
(a) the following topics, which have been identified as areas of particular
(i) the examination and re-examination of witnesses, before and during
proceedings;
(ii) the hearsay rule and its exceptions;
(iii) the opinion rule and its exceptions;
(iv) the coincidence rule;
(v) the credibility rule and its exceptions; and
(vi) privileges, including client legal privilege;
(b) the relationship between the
Evidence Act 1995
legislation regulating the laws of evidence, including the provisions of the
Judiciary Act 1903
, in particular in relation to the laws, practices and
procedures applying in proceedings in federal jurisdiction; and whether the
that significant areas of evidence law are dealt with in other legislation poses
any significant disadvantages to the objectives
of clarity, effectiveness and
uniformity;
(c) recent legislative and case law developments in evidence law, including
the extent to which common law rules of evidence continue
to operate in areas
not covered by the
Evidence Act 1995
(d) the application of the rules of evidence contained in the Act to
pre-trial procedures; and
(e) any other related matters.
2. In carrying out its review of the Act, the Commission, in keeping with the
spirit of the uniform
Evidence Act
scheme, will:
(a) work in association with the New South Wales Law Reform Commission with a
view to producing agreed recommendations;
(b) consult with the other members of the uniform
Evidence Act
the Australian Capital Territory and Tasmania;
(c) consult with other States and Territories as appropriate; and
(d) consult with other relevant stakeholders, in particular the courts, their
client groups and the legal profession.
in the interests of identifying and addressing any defects in the current
law, and with a view to maintaining and furthering the harmonisation
of the laws
of evidence throughout Australia.
3. The Commission is to report no later than 5 December 2005.
Dated: 12th July 2004
Philip Ruddock
Attorney-General
Terms of Reference
NEW SOUTH WALES LAW REFORM
REVIEW OF THE EVIDENCE ACT
I, BOB DEBUS, Attorney General of New South Wales, HAVING REGARD TO:
• the importance of maintaining an efficient and effective justice
system in which clear and comprehensive laws of evidence
play a fundamental
• the experience gained from nearly a decade of operation of the
Evidence Act
scheme, and
• the desirability of achieving greater clarity and effectiveness and
promoting greater harmonisation of the laws of evidence
in Australia,
REFER to the New South Wales Law Reform Commission, for inquiry and report
pursuant to
Law Reform Commission Act 1967
operation of the
Evidence Act 1995
1. In carrying out its review of the
Evidence Act 1995
Commission, will have particular regard to:
(a) the following topics, which have been identified as areas of particular
(i) the examination and re-examination of witnesses; before and during
proceedings;
(ii) the hearsay rule and its exceptions;
(iii) the opinion rule and its exceptions;
(iv) the coincidence rule;
(v) the credibility rule and its exceptions; and
(vi) privileges, including client legal privilege
(b) the relationship between the
Evidence Act 1995
(NSW) and other
legislation regulating the laws of evidence and whether the fact that
significant areas of evidence law are dealt
with in other legislation poses any
significant disadvantages to the objectives of clarity, effectiveness and
(c) recent legislative and case law developments in evidence law, including
the extent to which common law rules of evidence continue
to operate in areas
not covered by the
Evidence Act 1995
(d) the application of the rules of evidence contained in the
(NSW) to pre trial procedures
(e) any related matter.
2. In carrying out its review of the
Evidence Act 1995
Commission, in keeping with the spirit of the uniform
Evidence Act
(a) work in association with the Australian Law Reform Commission, with a
view to producing agreed recommendations,
(b) consult with the other members of the uniform
Evidence Act
– the Australian Capital Territory and Tasmania,
(c) consult with other States and Territories as appropriate; and
(d) consult with other relevant stakeholders, in particular the courts,
their client groups and the legal profession;
in the interests of identifying and addressing any defects in the current
law, and with a view to maintaining and furthering harmonisation
of the laws of
evidence throughout Australia.
3. The Commission is to report no later than 5 December 2005.
Terms of Reference
VICTORIAN LAW REFORM
REVIEW OF THE EVIDENCE ACT
1. To review the
Evidence Act 1958
and other laws of evidence which
apply in Victoria and to advise the Attorney-General on the action required to
facilitate the introduction
of the Uniform
Evidence Act
into Victoria, including
any necessary modification of the existing provisions of the Uniform
2. To consider whether modifications of the existing provisions of the
Evidence Act
are required:
• to take account of case law on the operation of the Uniform
in jurisdictions where the Act is currently in force;
• in relation to the following topics which have been identified as
areas of particular concern and are currently being considered
by the Australian
Law Reform Commission and the New South Wales Law Reform Commission:
− the examination and re-examination of witnesses, before and during
proceedings;
− the hearsay rule and its exceptions;
− the opinion rule and its exceptions;
− the coincidence rule;
− the credibility rule and its exceptions; and
− privileges, including client legal privilege.
3. In conducting the review the Victorian Law Reform Commission should have
• the experience gained in other jurisdictions in which the Uniform
Evidence Act
has been in force for some time;
• the desirability of promoting harmonisation of the laws of evidence
throughout Australia, in particular by consulting with
the other members of the
Evidence Act
• recommendations for changes to the law of evidence which have already
been made in the Victorian Law Reform Commission’s
Reports on Sexual
Offences and Defences to Homicide;
• the right of defendants in criminal trials to receive a fair trial;
• arrangements for vulnerable witnesses to provide evidence to promote
their access to justice.
Consistent with the goal of promoting harmonisation of the laws of evidence,
the Commission should collaborate with the New South
Wales Law Reform
Commission, and the Australian Law Reform Commission, in their respective
reviews of the
Evidence Act 1995
(NSW) and the
Evidence Act 1995
Participants
Australian Law Reform Commission
The Division of the ALRC constituted under the
Australian Law Reform
Commission Act 1996
(Cth) for the purposes of this Inquiry comprises the
Professor David Weisbrot
Associate Professor Anne Finlay (until
November 2004)
Associate Professor Les McCrimmon (from January 2005)
Justice Susan Kenny (part-time Commissioner)
Justice Susan Kiefel
(part-time Commissioner)
Justice Mark Weinberg (part-time Commissioner)
Senior Legal Officers
Bruce Alston
Miranda Biven (until September 2004)
Legal Officers
Kate Connors
Imogen Goold (until September 2004)
Sarah Jahani (from
February 2005 until May 2005)
Huette Lam (from April 2005)
Melissa Lewis
(from March 2005)
Research Manager
Lani Blackman
Project Assistant
Alayne Harland
Legal Interns
Lucy Couchman
Joe Edwards
Frances Foster-Thorpe
Natasha Schot
Advisory Committee Members
Judge Peter Berman SC, District Court of New South Wales
Jim Brewster,
Federal Magistrate, Federal Magistrates Court of Australia
Simon Daley,
Special Counsel Litigation, Australian Government Solicitor
Amanda Davis,
Attorney-General’s Department (from April 2005)
Dr Ian Freckelton,
Victorian Bar
Terese Henning, Faculty of Law, University of
Justice Roderick Howie, Supreme Court of New South
Associate Professor Jill Hunter, Faculty of Law, University of New
South Wales
Miiko Kumar, New South Wales Bar (from February 2005)
Ligertwood, Reader in Law, University of Adelaide
Stephen Mason, Blake Dawson
Stephen Odgers SC, New South Wales Bar
Associate Professor Anne
Rees (nee Finlay), School of Law, University of Newcastle (from November
Wayne Roser, Deputy Senior Crown Prosecutor New South Wales
Tim Smith, Supreme Court of Victoria
Neil Williams SC, New South Wales
Peter Zahra SC, Senior Public Defender, Public Defenders Office New South
Consultants
Associate Professor Jill Hunter, Faculty of Law, University of New South
New South Wales Law Reform Commission
The Division of the NSWLRC constituted under
Commission Act 1967
(NSW) for the purposes of this Inquiry comprises the
Justice Michael Adams
Judge Christopher Armitage
Acting Judge Angela Karpin
Professor Michael Tilbury
Executive Director
Peter Hennessey
Legal Officers
Catherine Gray
Robyn Johansson
Victorian Law Reform Commission
The Division of the VLRC constituted under
Victorian Law
Reform Commission Act 2000
(Vic) for the purposes of this Inquiry comprises
the following:
Justice David Harper
Professor Marcia Neave AO
(Chairperson)
Iain Ross (Vice-President AIRC)
Justice Tim Smith
Chief Executive Officer
Padma Raman
Team Leader
Angela Langan
Research and Policy Officers
Samantha Burchell
Claire Downey
Administrative Officers
Kathy Karlevski (Operations Manager)
Lorraine Pitman
List of Proposals and
Chapter 2 The Uniform Evidence Acts
Proposal 2–1
The definition of ‘NSW court’ in the
Dictionary to the
Evidence Act 1995
(NSW) should be amended to delete the
parenthetical words ‘including such a court exercising federal
Proposal 2–2
Section 4(1)
of the Commonwealth and New South
Wales Evidence Acts should be amended to delete the words ‘in
relation’ from the phrase
‘in relation to all
proceedings’.
Chapter 3 Understanding the Uniform Evidence
Proposal 3–1
Educational programs should be implemented by the
National Judicial College, the Judicial College of Victoria and the Judicial
of New South Wales and by the state and territory law societies and
Bar which focus on the policy underlying the uniform Evidence
approach to admissibility of evidence.
Chapter 4 Competence and Compellability
Proposal 4–1
Sections 13(2)
, (3) and (4) should be amended
or replaced to bring about the following:
• a person not competent to give sworn evidence should be competent to
give unsworn evidence provided that the court informs
that person of the
importance of telling the truth and that person satisfies the test of general
competence;
• there should be a test of general competence for both sworn and
unsworn evidence. It should provide that if for any reason,
including physical
disability, a person is unable to understand a question about a fact or is
unable to give answers to a question
that incapacity cannot be overcome, the person is not competent to give evidence
Section 13(7)
should be amended to make it clear that in informing
itself as to the competence of a witness, the court is entitled to draw on
opinion. The wording of
should be amended to bring it in line
with the proposed changes to
Proposal 4–2
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth) should be
amended to provide that the definition of ‘de facto spouse’, in
relation to a person, be a person with
whom the person has a de facto
relationship. A definition of ‘de facto relationship’ should be
provided in the following
‘de facto relationship’ is a relationship between two
• who have a relationship as a couple; and
• who are not married to one another or related by family.
Chapter 5 Examination and Cross-Examination
of Witnesses
Proposal 5–1
of the uniform Evidence Acts should
be amended to remove the requirement that a party must apply to the court for a
direction that
the witness may give evidence in narrative form. A court may give
directions about what evidence is to be given in narrative form
and the way in
which that evidence may be given.
Proposal 5–2
of the uniform Evidence Acts should be
amended to allow that the court may disallow an improper question put to a
witness in cross-examination,
or inform the witness that it need not be
answered. An improper question should be defined as a question that is
misleading or confusing,
or is annoying, harassing, intimidating, offensive,
humiliating, oppressive or repetitive, or is put to the witness in a manner or
tone that is inappropriate (including because it is humiliating, belittling or
otherwise insulting), or has no basis other than a
sexual, racial, cultural or
ethnic stereotype.
Proposal 5–3
The uniform Evidence Acts should be amended to
include a provision imposing a duty on the court to disallow any question of the
referred to in Proposal 5–2 where the witness being cross-examined is
a vulnerable witness because of their age or mental or
intellectual
disability.
Proposal 5–4
Educational programs should be implemented by the
National Judicial College, the Judicial College of Victoria and the Judicial
of New South Wales and by the state and territory law societies and
Bar which draw attention to
and, if adopted, new provisions of the
uniform Evidence Acts dealing with improper questioning.
Question 5–1
Should the uniform Evidence Acts contain provisions
dealing with the form of affidavit evidence? If so, what considerations should
be included in such a section?
Chapter 6 Documentary Evidence
Question 6–1
Should the uniform Evidence Acts be amended to
impose a more rigorous requirement for the presumption of reliability and
of computer-produced evidence? Who should have the obligation to
establish reliability or unreliability?
Proposal 6–1
of the uniform Evidence Acts
should be amended to replace the words ‘a document recording a message
that has been transmitted
by electronic mail or by a fax, telegram, lettergram
or telex’ with the words ‘an electronic communication’, and
a definition for ‘electronic communication’
identical to that in
Electronic Transactions Act 1999
Chapter 7 The Hearsay
Rule and its Exceptions
Proposal 7–1
The uniform Evidence Acts should be amended to
provide expressly that, for the purposes of s 59, in determining whether a
person intended
to assert the existence of facts contained in a previous
representation, the test to be applied should be based on what a person
position of the maker of the representation can reasonably be supposed to have
intended; and the court may take into account
the circumstances in which the
representation was made.
Proposal 7–2
The uniform Evidence Acts should be amended to
confirm that s 60 operates to permit evidence admitted for a non-hearsay
be used to prove the truth of the facts asserted in the
representation, whether or not the evidence is first-hand or more remote
Question 7–1
If Proposal 7–2 is implemented, should
the uniform Evidence Acts also be amended to provide that:
• a previous representation of a party to any proceeding made to an
expert to enable that expert to give evidence; or
• evidence of admissions that are not first-hand;
or both be excluded from the ambit of s 60? If so, how should these
provisions be worded?
Proposal 7–3
Section 64(3) of the uniform Evidence Acts
should be amended to remove the requirement that, when the representation was
occurrence of the asserted fact was fresh in the memory of the person
who made the representation.
Proposal 7–4
The uniform Evidence Acts should be amended to
provide that a person is taken not to be available to give evidence about a fact
a person is mentally or physically unable to give the evidence about the
Proposal 7–5
Section 65(2)(d) of the uniform Evidence Acts
should be amended to require that the representation be made against the
interests of
the person who made it at the time it was made
circumstances that make it likely that the representation is reliable.
Proposal 7–6
The uniform Evidence Acts should be amended to make
it clear that, for the purposes of s 66(2), whether a memory is
is to be determined by reference to factors in addition to
the temporal relationship between the occurrence of the asserted fact
making of the representation. These factors may include the nature of the event
concerned, and the age and health of the
Question 7–2
What concerns are raised by the operation of
s 69(2) of the uniform Evidence Acts with respect to business records?
Should these concerns
be addressed through amendment of the Acts and, if so,
Question 7–3
Should s 69(3) of the uniform Evidence Acts be
amended to provide the judge with a discretion to admit documents made in
with an investigation relating or leading to a criminal proceeding
and, if so, on what criteria?
Proposal 7–7
The uniform Evidence Acts should be amended so that
the s 72 exception to the hearsay rule, which relates to certain
contemporaneous
statements, applies to first-hand hearsay only.
Question 7–4
Should s 67 of the
uniform Evidence Acts be amended to require the prosecution to give notice of an
intention to adduce evidence under
Chapter 8 The Opinion Rule and its
Question 8–1
Does the decision of the High Court in
overly constrain the admission of police opinion evidence on
identification and, if so, how should this be remedied?
Proposal 8–1
To avoid doubt,
the uniform Evidence Acts
should be amended to provide an exception to the opinion and credibility rules
for expert opinion evidence
on the development and behaviour of children.
Question 8–2
Should the uniform Evidence Acts be amended to
provide for the admissibility of expert opinion evidence on the credibility or
reliability
of other categories of witness, such as victims of family violence
or people with an intellectual disability?
Chapter 9 Admissions
Proposal 9–1
Section 85(1) of the uniform Evidence Acts should
be amended to provide that the section applies only to evidence of an admission
made by a defendant (a) to an investigating official who was at the time
performing functions in connection with the investigation
of the commission or
possible commission of an offence; or (b) as a result of an act of another
person who is capable of influencing
the decision whether a prosecution of the
defendant should be brought or should be continued. A consequent amendment
should be made
s 89(1) to incorporate (a) above.
Chapter 10 Tendency and Coincidence
Proposal 10–1
Section 98(1) of the uniform Evidence Acts should
be amended to provide that evidence that 2 or more events occurred is not
to prove that a person did a particular act or had a particular state
of mind on the basis that, having regard to the similarities
in the events and
the similarities in the circumstances surrounding them, it is improbable that
the events occurred coincidentally
unless the party adducing the evidence gives
reasonable notice in writing to each other party of the party’s intention
the evidence; and the court thinks that the evidence, either by itself
or having regard to other evidence adduced or to be adduced
by the party seeking
to adduce the evidence, has significant probative value.
Proposal 10–2
Section 97 of the uniform Evidence Acts should be
amended to replace the word ‘if’ in s 97(1) with
and to replace the word ‘or’ in
s 97(1)(a) with ‘and’.
Question 10–1
Should s 101 apply to any evidence led
against an accused person which reveals disreputable behaviour whether or not
relevant as showing
a tendency or coincidence and whether or not tendered for
such purposes? If so what form should the provision take?
Chapter 11 The Credibility Rule and its
Proposal 11–1
The uniform Evidence Acts should be amended to
ensure that the credibility rule applies to evidence:
• relevant only to the credibility of a witness; and
• relevant to the facts in issue, but not admissible for that purpose,
which is also relevant to the credibility of a witness.
Proposal 11–2
Section 103(1) of the uniform Evidence Acts should
be amended to read as follows: ‘The credibility rule does not apply to
adduced in cross-examination of a witness if the evidence could
substantially affect the assessment of the credibility of the
Proposal 11–3
Section 104(4)(a) of the uniform Evidence Acts
should be deleted from s 104(4).
Proposal 11–4
Section 112 of the uniform Evidence Acts should be
amended by substituting ‘A defendant must not be cross-examined’ for
‘A defendant is not to be cross-examined’.
Proposal 11–5
Section 106 of the uniform Evidence Acts should be
amended to enable evidence to be adduced with the leave of the court to rebut
and non-admissions in cross-examination.
Question 11–1
Should s 108 be extended to refer to any
evidence relevant to rebuttal evidence adduced under s 106? If so, in what
way should it
be extended?
Proposal 11–6
The uniform Evidence Acts should be amended to
include a new exception to the credibility rule which provides that, if a person
specialised knowledge based on the person’s training, study or
experience, the credibility rule does not apply to evidence
given by the person,
being evidence of an opinion of that person that: (a) is wholly or substantially
based on that knowledge: and
(b) could substantially affect the credibility of a
witness; and (c) is adduced with the court’s leave.
Proposal 11–7
Sections 105 and
(Cth) should be repealed.
Chapter 12 Identification Evidence
Question 12–1
To what extent is in-court identification used in
practice and is this a problem? Should
of the uniform Evidence
Acts be amended to make it clear that, subject to the exceptions set out in
, in-court identification is inadmissible?
Chapter 13 Privilege
Proposal 13–1
The client legal privilege provisions of the
uniform Evidence Acts should apply to pre-trial discovery and the production of
in response to a subpoena and non-curial contexts such as search
warrants and notices to produce documents, as well as court proceedings.
Proposal 13–2
Section 117(a)
of the uniform Evidence Acts should
be amended to allow that a ‘client’ is an employer of a lawyer,
which may include
lawyers who employ other lawyers.
Proposal 13–3
The definition of a ‘lawyer’ in the
Dictionary of the uniform Evidence Acts should be amended to allow that a lawyer
a person who is admitted to practice as a legal practitioner, barrister or
solicitor in an Australian jurisdiction or in any other
Proposal 13–4
Section 118(c)
of the uniform Evidence Acts should
be amended to replace the words ‘the client or a lawyer’ with
‘the client,
a lawyer or another person’.
Proposal 13–5
Section 122(2)
of the uniform Evidence Acts should
be amended to allow that evidence may be adduced where a client or party has
knowingly and voluntarily
disclosed to another person the substance of the
evidence or has otherwise acted in a manner inconsistent with the maintenance of
the privilege.
Proposal 13–6
If Proposal 13–1 is adopted,
the uniform Evidence Acts should be amended to preserve the availability of
client legal privilege to any legal advice—as
provided for in
and professional legal services as provided for in
—provided to
the Director of Public Prosecutions and to non-DPP prosecutors.
Alternative Proposal 13–6
If Proposal 13–1 is adopted,
of the uniform Evidence Acts should remain applicable only to the
adducing of evidence by an accused in a criminal proceeding.
Question 13–1
Should the uniform Evidence Acts abrogate client
legal privilege in relation to investigations being conducted by watchdog
such as the Commonwealth Ombudsman and state and territory ombudsmen?
Alternatively, should the client legal privilege sections of
the Acts be amended
to create an exception for information and documents relating to the
accountability of government?
Proposal 13–7
Evidence Act 1995
should be amended to adopt the equivalent of Division 1A of the
Evidence Act
Proposal 13–7a
Evidence Act 1995
, Division 1B of the
Evidence Act 1995
(NSW) should be
amended to include a sexual assault counselling privilege of a discretionary
kind applicable to both civil and criminal
proceedings.
Proposal 13–7b
If Proposal 13–7a is accepted,
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
(NSW) should be repealed.
Proposal 13–8
Both the confidential communications privilege and
the sexual assault communications privilege should apply to pre-trial discovery
and the production of documents in response to a subpoena and non-curial
contexts such as search warrants and notices to produce
documents, as well as
court proceedings.
Proposal 13–9
Section 128
should be re-drafted to clarify
the procedure by which a witness is able to object to giving evidence, may be
compelled to give evidence
and may be granted privilege in respect of
self-incrimination in other proceedings.
Question 13–2
On what terms should
be redrafted to
clarify its procedure?
Proposal 13–10
Section 128A should be inserted in the uniform
Evidence Acts to apply in respect of orders made in a civil proceeding requiring
individual to disclose assets or other information (or to attend court to
testify regarding assets or other information) or to permit
premises to be
Proposal 13–11
Section 128(7)
of the uniform Evidence Acts
should be amended to clarify that a ‘proceeding’ under that section
does not include a retrial
for the same offence or an offence arising out of the
same circumstances.
Proposal 13–12
The definition of a ‘NSW court’ in
the Dictionary of the
Evidence Act 1995
(NSW) should be amended to
include ‘any person or body authorised by a New South Wales law, or by
consent of the parties, to
hear, receive and examine evidence’.
Proposal 13–13
Section 130
of the uniform Evidence Acts should
apply to pre-trial discovery and the production of documents in response to a
subpoena and non-curial
contexts such as search warrants and notices to produce
documents, as well as court proceedings.
Question 13–3
Are there any difficulties with the operation of
of the uniform Evidence Acts? In particular, are there difficulties
with statements made during mediation, that may not be covered
by the privilege,
but should be?
Chapter 14 Discretionary and Mandatory
Proposal 14–1
The heading at
‘Discretions to
exclude evidence’ should be amended to read ‘Discretionary and
mandatory exclusions’.
Proposal 14–2
The uniform Evidence Acts should be amended to
provide the Court with the power to give advance rulings.
Chapter 15 Judicial Notice
Question 15–1
Should the provisions relating to judicial notice
allow judges to take account of social facts? Are there more effective ways of
with this issue?
Chapter 16 Comments, Warnings and Directions to
Proposal 16–1
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth) should be
amended to include similar provisions to
Evidence Act 1995
(NSW) dealing with warnings in respect of
children’s evidence.
Question 16–1
Should the recommendations proposed by the
Victorian Law Reform Commission or the Tasmania Law Reform Institute in relation
warnings (or any other models) be adopted
under the uniform Evidence Acts?
Question 16–2
Should the uniform Evidence Acts be amended to
require that, where the parties are represented, warnings, including warnings
, are only required to be given on request of one of
the parties? In the alternative, should the uniform Evidence Acts be amended
provide that a trial judge’s obligation to give warnings at common law
continues to operate unless all the parties agree
that such a warning should not
Question 16–3
In either case referred to in Question 16–2,
should the uniform Evidence Acts be amended to provide that the court is
to inform the parties of their rights in relation to common law
Chapter 17 Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
Traditional Laws and Customs
Proposal 17–1
The uniform Evidence Acts
should be amended to provide an exception to the hearsay and opinion evidence
rules for evidence relevant
to Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander traditional
laws and customs.
Question 17–1
Should the proposed amendment in Proposal
17–1 apply to a broader category of evidence such as evidence based on
knowledge’ or ‘oral tradition’ and, if so, how
should such a term be defined?
Question 17–2
Should the uniform Evidence Acts be amended to
allow courts to excuse a witness from answering a question which tends to
incriminate
the witness under his or her Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander
traditional laws and customs and, if so, on what basis and subject
Other Sections Considered
The following sections of the uniform Evidence Acts have received
consideration in this Discussion Paper, but no proposal for change
has been made
or question raised about the need for change.
Chapter 2 The Uniform Evidence Acts
Powers of a court with respect to abuse of process in a
Chapter 5 Examination and Cross-Examination
of Witnesses
Unfavourable witnesses
Previous representations of other persons
Leave to recall witnesses
Chapter 6 Documentary Evidence
Evidence of official records
Public documents
Chapter 7 The Hearsay
Rule and its Exceptions
Evidence of a previous representation about a matter adduced by
a defendant
Exception [to hearsay]: interlocutory proceedings
Chapter 8 The Opinion Rule and its
Exception [to opnion]: lay opinions
Ultimate issue and common knowledge rules abolished
Chapter 9 Admissions
Discretion to exclude admissions
Chapter 11 Credibility Evidence
s 104(4)(b)
and (c) of the
Evidence Act 2001
Admissibility of evidence of credibility of person who has made a
previous representation [consequential amendments suggested due
to proposals on
other sections]
Chapter 12 Identification Evidence
Exclusion of evidence of identification by pictures
Directions to jury [on identification evidence]
Chapter 13 Privilege
Loss of client privilege: misconduct
Religious confessions
Chapter 14 Discretionary and Mandatory
General discretion to exclude evidence
General discretion to limit use of evidence
Discretion to exclude improperly or illegally obtained
Leave, permission or direction may be given on terms
Chapter 15 Judicial Notice
Matters of law
Matters of common knowledge
Certain Crown certificates
Chapter 16 Warnings and Directions to the
Comment on failure to give evidence
1. Introduction to the Inquiry
Inquiry with other law reform bodies
The scope of the Inquiry
Organisation of this paper
Process of reform
Participating in the Inquiry
1. Introduction to the Inquiry
1.1 On 12 July 2004, the Attorney-General of Australia asked the Australian
Law Reform Commission (ALRC) to conduct an Inquiry into
the operation of the
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth). The New South Wales Attorney General had
similarly asked the New South Wales Law Reform Commission (NSWLRC) on 2 July
to conduct a review of the operation of the
Evidence Act 1995
in almost identical terms. The ALRC, in consultation with the NSWLRC, published
an Issues Paper,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
(IP 28), in
December 2004. IP 28 identifies the main issues relevant to the Inquiry,
and provides background information and over
100 questions designed to encourage
informed public participation.
1.2 The Inquiry commenced on the eve of the tenth anniversary of the
Commonwealth and New South Wales Evidence Acts. The uniform
Evidence Act
itself the product of an extensive research effort by the ALRC. In 1979, the
ALRC received Terms of Reference for an inquiry
into the law of evidence. The
ALRC produced a series of research reports and discussion papers; an Interim
(ALRC 26) including draft
legislation in 1985;
and a final
(ALRC 38) in 1987, which also contained draft
legislation.
1.3 The NSWLRC also conducted an inquiry into the law of evidence that commenced
in 1966. It published two reports,
a working paper,
discussion papers
during the course
of that inquiry. However, when the ALRC received the Terms of Reference for its
evidence inquiry in 1979, the NSWLRC
suspended its work pending the outcome of
the ALRC’s inquiry.
1.4 In its 1988 Report,
(NSWLRC 56), the NSWLRC recommended
that the bulk of the ALRC’s proposals be adopted in New South Wales and
that the draft
legislation be
1.5 In 1991, the Commonwealth and New South Wales governments each introduced
legislation substantially based on—but differing
respects—the ALRC’s draft legislation. In the same year, the
Standing Committee of Attorneys-General gave in
principle support to a uniform
legislative scheme throughout Australia.
1.6 The Commonwealth and New South Wales parliaments each passed an Evidence Bill
in 1993 to come into effect from 1 January 1995.
The Acts were in most respects
identical and are often described as the ‘uniform Evidence Acts’. In
1997, the New South
Wales Parliament enacted the
Evidence Amendment
(Confidential Communications) Act 1997
, which incorporated into
Evidence Act 1995
(NSW) privilege in relation to professional
confidential relationships and sexual assault communications. These amendments
are discussed
in detail in Chapter 13. Further, in 2002, the
Evidence Act
(NSW) was amended to adopt a broader definition of ‘de facto
relationship’
and to insert a
provision relating to warnings about children’s
Comparable provisions
were not introduced into the
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth), thus diminishing
the uniformity achieved
1.7 The Commonwealth Act applies in federal courts and, by agreement, in courts
in the Australian Capital Territory. The New South
Wales Act applies in
proceedings, federal or state, before New South Wales courts and some
1.8 In 2001, Tasmania passed legislation that essentially mirrors that of the
Commonwealth and New South Wales Acts, although there
differences.
In 2004, Norfolk
Island passed legislation that essentially mirrors the
Evidence Act 1995
1.9 No other state or territory has yet adopted similar legislation. The
Victorian Government announced in 2004 that ‘it is
proposing to implement
legislation consistent with the model Evidence Acts passed by the Commonwealth
and New South Wales parliaments
and adapted to the needs of the Victorian
In November 2004,
the Attorney-General of Victoria asked the Victorian Law Reform Commission
(VLRC) to review the laws of evidence
applying in Victoria. The VLRC was
directed to review the
Evidence Act 1958
(Vic) and other laws of evidence
and to advise on the action required to facilitate the introduction of the
Evidence Act
into Victoria.
1.10 In March 2005, the Queensland Attorney-General asked the Queensland Law
Reform Commission (QLRC) to undertake a review under
terms of reference similar
to the ALRC’s inquiry, with some minor modifications in relation to
Queensland specific matters.
Unlike the VLRC’s Terms of Reference, the
QLRC’s Terms of Reference do not require the QLRC to advise on the action
to facilitate the introduction of the uniform
Evidence Act
Queensland. Rather, the QLRC is directed to work in association with the ALRC
and the NSWLRC with a view to producing agreed
recommendations for inclusion in
this Discussion Paper. The QLRC is then to provide a report to the Queensland
Attorney-General by
31 July 2005 on its review of the uniform Evidence Acts.
1.11 In May 2005, the ALRC was informed that the Northern Territory
Attorney-General asked the Northern Territory Law Reform Committee
to review the
uniform Evidence Acts. The ALRC has also been advised that the Attorney-General
of Western Australia has formally placed
the uniform
Evidence Act
legislative agenda.
1.12 In those states and territories that have not adopted the uniform
legislation, the law of evidence is a mixture of statute and
common law,
together with applicable rules of court.
Judiciary Act 1903
(Cth), the laws of each
state or territory—including the laws relating to procedure, evidence, and
the competency of witnesses—are
binding on all courts exercising federal
The effect of this is
that the courts of the states and territories, when exercising federal
or territory rather than the
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth), except for those provisions that have a wider
1.14 The passage of the
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth) therefore has had the
effect of achieving uniformity among federal courts wherever they are sitting,
but there is no uniformity
among the states or territories when exercising
federal jurisdiction. As a practical example, a Melbourne barrister defending a
charged with a federal crime before the Victorian Supreme Court would use
that state’s evidence law; but would use the
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth) if appearing before the Federal Court, the Federal Magistrates Court or
the Family Court on a different matter the following
1.15 In carrying out its review of the
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth), the ALRC is
directed in the Terms of Reference to have regard to the desirability of
promoting greater harmonisation of the
laws of evidence of
To achieve this
objective the ALRC is working with law reform bodies in New South Wales,
Victoria, Tasmania and Queensland, and has
conducted consultations in all
non-uniform
Evidence Act
Inquiry with other
law reform bodies
1.16 The project was conceived from the outset as a ‘joint
venture’ between the ALRC and the NSWLRC. The scope of the
project has
widened since the publication of IP 28. The VLRC’s Terms of Reference
require the VLRC to work with the ALRC and
the NSWLRC, and the three Commissions
have collaborated to produce an agreed set of proposals in this Discussion
Paper, with a view
to producing agreed recommendations in a final Report. In
addition, an ongoing consultative relationship has been established with
Tasmania Law Reform Institute (TLRI), the QLRC, the Northern Territory Law
Reform Committee (NTLRC) and the Law Reform Commission
of Western Australia
1.17 The recommendations for legislative amendment contained in the final
Report will have direct application to the
Evidence Act 1995
Evidence Act 1995
(NSW). In the interests of uniformity, it is hoped
that the recommendations will be taken up where applicable by other participants
in the uniform Evidence Acts regime, (Tasmania and Norfolk Island), and by those
Evidence Act
legislation. The
involvement of the law reform bodies noted in the preceding paragraph should
facilitate this outcome.
1.18 The ALRC, VLRC and NSWLRC will work together closely during the Inquiry,
with involvement of commissioners and staff from all
the institutions. This
Discussion Paper is a joint effort of the ALRC, VLRC and NSWLRC (the
‘Commissions’). The VLRC
had the primary responsibility for the
research and writing of chapters dealing with competence and compellability,
tendency and
coincidence and credibility evidence. The NSWLRC had primary
responsibility for the research and writing of the judicial notice and
documentary evidence chapters. The ALRC had primary responsibility for the
preparation of the remaining chapters.
1.19 Where a proposal relates only to one jurisdiction, for example Proposal
2-1, the Commissions, in jointly making the proposal,
rely on the requirement in
the Terms of Reference of all three Commissions to promote greater harmonisation
of the laws of evidence
in Australia. Hence, such proposals are made by all of
the Commissions, not just the Commission in the relevant jurisdiction.
The scope of the
1.20 The ALRC, NSWLRC and VLRC Terms of Reference are reproduced at the
beginning of this Discussion Paper. The Terms of Reference
require the
Commissions to focus on the following areas:
• the examination and re-examination of witnesses, before and during
proceedings;
• the hearsay rule and its exceptions;
• the opinion rule and its exceptions;
• the coincidence rule;
• the credibility rule and its exceptions; and
• privileges, including client legal privilege.
1.21 The ALRC and the NSWLRC are also directed to consider the relationship
between the uniform Evidence Acts and other legislation
regulating the laws of
evidence, and whether the fact that significant areas of evidence law are dealt
with in other legislation
poses any significant disadvantages to the objectives
of clarity, effectiveness and uniformity.
1.22 Accordingly, in the course of the Inquiry, there may be issues about
whether some matters not included within the purview of
the current legislation
ought to be so included. For example, the
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
(NSW) contains a number of evidentiary provisions that are not contained in the
uniform Evidence Acts.
1.23 The VLRC is directed to review the laws of evidence applying in Victoria. In
particular, the VLRC is directed to review the
Evidence Act 1958
and other laws of evidence and to advise on the action required to facilitate
the introduction of the uniform
Evidence Act
into Victoria, including any
necessary modification of the existing provisions of the Act.
1.24 In undertaking the Inquiry, the Commissions are also directed to consider
recent legislative and case law developments in evidence
law, including the
extent to which common law rules of evidence continue to operate in areas not
covered by the uniform Evidence
together with the application of
the rules of evidence contained in the Acts to pre-trial procedures.
1.25 The Commissions, in keeping with the spirit of the uniform Evidence Acts
scheme, are directed to work with other law reform bodies.
The ALRC, being a
federal body, is directed to consult with relevant stakeholders in all states
and territories, including government
departments, the courts, their client
groups and the legal profession, in the interests of identifying and addressing
any defects
in the current law, and with a view to maintaining and furthering
the harmonisation of the laws of evidence throughout Australia.
Definition of
‘law of evidence’
1.26 For the purpose of this Inquiry, the Commissions have adopted the
definition of evidence utilised by the ALRC when it considered
these matters in
the 1980s. The ALRC stated that:
any review of the laws of evidence requires a consideration of any rules of law
which have an impact on the admission and handling
of evidence. This is so
notwithstanding the fact that some of these rules, for example, res judicata,
may go beyond purely evidentiary
1.27 The ALRC indicated that, in adopting that approach, it would consider
those rules that either directly or indirectly:
• control what evidence may be received;
• control the manner in which evidence is presented and received;
• control how evidence is to be handled and considered once it is
received and what conclusions, if any, are to be drawn from
particular classes
of evidence;
• specify the degree of satisfaction that the tribunal of fact must
attain in determining whether a fact in issue is established
consequences if such level of satisfaction is not
1.28 Chapter 2 discusses the policy behind the ALRC’s original
recommendations.
Terminology
1.29 The ALRC’s Terms of Reference ask the ALRC to consider the
operation of the
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth) and the NSWLRC is asked by its
Terms of Reference to consider the
Evidence Act 1995
(NSW). This requires
consideration of the decisions of the High Court, the Federal and Family Courts,
the Federal Magistrates Court,
the courts of New South Wales and the courts of
the Australian Capital Territory. However, given that the Commonwealth and New
Wales Acts have counterparts in Tasmania and Norfolk Island, relevant
decisions about the meaning of a particular provision may arise
in a Tasmanian
or Norfolk Island court in relation to evidence legislation in these
The Commissions
consider that such decisions form part of the review as they indicate how the
present legislation is operating and
may highlight deficiencies in it.
1.30 Accordingly, in this Discussion Paper, reference to the ‘uniform
Evidence Acts’ means the
Evidence Act 1995
Evidence Act 1995
Evidence Act 2001
(Tas) and the
Evidence Act 2004
(NI). Where it is necessary in the context of a
discussion to differentiate between the statutes, this will be done
Breadth of the
1.31 The ALRC’s original evidence inquiry was lengthy and
comprehensive. Although the topics identified in the Commissions’
Reference for this Inquiry are broad, this has not been interpreted to mean that
all aspects of the uniform Evidence Acts
must be reviewed again. Rather, the
Commissions are interested in identifying those parts of the uniform Evidence
Acts that may benefit
from some fine-tuning in the light of experience.
1.32 Based on the submissions received, and the meetings and consultations
held to date, it appears that there are no major structural
problems with the
legislation or with the policy underpinning it. As was noted by the Law Council
of Australia, ‘this review
is not the place for a wide-ranging review of
the policies underpinning the uniform Evidence Acts’, and ‘[t]he
accepts the policy framework of the
legislation’.
Commissions agree with this view.
1.33 IP 28 identified two potential impacts of any large-scale revision of
the uniform Evidence Acts. First, the commencement of the
Evidence Act
(Cth) and the
Evidence Act 1995
(NSW) required judicial officers
and legal practitioners to master the Acts’ provisions and to adapt to the
modification of
many common law evidentiary principles. This educative process
is well advanced, and judicial officers and litigation practitioners
familiar with the operation of the legislation. Any major changes would require
yet another significant educative effort.
1.34 Secondly, there are well-founded concerns that any major changes in the
uniform Evidence Acts would lead to a spate of litigation,
with attendant cost
considerations, to test the meaning of any new or reworded sections. This could
lead to significant uncertainty
until the meaning is settled by the courts.
1.35 It follows that a case for change should be made before the Commissions
propose a legislative amendment. In this Discussion Paper,
the Commissions have
attempted to reflect accurately the views expressed in submissions and
consultations, and to set out clearly
the view of the Commissions. Where, in the
Commissions’ view, a case for change has been successfully advocated, a
is put forward. Where no change is recommended, this has also been
noted in the discussion. Both the proposals for reform and the
areas where no
change is recommended are summarised at the front of this Paper.
1.36 There was not a strong call in submissions and consultations for a more
wide-ranging reappraisal. In fact, as outlined in Chapter
2, while areas of
concern were identified, a clear message was conveyed to the Commissions that a
major overhaul of the legislation
is neither warranted nor desirable. Therefore,
it is not the intention of this Inquiry to carry out a review as extensive as
of the original ALRC inquiry.
Organisation of this
1.37 IP 28 largely followed the organisation and structure of the
uniform Evidence Acts, with the inclusion of some additional topics
15. While this paper is structured in a similar way, it became clear during the
course of the consultations, both with
stakeholders and with participating law
reform bodies, that additional areas warranted attention. In particular, it was
decided that
separate chapters dealing with aspects of the policy framework of
the Acts, competence and compellability of witnesses, and evidence
of Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander traditional law and custom were required.
Chapters 1–3:
Introduction and background
1.38 Chapter 1 contains introductory and background material to the
Inquiry and the uniform Evidence Acts. Chapter 2 describes the
their relationship with the common law and other legislation. The chapter also
discusses the policy framework behind the
uniform legislation. The chapter notes
that one of the central approaches to evidence recommended by ALRC 38, and
adopted in the
uniform Evidence Acts, was not to distinguish between jury and
non-jury trials. It discusses whether the Acts should be amended to
greater differentiation between the rules of evidence applying in jury and
non-jury trials, and proposes no change in this
regard. The chapter concludes
with a discussion of the scope of the uniform Evidence Acts, and in particular
the general obligation
of the court to ensure a fair trial.
1.39 Chapter 3 discusses certain concepts in the uniform Evidence Acts
which appear to have caused confusion. In particular, the approach
the Acts to evidence of tendency, coincidence, credibility and character, and
the concepts of probative value, unfair
prejudice and unfairness are analysed in
detail. The chapter concludes with a proposal to facilitate a better
understanding among
judicial officers and legal practitioners of the policy
underlying the Acts.
Chapters 4–6:
Adducing evidence
1.40 Chapters 4, 5 and 6 are concerned with the competence and
compellability of witnesses (Chapter 4), the adducing of evidence from
(Chapter 5) and the use of documents in court proceedings (Chapter 6). Chapter 4
addresses the concept of competence, particularly
in relation to the giving of
unsworn evidence by a witness, and the definition of de facto spouse in the
context of compellability
of spouses in criminal proceedings.
1.41 Chapter 5 discusses a number of issues in relation to the examination
and re-examination of witnesses, the primary focus being
the rules governing
cross-examination of witnesses. While there has not been a suggestion to the
Inquiry that these sections of the
Acts are fundamentally flawed or require
significant amendment, the following topics have been raised as being of some
interest or
concern: the giving of evidence in narrative form, cross-examination
of unfavourable witnesses and cross-examination of vulnerable
1.42 The uniform Evidence Acts introduced significant changes with respect to
the proof of documents. Chapter 6 examines how the provisions
of the uniform
Evidence Acts dealing with documentary evidence have operated in practice. It
then examines two specific issues raised
in IP 28: proof of electronic
evidence and evidence of official records.
Chapters 7–14:
Admissibility of evidence
1.43 Chapters 7–14 examine the rules pertaining to the admissibility of
evidence. Chapter 7 discusses the hearsay rule, as codified
the uniform Evidence Acts, and its exceptions. These exceptions fall into two
categories. The first category applies to first-hand
hearsay (where the maker
has personal knowledge of the asserted
The second category
applies to more remote (or ‘second-hand’)
The operation of
and the policy underlying the provision are discussed in detail. The
chapter makes a limited number of proposals for reform of the
provisions.
1.44 Chapter 8 discusses the exceptions to the opinion rule. These include
exceptions in relation to lay
and opinion based on
specialised knowledge
opinion evidence). Submissions and consultations have identified the
admissibility of expert opinion evidence as a significant
issue in this Inquiry.
1.45 Chapter 9 focuses on admissions in a criminal context, primarily
of the uniform Evidence Acts. A proposal is made to
clarify the meaning of the term ‘in the course of official
questioning’
1.46 Chapter 10 discusses evidence pertaining to tendency and
coincidence. A number of issues have been raised concerning the operation
and the notice requirement
attention is paid to whether, for criminal trials,
should be replaced
by a provision which relies upon ‘the interests of justice’ as the
test for admissibility. The Commissions
conclude that this is not an option that
should be adopted.
1.47 Chapter 11 discusses the credibility rule and exceptions to the
credibility rule. Evidence relevant to credibility may include
evidence of a witness, evidence of inconsistent or consistent statements and
evidence that shows a witness’ capacity
for observation. The chapter
discusses certain concerns about the credibility rule and its operation,
including the articulation
of the rule in
1.48 Chapter 12 focuses on selected aspects of the identification
evidence provisions of the uniform Evidence Acts, including: the
definition of
identification evidence and whether it covers DNA evidence and exculpatory
evidence; identification using pictures
kept for the use of police officers
(‘picture identification evidence’); and directions to the jury
regarding identification
1.49 Chapter 13 deals with privilege. Proposed amendments to the client
legal privilege sections of the uniform Evidence Acts are
discussed. The aim is
to clarify unclear terms or, in some cases, align the Acts with developments at
common law which are supported
by the Commissions. The chapter also looks at the
confidential communications, sexual assault communications and medical
communications
privileges available under the
Evidence Act 1995
Evidence Act 2001
(Tas) and discusses whether one of these models
should be adopted by the
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth). Criticisms of the
certification process available under the sections dealing with the privilege
against self-incrimination
are analysed. Finally, the chapter considers
submissions received regarding the three types of evidence which may be excluded
the public interest.
1.50 The uniform Evidence Acts contain a number of provisions that give
courts the discretion to exclude otherwise admissible evidence
in both civil and
criminal proceedings. Chapter 14 examines how these sections are operating
in practice and how any concerns about
their operation should be addressed,
whether through amendment of the uniform Evidence Acts or otherwise.
Chapter 15–18:
Other topics
1.51 Chapter 15 considers judicial notice, an area of the legislation
that largely mirrors the common law, and discusses whether this
concept has
raised any concerns in practice. Chapter 16 discusses comments, warnings
and directions to the jury, with particular
emphasis on comments on the failure
of the accused to give evidence, inferences from the absence of evidence,
warnings about unreliable
evidence and warnings in respect of children’s
1.52 Chapter 17 discusses two issues concerning the evidence of
Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander (ATSI) witnesses. The discussion
whether the uniform Evidence Acts should be amended to include a provision
dealing specifically with the admissibility
of evidence of traditional laws and
customs. The chapter also considers whether there should be a privilege with
respect to evidence
that, if disclosed, would render an ATSI witness liable to
punishment under traditional laws and customs.
1.53 Chapter 18 considers the relationship between the uniform Evidence
Acts and other legislation, and in particular examines whether
concerns that significant areas of evidence law are dealt with in other
legislation. The chapter looks at particular topics
including rape shield laws,
child witnesses and family law proceedings.
ALRC Advisory Committee
1.54 It is standard operating procedure for the ALRC to establish a broad
based expert Advisory Committee to assist with the development
of its inquiries.
In this Inquiry, the Advisory Committee includes members of the judiciary,
practitioners from government and the
private profession, and
1.55 The Advisory Committee met for the first time on 16 September 2004, and
again on 26 May 2005. It will meet again as required
during the course of the
Inquiry to provide general advice and assistance to the ALRC. The Committee has
particular value in helping
to identify the key issues for Inquiry, as well as
in providing quality assurance in the research and consultation effort. The
Committee has assisted with the development of the reform proposals and
questions contained in this paper, and will assist with the
development of
recommendations for reform contained in the final Report. However, ultimate
responsibility for the proposals contained
in this paper, and for the
recommendations in the final Report, remains with the Commissioners of the ALRC,
the NSWLRC, and the VLRC.
NSWLRC and VLRC Divisions
1.56 As noted above, this Discussion Paper is a joint effort of the ALRC, the
NSWLRC and the VLRC. The Commissions held a workshop
in May 2005 to discuss and
finalise the proposals for reform. Representatives of the QLRC and the TLRI also
participated in the workshop.
The Divisions of the NSWLRC and the VLRC, part of
the internal approval process of the NSW and Victorian Commissions, also had
into the development of the reform proposals and questions contained in
this paper.
Community consultation
1.57 Under the terms of its constituting Act, the ALRC ‘may inform
itself in any way it thinks fit’ for the purposes of
reviewing or
considering anything that is the subject of an
One of the most
important features of ALRC inquiries is the commitment to widespread community
consultation.
This is similarly
the case with the NSWLRC and the VLRC.
1.58 The nature and extent of this engagement is normally determined by the
subject matter of the reference. Areas that are seen to
be narrow and technical
tend to be of interest mainly to experts. Some ALRC references
as those relating to children and the law, Aboriginal customary law,
multiculturalism and the law, and the protection of human
information
involve a significant level of interest and involvement
from the general public and the media. This Inquiry falls into the former
category and hence interest has been expressed mainly by legal practitioners,
the judiciary and legal academics.
1.59 Consultations prior to the publication of IP 28 in December 2004
included public forums and ‘round table’ discussions
groups. The ALRC provided details of, and invited participation in, the Inquiry
to courts and legal professional bodies
throughout Australia and held some
15 meetings. These included consultations with members of the judiciary in
a range of jurisdictions.
In addition, the ALRC had the benefit of submissions
from the New South Wales judiciary responding to an invitation from the
1.60 In releasing the Terms of Reference for the Inquiry, the Australian
Government asked the ALRC to consult with the other members
of the uniform
Evidence Acts scheme—the Australian Capital Territory and Tasmania; with
other states and territories as appropriate
and with other relevant
stakeholders, in particular the courts, their client groups and the legal
profession.
1.61 From January to April 2005, consultations on the issues raised in
IP 28 were conducted in every state, the Australian Capital
Territory and
the Northern Territory. Judicial officers from every jurisdiction, including
some members of the High Court, participated.
In New South Wales and Victoria,
consultations, public forums, and round table discussions were held with
judicial officers from
the Local, District/County and Supreme Courts. Legal
practitioners from both branches of the profession, and their representative
organisations, were also consulted, as were academics with an expertise in
evidence law. Consultations were also held with organisations
involved with
specific client groups, for example the Legal Aid Office (ACT) and the Northern
Territory Aboriginal Interpreter Service.
Further, over 50 submissions
addressing issues raised in IP 28 were received.
1.62 To promote the harmonisation of the laws of evidence throughout
Australia, as mandated in the ALRC’s Terms of Reference,
the ALRC met with
the Attorney-General of Queensland, and representatives of the Northern
Territory Department of Justice, the Western
Australian Department of Justice
and the South Australian Attorney-General’s Department.
Participating in the
1.63 There are several ways in which those with an interest in this Inquiry
may participate. First, individuals and organisations
may indicate an expression
of interest in the Inquiry by contacting the ALRC, NSWLRC or the VLRC or by
applying online at <
www.alrc.gov.au
1.64 Secondly, individuals and organisations may make written submissions to
the ALRC, NSWLRC or the VLRC. There is no specified
format for submissions. The
Inquiry will gratefully accept anything from handwritten notes and emailed
dot-points to detailed commentary
on matters concerning the uniform Evidence
Acts. The Commissions also receive confidential submissions. Details about
making a submission
may be found at the front of this Discussion Paper.
1.65 Thirdly, the Commissions maintain an active program of direct
consultation with stakeholders and other interested parties. The
responsibility for conducting consultations has been delegated by the
Commissions to the ALRC, although the VLRC is also
conducting consultations of
particular relevance to the VLRC’s Terms of Reference. The ALRC is based
in Sydney, but in recognition
of the national character of the ALRC,
consultations have been conducted throughout Australia. Consultations on the
proposals put
forward in this Discussion Paper will also be conducted. Any
individual or organisation with an interest in meeting with the Commissions
relation to the proposals raised in this Discussion Paper is encouraged to
Timeframe for the
1.66 Two community consultation papers will be produced prior to issuing the
final Report. The first, IP 28, was released in December
2004. The second
is this Discussion Paper.
1.67 IP 28 identified the main issues relevant to the Inquiry, provided
some background information, and encouraged informed public
participation. An
electronic copy of IP 28 is available on the ALRC website at
www.alrc.gov.au
>. IP 28 made assumptions about the likely breadth of
the Inquiry.
However, this was
not meant to inhibit full and open discussion of the issue and policy choices.
Issues not raised in IP 28 have
arisen and are dealt with in this
Discussion Paper, including certain questions relating to the unsworn testimony
of children, the
proposal relating to evidence of ATSI traditional laws and
customs and the proposal relating to the definition of ‘de facto
1.68 This Discussion Paper contains a more detailed treatment of the issues and
indicates the Commissions’ current thinking
in the form of specific reform
proposals and focused questions. The proposals and questions are put forward for
critical examination
and to provide a focus for discussion.
1.69 The ALRC and NSWLRC are each due to present a final Report, containing final
recommendations, to their respective Attorneys-General
by 5 December 2005. It is
planned that the ALRC, NSWLRC and VLRC will produce a joint final Report by this
date. Once tabled in Parliament,
the Report becomes a public
The final Report will
not be a self-executing document
law reform bodies provide advice
and recommendations about the best way to proceed, but implementation is a
matter for others.
In order to be considered for use in the
final Report
, submissions
addressing the questions and proposals in this Discussion Paper must reach the
Commissions by
Friday 16 September 2005
. Details about how to make a
submission are set out at the front of this publication.
1.70 The ALRC’s earlier Report on evidence contained draft legislation
which became the basis of the
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth) and the
Such draft legislation was typical of the law reform
effort in those times. Since then the ALRC’s practice has changed, and
does not produce draft bills unless specifically asked to do so in the Terms of
Reference. This is partly because drafting is
a specialised function better left
to the legislative drafting experts and partly a recognition of the fact that
time and resources are better directed towards determining the
policy that will shape any resulting legislation.
1.71 While the Commissions have not been asked to produce draft legislation
in this Inquiry, some proposals in this Discussion Paper
indicate the precise
nature of the desired legislative change. To assist those charged with the
responsibility of implementing the
recommendations contained in the final
Report, and to promote informed discussion, a consultant was retained to draft
some specific
proposals for legislative amendment. These proposals are set out
for review and comment in Appendix 1 to this Discussion Paper.
Australian Law Reform Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) (1985).
Australian Law Reform Commission,
, ALRC 38 (1987). Both reports
may be found on the ALRC’s website at <
www.alrc.gov.au
New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Evidence (Business Records)
, LRC 17 (1973) and New South Wales Law Reform
Commission,
The Rule Against Hearsay
New South Wales Law Reform
Commission,
Illegally and Improperly Obtained Evidence
New South Wales Law Reform
Commission,
Competence and Compellability
, DP 7 (1980); New South Wales
Law Reform Commission,
Oaths and Affirmations
, DP 8 (1980); and New South
Wales Law Reform Commission,
Unsworn Statements of Accused Persons
New South Wales Law Reform
Commission,
, LRC 56 (1988),
Miscellaneous Acts Amendment
(Relationships) Act 2002
(NSW) which extended the non-gender specific
definition of ‘de facto relationship’ contained in the
(Relationships) Act 1984
(NSW) to a number of statutes including the
Evidence Act 1995
(NSW). This is discussed in detail in
Evidence Legislation
Amendment Act 2001
(NSW). This is discussed in detail in
Evidence Law
(6th ed, 2004),
As discussed below, the Acts
leave room, in some circumstances, for the operation of the common law, together
with other relevant
legislation and rules of
Evidence Act 2001
This legislation came into effect on 1 July
Evidence Act 2004
State Government of Victoria,
New Directions for the Victorian Justice System 2004-2014:
Attorney-General’s Justice Statement
Except as otherwise provided by
Constitution
or the laws of the
Commonwealth.
See the discussion later
in this chapter on the desirability or otherwise of requiring all state courts,
when exercising federal
Evidence Act 1995
See Chs 13,
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Reform of Evidence Law
, IP 3 (1980),
Evidence Act 2001
Evidence Act 2004
Council of Australia,
Uniform Evidence Acts
The members of the Advisory
Committee are listed in the front of this Discussion
Australian Law Reform
Commission Act 1996
See B Opeskin,
‘Engaging the Public: Community Participation in the Genetic Information
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004),
See Ch 4 in relation to
unsworn testimony and the definition of de facto spouse, and Ch 17 in
relation to evidence of ATSI traditional
The Attorney-General of
Australia must table a Report received from the ALRC within 15 sitting days of
receiving it:
Australian Law Reform Commission Act 1996
Law Reform Commission Act 1967
Victorian Law
Reform Commission Act 2000
However, the ALRC has a
strong record of having its advice followed. About 57% of the ALRC’s
previous reports have been fully
or substantially implemented, about 29% of
reports have been partially implemented, 3% of reports are under consideration
have had no implementation to date.
2. The Uniform Evidence Acts
Introduction
Relationship with common law, equity and other statutes
The application of the uniform Evidence Acts in federal jurisdiction
The uniform Evidence Acts
Evidentiary provisions outside the uniform Evidence Acts
Policy framework
Evidence, jury and non-jury trials
Application of the
Evidence Act 1995
Scope of the uniform Evidence Acts
2. The Uniform Evidence
Introduction
2.1 The law of evidence in Australia is a mixture of statute and common law
together with rules of court.
discussed in Chapter 1, although there were hopes when the
Evidence Act
(Cth) was passed that this would lead to uniform legislation
throughout Australia, this has not occurred. Federal courts and courts
Australian Capital Territory apply the law found in the
Evidence Act 1995
provisions have a wider reach.
addition, New South Wales, Tasmania and Norfolk Island have passed mirror
legislation.
These statutes are
substantially the same as the Commonwealth legislation but not
In New South Wales and
Tasmania, state courts exercising federal or state jurisdiction and some
tribunals apply the law found in
the mirror legislation.
2.2 While harmonisation of the laws of evidence in Australia has not yet
occurred, there are promising signs that non-uniform
Evidence Act
are moving towards entry into the uniform
Evidence Act
regime. The
recommendations of the reports of the previous ALRC evidence
and the provisions of the
uniform Evidence Acts have been considered by various bodies, each of which have
recommended enactment.
• Report of the Standing Committee on Uniform Legislation and
Intergovernmental Agreements (Western Australia Legislative Assembly)
Evidence Law
, 18th Report in the 34th Parliament (1996).
• Law Reform Commission of Western Australia, Review of the Criminal
and Civil Justice System in Western Australia Final Report,
• The Victorian Parliament Scrutiny of Acts and Regulations Committee,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1958
• The Victorian Bar Council and the Law Institute of Victoria jointly
in November 2003.
• The VLRC reports on defences to homicide and sexual
2.3 In Victoria, the VLRC has stated:
Given our terms of reference [in relation to the
Evidence Act
Review], the
VLRC’s view is that it should not explore whether legislation based on the
UEA should be introduced in Victoria.
A detailed discussion of the reasons for
changing the laws of evidence can be found in the original ALRC reports. …
While those
reports focus on federal and territory courts, similar issues arise
and similar advantages would flow from the adoption of a comprehensive
legislative approach in Victoria.
2.4 Further, while the Terms of Reference relating to this Inquiry given to
the Queensland Law Reform Commission (QLRC) are not as
definitive on the
desirability of implementing the uniform Evidence Acts, they highlight in the
preamble the ‘desirability
of achieving greater clarity and effectiveness
and promoting greater harmonisation of the laws of evidence in Australia’.
coupled with the fact that both the VLRC and the QLRC, and more recently
the NTLRC and the WALRC, are involved in this Inquiry, augers
well for continued
movement towards uniformity.
2.5 As noted in Chapter 1, for the purposes of this Discussion Paper,
reference to the ‘uniform Evidence Acts’ means the
(Cth) and the mirror statutes of New South Wales, Tasmania
and Norfolk Island. Where it is necessary in the context of any discussion
differentiate among them, this will be done so expressly.
Relationship with
common law, equity and other statutes
2.6 The extent to which the uniform
Evidence Acts operate as a code is
an issue which has attracted some
discussion.
It is uncontested
that the uniform
Evidence Acts in their entirety are not a code of the
law of evidence. This would have required an express intention by the ALRC to
develop a code and by the relevant legislatures to enact
The New South Wales
Attorney General, in his second reading speech, stated: ‘it should be
noted that, while the bill codifies
many aspects of the law of evidence, it is
not intended to operate as an exhaustive
For the uniform
Evidence Acts to do so would have required a significantly different
statutory scheme; one which explicitly excluded the operation
of evidentiary
rules and principles contained in other bodies of law.
2.7 The New South Wales, Tasmanian and Norfolk Island Evidence Acts provide that
the legislation does not affect the operation of
an evidentiary principle or
rule of the common law or equity in proceedings to which the legislation
applies, except in so far as
the legislation provides otherwise expressly or by
necessary intendment.
limiting these provisions, the New South Wales, Tasmanian and Norfolk Island
Evidence Acts also provide that they do not
affect the operation of a legal or
evidential presumption that is consistent with the
legislation.
Commonwealth Act contains a version of the latter
it makes no provision
for the operation of the rules and principles of evidence developed at common
law or in equity. However, so
far as the provisions of the Commonwealth Act are
not applicable to particular proceedings, are not sufficient to carry them into
effect, or are not appropriate to provide adequate remedies,
Judiciary Act 1903
(Cth) will result in the application of the common law
as modified by the statute law of the state or territory in which the court
exercising jurisdiction.
2.8 The uniform Evidence Acts do, however, exclude the operation of other laws
regarding the admissibility of evidence and the competence
and compellability of
As a consequence,
there as has been some judicial discussion as to whether Chapter 3 of the
uniform Evidence Acts functions as a
code. Stephen Odgers SC has argued
that Chapter 3 ‘constitutes a code for the rules relating to the
admissibility of evidence,
in the sense that common law rules relating to the
admissibility of evidence are
abrogated.’
has been cited by a number of judges as the ‘pivotal
regarding the
operation of the uniform Evidence Acts to admit or exclude evidence. On this
basis, Branson J suggested in
Quick v Stoland Pty Ltd
‘Chapter 3 is designed to deal exhaustively with this topic and, in a
practical sense, constitutes a code relating to
the admissibility of evidence in
proceedings to which the Act
The issue has
not been judicially resolved, with the discussion being limited to comments in
obiter dicta.
2.9 The significance of whether the uniform Evidence Acts are a code has emerged
in the context of the broader discussion regarding
the relationship between the
uniform Evidence Acts
and the common law. If the admissibility provisions
do operate as a code, this will significantly influence the way in which common
law principles can be used in the application of the uniform Evidence
In the light of this, a
consensus has emerged that the important issue is not whether Chapter 3 is
or is not technically a code,
but the extent to which all issues of
admissibility are to be governed by the statutory
There is judicial
concern that statements as to whether the uniform Evidence Acts are not a code
might ‘be used as a means
to retain aspects of the common law of evidence
which are inconsistent with the operation of the
2.10 An approach that abandons any technical attempt to characterise the
admissibility provisions of the uniform Evidence Acts with
codification is preferable. The jurisprudence regarding legal codes and
codification reveals a complexity not easily amenable
Reflecting, however, on
the nature of codified legislation can be useful. This is because the uniform
Evidence Acts do embody some
of the aspects of truly codified legislation, as
implemented in common law
When considering
the codification of New Zealand’s evidence law, the New Zealand Law
Commission identified the essential elements
of a legal code:
A true code may be defined as a legislative enactment which is comprehensive,
systematic in its structure, pre-emptive and which
states the principles to be
applied. It is pre-emptive in that it displaces all other law in its subject
area, save only that which
the code excepts. It is systematic in that all of its
parts form a coherent and integrated body. It is comprehensive in that it is
sufficiently inclusive and independent to enable it to be applied in a
relatively self-sufficient way. It is, however, the final
element which
particularly distinguishes a code from other legislative enactments: the purpose
of a code, as opposed to more limited
statutory enactments, is to establish a
legal order based on principles.
2.11 A primary purpose of the ALRC’s original
evidence inquiry was to review the common law and develop a principled approach
to evidence law. In some areas this resulted in substantial changes to the
common law; in other areas the common law remains an important
assisting application of the uniform Evidence Acts. The approach taken by the
High Court of Australia in
Papakosmas v The
and the New
South Wales Supreme Court in
reflects an approach
guided by the principles articulated in the uniform Evidence Acts. Stated
simply, Chapter 3 of the Act governs
admissibility issues. Reference to the
common law can facilitate an understanding of underlying concepts and helps to
identify the
changes brought about by Chapter 3.
2.12 A number of other statutes in each jurisdiction include rules of evidence
applicable to specific legislative schemes or particular
offences. For example,
Evidence Act 1995
provides that the Act
is subject to the
Corporations Act 2001
Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act
Provisions in these statutes contain specific formulations of the privilege
against self-incrimination as they relate to proceedings
brought under these
In New South Wales,
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
(NSW) restricts the
circumstances in which evidence in relation to a complainant’s sexual
history will be admissible.
The application of
the uniform Evidence Acts in federal jurisdiction
2.13 Except for the few provisions that apply to proceedings in an Australian
the Commonwealth Act
applies only to proceedings in an Australian Capital Territory court or a
federal court,
except where the
federal court is hearing an appeal from a state or Northern Territory
The Act does not,
therefore, apply to state courts even when such courts are exercising federal
2.14 However, where a state court is exercising federal jurisdiction in New South
Wales or Tasmania, the provisions of the mirror
legislation in those states will
apply to those proceedings by reason of
Judiciary Act
(Cth). Yet both the New South Wales and Tasmanian Evidence Acts purport
to apply of their own force to proceedings in, respectively,
New South Wales and
Tasmanian courts when those courts are exercising federal
To this extent,
the legislation is plainly invalid. It is not within the power of a state
parliament to make laws governing the exercise
of federal jurisdiction,
including the exercise of that jurisdiction by the courts of that
Indeed, even if it were
within power, such state law would be inoperative through constitutional
inconsistency with
Judiciary Act 1903
Commissions propose that the New South Wales Act should be amended to reflect
this position.
Proposal 2–1
The definition of ‘NSW court’ in the
Dictionary to the
Evidence Act 1995
(NSW) should be amended to delete the
parenthetical words ‘including such a court exercising federal
The uniform Evidence
2.15 The uniform Evidence Acts extend to all proceedings in a relevant
including proceedings
that relate to bail; are interlocutory proceedings or proceedings of a similar
kind; are heard in chambers;
or, subject to the direction of the court, relate
to sentencing.
In relation to
privilege, other than religious confession privilege, the Acts do not extend to
pre-trial matters. This is an important
issue for this Inquiry, and is discussed
in detail in Chapter 13.
2.16 In relation to sentencing,
states that the uniform Evidence
Acts extend to sentencing only:
(a) … if the court directs that the law of evidence applies in the
proceeding; and
(b) if the court specifies in the direction that the law of evidence applies
only in relation to specified matters—the direction
accordingly.
2.17 The ALRC is currently conducting a separate Inquiry into aspects of
federal sentencing law. One of the issues for that Inquiry
is the role of
evidence laws in relation to sentencing. As this is substantively a sentencing
issue, it will be dealt with in that
2.18 As discussed in Chapter 10, there have been differing judicial
approaches to the application of common law principles in relation
admissibility of tendency and coincidence evidence in criminal proceedings. The
issues about the common law rules on tendency and coincidence evidence in the
light of the uniform Evidence Acts. Spigelman
CJ of the New South Wales
Court of Criminal Appeal found that:
As finally enacted in the
Acts of both the Commonwealth and New
South Wales, there are a number of indications in the regime for tendency and
coincidence evidence,
, that the Parliaments intended to lay down
a set of principles to cover the relevant field to the exclusion of the common
law principles
applicable.
In rescinding special leave to appeal in
, the High Court stated,
‘we would add that we agree with the decision of Chief Justice
Spigelman on the construction of the
Evidence Act 1995
2.19 There are a number of matters, which might be described as evidentiary,
that are omitted from the uniform Acts. This is a consequence
of the definition
of evidence law adopted by the ALRC in its earlier inquiry into the laws of
In its Interim Report
(ALRC 26), the ALRC stated that:
the laws of evidence should be classified as part of adjectival law—the
body of principles and rules which deal with the means
‘people’s rights and duties may be declared, vindicated or enforced,
or remedies for their infraction
2.20 Accordingly, ALRC 26 stated that the ALRC’s review would
• Those topics which should be classified as part of the substantive
law or which are so linked to the substantive law that
they can only properly be
considered in that context. These include legal and evidential burden of proof,
parol evidence rule,
res judicata
, issue estoppel, presumptions.
• Those topics of adjectival law which should be classified as
procedural rather than evidentiary. The result of this distinction
exclusion of rules such as those relating to the gathering of evidence
(including evidence on commission) the perpetuation
of testimony, who begins,
notice of alibi evidence, no-case submissions and the standard of proof
applicable.
• Topics such as ordering witnesses out-of-court, bans on the
publication of evidence, duties of the prosecution in calling
evidence, the
powers of judges and parties to call witnesses and the suggestion that there
should be changes in the organisation
and operation of forensic scientific
2.21 This approach was reflected in the drafting of the
Evidence Act
(Cth). As a result, a number of topics commonly found in evidence
texts, perhaps most notably who bears the legal burden of proof
on the facts in
issue estoppel,
, the parol evidence rule and the court’s obligation to ensure
a fair trial,
are not found in
the statute.
2.22 The Act is divided into five chapters. The organisation and structure follows
the order in which evidentiary matters would generally
arise in a trial. This is
consistent with the recommendations of the
Accordingly, issues
concerning the adducing of evidence in relation to both witnesses and documents
are dealt with in Chapter 2;
Chapter 3, which is the central part of
the statute, deals with the admissibility of evidence; and issues of proof
follow in Chapter
4. A flow chart on the admission of evidence precedes
s 55 and gives guidance on whether evidence is admissible.
2.23 Odgers notes that the Act introduces ‘significant reforms’ to the
common law.
For example, the
‘original document’ rule is abolished in favour of a more flexible
approach (Pt 2.2); cross-examination
of a party’s own witness is
permissible, with leave of the court, if the witness gives
‘unfavourable’ evidence
(s 38); the hearsay rule is
substantially modified (Pt 3.2); tendency and coincidence evidence is not
admissible unless notice has
been given and it has ‘significant probative
value’, and in criminal proceedings, such evidence adduced by the
prosecution
must ‘substantially outweigh’ any prejudicial effect it
may have on the defendant (Pt 3.6); the privilege against
self-incrimination
is modified (s 128); a court may exercise a general
discretion to refuse to admit evidence where the probative value is
substantially
outweighed by the danger that it is unfairly prejudicial to the
defendant (s 135), or may limit the use to be made of the evidence
is a danger that the evidence might be unfairly prejudicial to a party or be
misleading or confusing (s 136); the use of
computer-generated evidence is
facilitated (ss 146–147); and a ‘request’ system has been
introduced as a procedural
safeguard (Div 1 of Pt 4.6). Other notable
reforms include abolition of the ultimate issue and common knowledge rules
extension of privilege to religious confessions (s 127)
and, in the case of the
Evidence Act 1995
(NSW), an extension of a
qualified privilege to protect professional communications (Pt 3.10
Evidentiary
provisions outside the uniform Evidence Acts
2.24 The Terms of Reference of the ALRC and NSWLRC
direct the Commissions to examine the relationship between the
Evidence Act
(Cth) and the
Evidence Act 1995
(NSW) respectively and other
legislation regulating the law of evidence. The VLRC Terms of Reference direct
the VLRC more broadly
to examine ‘any necessary modification of the
existing provisions of the Uniform
Evidence Act
’. The Commissions are to
have regard to the laws, practices and procedures applying in proceedings in
their respective jurisdictions;
and whether the fact that significant areas of
evidence law are dealt with in other legislation poses any significant
disadvantages
to the objectives of clarity, effectiveness and uniformity.
2.25 As discussed in Chapter 18, the uniform Evidence Acts work in
conjunction with evidentiary provisions contained in a range of
Commonwealth, state and territory legislation. A central concern of the Inquiry
is to consider whether, in view of the desirability
of clarity, effectiveness
and uniformity in evidence law, some of these other evidentiary provisions
should be incorporated into
the uniform Evidence Acts and, if so, in what
2.26 Issues concerning whether certain existing or proposed evidentiary
provisions should be enacted in the uniform Evidence Acts
or in other
legislation arise in a multitude of contexts throughout this Discussion Paper.
The discussion and conclusions reached
are informed by the Commissions’
common policy position with regard to matters that should be incorporated in the
uniform Evidence
Acts and matters that should be enacted elsewhere.
2.27 This policy position is based on the propositions that: (i) uniformity
in evidence laws should be pursued unless there is good
reason to the contrary;
(ii) the uniform Evidence Acts should be a comprehensive statement of the laws
of evidence (the evidence
law ‘pocket bible’); and (iii) the uniform
Acts should be of general application to all criminal and civil proceedings.
Each of these propositions is discussed briefly below.
in evidence laws should be pursued
2.28 Uniformity in evidence laws should be pursued unless there is good
reason to the contrary. A primary objective of the Inquiry
is to capitalise on a
decade of operation of the uniform Evidence Acts regime. The Commissions hope
that identifying the pressure
points that have arisen and addressing those
aspects of the uniform Evidence Acts which require fine-tuning, will facilitate
introduction in all Australian states and territories.
2.29 While the passage of the
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth) had the effect
of achieving uniformity of evidence law in all federal courts, in non-uniform
Evidence Act
territory courts. This is confusing and costly to litigants, and requires
practitioners to master two different evidence regimes. Clearly this is an
undesirable state of affairs.
2.30 While the
Evidence Act 1995
Evidence Act 1995
(NSW) were in most respects identical when enacted they now differ from each
other in significant ways. The Tasmanian and Norfolk
Island Acts also have
differences, both from each other and from the Commonwealth and New South Wales
legislation. These differences
are discussed, where relevant, throughout this
Discussion Paper.
2.31 The uniform Evidence Acts are more correctly described as
‘mirror’ legislation rather than as uniform legislation.
legislation refers to a situation in which a draft statute is enacted by
separate legislation in each participating jurisdiction.
This was what occurred
Evidence Act 1995
Evidence Act 1995
enacted. While this mechanism produces virtual uniformity at the outset, this
often erodes over time as legislators exercise
their independent political
judgement and make piecemeal
2.32 In making proposals in relation to whether certain categories of evidentiary
provision should be incorporated into the uniform
Evidence Acts, the Commissions
have been mindful of the desirability of maintaining uniformity. Arguably, the
more non-uniform provisions
that are included, the less the incentive to
maintain uniformity in the existing provisions.
2.33 This consideration weighs against recommending the incorporation of
categories of evidentiary provision which differ greatly
from jurisdiction to
uniformity difficult. The time
and resources required to develop uniform
provisions is another factor dictating against the Inquiry recommending the
incorporation
of some categories of evidentiary provision in the uniform
Evidence Acts.
uniform Evidence Acts should be comprehensive
2.34 The uniform Evidence Acts should be a comprehensive statement of the
laws of evidence. One of the great advantages of the uniform
Evidence Acts to
judges, legal practitioners and academics has been referred to as their
‘pocket bible’ status. That
is, ideally, with respect to rules of
evidence applicable in all civil and criminal proceedings, it should not be
necessary to refer
to other statutes.
2.35 To some extent, this proposition is in tension with the proposition that
the uniformity of the Evidence Acts should be maintained.
The uniform Evidence
Acts could be made more comprehensive by including all manner of evidentiary
provision, even where these are
not uniform across jurisdictions. Suggestions
have been made that each uniform
Evidence Act
could include a separate part
containing evidentiary provisions unique to the particular jurisdiction.
Alternatively, the jurisdiction-specific
provisions could be incorporated into
the relevant part of the Act, maintaining its overall structure.
2.36 These suggestions found little support in submissions and consultations.
In the Commissions’ view the ‘pocket bible’
approach should
not be pursued at the cost of reduced
uniformity.
uniform Evidence Acts should be of general application
uniform Acts should be of general application to all criminal and civil
proceedings. The corollary is that the uniform Evidence
Acts should generally
include provisions of application only to specific offences or
categories of
2.38 These propositions were widely supported in submissions and consultations.
The approach has the advantage of making it easier
to maintain the uniformity of
the uniform Evidence Acts. Further, in areas such as family law proceedings and
child witnesses, evidentiary
provisions are closely linked with particular types
of proceedings or associated procedural provisions, and it is most convenient
for these to be co-located. Provided a consistent approach is taken to the
location of offence-specific evidentiary provisions, the
accessibility of
evidence law should not be materially affected.
2.39 However, the balance of convenience and policy principle will differ from
case to case. For example, while the Commissions have
rejected the idea of
introducing a hearsay exception directed to children’s evidence into the
uniform Evidence Acts, the introduction
of a provision dealing with expert
evidence on the credibility or reliability of children’s evidence is
2.40 In carrying out its original inquiry, the ALRC sought to locate within
the new legislation many of the existing common law rules.
However, it also
recommended modifications to those rules to remove unnecessary restrictions on
evidence being placed before courts
and to reform the law to meet the demands of
contemporary society.
2.41 The ALRC’s final Report (ALRC 38) stated that the inquiry was
predicated on the continuation of the trial
In particular, it
emphasised two features of that system:
The adversary nature of the civil and criminal trial
ALRC 38 argued that the nature of the adversary system meant that rules
were important to guide and control the proceedings; that
rules allowed
predictability about what evidence is necessary and admissible so as to enable
parties to prepare their cases for trial
with reasonable confidence, and to be
able to assess their prospects for success; and that without a body of rules,
control of trials
through an appeal system and appellate review would be
unpredictable. However, the Report noted the difficulty of establishing an
appropriate level of predictability.
The more detailed and precise the rule, the more difficult it may be to
understand it fully and the more rigid it is likely to be
in its application.
The more general the language used the more flexible the rule will be but the
less predictable will be its application.
This issue is central to the approach
to be taken in reform proposals. The approach taken in the interim proposals was
to draft rules as the first option. Where this was not possible,
discretions were formulated.
. ALRC 38 noted that while questions may be
asked about whether there should be separate rules for jury and non-jury trials,
the preferable
approach was to distinguish between civil and criminal trials.
This is discussed in detail later in this chapter.
2.42 ALRC 38 was also predicated on the continuation of the laws of
evidence in courts.
way of contrast with many administrative and quasi-judicial tribunals that are
not bound by the rules of evidence. In
particular, ALRC 38 emphasised that
even if it had been open to the ALRC under its Terms of Reference, ‘it
would not be appropriate
simply to abolish the rules of
In the case of
criminal trials, ALRC 38 stated ‘the trial is accusatorial and the
underlying concern to minimise wrongful convictions
warrants a strict approach
to the admissibility of
This Inquiry
has not departed from this underlying assumption, nor does it consider that its
Terms of Reference permit it to do so.
2.43 In relation to civil trials, ALRC 38 stated that while a civil
trial is a method for the resolution of a dispute between plaintiff
defendant, ‘the object of a trial must be something more than merely to
resolve a dispute’ and noted that the object
should be to resolve a
dispute in a way that is
It concluded
that there were four essential elements to a civil trial achieving its
• fact-finding;
• procedural fairness;
• expedition and cost; and
• quality of rules.
2.44 ALRC 26 argued that, while the elements of a civil trial were also
important to a criminal trial,
the nature and purpose of the criminal trial differ significantly from those of
the civil trial. Its larger and more general object
is to serve the purposes of
the criminal law, which are to control, deter and punish the commission of a
crime for the general good.
2.45 ALRC 38 confirmed the five key features of a criminal trial that
had been discussed in ALRC 26:
Accusatorial system
. An accused is presumed innocent until
proved guilty and has no obligation to assist the Crown.
Minimising the risk of wrongful convictions
. Traditionally
this reflects the view that it is in the interest of the community to minimise
the risk of conviction of the innocent
even if it may result, from time to time,
in the acquittal of the guilty.
Definition of central question
. The central question is
whether the Crown has proved the guilt of the accused beyond reasonable doubt.
The purpose of the criminal
trial is to be able to say with confidence if there
is a guilty verdict that the accused committed the offence charged with the
Recognition of rights of individual
. Convictions are not to be
obtained at any cost and accused persons have rights consistent with recognition
of their personal dignity
and integrity and with the overall fairness of
Assisting adversary contest
. An accused person is entitled to
be armed with some protections consistent with ‘the idea of the adversary
system as a genuine
2.46 ALRC 38 noted that this view of the nature and purpose of the
criminal trial is of long standing. It noted that there had been
issues for inquiry in relation to criminal trials:
• whether and, if so, to what extent the criminal trial involves a
• the traditional concern to minimise the risk of wrongful conviction;
• the balance to be struck between the prosecution and the
2.47 ALRC 38 discussed the arguments surrounding the issue of a
‘search for the truth’, noting their impact on the privilege
self-incrimination, the use of the unsworn statement and cross-examination of
the accused.
It rejected the
view that all else should be subordinated to a search for the truth, emphasising
the policy considerations of ‘the
serious consequences of conviction, fear
of error, a concern for individual rights and fear of abuse of governmental
2.48 ALRC 38 also discussed whether any case had been made out in favour
of disturbing the traditional balance that prefers the wrongful
acquittal of
accused persons over wrongful conviction and concluded that no such case had
been made out. The Report noted that while
the ALRC agreed with criticism of
technical acquittals, its recommendations would go a long way to avoid such
2.49 In regard to the issue of the balance between the prosecution and the
defence, ALRC 38 observed that the proposals in ALRC 26
criticised by some as favouring the accused and by others as favouring the
prosecution.
ALRC 38 noted
that the inquiry had not started out with any preconceived notion of altering
the balance but that some of the proposals
advanced in ALRC 26 would have
had that impact. ALRC 38 indicated that in response to submissions,
amendments had been made to some
of its original proposals: some that might
favour the prosecution;
that might favour the accused.
2.50 This debate has not been resolved. In the consultations and submissions on
IP 28, concerns were expressed that the uniform Evidence
Acts may have
shifted the balance in favour of the prosecution in criminal
The basis of this
criticism revolved largely around the operation of
Others suggested that, while
the uniform Evidence Acts have had a significant impact on the way criminal
trials are conducted—and
in particular on the prosecution’s duty to
call relevant witnesses—this change has not shifted the balance in favour
of the prosecution.
These issues
are discussed in detail in later chapters of this Discussion Paper.
2.51 Ultimately, the recommendations in ALRC 38 were structured around the
policy framework described in ALRC 26. The key elements
of the framework
Fact-finding
. This is the pre-eminent task of the courts and
recommendations were directed ‘primarily to enabling the parties to
the probative evidence that is available to
Civil and criminal trials
. These differ in nature and purpose and this
should be taken into account. In regard to the admission of evidence against an
a more stringent approach should be taken. The differences were also
reflected in areas such as: compellability of an accused, cross-examination
an accused, and in the exercise of a court’s power in matters such as the
granting of leave.
Predictability
. The use of judicial discretions should be minimised,
particularly in relation to the admission of evidence, and rules should
be preferred over discretions.
Cost, time and other concerns
. Clarity and simplicity are the
objectives.
Evidence, jury and
non-jury trials
2.52 One of the central approaches to evidence recommended by ALRC 38,
and adopted in the uniform Evidence Acts, was not to distinguish
between jury
and non-jury trials per se, but to draw a distinction between criminal and civil
proceedings. This has been discussed
above. While juries are used primarily in
criminal proceedings for serious indictable
they are not the
exclusive province of criminal trials. For example, juries are used in
defamation cases in New South Wales, and
in some civil trials in Victoria.
2.53 While the Acts contain some provisions dealing specifically with
juries—including those dealing with the presence (or absence)
of the jury
where preliminary questions are heard and determined, and concerning judicial
directions to juries—the Acts do
not generally distinguish between trials
by judge and jury (jury trials) and trials by judge alone (non-jury trials).
2.54 One of the purposes served by the laws of evidence is to keep from
juries evidence that may be misused by
In ALRC 26, the ALRC
discussed in some detail the view that the laws of evidence developed from a
mistrust of juries’ ability
to assess properly the evidence placed before
them. The ALRC noted that, if that was the only, or the main, purpose served by
laws of evidence, the direction of reform should be to abolish, or at least
to limit severely, the operation of the rules of evidence
in Commonwealth and
territory courts, as juries are seldom
2.55 While the ALRC rejected the thesis that the rules of evidence are purely
the ‘child of the jury’, it acknowledged
that the significance of
jury trials for the rules of evidence had to be considered. Specifically, the
ALRC considered whether there
should be separate rules designed for jury and
non-jury trials.
2.56 The argument for separate rules is, in essence, that a more flexible and
less exclusionary system can be used for non-jury trials.
magistrates, through training and experience are, it is said, less susceptible
than jurors to misusing evidence such as
hearsay or character
2.57 The ALRC concluded that, on the available evidence, it should not be assumed
that there is necessarily such a difference between
the abilities of judges and
jurors that different rules should be developed for jury and non-jury trials.
Rather, for the purposes
of evidence law, the distinction between civil and
criminal trials was seen as the more important
distinction.
2.58 The ALRC noted that, regardless of whether the trial is with a jury, there
may be other reasons why doubtful evidence should
be excluded from criminal
trials except in clearly defined circumstances. Further, considerations of time,
cost and fairness—none
of which have any connection with the quality of
the tribunal—were said to warrant control over unreliable and dangerous
Rules of evidence in
non-jury trials
2.59 The operation in non-jury trials of some exclusionary provisions of the
uniform Evidence Acts has been criticised. It has been
said that some provisions
of the uniform Evidence Acts
‘premised on the belief that the prejudicial effect of certain types of
evidence is consistent throughout the criminal
In fact, it is
said that the prejudicial effect of evidence before a judge or magistrate
sitting alone should not be equated with
that which may exist before a jury.
Therefore, why should exclusionary rules operate on the basis of assumed
prejudice when the prejudice
does not operate in a particular
2.60 The exclusionary provisions of the uniform Evidence Acts are not
directed solely to the exclusion of prejudicial evidence, but
also facilitate
the exclusion of evidence that might be distracting to the effective resolution
of the matters at issue, including
evidence that is misleading or confusing or
likely to result in undue waste of time. This is discussed in detail in Chapter
2.61 It has also been suggested that the general discretions to exclude
evidence contained in the uniform Evidence Acts cannot operate
with any real
effect in non-jury trials. For example, s 135 provides in part that the
court may refuse to admit evidence if its probative
value is substantially
outweighed by the danger that the evidence might be unfairly prejudicial to a
party. At common law it is recognised
that a trial judge has a discretion to
exclude otherwise admissible evidence if its probative value is outweighed by
prejudicial
However, the
common law discretion is only available in relation to prosecution evidence in
criminal proceedings.
rationale for the discretion is to ‘prevent a jury from being exposed to
evidence likely to produce incorrect verdicts
by misleading it or playing upon
its prejudices’.
2.62 On one view, there is little point, in non-jury trials—whether civil or
—in a judge,
having heard evidence that he or she may lawfully consider, determining that the
evidence should then be excluded
on the grounds that he or she may be prejudiced
However, in effect, this
is the consequence of the application of s 135 of the uniform Evidence
Acts, which applies in both civil and criminal proceedings and to jury and
non-jury trials.
A dual system of
rules of evidence?
2.63 More recent inquiries have considered whether different rules of
evidence should apply to non-jury trials. The Law Reform Commission
Australia (LRCWA) considered, as part of its review of the criminal and civil
justice system, whether the general applicability
of exclusionary rules of
evidence should be varied.
2.64 The LRCWA proposed initially that a dual system of rules of evidence
should be introduced, with one set of rules applying to
jury trials and one to
non-jury trials.
The LRCWA later
withdrew this proposal, noting that such a dual system of rules and procedure
‘may create further complexity
in the already highly complex laws of
evidence and undermine public confidence in jury
Submissions and
consultations
2.65 IP 28 asked whether the uniform Evidence Acts should be amended to
allow more differentiation between the rules of evidence
applying in jury and
non-jury trials.
2.66 There is general support for the approach in the uniform Evidence Acts
of placing primary importance on the nature of the proceeding,
rather than on
whether the case was being tried before a
The Law Council of
Australia (Law Council) notes that:
In considering evidential rules a fundamental distinction needs to be drawn
between civil and criminal proceedings. Whilst civil
process is ultimately
concerned to provide a forum for the settlement of disputation between citizens,
criminal process involves
accusation by the state against citizens for the
purpose of punishment. It is a foundational principle of criminal process that
should be designed to avoid the wrongful conviction of the innocent and this
requires evidential rules protecting an innocent accused
2.67 The Law Council further notes that ‘this foundational principle
applies whether an accused is tried before a jury or before
a judge sitting
alone and the Council is of the view that generally the rules of evidence should
be the same at both forms of
2.68 One senior practitioner considers that specific provisions, for example
s 60 relating to the admission of hearsay evidence, and
the credibility
provisions, could be limited to jury
This view has not
received general support. For example, one judicial officer notes:
I think it would be highly undesirable to distinguish between jury and non-jury
trials for the purposes of the rules of evidence.
One of the great benefits of
the Act is that there are uniform rules which, in my submission, operate fairly
and efficiently in both
criminal and civil trials. It would be confusing, and
possibly a source of unfairness, to make more distinctions than are absolutely
2.69 It is suggested that, even in non-jury trials, the discipline imposed by
provisions such as the discretionary exclusions in ss
135 and 136 has a
beneficial effect on judicial decision
The Law Council notes
although it may appear unnecessary for judges sitting alone to exercise
discretions to exclude prejudicial evidence, the existence
of such discretions
serves to emphasize emphatically to the judge not to act upon such evidence
Commissions’ view
2.70 ALRC 38 noted that, on the issue of separate rules designed for
jury and non-jury trials:
The Interim Report [ALRC 26] concluded that, on the available evidence, it
should not be assumed that there is necessarily such a
difference between the
abilities of judicial officers and jurors that different rules should be
developed for jury and non-jury trials.
Rather, for the purposes of the
reference, the distinction between civil and criminal trials was seen as the
more important distinction.
… The emphasis in the Interim Report on
distinguishing between civil and criminal trials rather than jury and non-jury
has received general
2.71 Submissions received and consultations conducted during the course of
this Inquiry to date indicate clearly that there is little
support for more
differentiation in the uniform Evidence Acts between rules applying in jury and
non-jury trials. It appears that
the emphasis on the distinction between civil
and criminal trials, rather than whether a jury is involved in the decision
is working well in practice. The Commissions do not propose that the
uniform Evidence Acts be amended to allow more differentiation
between rules of
evidence applying in jury and non-jury trials.
Application of the
Evidence Act 1995
2.72 As noted above, the
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth) applies generally to
all proceedings in a federal court or an Australian Capital Territory court.
However, some provisions of
the Act apply to proceedings in all Australian
courts, including the courts of the states and territories, whether or not
The application
of certain provisions specified in s 5 of the Act, for example, relating to
proof of official records and Commonwealth
documents, is extended to cover
proceedings in all Australian
Provisions dealing
with the full faith and credit to be given to documents properly
authenticated;
the swearing
of affidavits for use in Australian courts exercising federal jurisdiction or
similar jurisdiction;
abolition of the privilege against self-incrimination for bodies
also apply to
proceedings in all Australian courts. Reliance is placed on Commonwealth powers
Constitution
that clearly support a wider
application, for example,
(recognition of state laws and judicial
proceedings) and
(full faith and credit).
Section 8(1)
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth) provides that the Act
‘does not affect the operation of the provisions of any other Act, other
sections 68
Judiciary Act 1903
relevant provisions of the
Judiciary Act 1903
(Cth) allow state or
territory procedural and evidence law to operate in courts exercising federal
Commonwealth law applicable. These provisions
are modified in their operation by the provisions of the
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth), noted above, which have extended application to proceedings in all
Australian courts. Otherwise, the
does not affect procedural or evidence law in state or territory courts.
2.74 It has been suggested that one way to achieve greater uniformity in
Australian evidence laws would be to extend the operation
Evidence Act
(Cth) to all Australian courts when exercising federal jurisdiction. In
ALRC 38, the ALRC noted the possibility of extending the
application of
Commonwealth evidence legislation to state courts exercising federal
Reference did not extend to this
2.75 There are fundamental policy questions about whether or to what extent the
Commonwealth should attempt to prescribe the manner
in which state courts
exercise federal jurisdiction. One view is that the Commonwealth should accept
state courts as it finds them.
This derives from the idea that state courts
provide a service to the federal government when they exercise federal
albeit one that has an express constitutional foundation. An
alternative view is that it is legitimate and desirable for the Commonwealth
seek to ensure that federal jurisdiction is exercised uniformly in all
Australian courts, whether they be federal or state, and
not only that it is
uniform, but that federal jurisdiction is exercised effectively and
efficiently.
2.76 ALRC 38 noted that there would be difficulties, in the absence of
similar state evidence laws, in the trial in state courts of
persons charged
with both federal and state
Some of the
difficulties that would arise if state courts were required to switch between
state and federal procedures according
to the nature of the jurisdiction they
exercised were highlighted in the ALRC’s 2001 Report,
The Judicial
Power of the Commonwealth: A Review of the
Judiciary Act 1903
and Related
Legislation
2.77 These difficulties include that: many disputes
raise a combination of state and federal issues, the relative importance of
may change significantly during the course of litigation; emphasising the
nature of the jurisdiction exercised by a court may lend
disproportionate weight
to the procedural aspects of a case; the determination of whether a matter lies
within state or federal jurisdiction
may be highly technical and ultimately
peripheral to settling the substantive dispute between the parties; there is a
degree of unpredictability
as to when a matter becomes federal in character; and
there may be legal difficulties in determining the scope of federal jurisdiction
where, for example, a federal claim is allied to a common law claim and the
accrued jurisdiction of a federal court is consequently
2.78 Such difficulties were a major factor contributing to the view,
expressed in ALRC 92, that there should be no general policy
of extending
federal law, including matters of practice and procedure, to all courts
exercising federal
Submissions and
consultations
2.79 IP 28 asks whether the application of the
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth) should be extended to all proceedings in all Australian courts exercising
federal jurisdiction.
not unanimous,
the general
consensus is that such an amendment is
undesirable.
It is suggested
that such an extension may give rise to jurisdictional arguments that complicate
and protract litigation,
result in the possibility that two evidentiary regimes might apply in cases
where state and federal matters are heard
uncertainty as to the scope of ‘federal jurisdiction’, the
resolution of which may result in complex collateral
issues being raised in the
litigation.
Commissions’ view
2.80 The best path to uniformity is through the participation of all states
and territories in the uniform Evidence Acts scheme, rather
than by mandating
the application of the
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth) to all proceedings in all
Australian courts exercising federal jurisdiction. The implementation of uniform
evidence legislation
throughout Australia has received widespread, although not
2.81 In addition to the problems identified in the submissions and consultations,
with which the Commissions agree, it is unlikely
that such an extension would be
workable. To apply properly the provisions of the uniform Evidence Acts,
judicial officers and practitioners
must be familiar with both the Acts’
provisions and the policy underlying the Acts. Such an understanding is gained
instruction, informed analysis and exposure on a regular basis to the
Acts’ provisions. Given the movement towards uniformity
outlined in
Chapter 1, mandating the application of the
Evidence Act 1995
all proceedings in all Australian courts exercising federal jurisdiction is not
Scope of the uniform
Evidence Acts
2.82 Chapter 1 of the uniform Evidence Acts deals with a number of
preliminary matters.
deals with formal matters, including the short title
commencement
, and definitions
In relation to the
definition section, the
Evidence Act 2001
(Tas) defines the terms used in
the Act in s 3, whereas the Commonwealth, New South Wales and Norfolk
Island Acts define the terms
in a Dictionary at the end of the Acts.
2.83 Part 1.2 of the uniform Evidence Acts deals with the application of the
Acts. Some problems with the wording used in the sections
in Part 1.2 have
been identified. Drafting problems of general application will be discussed in
this section of the Discussion Paper.
4—Courts and proceedings to which the Acts apply
2.84 A question arises as to the meaning of the phrase ‘applies in
relation to all proceedings’ in s 4(1) of the uniform
Dealing first with the
meaning of the word ‘proceeding’, in the context of the
(NSW), Giles CJ Comm D (as his Honour then was) noted in
Sved v Council of the Municipality of
Proceeding is not defined in the Evidence (Consequential and Other Provisions)
Act, or in the [
Evidence Act 1995
(NSW)]. The word
‘proceeding’ may or may not, depending upon its context and purpose,
refer to a step in the action …
and in other contexts has been held to
refer to the action as whole … and to a step in the action … Neither
of the [Australian] Law Reform Commission (Report No 38, 1987)
nor the report of the New South Wales Law Reform Commission (LRC 56,
sheds light on the matter.
2.85 His Honour held that ‘proceedings’ may consist of a step in
The Family Court
of Australia applied a similar interpretation of
Deputy Commissioner of Taxation v
2.86 Having established that ‘proceeding’ for the purpose of
of the uniform Evidence Acts may consist of a step in the action,
the question arises as to whether any step will suffice, or whether
limitations on the types of steps that will qualify. Such a limitation was
suggested in
When addressing
the application of
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth) to an
examination under s 81 of the
Bankruptcy Act 1996
(Cth), Allsop J,
on behalf of the Full Federal Court, stated:
The word ‘proceedings’ is capable of wide and flexible application.
Evidence Act
, however, the proceedings contemplated are those conducted
by a court, or by a person or by a body who or which is required to apply
laws of evidence. The whole
Evidence Act
is concerned with the regulation of the
rules of evidence in proceedings in which there are parties, and in which there
are witnesses.
2.87 His Honour went on to note that:
It is not easy to see how an examination under
is such a proceeding.
It is not between parties. It is not the resolution or agitation of a
at which evidence is adduced under the rules of evidence. It does not have
parties or witnesses properly so-called. It is an interrogation—a
fact-finding exercise of the kind discussed by Lord Hanworth MR in
[[1927] 2 Ch 85].
2.88 In the result, the present state of the law seems to be that
‘proceedings’ in
of the uniform Evidence Acts encompasses any
step in a suit or action where there is an issue between parties in dispute and
suit or action involves witnesses.
2.89 While the case law has provided guidance as to the meaning of the word
‘proceeding’ in
, a question arises as to whether the
prepositional phrase ‘in relation to’ as used in
Commonwealth, New South Wales and Norfolk Island Evidence Acts means something
different to the word ‘to’ as used
answer is ‘no’, then to clarify the meaning of the section and
promote uniformity, the phrase ‘in relation
uniform Evidence Acts should be amended.
Perlman v Perlman
, Gibbs CJ considered the meaning of the
words ‘in relation to’ in the
Family Law Act 1975
The words ‘in relation to’ import the existence of a connexion or
association between the two proceedings; or in other
words that the proceedings
in question must bear an appropriate relationship to completed proceedings of
the requisite kind.
The Commissions’ view
2.91 The evidentiary rules prescribed in the uniform Evidence Acts have been
held incapable of application otherwise than in the course
of a hearing of a
proceeding in a court.
there is no ‘proceeding’ outside of the courts identified in
to which the ‘proceedings’ can ‘relate’. The
better view would appear to be that the use of the phrase ‘in
of the Evidence Acts of the Commonwealth, New South
Wales and Norfolk Island is an example of ‘verbosity in
prepositions’,
the Tasmanian approach should be adopted.
Proposal 2–2
Section 4(1)
of the Commonwealth and New South
Wales Evidence Acts should be amended to delete the words ‘in
relation’ from the phrase
‘in relation to all
proceedings’.
11—General powers of a court
2.92 Section 11 of the uniform Evidence Acts provides:
11(1) The general power of a court to control the conduct of a proceeding is not
affected by this Act, except so far as this Act
provides otherwise expressly or
by necessary intendment.
(2) In particular, the powers of a court with respect to abuse of process in a
proceeding are not affected.
Nationwide News v District Court of New South Wales,
Meagher JA referred to s 11 as being ‘almost
unintelligible’.
inelegantly expressed, s 11(1) assumes that the general power of a court to
control the conduct of proceedings before it is
found elsewhere—either in
legislation or at common law. This power is preserved unless the Act provides
otherwise, expressly
or by necessary intendment. Section 11(2) preserves
the general power of a court to control an abuse of process in a proceeding.
2.94 What is not clear is the relationship between ss 11(1) and (2). Does
s 11(2) provide an absolute rule, or should the test used
be read by implication into s 11(2)? The latter position was accepted by
the New South Wales Court of Appeal in
Van Der Lee v New South
In that case,
certain defendants to cross-claims in the New South Wales Supreme Court moved
for the stay or dismissal of those cross-claims
on the ground that they were an
abuse of the Court’s process. At issue was whether the primary judge was
correct in holding
Evidence Act 1995
rendered inadmissible on the motion before the court evidence of settlement
negotiations.
2.95 Hodgson JA, with whom Mason P and Santow JA agreed on the
point, stated:
does have the effect that, when evidence is tendered that
could be evidence of an abuse of process, albeit evidence of without prejudice
settlement negotiations, the Court may receive that evidence on the voir dire;
and then, if that evidence does either by itself or
in combination with other
evidence establish an abuse of process, the Court may rule the evidence
admissible and make appropriate
orders to deal with that abuse of process. In my
opinion, the powers of a court with respect to abuse of process include its
to receive evidence, and in my opinion the authorities relied on by the
claimants show that, at common law, communications evidencing
abuse of process
will not be protected by without prejudice privilege
. I do not think that
provides otherwise, either expressly or by necessary intendment
2.96 The last sentence of the above quote supports the view that the test
is to be read by implication into
General obligation to ensure a fair
2.97 IP 28 asked whether
should be amended to include a
general obligation to ensure a fair
Divergent views have
been expressed. Some practitioners consider that such an amendment is
unnecessary.
judicial officer notes that the obligation to ensure a fair trial is an
obligation which operates at a higher level than
the rules of evidence. For
example, there is no rule of evidence that says that judges should not be
biased. The judge suggested
that it was better to treat the Acts as providing
only detailed regulation of particular areas of
2.98 In contrast, it is noted in one submission that:
Recent legislation, both Commonwealth and State, especially relating to alleged
acts of terrorism and national security, have significantly
restricted or
curtailed traditional rights under the common law. This makes it essential that
the courts have a general duty to ensure
a fair trial and …
should be amended
accordingly.
The Commissions’ view
2.99 The court’s obligation to ensure a fair trial has been described,
in the context of criminal trials, as the ‘central
pillar of our criminal
justice system’.
obligation applies equally in a civil context. An attempt to reduce such a
fundamental principle of substantive law to a statutory
evidentiary rule may
prove to be counterproductive. For example, an argument could be made that the
absence of a reference to an
obligation to ensure a fair trial in other sections
of the Acts relieves the court of the obligation in those contexts. This, in
turn, could be taken as a point on
The Commissions are
of the view that the obligation to ensure a fair trial is adequately enshrined
in the common law and that the
inclusion of such an obligation in the uniform
Evidence Acts would be redundant and potentially counterproductive. Hence, the
Commissions
do not consider that an amendment to
to ensure a fair
trial is necessary.
Each court has its own rules covering
matters of procedure, including some relating to
This does not apply to appeals
to the High Court from courts in states and territories that have not passed
Evidence Act
legislation.
there are specified provisions to cover proceedings in all Australian
covers documents properly authenticated;
with affidavits in Australian courts exercising federal jurisdiction; and
abolishes the privilege against self-incrimination for bodies
Evidence Act 1995
Evidence Act 2001
Evidence Act 2004
Some of the uniformity was lost
with the passage of the
Evidence Amendment (Confidential Communciatons) Act
(NSW) and provisions dealing with jury warnings in New South Wales in
2002. The Tasmanian Act has a number of sections not found
in the Commonwealth
or New South Wales legislation, for example, dealing with procedures for proving
certain matters, certain privileges,
certain matters dealing with witnesses and
rape shield provisions.
Australian Law
Reform Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1 (1985); Australian
Law Reform Commission,
See Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Evidence Uniformity: Information Paper
(2005) Victorian Law
Reform Commission, 3.
Victorian Law
Reform Commission,
Defences to Homicide: Final Report
(2004); Victorian
Law Reform Commission,
Sexual Offences: Final Report
(2004). These
reports identified deficiencies in the laws of evidence and recommended adoption
of some uniform Evidence Act provisions
to address the deficiencies: see
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Evidence Uniformity: Information Paper
(2005) Victorian Law Reform Commission, 3.
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Evidence Uniformity: Information Paper
(2005) Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Pepsi Seven-Up Bottlers
Perth Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Taxation
[1995] FCA 1655
(1995) 62 FCR 289
Corporation v Australis Media Holdings (No 2)
(1997) 41 NSWLR 346
Newcastle Wallsend Coal Co Pty Ltd v Court of Coal Mines Regulation
(1997) 42 NSWLR 351
Quick v Stoland Pty Ltd
[1998] FCA 1200
(1998) 87 FCR 371
Idoport Pty Ltd v National Australia Bank Ltd
[2000] NSWSC 1077
(2000) 50 NSWLR 640
[2000] NSWCCA 195
Workcover Authority
of New South Wales v Tsougranis
[2002] NSWIRComm 282
, [33]–[40];
Dupont de Nemours & Co v Imperial Chemical Industries
[2002] FCA 230
Although the original terms of
reference in 1979 advert to ‘a comprehensive review of the law of evidence
to be undertaken
by the Law Reform Commission with a view to producing a code of
evidence’, ALRC 38 made it clear that the uniform Evidence
not, and was not intended to be, a comprehensive code: see Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, ALRC 38 (1987), [27]–[47] and
[213]–[230].
New South Wales,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Council, 24 May 1995, 113 (J
Shaw—Attorney General), 114.
Evidence Act 1995
Evidence Act 2001
Evidence Act 2004
Evidence Act 1995
Evidence Act 2001
(NI) s 9(2)(b).
Evidence Act 1995
Uniform Evidence Acts
(1) (‘except as otherwise provided by this
Evidence Law
(6th ed, 2004),
Telstra Corporation v
Australis Media Holdings (No 2)
(1997) 41 NSWLR 346
Quick v Stoland
[1998] FCA 1200
(1998) 87 FCR 371
Idoport Pty Ltd v National Australia Bank
[2000] NSWSC 1077
(2000) 50 NSWLR 640
EI Dupont de Nemours & Co v Imperial
Chemical Industries
[2002] FCA 230
Quick v Stoland Pty Ltd
[1998] FCA 1200
(1998) 87 FCR 371
See J Heydon,
Cross on Evidence
(7th ed, 2004), [46,080];
Gamer’s Motor Centre
(Newcastle) Pty Ltd v Natwest Wholesale Australia Pty Ltd
[1987] HCA 30
(1987) 72 ALR 321
Mellifont v Attorney-General (Qld)
[1991] HCA 53
(1991) 104 ALR 89
EI Dupont de Nemours & Co
v Imperial Chemical Industries
[2002] FCA 230
Idoport Pty Ltd v National
Australia Bank Ltd
[2000] NSWSC 1077
(2000) 50 NSWLR 640
J Bergel, ‘Principal
Features and Methods of Codification’ (1987–
; GA Weiss, ‘The Enchantment of Codification in the
Common-Law World’
Yale Journal of International Law
Also see New Zealand Law Commission,
Evidence Law: Codification—A
Discussion Paper
, PP14 (1991),
(7th ed, 2004), [46,085].
New Zealand Law Commission,
Evidence Law: Codification—A Discussion
, PP14 (1991), 3.
Papakosmas v The Queen
[1999] HCA 37
(1999) 196 CLR
[2003] NSWCCA 319
(2003) 58 NSWLR
Corporations Act 2001
Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act
Evidence Act 1995
(b), subject to
which deals with appeals to the Family Court of
Australia from a state or territory court of summary
Evidence Act 1995
, read with definition of ‘NSW court’ in the
Dictionary;
Evidence Act 2001
, read with the definition
of ‘Tasmanian court’ in
Commissioner
of Stamp Duties v Owens (No 2)
[1953] HCA 62
(1953) 88 CLR 168
Securities and Investments Commission v Edensor Nominees Pty Ltd
CLR 559, [59].
‘proceeding’, as used in
, is discussed in detail
Uniform Evidence Acts
does not apply to proceedings in relation to bail
or sentencing.
For more information see
the ALRC’s website, <
www.alrc.gov.au
[2003] NSWCCA 319
(2003) 58 NSWLR 700.
Ibid, [74].
Ellis v The Queen
[2004] HCA Trans 488.
See further
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1 (1985),
of the uniform Evidence
Acts does contain provisions relating to the standard of proof required in civil
and criminal proceedings.
court’s obligation to ensure a fair trial is discussed in detail
See Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Uniform Evidence
(6th ed, 2004), [1.1.60].
Opeskin, ‘The Architecture of Public Health Reform’
[1998] MelbULawRw 15
(2002) 22(2)
Melbourne University Law Review
See also P Greenwood,
Consultation
, Sydney, 11 March
While the uniform Evidence Acts
already contain some provisions of application only to specific categories of
witness, these are
limited; eg, in relation to the compellability of spouses and
the questioning of mute or deaf witnesses: Uniform Evidence Acts
in part, because the latter reform is not seen as constituting any major
departure from the existing law, but as highlighting
the admissibility of a
particular type of expert opinion evidence in order to bring about a change in
practice: see Ch 8.
Senate Standing
Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs—Parliament of Australia,
Evidence Bill 1993
, Interim Report (1994),
Australian Law Reform Commission,
, ALRC 38 (1987), [28].
Ibid, [29], fn
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1 (1985),
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, ALRC 38 (1987),
In relation to the tape
recording of interviews, illegally obtained evidence, co-accused as witness for
the prosecution and some
issues around cross-examination of the accused: Ibid,
Reinstatement of the discretion
to exclude unfairly obtained evidence and inclusion of a rule regarding the
exclusion of a confession
in the absence of a caution: Ibid,
See, eg, S Cox,
Consultation
, Darwin, 31 March 2005; Law Council of Australia,
4 March 2005,
Discussed in
Discussed in
Consultation
, Sydney, 25 February 2005; New South Wales District Court
Consultation
, Sydney, 3 March
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, ALRC 38 (1987),
New South Wales Law Reform
Commission,
The Jury in a Criminal Trial
, LRC 48 (1986),
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1 (1985),
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, ALRC 38 (1987),
Ibid, [28]; Australian Law
Reform Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1 (1985), [79]. See
also Australian Law Reform Commission,
Reform of Evidence Law
(1980), 19–29; 45–49.
Australian Law Reform Commission,
, ALRC 38 (1987),
For example, s 115(2),
which excludes picture identification evidence where photographs examined by an
identifying witness suggest
that they are pictures of persons in police
‘Identification Evidence under the
Evidence Act 1995
’ (1996) 3(2)
Criminal Law News
R v Christie
J Gans and A Palmer,
Australian Principles of Evidence
(2nd ed, 2004), 144;
[1977] HCA 43
(1977) 137 CLR 517
A Ligertwood,
Australian Evidence
(4th ed, 2004),
See Ibid, [2.29]. However, the
High Court in
Director of Public Prosecutions (Nauru) v Fowler
[1984] HCA 48
recognised that inadmissible evidence in a criminal case could affect a
magistrate’s decision.
Reform Commission of Western Australia,
Review of the Criminal and Civil
Justice System: Collected Consultation Drafts
(1999), Ch 1.3
Law Reform Commission of Western
Review of the Criminal and Civil Justice System: Final Report
(1999), [7.6].
Law Council of
4 March 2005, [13]; Director of Public
Prosecutions (NSW),
15 February 2005,
Law Council of Australia,
4 March 2005,
Consultation
Sydney, 25 February 2005.
Confidential,
22 February 2005, 2. See also New
South Wales Public Defenders,
21 April 2005,
J Garbett, Sydney, 28 February
2005; Law Council of Australia,
4 March 2005,
Law Council of Australia,
4 March 2005,
Australian Law Reform Commission,
, ALRC 38 (1987),
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth) Dictionary definition of ‘Australian
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, ALRC 38 (1987),
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
The Judicial Power of the Commonwealth: A Review of the Judiciary
Act 1902 and Related Legislation
, ALRC 92 (2001),
[6.45]–[6.47].
Australian Law
Reform Commission,
, ALRC 38 (1987), [21]. See also Australian
Law Reform Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1 (1985), Ch
See Australian Law Reform
Commission,
The Judicial Power of the Commonwealth: A Review of the Judiciary
Act 1902 and Related Legislation
, ALRC 92 (2001); J McKechnie,
Consultation
, Perth, 9 May
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
The Judicial Power of the Commonwealth: A Review of the Judiciary
Act 1902 and Related Legislation
, ALRC 92 (2001),
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004),
Customs Service,
21 February 2005, 1;
Confidential,
22 February 2005,
See, eg, Queensland Bar
Association,
Consultation
, Brisbane, 9 February 2005; Victoria Legal Aid,
18 February
Law Council of Australia,
4 March 2005, [16]. The Law Council indicated
that it may make a further submission on this
Australian Securities &
Investments Commission,
7 March 2005,
P Holdenson,
Consultation
, Melbourne, 17 March 2005; Queensland Bar Association,
Consultation
, Brisbane, 9 February 2005; Victoria Legal Aid,
18 February 2005, 3; New South Wales Public
21 April 2005,
Law Council of Australia,
4 March 2005, 50; Commercial Bar Association of
the Victorian Bar,
March 2005; A Palmer,
Consultation
, Melbourne, 16 March 2005; C McDonald,
Consultation
Darwin, 31 March 2005; M Johnson,
Consultation
, Darwin, 30 March 2005; J
Consultation
, Perth, 9 May 2005; W Martin,
Consultation
, Perth, 9 May 2005; Law Reform Commission of Western
Consultation
, Perth, 9 May 2005; S Tilmouth,
Consultation
, Adelaide, 11 May 2005.
Evidence Act 2001
Evidence Act 2001
adopts the wording ‘applies to all proceedings’. This
is discussed in detail below.
Sved v Council of the Municipality of Woollahra
(Unreported, New South
Wales Supreme Court, Giles J, 15 April 1998); leave to appeal was refused in
Council of the Municipality of Woollahra v Sved
(Unreported, New South
Wales Court of Appeal, Mason P and Sheller JA, 30 September
Sved v Council of the
Municipality of Woollahra
(Unreported, New South Wales Supreme Court, Giles
J, 15 April 1998), 6 (citations
Deputy Commissioner of
Taxation v McCauley
(1996) 22 Fam LR 538
[2004] FCAFC 113
(2004) 207 ALR 169.
Ibid, [198].
This is important, as the
High Court has noted ‘a court construing a statutory provision must strive
to give meaning to every
word of the provision’:
Project Blue Sky Inc v
Australian Broadcasting Authority
(1998) 194 CLR 355,
Perlman v Perlman
[1984] HCA 4
(1984) 155 CLR 474
, 484 (citations
Mann v Carnell
[1999] HCA 66
(1999) 201 CLR 1
Esso Australia Resources Ltd v Commissioner of
(1999) 2001 CLR 49,
Complete Plain Words
(2nd ed, 1973),
Nationwide News Pty Ltd v
District Court of New South Wales
(1996) 40 NSWLR 486
Van Der Lee v New South
[2002] NSWCA 286
Ibid, [62] (emphasis added). See also S Odgers,
Uniform Evidence Law
(6th ed, 2004), [1.1.1260].
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
(2004), Q 12–5.
of Public Prosecutions (NSW),
15 February 2005; P
Consultation
, Sydney, 11 March
High Court of Australia,
Consultation
, Canberra, 9 March
Confidential,
22 February 2005. The New South Wales Public
Defenders Office submits that ‘it would be useful to give a statutory
to the undoubted common law obligation to ensure a fair trial’:
New South Wales Public Defenders,
21 April 2005,
Dietrich v The Queen
[1992] HCA 57
(1992) 177 CLR 292
of Australia,
Consultation
, Canberra, 9 March 2005.
3. Understanding the Uniform Evidence Acts
Introduction
Evidence of tendency, coincidence, credibility and character
Probative value, unfair prejudice and unfairness
Facilitating an understanding of the uniform Evidence Acts
3. Understanding the Uniform
Evidence Acts
Introduction
3.1 The uniform Evidence Acts made significant modifications to existing
common law evidentiary principles. While the specific provisions
of the Act are
discussed in detail in subsequent chapters, certain aspects of the policy
framework of the Acts warrant a thematic
3.2 Submissions and consultations conducted following the release of
evidenced a significant
degree of confusion around certain concepts used in the uniform Evidence Acts.
It is hoped that the following
analysis will help to clarify the approach
adopted in the Acts in relation to: evidence of tendency, coincidence,
credibility and
character; and the concepts of probative value, unfair prejudice
and unfairness. A proposal to facilitate a better understanding
of the policy
underlying the uniform Evidence Acts is then discussed.
of tendency, coincidence, credibility and character
Introduction
3.3 Parts 3.6 to 3.8 of the uniform Evidence Acts contain provisions to
control the admissibility of evidence of past conduct and
character which is
relevant to the facts in issue or to the credibility of witnesses.
3.4 Part 3.6 (ss 94–101) deals with evidence of:
• character, reputation, conduct or tendency which is relevant to prove
that a person has or had a tendency to act in a particular
way or to have a
particular state of mind (s 97); and
• two or more related events which are relevant because the
improbability of the events occurring coincidentally is relevant
to prove that a
person did a particular act or had a particular state of mind (s 98).
The act or state of mind must be a fact in issue at the trial. At common law,
such evidence is referred to as propensity and similar
fact evidence and
includes evidence of conduct from which the nature of a relationship may be
demonstrated.
3.5 Part 3.7 (ss 102–108) deals with evidence which is relevant
only to the credibility of a witness. Part 3.8 (ss 109–112)
to evidence about the character of accused persons which may be relevant both to
the facts in issue and to the credibility
of the accused persons.
3.6 Parts 3.6 and 3.7 apply in both civil and criminal proceedings, yet
most of the issues raised to date concern the operation of
those provisions in
criminal proceedings. However, the fact that the provisions operate in both
civil and criminal proceedings must
be borne in mind when considering the issues
and possible solutions discussed in Chapters 10 and 11. In particular,
where a problem
is unique to criminal proceedings, it may require a solution
confined to such proceedings.
3.7 The law has always been concerned with the potential to overestimate the
value of, and be improperly influenced by, evidence of
tendency, coincidence,
credibility and character. The approach of the law is supported to a
considerable extent by a substantial
body of psychological research, described
in some detail in the Interim Report of the original ALRC evidence enquiry
However, this is
subject to one significant qualification, discussed below.
3.8 The common law generally assumes that the character of a person is
indivisible—in other words, a person with bad character
traits is likely
to be a bad person generally and a person with good character traits is likely
to be a good person generally. Underlying
this assumption is the belief that
people act consistently according to the character traits they exhibit, whatever
the circumstances.
Psychological research confirms that such assumptions are
commonly made, although incorrectly so, as in reality a person’s
will vary depending on the context. This is of particular relevance to the
assumptions underpinning the common law approach
to credibility evidence.
3.9 Originally, psychological theory assumed that the mental organisation of
each individual embodied a predisposition towards either
truthful or untruthful
behaviour. It is now accepted that moral disposition is not so highly integrated
as to cause consistency of
behaviour in different situations. The fact that
someone has a violent personality does not mean that they also have a dishonest
personality. Evidence of previous convictions will generally have little
probative value and may mislead on the issue of credibility
unless they involve
some element of dishonesty. Even then, a person may be dishonest in some
circumstances and not others—for
example, lying to protect one’s
friends or the Machiavellian individual who will lie and cheat only where it is
feasible and
to that person’s advantage.
3.10 Psychological research has demonstrated that this process of attributing
actions in others to stable personality dispositions
is common and carries with
it the danger of overestimation of the probative value of such
This is exacerbated by
what is known as the ‘halo effect’; the phenomenon that one
outstanding good or bad quality will
tend to colour all judgments about that
person. This, of course, may result in bias against an accused
These processes are
particularly troubling because the psychological research has demonstrated that
evidence of character or evidence
relevant to character generally has a low
probative value. The law, however, must deal with such evidence.
3.11 Psychological literature has also confirmed and explained the risk of unfair
prejudice flowing from evidence indicating bad character.
In addition to the
‘halo effect’, there operates a mechanism described as the
‘regret matrix’. In most trials,
absolute certainty is not possible.
The responsible fact finder will be concerned about making a wrong decision. The
matrix’ operates in a trial context so that a fact finder
will be less concerned about making a wrong decision where he or
she believes
that the defendant has been guilty of other misconduct justifying punishment for
which he or she has not been convicted.
Similarly, concern about wrongly
convicting an accused will be less if it is known that the person has prior
convictions. The cost
of an additional conviction which may be incorrect will be
seen as less than if the conviction were an accused’s
3.12 In sum, the psychological
shows that:
• Behaviour tends to be highly dependent on situational factors and
not, as previously postulated, on personality traits. Thus
the ability to
predict behaviour from past behaviour depends on the similarity of the
situations. (Low cross-situational consistency
of behaviour).
• People tend to attribute the behaviour of others to enduring
personality traits and underestimate the role of situational
determining behaviour in any given situation. (Fundamental attribution
• People tend to infer, from limited knowledge of a person, general
personality traits which thereafter colour their perception
person’s behaviour. (The halo and reverse halo effects).
• Jurors will be less reluctant to convict an accused if they are
informed of an accused’s previous misconduct and/or
convictions, because
they feel either that the gravity of their decision is lessened or that there is
some basis for punishment even
if they are not convinced the accused committed
the crime charged. (The regret matrix).
3.13 In a discussion in
Pfennig v The
McHugh J identified
similar issues in support of the exclusion of evidence of this kind, commenting
additionally that such evidence
creates ‘undue suspicion’ and
‘undermines the presumption of
innocence’.
McHugh J also
commented that:
Common assumptions about improbability of sequences are often wrong, and when
the accused is associated with a sequence of deaths,
injuries or losses, the
jury may too readily infer that the association ‘is unlikely to be
3.14 His Honour also drew attention to the potential practical disadvantages
of receiving evidence of other misconduct, in particular
to its implications for
the length and cost of trials.
3.15 In a discussion of the potential prejudicial effects of such evidence,
Professor Bob Williams referred to the problem of a jury
giving undue weight to
the evidence and reasoning that the accused deserves to be punished. He also
commented that there are other
forms of prejudice or potential unfairness, such
as misdirecting the focus of the jury to the question of whether the disputed
facts have been proved, with the attendant risk that, if the jury is so
satisfied, it may precipitately reach the conclusion that
the offence is proven.
He also referred to the danger that, where an accused is charged with a number
of counts, the evidence of
which is admissible in respect of the others, a jury
may reason that the accused must be guilty of some of
3.16 The prejudicial effect of evidence of previous misconduct has been confirmed
in research conducted by the Law Commission of England
and Wales involving
magistrates and mock juries.
relation to mock juries it was found, among other things, that information of a
previous conviction for indecent assault on a
child can be particularly
prejudicial whatever the offence charged and will have a significant impact on
the jurors’ perception
of the defendant’s credibility as a
In relation to
magistrates, the study concluded that:
In general the results indicate that information about previous conviction is
likely to affect magistrates’ decisions despite
their awareness of the
dangers and their efforts to avoid bias. These findings did not offer confidence
that the rules on admitting
previous convictions can be safely relaxed for
magistrates anymore than for
3.17 A review of psychological research since the original ALRC evidence
inquiry and current psychology teaching confirms and, in
some instances,
strengthens the basis for the analysis in the ALRC reports.
3.18 Current psychology texts
continue to refer to the studies used in the ALRC
which contradicted
classical trait theory, finding that the correlation between individual
behaviour in different situations was
in fact quite low.
3.19 However, trait theory has not been wholly discredited. Personality
psychologists have argued that by aggregating behaviours across
situations over
time, one can discern consistent personality traits which may be used to predict
an aggregate of future
This research does
not, however, challenge the basic proposition that the behaviour of an
individual on one occasion has a very low
correlation to his or her behaviour on
another occasion in a different situation.
3.20 Further research has sought to quantify the difference between the
actual cross-situational consistency of behaviour and the
general belief as to
such consistency in others. Kunda and Nisbett found that participants in their
study dramatically overestimated
the consistency of trait related behaviour,
People are enormously more confident of the expected nature of a person’s
social behaviour, given knowledge of the nature of
their behaviour on one
occasion, than reality affords them any right to
3.21 Wilson and Brekke have taken this research one step further, examining
the process by which attribution and the halo effect occur
and its implications
for attempts to correct for these
They argue that people
will only be able to make a successful correction for bias where they are: aware
of the bias; motivated to
correct it; aware of the magnitude of the bias; and
able to adjust their response. They argue that:
it is difficult to satisfy these conditions, in part because of fundamental
properties of human cognition: people are unaware of
many of their cognitive
processes, mental contamination often has no observable ‘symptoms’,
and people have limited control
over their cognitive processes. These facts
alone are cause for considerable pessimism about people’s ability to avoid
3.22 Law and psychology has now become a field of research in its own right,
with some authors directing their research specifically
to jury scenarios and
the prejudicial effect of
Research into the
effectiveness of judicial directions to juries, particularly with regards to
evidence of prior criminal history,
has shown that directions to disregard
evidence or to use it for only a limited permissible purpose may not always be
complied with
and can in some
instances have the opposite effect to that
Such directions are
likely to be more effective if the jurors accept the legitimacy of the
or believe it is not
fair to consider the evidence.
This research accords with the conclusions of Wilson and Brekke that there must
be recognition of biases and motivation to avoid
3.23 ALRC 26 stated:
The research confirms the need to maintain strict controls on evidence of
character or conduct and for such evidence to be admitted
only in exceptional
circumstances. It demonstrates, however, that the emphasis of the law should be
changed. For the sake of accurate
fact-finding, fairness and the saving of time
and cost, the law should maximise the probative value of the evidence it
receives by
generally limiting it to evidence of conduct occurring in
circumstances similar to those in question. Only for special policy reasons
should other evidence of character or conduct be
3.24 It should also be borne in mind that the prejudicial effects of such
evidence operate at all stages in which the evidence is
considered—from
consideration of admissibility of the evidence by the judge through to the
assessment of the evidence by the
finder of fact. As regards the latter, it can
operate to affect the assessment of the credibility of the particular witnesses,
reliability of their evidence, the weight to be given to the evidence and
the judgment as to whether the evidence has established
the facts in
value, unfair prejudice and unfairness
3.25 The uniform Evidence Acts require the judge to assess the degree of
probative value of particular types of evidence in order
to determine the
question of admissibility. These include evidence going to tendency or
coincidence and evidence adduced in cross-examination
credibility.
In addition, the
judge will sometimes be required to balance the probative value of a piece of
evidence against the danger of unfair
prejudice to the
Other provisions
require the judge to determine whether taking a particular course of action is
‘unfair’ or ‘unfairly
prejudicial’ to the parties
3.26 The same terms appear in various sections throughout the Acts.
‘Probative value’ appears in ss 97, 98, 101, 103,
(Commonwealth Act only), 108, 135, 136, 137, 138, and 190. ‘Unfair
prejudice’ appears in ss 53, 135, 136 and 137.
‘prejudicial’ appears in s 101. The term ‘unfair’
appears in ss 90 and 192.
3.27 Concerns have been raised as to the precise meaning of these concepts and the
degree to which there has been or should be consistency
in the interpretation of
these terms in the various sections in which they appear throughout the Acts.
Consistency of terms
throughout the Acts
3.28 Clearly the legislative intent was that there be some degree of
consistency in the use of these terms. In
, Hunt CJ at CL
The meaning given to each of those phrases must logically be the same in each
section—whether or not a weighing exercise is
contemplated.
, Spigelman CJ said:
It is noteworthy that the Act provides a definition of ‘probative
value’ … Although the definition could well have
been the same as at
common law, the fact that such a term was defined at all suggests an intention
to ensure consistency for purposes
Evidence Act
for the words, which
appear in a number of sections. This suggests that the Act, even if
substantially based on the common law, was
intended to operate in accordance
with its own terms.
3.30 It is also apparent that the factors to be taken into account in
determining whether a piece of evidence has the requisite degree
of probative
value or results in a degree of unfair prejudice will vary depending on the type
of evidence and the context in which
it is sought to be adduced. Some academic
commentators have described probative value as ‘a floating
particularly evident with regards to evidence relating to credibility, tendency
and coincidence, as evidence of these kinds
tend to bolster the strength of
other evidence rather than being directly associated with a fact in issue. These
concepts will be
dealt with in more detail in the relevant chapters of this
Discussion Paper.
Measuring probative
value: ‘significant’ and ‘substantial’
3.31 Different categories of evidence require different degrees of probative
value in order to be admissible. For example, tendency
and coincidence evidence
is required to have ‘significant probative
credibility evidence adduced in cross-examination must have ‘substantial
probative value’.
uniform Evidence Acts provide no guidance as to the difference between
‘significant’ and ‘substantial’.
3.32 There appears to be consensus that ‘substantial probative
value’ imports a more exacting standard than ‘significant
value’. Hunt CJ at CL said in
R v Lockyer
‘“significant” probative value must mean something more than
mere relevance but something less than a “substantial”
relevance’.
felt that ‘significant’ in this context meant
‘important’ or ‘of consequence’. He
also felt that an
assessment of the significance of the probative value of a piece of evidence
would depend on both the nature of
the fact in issue to which it was relevant
and its importance in establishing that fact.
3.33 It was observed by Lehane J in
Zaknic Pty Ltd v Svelte
Corporation Pty Ltd
that ‘more is required than mere statutory
relevance’ in order to satisfy the test of ‘significant probative
3.34 As noted above, probative value must be assessed in its factual and
legal context. Whilst it is clear from authorities that
‘substantial’
probative value is a more exacting standard, the
factors that will go to determining whether a piece of evidence reaches the
standard vary between the different types of evidence, and hence it is
of little use to attempt a detailed comparison of the two.
Unfair prejudice
3.35 As with probative value, the concept of unfair prejudice is used
consistently between the provisions in the uniform Evidence
but the factors to be
taken into account in determining unfair prejudice will vary according to the
factual and legal context in
which the evidence is sought to be adduced. See
Chapter 14 for a detailed discussion of this concept.
‘Unfair’ and ‘unfair
3.36 The word ‘unfair’, as opposed to ‘unfair
prejudice’, appears in ss 90(b) and 192(2)(b) of the uniform
Acts. Section 90(b) provides the court with the power to exclude evidence
of an admission adduced by the prosecution in
criminal trials where, having
regard to the circumstances in which the admission was made, it would be unfair
to the defendant. Section
192(2)(b) provides that when granting leave or
making a direction, a court must take into account the extent to which doing so
be unfair to a party or witness.
3.37 The High Court in
R v Swaffield
said that the concept of
unfairness ‘necessarily lacks precision’, but that:
Unfairness … relates to the right of the accused to a fair trial; in that
situation the unfairness discretion overlaps with
the power or discretion to
reject evidence which is more prejudicial than probative, each looking to the
risk that an accused may
be improperly convicted. While unreliability may be a
touchstone of unfairness, it has been said not to be the sole touchstone. It
be, for instance, that no confession might have been made at all, had the police
investigation been properly
3.38 While the High Court was dealing with the common law, the majority
indicated that its articulation of the fairness discretion
at common law
reflected the approach adopted in the uniform Evidence
Indeed, New South Wales
courts have been influenced by
in the application of the
Evidence Act
provisions.
The Court’s comment in
indicates that the notion of ‘unfairness’, both at common law
and under the uniform Evidence Acts, is broader than that
prejudice’. As discussed in Chapter 14, the statutory concept of unfair
prejudice relates primarily to the
misuse of evidence by the tribunal of fact
(for example, attributing more weight than it should to evidence due to an
emotional reaction
to it). There has been some uncertainty as to whether unfair
prejudice can arise from procedural considerations (such as the inability
cross-examine on hearsay evidence). The Commissions are of the view that unfair
prejudice can arise from procedural considerations
only where this affects the
ability of the tribunal of fact to assess rationally the weight of the evidence.
By contrast, ‘unfairness’
may arise solely from procedural
considerations. However, not surprisingly, the authorities indicate that there
is some overlap in
the use of the terms.
R v Duncan & Pierre,
Wood CJ at CL held that the issues arising
in relation to
in the context of that particular case were
essentially the same as those arising under
s 192(2)(b).
In this case,
the defendant argued on appeal that the overall weight and reliability of the
statement of a particular witness was
such that either leave should have been
refused to the Crown to cross-examine its own witness (pursuant to
that the witness’ statement should have been excluded pursuant to
. His Honour held that there was no unfairness or unfair
prejudice in this case as the jury had been given ample directions and the
defence had been given the opportunity to cross-examine the witness on his prior
3.41 A similar situation arose in
where the Crown
sought to cross-examine a witness pursuant to
One of the grounds of
appeal was that the trial judge, who had refused to exclude the evidence under
, had failed to consider
fairness when deciding whether
to grant leave under
On appeal, the New South Wales Court of Criminal
Appeal held that, although the trial judge had not considered
was no miscarriage of justice as she could not have found the evidence unfair
where she had refused to exclude it under
Although their
Honours gave no more detail, it is clear that the same questions arise regarding
reliability and the ability of the
trier of fact to assess correctly the weight
of particular evidence.
Probative value and
unfair prejudice
3.42 It is clear from the conflict in the authorities that there is
uncertainty as to the meanings of the terms ‘probative value’
‘unfair prejudice’. It has been suggested that the difficulty lies
in the fact that the concepts are insufficiently
This is because it is
difficult to measure prejudice without reference to the degree of probative
value. As McHugh J said in
‘in many cases the
probative value either creates or reinforces the prejudicial effect of the
Hence it is
apparent that the concepts are interdependent. Difficulties of interpretation
arise when attempts are made to conceptualise
them as completely distinct.
3.43 Another factor accounting for the inconsistency in the interpretation of
the relevant terms is that some judges and practitioners
are still in the
process of adjusting to the uniform Evidence Acts. When an evidentiary issue
arises, there is a tendency on the
part of some to approach the rules of
evidence as they would have under the common law.
3.44 In order to understand the terms as they are used in the Acts, it is
essential to recognise the important policy changes engendered
by the Acts.
Analysis of the case law dealing with these concepts reveals that at least some
of the confusion, particularly in regard
to unfair prejudice, is due to the fact
that courts and practitioners have not yet come to terms with the fact that some
evidence which would previously have been inadmissible under the common
law are now admissible under the Acts. This is particularly
evident in relation
to hearsay evidence and the inability to cross-examine. Judges and practitioners
trained under the common law
may view such evidence as unfairly prejudicial due
to the fact that it was previously inadmissible, and hence try to interpret the
Acts’ provisions in accordance with the common law notions. McHugh J
Some recent decisions suggest that the term ‘unfair prejudice’ may
have a broader meaning than that suggested by the
Australian Law Reform
Commission and that it may cover procedural disadvantages which a party may
suffer as the result of admitting
evidence under the provisions of the Act 1995
… I am inclined to think that the learned judges have been too much
by the common law attitude to hearsay evidence, have not given
sufficient weight to the change that the Act has brought about in
making hearsay
evidence admissible to prove facts in issue, and have not given sufficient
weight to the traditional meaning of ‘prejudice’
in a context of
rejecting evidence for discretionary reasons.
3.45 His Honour went on to note:
Sections 135, 136 and 137 contain powers which are to be applied on a case by
case basis because of considerations peculiar to the
evidence in the particular
case. It may be proper for appellate courts to develop guidelines for exercising
the powers conferred
by these sections so that certain classes of evidence are
usually excluded or limited. But those sections confer no authority to
emasculate provisions in the Act to make them conform with common law notions of
relevance or admissibility.
3.46 It is hoped that the commentary in this Discussion Paper will help to
achieve clarity and consistency in the use of the terms
probative value,
unfairness and unfair prejudice. Further, as is discussed in detail below,
education programs for the judiciary
and the profession focusing on the policy
underpinning the Acts will facilitate a more consistent approach.
Facilitating
an understanding of the uniform Evidence Acts
3.47 Consultations and submissions to date have indicated that, while most
judicial officers and practitioners in uniform Evidence
Acts jurisdictions are
familiar with the Acts’ provisions, more needs to be done to familiarise
those using the Acts with the
underlying policy of the legislation. This is
particularly important in relation to the approach to issues of admissibility
Chapter 3 of the Acts—specifically the use of ss 135–137
(discretionary and mandatory exclusions).
3.48 ALRC 38 outlined the approach to admissibility under the uniform
Evidence Acts:
As under the existing law, the admissibility of a piece of evidence should be
determined by first asking whether it is relevant.
If the answer to that
question is in the negative it should be excluded. If the answer is in the
affirmative, the evidence will be
admissible unless an exclusionary rule
operates to exclude it or an exclusionary discretion is exercised. It will be
for the party
against whom it is led to direct the court’s attention to
the rules set out in the legislation justifying exclusion of the
evidence if it
wishes to have the evidence
3.49 Other than directing the court’s attention to statutory rules of
admissibility rather than a common law evidentiary principle,
the process does
not differ from that which applies in non-uniform
Evidence Act
However, the uniform Evidence Acts’ relaxation of common law rules of
admissibility to accord with the primary
objective of enabling ‘the
parties to produce the probative evidence that is available to
places greater
emphasis on the use of the discretionary and mandatory exclusions contained in
3.50 As discussed in Chapter 14, the submissions and consultations have suggested
that judicial officers are often reluctant to take
a robust approach to the use
of the discretionary and mandatory exclusions contained in
. Some judicial officers in trial courts expressed concern
that reliance on the discretionary provisions to exclude or limit the use
otherwise admissible evidence could result in the decision being overturned on
Further, it was said
that, rather than identifying the precise grounds upon which evidence should be
excluded, counsel often seek
exclusion pursuant to
adopting a ‘package approach’ which is of little assistance to the
decision maker.
3.51 Educational programs should be implemented which focus on the policy
underlying the uniform Evidence Acts’ approach to
admissibility of
evidence. For judicial officers, this could be coordinated by the National
Judicial College, the Judicial College
of Victoria and the Judicial Commission
of New South Wales. The state and territory law societies and Bar should offer
legal education to their members in this regard.
Proposal 3–1
Educational programs should be implemented by the
National Judicial College, the Judicial College of Victoria and the Judicial
of New South Wales and by the state and territory law societies and
Bar which focus on the policy underlying the uniform Evidence
approach to admissibility of evidence.
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
Australian Law Reform Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1 (1985), [793]–[800].
See discussion in
Pfennig v The
[1995] HCA 7
(1995) 182 CLR 461
BRS v The Queen
[1997] HCA 47
(1997) 191 CLR 275
Pfennig v The Queen
[1995] HCA 7
182 CLR 461
R Eggleston,
Evidence, Proof and Probability
(2nd ed, 1983), 97–98.
See, eg, research cited in Australian
Law Reform Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1 (1985),
[795]–[800].
Pfennig v The
[1995] HCA 7
(1995) 182 CLR 461.
Murphy J expressed similar reservations concerning the impact of such
evidence on the presumption of innocence in the earlier case
Perry v The
(1982) 150 CLR 580
, 594: ‘The presumption of innocence and the
strict standard of proof required in criminal cases tends to be indirectly and
subtly undermined from the outset by reference to a sequence of events which
according to common human experience would not occur
unless the accused were
Pfennig v The Queen
[1995] HCA 7
(1995) 182 CLR 461
C Williams, ‘Approaches to
Similar Fact Evidence: England and Australia’ in P Mirfield and R Smith
Essays for Colin Tapper
(2003) 21, 22; C Williams,
Law Commission,
Evidence of
Bad Character in Criminal Proceedings
, Report 273 (2001), Appendix A. [A.
See Law Commission,
Evidence in Criminal Proceedings: Previous Misconduct of a Defendant
141 (1996) Appendix D, [D. 63].
Commission of England and Wales,
Evidence of Bad Character in Criminal
Proceedings
, Report 273 (2001), Appendix A,
See Z Kunda,
(1999) 417–421; J Hunt and T Budesheim, ‘How Jurors
Use and Misuse Character Evidence’ (2004) 89
Journal of Applied
H Hartshorne
Studies in Deceit
(1928); W Mischel,
Personality and
See S Epstein,
‘The Stability of Behaviour: I. On Predicting Most of the People Much of
the Time’ (1979) 59
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
202; S Epstein, ‘The Stability of Confusion: A Reply to Mischel and
Peake’ (1983) 90
Psychological Review
179; S Epstein and L
Terapulsky, ‘Perception of Cross-Situational Consistency’ (1986) 50
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
1152; D Funder and C Randall
Colvin, ‘Explorations in Behavioral Consistency: Properties of Persons,
Situations, and Behaviors’
Journal of Personality and Social
Z Kunda and R
Nisbett, ‘The Psychometrics of Everyday Life’ (1986) 18
T Wilson and
N Brekke, ‘Mental Contamination and Mental Correction: Unwanted Influences
on Judgments and Evaluations’
Psychological Bulletin
J Hunt and T Budesheim,
‘How Jurors Use and Misuse Character Evidence’ (2004) 89
of Applied Psychology
Wissler and M Saks, ‘On the Inefficiency of Limiting Instructions: When
Jurors Use Prior Conviction Evidence to Decide on
and Human Behavior
; K Pickel, ‘Inducing Jurors to Disregard
Inadmissible Evidence: A Legal Explanation that Does Not Help’ (1995) 19
Law and Human Behavior
407; J Lieberman and J Arndt, ‘Understanding
the Limits of Limiting Instructions: Social Psychological Explanations for the
Failures of Instructions to Disregard Pretrial Publicity and Other Inadmissible
Psychology, Public Policy and Law
M Costanzo,
Psychology Applied to
(2004) 144–146.
and S Sommers, ‘Inadmissible Testimony, Instructions to Disregard, and the
Jury: Substantive versus Procedural Considerations’
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin
Not Fair! The Typology
of Commonsense Unfairness
Australian Law Reform Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1
(1985), [800].
Uniform Evidence Acts
Evidence Act 1995
Evidence Act
(1997) 94 A Crim R 131
[2003] NSWCCA 319
(2003) 58 NSWLR 700
J Anderson, J Hunter and N
The New Evidence Law: Annotations and Commentary on the Uniform
Evidence Acts
(2002), 312.
Uniform Evidence Acts
R v Lockyer
A Crim R 457
, 459. This has been cited with approval in a number of cases:
(1997) 91 A Crim R 356
(1997) 42 NSWLR 702
(1997) 98 A Crim R 359
[2000] NSWCCA
R v Lockyer
(1996) 89 A
Zaknic Pty Ltd v
Svelte Corporation Pty Ltd
[1995] FCA 1739
(1995) 61 FCR 171
[2003] NSWCCA 319
58 NSWLR 700
(1997) 94 A Crim R 131
R v Swaffield
[1998] HCA 1
(1998) 192 CLR
Ibid, [68],
R v Fernando
[1999] NSWCCA
R v Duncan & Pierre
[2004] NSWCCA 431.
Wood CJ at CL noted
at [248] that a similar situation had arisen in
(Unreported, New
South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal, Gleeson CJ, McInerney and Sully JJ, 1
April 1997).
NSWCCA 321.
Ibid, [160].
D Mathias, ‘Probative Value,
Illegitimate Prejudice and the Accused’s Right to a Fair Trial’
Criminal Law Journal
Pfennig v The Queen
[1995] HCA 7
182 CLR 461
Papakosmas v The
[1999] HCA 37
(1999) 196 CLR 297
, [93]. Unfair prejudice is also discussed in
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, ALRC 38 (1987),
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1 (1985),
Judicial Officers of the
District Court of NSW,
Consultation
, Sydney, 3 March
4. Competence and Compellability
Introduction
Compellability
4. Competence and Compellability
Introduction
4.1 A person may lawfully be called to give evidence unless a court finds
they are incompetent to do so. A competent witness is also
compellable if he or
she may be lawfully required to give evidence. As a general rule, all witnesses
who are competent are compellable,
although there are some limited exceptions in
criminal matters, particularly in relation to the accused, the accused’s
and some other immediate family members.
4.2 The rationale for the existence of tests of competence is to guard
against the admission of evidence of little or no probative
value. This need has
to be balanced against the unnecessary exclusion of relevant evidence. These
competing priorities are particularly
evident in the context of the criminal law
where competency requirements are necessary, on the one hand to protect an
innocent defendant
from wrongful conviction and on the other to ensure that
relevant evidence is
admissible.
4.3 IP 28 does not identify any issues relating to competence and the
adequacy or otherwise of the current tests of competence under
the uniform
Evidence Acts. However, work by other law reform bodies and some academic
studies suggest that there are issues that
warrant a re-examination of the
provisions.
4.4 Similarly, IP 28 does not raise for consideration any aspect of the
compellability provisions under the uniform Evidence Acts.
However, an issue in
relation to the definition of de facto spouse in the context of compellability
in criminal proceedings has been
drawn to the attention of the Commissions.
Therefore, whilst this chapter concentrates on the concept of competence, it
make some limited proposals in relation to compellability.
Position prior to
the uniform Evidence Acts
4.5 The position at common law is that a person is only competent to give
evidence if he or she can give ‘sworn’ evidence:
that is, evidence
on oath or affirmation. The common law test of competence to give sworn evidence
is whether the person understands
the nature and consequences of the
In cases where the competence
of a person is in question or where a person is presumed incompetent to give
sworn evidence (for example,
where the witness is a child below a certain age),
the judicial officer questions the witness, often about their religious beliefs
or belief in God, to decide whether they are competent to take the oath.
4.6 In most Australian jurisdictions, the common law position has been modified
to change the test of competence to give sworn evidence
or to allow a witness to
give unsworn, as compared to sworn, evidence in certain
circumstances.
Discussion in
4.7 The interim report of the ALRC’s original evidence inquiry
(ALRC 26) reviewed the concept of an understanding of the nature
consequences of the oath as the basis for establishing competence. The report
points out that this approach was ‘far from
satisfactory’:
The common law test outlined here is essentially one of moral and religious
understanding. The test does not appear to meet directly
the real issues of
psychological competency. Factors such as memory, the ability to make inferences
and the capacity to be appropriately
informative and relevant are not
considered. Only the criterion that the witness should have the capacity to be
truthful is tested
by the common law formula. The capacity to understand which
information is required, extract it from other stored information and
clearly, is not tested as it would be if the test were framed in terms of
cognitive development.
4.8 The ALRC produced recommendations for reform, the primary recommendation
being that all witnesses should be presumed competent
to give evidence. However,
in circumstances where there is doubt raised, the court should be given power to
decline to hear evidence
from a witness who nonetheless does not meet a certain
‘minimum standard’ of competence. The proposal applies to the
witness’ evidence generally, as well as to the particular evidence the
witness is asked to give.
4.9 The ALRC’s proposals moved away from reliance on religious belief
to determine competence. In draft legislation, it recommended
a new test of
competence, requiring an understanding of an obligation to give truthful
to replace the common law
test based on an understanding of the nature and consequences of the oath. The
ALRC envisaged that this
would be the ‘minimum standard’ that a
witness would have to meet before being eligible to give
Hence it would no longer
be necessary for the court ‘to explore the religious belief and knowledge
of the witness’.
4.10 The draft provisions contained in ALRC 26 in relation to competence does
not draw a distinction between competence to give sworn
and unsworn evidence.
Rather, it was generally proposed that a person was to give evidence either
having sworn an oath or made an
affirmation.
The current
law—the uniform Evidence Acts
4.11 The competence and compellability provisions of the uniform Evidence
Acts are found in
. This chapter is particularly concerned
, which are the main provisions relating to
competence.
sets out the basic rules for competence and compellability.
, all persons, regardless of age or other factors, are
presumed to be competent to give evidence. This proposition applies subject
application of other provisions of the uniform Evidence Acts and, in particular,
The presumption of a person’s competence may be rebutted if it
is challenged and the person does not meet the relevant competence
Section 12(b)
provides that a person competent to give evidence
the court to determine competence and compellability in terms of a
person’s capacity to give evidence about particular matters
Section 13(1)
–(4) provide a number of qualifications to the
general proposition that all witnesses are competent to give evidence.
4.15 Central to this discussion is the distinction made in
sworn and unsworn evidence and the tests for competence to give each type of
Section 13(1)
sets out the test of competence to give sworn
evidence. It provides that a person who is incapable of understanding that he or
is under an obligation to give truthful evidence is not competent to give
sworn evidence.
4.16 The test for competence to give unsworn evidence contained in
requires the fulfilment of a number of criteria:
• first, the threshold issue must be established—that is, by
, the person is not competent to give sworn evidence
because of his or her inability to understand the obligation to be truthful;
• secondly, the court must be satisfied that the person understands the
difference between a truth and a lie
(s 13(2)(a))
• thirdly, the court must tell the person the importance of telling the
(s 13(2)(b))
• fourthly, the person must indicate appropriately that he or she will
not tell lies in the proceeding
(s 13(2)(c))
4.17 There is a further competence requirement applicable to both sworn and
unsworn evidence contained in
Section 13(3)
provides for
the concept of ‘partial’ incompetence—that is, a person who is
incapable of ‘giving a rational
reply to a question about a fact is not
competent to give evidence about the fact’. He or she may nevertheless be
to give evidence about other facts.
Section 13(4)
relates to physical
incompetence. It provides that a person is not competent to give evidence
‘about a fact’ unless he
or she is capable ‘of hearing or
understanding, or of communicating a reply to, a question about the fact’.
Section 13(5)
reinforces the proposition that all persons are competent
by specifically providing for a presumption of competence which is displaced
only ‘if the contrary is proved’. Accordingly, the burden of proof
is on the party challenging the competence of a witness.
Section 13(6)
deals with a situation where, before a witness finishes
giving evidence, he or she dies or becomes incompetent to give evidence.
provides that evidence that has already been given by the witness does not
become inadmissible merely because of the happening
of such an event.
4.20 In determining a question concerning a witness’ competence under
, the court is, by virtue of
, permitted to inform itself
as it sees fit.
4.21 The competence provisions in
for the most part reflect
the original ALRC proposals, except in two significant and related respects.
4.22 First, the provisions make a distinction between competence to give
sworn and unsworn evidence.
Section 13(1)
adopts the test of competence
recommended by the ALRC—that is, an understanding of the obligation to
give truthful evidence—but
confines it to a test for giving sworn
evidence. Ultimately, if the witness is found to be competent to give sworn
evidence, he or
she will have to mark that obligation by taking an oath or an
affirmation
4.23 Secondly,
introduces a test for competence to give unsworn
evidence, which is to be applied where a witness fails to meet the competence
for sworn evidence but can satisfy another set of criteria. This is a
departure from the ALRC draft legislation, which does not include
test for competence to give unsworn evidence. A witness found competent to give
unsworn evidence pursuant to
is subject to the exception in
and is not required to take an oath or affirmation.
4.24 It would appear that
is intended to relax the approach
recommended by the ALRC by allowing witnesses who cannot demonstrate an
understanding of an obligation
to give truthful evidence (for example, some
children or persons with cognitive impairment) nonetheless to give unsworn
However, in practice, fulfilling the requirements of the competence
test for unsworn evidence is arguably as onerous as establishing
competence to
give evidence on oath.
4.25 Notably, under the uniform Evidence Acts, ‘unsworn evidence is
still evidence and is treated no differently from other
(although sworn
evidence will presumably be afforded greater weight by the court).
VLRC’s Sexual
Offences Reports
4.26 Recent law reform work, particularly in Victoria, and academic
consideration of the competency provisions, questions the appropriateness
formulation of the competence tests under the uniform Evidence Acts.
4.27 In 2004, in its interim and final reports on sexual offences law and
procedure, the VLRC examined the evidence laws in Victoria
which determine the
competence of children to give evidence. The VLRC made a series of
recommendations for legislative change in
Some of those
recommendations are already reflected in the uniform Evidence Acts (for example,
the presumption that all witnesses
are competent). However, there are a number
of recommendations of the VLRC which are not part of the uniform Evidence Acts.
recommendations concern the following:
• the validity of the test for determining competence to give unsworn
evidence. In particular, the VLRC recommended that people
who are not competent
to give sworn evidence should be able to give unsworn evidence if they can
understand questions put to them
as a witness and give intelligible answers to
• the directions that judicial officers should be required to give to
witnesses, particularly children, before they give evidence;
• the availability of expert reports to assist the court in determining
competence to give evidence. The VLRC recommended that
in cases involving
allegations of child sexual assault, the court should be able to seek a report
from an independent and appropriately
qualified expert about the child’s
competence to give sworn or unsworn evidence.
4.28 One of the main principles underpinning the VLRC recommendations is the
liberalisation of the tests of competence and the processes
by which they are
applied to allow children who are capable of giving evidence to do so without
unnecessary or unfair hindrance.
However, any amendments to the competence
provisions of the uniform Evidence Acts would have broader application. The
would apply to children and to adults whose mental or physical
condition may cause questions to be raised about their competence
4.29 Characteristics of witnesses which may cause vulnerability in court
include old age, intellectual disability, acquired brain
injury, mental illness
and other forms of cognitive impairment. There is an extremely wide range of
conditions of varying severity
that may result in a witness’ competence
being challenged.
Criticisms of the
current law
4.30 There are a number of criticisms which can be made about the current
competency provisions under the uniform Evidence Acts. Broadly
speaking, the
three fundamental criticisms are:
• first, taken together, the tests of competence to give sworn and
unsworn evidence are too restrictive, with the result that
there is a risk that
evidence of probative value will be excluded;
• secondly, the tests of competence to give sworn and unsworn evidence
are too similar and pose difficulties for practical application;
• thirdly, the use of the truth criterion as the basis of the test for
competence to give unsworn evidence is questionable.
4.31 Achieving acceptable competency laws requires ‘a delicate
balancing of the interests and needs of individuals [including
defendants,
victims and witnesses], society, investigating authorities and the
No matter what
form the law takes, it is to be expected that there will be differences of
opinion about whether it is too stringent
or too liberal. It is apparent,
however, that the evolution of competency laws in recent years favours an
approach that is less exclusionary
and promotes greater admissibility of
Decisions about the
weight to be given to the evidence are then left to the court. This policy of
inclusion is reflected in the structure
, which makes provision for
tests of both sworn and unsworn evidence and also allows for a witness to be
competent to give evidence
in relation to some matters but not others.
4.32 However, the content and complexity of the tests in
may in fact
defeat this objective of greater inclusion of evidence. In their current form,
the uniform Evidence Acts require a witness
whose competence is in doubt to meet
certain standards. The level of intellectual capacity required to fulfil those
standards may
exclude some persons from giving evidence who may nonetheless be
able to communicate satisfactorily valuable information that may
be central to a
case. For instance, appropriately questioned, a person with an intellectual
disability may be able to understand
a question and provide an answer about some
straightforward concrete matters, but may not otherwise be able to respond to
questioning
such a witness may not be competent and evidence of probative
value will be
4.33 The competence tests for sworn evidence
and unsworn evidence
bear a striking similarity. Each is founded on the complex notion
of truth. Beyond this common attribute, the tests are distinguishable
significantly different.
4.34 The most important distinction is that the competence test for sworn evidence
requires a witness to understand that he or she
is under an
‘obligation’ to tell the truth when giving evidence. This entails a
certain level of sophisticated and conceptual
thought. The obligation is
something more than a promise or statement of an intention to tell the truth. It
equates to an appreciation
of the nature of the duty. On the other hand, the
competence test for unsworn evidence also requires conceptual thought for a
to satisfy the court that he or she understands the difference between
the truth and a lie
(s 13(2)(a)).
Similar to the test for competence to
give sworn evidence, the test involves a grasp of the meaning of the abstract
concepts of truth
and dishonesty.
4.35 These subtle distinctions between the tests are potentially problematic.
The value and effectiveness of having two separate tests
are diluted if the
content of the tests are too similar. This is so from the perspectives of both
the court applying the tests and
witnesses subjected to them.
4.36 In the application of the competence tests for sworn and unsworn
requires a judicial officer to conduct a staged inquiry.
Ideally he or she should ask questions which are developmentally sensitive
not too difficult or abstract, particularly when questioning
The questioning must
also be capable of eliciting the witness’ capacity for subtle distinctions
in conceptual thinking to establish
whether the witness understands the
obligation to tell the truth and, if not, whether the witness nonetheless
understands the difference
between the truth and a lie. However, because the
elements of the two tests are not sufficiently different, witnesses who do not
meet the requirements of the first test may also fail to meet the requirements
of the second test.
4.37 Currently, the legislation gives little guidance about the questions that
should be asked to assist judicial officers in establishing
competence. This may
result in inconsistent judicial decision
or the increased
likelihood of judicial error. Further, because of the similarities between the
two tests, in practice there is the
potential for judicial officers to ask
substantially the same questions, or to blend or fuse the questioning for each
test. In other
contexts where it has been considered that the distinction
between the competence tests for sworn and unsworn evidence is unclear,
been observed that some judicial officers administer a
‘dual-purpose’ competence test for both evidence
This involves asking the
same or substantially the same questions for each evidence type, reflecting the
view that one inquiry will
usually serve for a judicial officer’s
determination on both issues of sworn and unsworn
4.38 As there are few reported cases which show a difficulty in applying
, some of these concerns may be theoretical. Nonetheless, there have
been cases which illustrate the potential for confusion or judicial
example, in
, a new trial was ordered by the New South Wales
Court of Criminal Appeal where the trial judge allowed a child of 10 to give
evidence without first fulfilling all of the requirements of
case, the trial judge had erroneously assumed that the witness’ age
precluded her from being sworn. He then embarked
on a line of questioning that
purported to follow the requirements of
without first establishing
that she did not understand the obligation to tell the truth.
has been followed in at least one
also highlights judicial debate about the exact nature of
the requirement under
for the court to tell the person that it
is important to tell the truth. For instance, the provision may be interpreted
as requiring
some form of judicial ‘instruction’. Thus, one of the
judges in the New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal in
that the policy he discerns behind the provision is that ‘the authority of
the court is to be brought to bear on the witness
by means of an
instruction’.
therefore not surprising that the delivery of the judicial officer’s
statement may have the potential to sound like a
intimidating’ warning.
4.40 The contrary view about the usefulness of this provision is held by some
researchers on children’s competence, who suggest
that there may be some
benefit in asking a child to tell the
Indeed, aside from the
provision that currently exists in
, a like requirement exists in
Queensland and has been recommended in
4.41 The appropriateness of using an understanding of the concept of truth as a
criterion in the tests of competence is also questionable.
Truth is an abstract,
morally based concept. As has been noted, ‘truth is not an unitary concept
even for adults. “Truthfulness”
is a concept of little or no meaning
for very young children’.
4.42 Typically, challenges to competence will occur in relation to child witnesses
or witnesses with cognitive impairment. Arguably,
these witnesses should not be
subjected to testing founded on complex and abstract concepts. A grasp of a
concept such as truth depends
upon intellectual ability or cognitive
development. For example, in the case of many young children, an understanding
of the truth
or the nature of a lie will be influenced by developmental factors
and, possibly, cultural background and moral and religious influences.
4.43 The use of truth and related concepts in the criteria for the tests of both
sworn and unsworn evidence potentially makes the
test of giving unsworn evidence
as rigorous as the test for giving sworn evidence. A witness who cannot satisfy
the court that he
or she understands the concept of truth may be incompetent to
give either sworn or unsworn evidence, even though he or she may otherwise
general competence to give relevant probative evidence—that is, he or she
may possess basic comprehension and communication
Commissions’ view
4.44 The Commissions propose that the existing competency regime be made less
stringent to guard against the possibility of evidence
of probative value being
excluded from court proceedings. In particular, the Commissions propose reducing
the barriers to giving
unsworn evidence and addressing many of the above
criticisms by reformulating
, so that the standard for determining
competence of a witness to give unsworn evidence is substantially different from
that for competence
to give sworn evidence. This could be achieved if an ability
to demonstrate understanding of the concept of truth does not form part
test for competence to give unsworn evidence. It will be up to the court to
determine the weight that should be given to unsworn
4.45 In particular, the test of competence to give sworn evidence in
should continue to be that the person understands the obligation to
give truthful evidence. It should also be made clear that a person
who satisfies
the test must also satisfy a test of general competence founded on basic
comprehension and communication skills (to
be located elsewhere in
person who does not possess the requisite standard of comprehension and
communication to give sworn evidence in relation to some
matters will be
incapable of giving evidence about those matters or facts, but not necessarily
4.46 In relation to unsworn evidence, it is proposed that a person may give
unsworn evidence about a fact if they satisfy a test of
general competence. A
person who does not possess the requisite comprehension and communication skills
in relation to some matters
will be incapable of giving unsworn evidence about
these matters or facts, but not necessarily others. Therefore the Commissions
propose that, subject to retaining (in general terms) the requirement that the
court informs the person of the importance of telling
the truth, the current
test of competence to give unsworn evidence in
be deleted.
4.47 As to the common test of general competence, such a test is not novel. A
similar test formulated in the nineteenth century by
Sir James Fitzjames
Stephen, and as applied in Christmas Island and the Cocos (Keeling) Islands, is
favourably considered in
A like test
applies in:
• the United Kingdom under the
Youth Justice and Criminal Evidence
• Queensland under the
Evidence Act 1977
4.48 There are a number of possible alternative formulations of a test for
general competence to give sworn or unsworn evidence founded
comprehension and communication skills. The main variation is in the description
of the witness’ response to questions.
The options the Commissions have
considered are as follows:
• First, the test could provide that a person is competent to give
unsworn evidence if he or she can understand questions put
to him or her as a
witness and give
intelligible
answers to them. This is the formulation of
the test recommended by the VLRC in relation to unsworn evidence in its final
on sexual offences.
However, the Commissions note that the concept of ‘intelligibility’
is open to interpretation.
• Secondly, the test for unsworn evidence could require that the person
understand the questions put and give
answers to them. The word
‘rational’ also appears in
which deals with a
witness’ capacity to give evidence about some facts and not others. This
term is potentially quite restrictive
and also open to interpretation. For
instance, in the context of the analysis of Stephen’s test in
ALRC 26, the test of a ‘rational
answer’ is said to recognise
‘the requirement that a witness have an adequate memory, the ability to
give responses which
are clear and to give relevant
information’.
situations, memory or ‘recall’ has been said not to be
‘something which affects the rationality of the
Since it is open
to complex and diverse interpretation, the Commissions are not in favour of the
use of the word ‘rational’
in the test for competence to give sworn
or unsworn evidence or, indeed, in
• The third option considered is that a person be required to understand the
questions put and give
answers which can be understood
. This is the
English test of general competence in the
Youth Justice and Criminal Evidence
provision is seen to leave less room for interpretation than an intelligibility
or a test requiring
rationality.
4.49 The Commissions prefer the third option because of its clarity and lack
of ambiguity. Accordingly, the proposed standard for
general competence to give
sworn or unsworn evidence is that the person can understand a question about a
fact and can give an answer
which can be understood to a question about that
4.50 The Commissions also propose that the uniform Evidence Acts be amended
to provide that if for any reason, including physical
disability, a person is
incapable of meeting the requisite standard of comprehension and communication
and that incapacity cannot
be overcome, the person is not competent to give
evidence (sworn or unsworn). Otherwise, the current provisions in relation to
competence and physical competence in s 13(3) and (4) should be
4.51 The issues concerning competence have only arisen during consultation on
IP 28. A matter of obvious importance will be the way
the proposal for a
requirement of general competence is likely to operate in practice. A number of
matters may need to be considered.
For example, does requiring the witness to
have the capacity to give an understandable answer unduly shift the focus from
the witness
to the listener? Is the witness’ ability to give a response to
a question which can be understood an appropriate element of
the test, bearing
in mind that a witness may give an understandable but obviously illogical
response? In practice, will the focus
on questions about ‘a fact’
cause practical difficulties? Are these concerns more theoretical than real?
4.52 The Commissions have also considered the recommendation in the VLRC
sexual offences reports that, in cases involving allegations
of child sexual
assault, the court should be able to seek a report from an independent and
appropriately qualified expert about a
child’s competence to give sworn or
unsworn evidence. As the VLRC noted, courts generally
do not hear expert evidence on the capacity of a particular child to give
evidence, even though a person with expertise in the development
patterns of
children may be able to provide important information about the child’s
capacity to give evidence.
4.53 The VLRC’s recommendation should not be confined to child
witnesses or to sexual assault matters. It is reasonably foreseeable
court may benefit from the availability of expert reports in relation to other
witnesses, such as those with some form of
cognitive impairment. The insights of
an appropriately qualified expert skilled in determining intellectual
functioning may assist
the court in determining issues of capacity, which would
otherwise be determined by judicial questioning and impressions ascertained
the artificial environs of the courtroom.
4.54 Therefore, it is proposed that the current provision s 13(7), which
provides that in determining questions under s 13 the court
‘inform itself as it sees fit’, should be amended to make it clear
that a court is entitled to draw on expert opinion
to assist in determining such
4.55 Finally, the wording of s 14 should be amended to bring it in line
with the proposed changes to s 13.
Proposal 4–1
Section 13(2), (3) and (4) should be amended
or replaced to bring about the following:
• a person not competent to give sworn evidence should be competent
to give unsworn evidence provided that the court informs
that person of the
importance of telling the truth and that person satisfies the test of general
competence;
• there should be a test of general competence for both sworn and
unsworn evidence. It should provide that if for any reason,
including physical
disability, a person is unable to understand a question about a fact or is
unable to give answers to a question
that incapacity cannot be overcome, the person is not competent to give evidence
Section 13(7) should be amended to make it clear that in informing
itself as to the competence of a witness, the court is entitled
expert opinion. The wording of s 14 should be amended to bring it in line
with the proposed changes to s 13.
Compellability
Compellability of de
facto spouses in criminal proceedings
4.56 The common law provides that spouses are not compellable unless the law
provides that they are.
approach taken under the uniform Evidence Acts is to make a spouse (as well as a
de facto spouse, parent or child) of the accused
compellable to give evidence
for the prosecution in a criminal trial, but to give him or her the right to
The uniform Evidence
Acts provide that the judicial officer then has the discretion to excuse the
witness from testifying by balancing
the risk of harm to the witness or to their
relationship with the accused, on the one hand, against the importance of the
on the other hand.
Acts also set out a non-exhaustive list of factors that must be taken into
account in the exercise of the discretion, including
the nature and gravity of
the offence, the importance of the evidence, the availability of other evidence,
the nature of the relationship
between the witness and the accused, and any
breach of confidence involved.
This general approach is subject to exceptions for proceedings for certain
criminal offences (which differ for each of the uniform
Evidence Act
Acts. In proceedings relating to the excepted
offences, the witness is
compellable.
4.57 The discretionary approach to compellability in the uniform Evidence Acts
reflects the underlying rationale and competing policy
considerations:
on the one hand, the desirability, in the public interest, of having all
relevant evidence available to the courts and on the other
the undesirability in
the public interest that
• the procedures for enforcing the criminal law should be allowed to
disrupt marital and family relationships to a greater extent
than the interests
of the community really require, and
• the community should make unduly harsh demands on its members by
compelling them, where the general interest does not require
it, to give
evidence that will bring punishment upon those they love, betray their
confidences, or entail economic and social
4.58 Under the uniform Evidence Acts, the right to object to giving evidence
applies not only to the accused’s spouse, but also
to a de facto spouse
(as well as a parent or child) of the accused. This acknowledges that the
rationale for the discretion to excuse
a spouse applies equally to a de facto
spouse. It also takes account of contemporary social attitudes and
4.59 The definition of ‘de facto spouse’ contained in the
Evidence Act
(Cth) provides that a de facto spouse:
(a) of a man, means a woman who is living with the man as his wife on a genuine
domestic basis although not married to him; and
(b) of a woman, means a man who is living with the woman as her husband on a
genuine domestic basis although not married to
4.60 Among other things, this definition requires co-habitation between a man
and a woman. It does not extend to same sex couples.
In this respect, it is
inconsistent with the position in the majority of the other uniform
Evidence Act
sex couples who come within definitions in other
legislation.
4.61 The issue raised in this review is whether the definition of ‘de facto
spouse’ in the
Evidence Act
(Cth) should be extended to
cover a de facto spouse in a same sex relationship, as is the case in New South
Wales and Tasmania. In
2002, amendments were made to the
Evidence Act
(NSW) with the passing of the
Miscellaneous Acts Amendment
(Relationships) Act 2002
(NSW). This Act extended the definition of
‘de facto relationship’ contained in the
Property (Relationships)
(NSW) to a range of statutes, including the
Evidence Act
(NSW). The effect of the amendment was to broaden the definition of
‘de facto spouse’ in the
Evidence Act 1995
(NSW) by making it
non-gender specific. A ‘de facto spouse’ for the purposes of the
Evidence Act 1995
(NSW) is now a person with whom the person has a de
facto relationship within the meaning of the
Property (Relationships) Act
(NSW), that is:
a relationship between two adult persons:
(a) who live together as a couple, and
(b) who are not married to one another or related by
4.62 In determining whether two persons are in a de facto relationship, the
court is to take into account all the circumstances of
the relationship,
(a) the duration of the relationship,
(b) the nature and extent of common residence,
(c) whether or not a sexual relationship exists,
(d) the degree of financial dependence or interdependence, and any arrangements
for financial support, between the parties,
(e) the ownership, use and acquisition of property,
(f) the degree of mutual commitment to a shared life,
(g) the care and support of children,
(h) the performance of household duties,
(i) the reputation and public aspects of the
relationship.
Section 4(3)
provides that no finding in respect of any of the
above matters, or any combination of them, is
to be regarded as necessary for the existence of a de facto relationship, and a
court determining whether such a relationship exists
is entitled to have regard
to such matters, and to attach such weight to any matter, as may seem
appropriate to the court in the
circumstances of the case.
4.64 Although not explicitly stated, this provision has the effect, in New
South Wales, of extending the potential exemption to compellability
facto spouse to a person in a same sex relationship.
4.65 In Tasmania, persons in a same sex relationship are recognised in a
similar way. However, the position is less prescriptive than
in New South Wales.
The term ‘spouse’ in
Evidence Act 2001
includes a person who is in a ‘significant relationship’ within the
meaning of the
Relationships Act 2003
For the purposes of the
Relationships Act 2003
(Tas), the definition of a ‘significant
relationship’ differs from the definition of a ‘de facto
relationship’
contained in the
Property (Relationships) Act 1984
(NSW) in a notable respect. A ‘significant relationship’ is defined
Relationships Act 2003
a relationship between two adult persons:
(a) who have a relationship as a couple; and
(b) who are not married to one another or related by family.
4.66 It follows that in Tasmania it is not necessary for a couple to live
together to establish the requisite relationship (as is
the case in New South
Wales). Otherwise,
provides that in determining whether two persons
are in a ‘significant relationship’, the court is to take into
a range of matters that point to the nature and quality of the
relationship. These are the same matters that are also contained in
Property (Relationships) Act 1984
(NSW). The list includes ‘the
nature and extent of common
as one of the
matters that may be taken into account, if relevant.
4.67 Given the differing definitions of ‘spouse’ and ‘de
facto spouse’ in the Commonwealth, New South Wales
and Tasmania, there is
currently disconformity in the laws relating to compellability of a de facto
spouse between uniform
Evidence Act
Submissions and
consultations
4.68 Although not canvassed in IP 28, the Inquiry received a submission
in relation to this matter from Rights
Rights Australia
submits that the
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth) should be amended to give same sex de facto relationships recognition
within the definition of ‘de facto spouse’
under that Act.
4.69 In addition to acknowledging the desirability of consistency in evidence
laws, the submission encourages amendment to ensure
equal protection in relation
to compellability for a same sex partner of an accused in a criminal matter.
Commissions’ view
4.70 The Commissions propose that the
Evidence Act
be amended to allow a de facto spouse in a same sex relationship with the
accused the right to object to giving evidence for
the prosecution in criminal
matters. This can be achieved by amending the current definition of ‘de
facto spouse’ in
4.71 This change would ensure equality and avoid discrimination by according
the same legal privileges in relation to compellability
provisions to all those
who are couples irrespective of the gender of the parties involved. It would
also reflect developments in
social attitudes and result in greater uniformity
between the uniform Evidence Acts jurisdictions.
4.72 The Commissions are of the view that the definition of ‘de facto
relationship’ that applies under the Tasmanian legislation
preferred approach, as it is less prescriptive and does not require that the
parties to a relationship live together. It caters
for a range of situations in
which a couple may not cohabit but may nonetheless have a relationship with many
of the other characteristics
indicative of a de facto relationship. For example,
circumstances can be envisaged where parties in a relationship maintain separate
residences or live apart whilst one party is in long term care outside the home.
In such cases, the circumstances of any cohabitation
(or lack of it) are just
one factor to be taken into account in determining whether a de facto
relationship exists.
4.73 Further, the Commissions propose that it should not be a requirement
that the relationship is between two ‘adult’
persons. It is quite
foreseeable that one or both of the persons in a de facto relationship may be
less than 18 years old and should
be entitled to object to giving evidence in
the same way as an older de facto spouse.
4.74 It should be noted that whatever definition of ‘de facto
spouse’ applies, it is still up to the court to assess whether
relationship exists and whether, taking into account various factors, the
discretion should be exercised to excuse the
4.75 Once again, the Commissions note that the above issue in relation to
compellability arose during consultation on IP 28 and there
has not been an
opportunity for consultation on this matter. Future consultation will be
directed to the issue.
Proposal 4–2
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth) should be
amended to provide that the definition of ‘de facto spouse’, in
relation to a person, be a person with
whom the person has a de facto
relationship. A definition of ‘de facto relationship’ should be
provided in the following
‘de facto relationship’ is a relationship between two
• who have a relationship as a couple; and
• who are not married to one another or related by family.
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Sexual Offences: Interim Report
R v Brazier
[1730] EngR 38
(1799) 168 ER
Evidence Act 1995
Evidence Act 1995
Evidence Act 1977
Evidence Act 1958
(Vic) s 23;
Evidence Act
Evidence Act 1906
Evidence Act 2001
Oaths Act 1939
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1 (1985),
Australian Law Reform Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 2 (1985), 21, cl 14(1): ‘A
person who is incapable of understanding that, in giving evidence, he or
under an obligation to give truthful evidence is not competent to give
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1 (1985),
Australian Law Reform Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 2 (1985), 24, cl 20(1):
‘Except as otherwise provided by this Division, a person may not give
or act as an interpreter, in a proceeding unless the person has sworn
an oath or made an affirmation in accordance with the appropriate
form in the
Schedule or in accordance with a similar
Stephen Odgers,
Evidence Law
(6th ed) (2004),
Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Sexual Offences: Interim Report
(2003), 291,
Recs 70–74; Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Sexual Offences:
Final Report
(2004), 296,
Recs 132–138.
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Council, 24 May 1995, 113 (J
Shaw—Attorney General).
Australian Law Reform Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1
(1985), [521].
Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Sexual Offences: Interim Report
K Schultz, ‘The Content
of Competence Tests: Queensland Judicial Perspectives on Non-Accused Child
Witnesses in Criminal Proceedings,
[2004] UQLawJl 6
University of
Queensland Law Journal
Ibid, 138, referring to
Lau v The Queen
(1991) 6 WAR 30
(1998) 44 NSWLR
[2003] NSWCCA
(1998) 44 NSWLR
, 127 per Sperling J.
‘The Content of Competence Tests: Queensland Judicial Perspectives on
Non-Accused Child Witnesses in Criminal Proceedings,
[2004] UQLawJl 6
University of Queensland Law Journal
, 145, referring to J Cashmore
and K Bussey, ‘Judicial Perceptions of Child Witness Competence’
Law and Human Behavior
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Sexual Offences: Final Report
(2004), [5.92], referring to New Zealand
Law Commission,
The Evidence of Children and Other Vulnerable
Witnesses—A Discussion Paper
, PP 26 (1996),
Evidence Act 1977
; Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Sexual Offences:
Final Report
(2004), 296
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1 (1985),
Ibid, [237], referring to J
A Digest of the Law of Evidence
(1876), arts 106–107:
All persons shall be considered competent unless they are ‘prevented from
understanding the questions
put to them or from giving rational answers to those
questions by tender years, extreme old age, disease, whether of body or mind,
any other cause of the same
Youth Justice and
Criminal Evidence Act
c 23 (UK) s 53(3): a person will lack
competence to give evidence in a criminal proceeding if it appears to the court
that they are
‘not a person who is able to (a) understand questions put to
him as a witness, and (b) to give answers to them which can be
understood’.
Evidence Act
, (3): A ‘person is competent to give evidence
in the proceeding if, in the court’s opinion, the person is able to give
an intelligible account of events which he or she has observed or
experienced’.
Victorian Law
Reform Commission,
Sexual Offences: Final Report
(2004), 296,
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1 (1985),
[2003] ACTSC
Youth Justice and
Criminal Evidence Act
D Birch, ‘A Better
Deal for Vulnerable Witnesses’
Criminal Law Review
Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Sexual Offences: Final Report
Hoskyn v Metropolitan
Police Commissioner
[1979] AC 474.
Uniform Evidence Acts ss 12(b),
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, ALRC 38 (1987),
Evidence Act 1995
Evidence Act
(NI) Dictionary Pt 1 includes the same definition as the Commonwealth
Evidence Act 1995
Dictionary Pt 1;
Property (Relationships) Act 1984
Evidence Act 2001
Rights Australia Inc,
24 March 2005.
5. Examination and Cross-Examination of Witnesses
Introduction
Examination of witnesses
Cross-examination of witnesses
Other issues
5. Examination and Cross-Examination of Witnesses
Introduction
5.1 Chapter 2, Division 3 of the uniform Evidence Acts governs the
manner in which witnesses may be questioned and give evidence.
For example,
, the court has a general power to make such orders as it
considers just in relation to the questioning of witnesses and the production
and use of documents. Division 3 also sets the order in which examination
in chief, cross-examination and re-examination are to take
place, and deals with
attempts to revive memory and evidence given by police officers. Division 3
is concerned with the giving of
oral evidence by witnesses during proceedings
only, and not in pre-trial proceedings or where evidence is being given by
Division 4 is
concerned with the examination in chief and re-examination of witnesses.
5.2 The focus of this chapter will be the rules governing cross-examination of
witnesses. Generally, it has not been suggested that
these sections of the Acts
are fundamentally flawed or require significant amendment. However, the
following topics have been raised
as being of some interest or concern and will
be considered as part of this chapter: giving evidence in narrative form,
cross-examination
of unfavourable witnesses and cross-examination of vulnerable
Examination
of witnesses
5.3 It is a general principle of the common law that a witness must testify
in his or her own words. In order to protect the integrity
of the evidence, a
party who calls a witness is prevented from asking leading
questions—questions that suggest a desired answer
or a set of
assumptions.
of the uniform Evidence Acts, a leading
may not be put to a
witness in examination in chief or re-examination except where:
• the court has given leave;
• the matter relates to an introductory part of the witness’
• no objection is made to the question (where the other party is represented by
• the question relates to a matter not in dispute; or
• the witness is an expert and the question seeks the witness’ opinion on
a hypothetical statement of facts related to
the evidence being adduced.
5.5 This provision reflects what the ALRC considered in its final Report of
the original evidence inquiry
(ALRC 38) to be existing practices in
relation to leading questions.
exceptions contained in the legislation are similar to those canvassed by the
ALRC as instances where leading questions could
be appropriate either to obtain
the whole of a witness’ evidence or to expedite the
Giving evidence in
narrative form
5.6 In a trial, witnesses generally give their evidence in response to
specific questions from counsel. The uniform Evidence Acts
maintain the question
and answer format as the primary way in which witnesses are examined. However,
s 29(2) of the Act also allows
a witness to give evidence wholly or
partially in narrative form, where the party applies to the court for a
direction allowing the
witness to do so. ‘Narrative form’ refers to
the witness giving evidence as a continuous story in their own words,
uninterrupted
by questions from counsel.
5.7 In the Interim Report of the original evidence inquiry
(ALRC 26), the ALRC noted that there was a general reluctance by
lawyers to allow witnesses to tell their story freely, with oral
evidence being
limited to the answering of specific questions. However, research cited by the
ALRC shows that allowing a witness
to give a free report of events as a
narrative may give a significantly more accurate version, as answering specific
questions may
limit and distort
Giving evidence in
narrative form may also be more culturally appropriate for some witnesses and
may assist child witnesses to give
5.8 ALRC 26 discussed criticisms of ‘free report’ or narrative
evidence. It is argued that the method leads to witnesses
taking charge of
proceedings, resulting in wasted court time. Witnesses may also give irrelevant
or inadmissible evidence, including
hearsay evidence. Nonetheless, although the
ALRC acknowledged that the benefit may be marginal in a number of cases, it was
that narrative evidence should be encouraged, to avoid the
‘filtering and distorting’ process of giving evidence by question
and answer.
Psychological research lends support to the claim advanced at times by witnesses
that being tied to answering designated questions
tends to result in the
distortion of their testimony. Similarly, the claim that a free report would
give a more accurate version
of the events in dispute is supported. On the other
hand, psychological research also confirms the experience of many legal
practitioners:
a free report by a witness is usually found to be sketchy or
incomplete … Obviously, both these techniques have positive and
attributes and there would be considerable merit in the courts generally
adopting a procedure which incorporated the use
of each method to its greatest
5.9 The ALRC suggested that while it would not always be desirable, the
opportunity for evidence to be given in free narrative should
be available under
the Acts to encourage the court to adopt the practice where
appropriate.
5.10 As noted above, s 29(2) of the uniform Evidence Acts allows a witness to
give evidence in narrative form if the party calling
the witness applies to the
court for a direction that the witness give evidence in that form. As with
making any directions under
the uniform Evidence Acts, the court must take into
account s 192(2) factors when considering whether to make any directions
how the witness is to give their
Where the court gives
no direction under s 29, the witness must give their evidence by the
question and answer method; and if an
answer is unresponsive to the question
asked, it may be struck out.
Section 29 applies only where the evidence is given orally by the witness,
and does not apply to affidavit
5.11 The requirement that a party apply for a direction was not part of the
ALRC’s original
recommendation.
It has been
suggested that the requirement to apply for a direction has limited the use of
s 29. Stephen Odgers SC points out that
a lawyer would rarely seek to
have their own witness give evidence in narrative form, as it potentially allows
the witness to take
charge of the
proceedings.
Similarly, Andrew
Ligertwood states that, as directions under s 29 can only be made on
application of the party calling the witness,
the section is unlikely to be
Odgers notes that the
section is most likely to be used in relation to expert witnesses, because they
are familiar with the rules
of evidence and can observe warnings regarding what
evidence is or is not
admissible.
5.12 Section 29(2) reflects the common law position. The general rule is that
evidence is given by question and answer, but an exception
may be made where it
would aid in the giving of more effective
Victoria and Western
Australia have similar provisions to
Submissions and consultations
5.13 IP 28 asked how s 29(2) of the uniform Evidence Acts operated
in practice and whether this provision was sufficient to address
the needs of
different categories of witnesses. Should it be a requirement that the party
calling the witness apply to the court
for a direction that the witness give
evidence in narrative form?
5.14 The Commissions received differing views on the desirability of encouraging
the use of narrative evidence. A common view expressed
is that narrative
evidence will allow a witness to give inadmissible
Victoria Legal Aid
indicates that it does not support the giving of evidence in narrative form, on
the basis that witnesses may include
inadmissible evidence that may prejudice
the jury and the jury is left to disentangle fact from opinion and relevant
evidence from
5.15 The New South Wales Public Defenders Office (NSW PDO) says that, in
practice, s 29(2) is rarely relied upon in criminal trials.
In their view,
criminal advocates recognise the importance of guiding the witness through the
relevant parts of the witness’
evidence, and of avoiding irrelevant and
prejudicial material. Inviting a witness to give a narrative account is
generally poor advocacy
and increases the risk of derailing the trial by the
accidental adducing of prejudicial evidence. On that basis, the
view is that s 29(2) should be
5.16 A senior member of the New South Wales Bar suggests that there are good
reasons why narrative evidence is not used, and that
legislation need not be
changed to make up for what may be a problem with inadequate
5.17 One District Court judge agrees that he has rarely seen s 29(2)
invoked, except to allow children to give evidence. His view
is, however, not
that it should be repealed but rather that it is adequate for present
One magistrate indicates
that she has used the section to good
5.18 However, the contrary view has been put by the New South Wales Director
of Public Prosecutions (DPP NSW) which submits that narrative
evidence may
be a more efficient method of adducing evidence from some witnesses (for
example, child witnesses or witnesses with
a cognitive impairment) and may be
more culturally appropriate for some witnesses. The DPP NSW suggests that
the legislation be amended
so that a court of its own volition is able to direct
that a witness give evidence in narrative form, in the absence of a request
leave from the party calling the
5.19 The Law Council of Australia (Law Council) argues that, as long as it remains
the adversarial responsibility of parties to collect
and present evidence at
trial, parties should be entitled to retain control over the presentation of
oral testimony through the process
of examination in chief. Allowing witnesses
to testify in narrative form would undermine this adversarial process. The Law
submits that whilst there may be arguments in favour of changing the
procedural system to give the court responsibility for the presentation
evidence, changes to the current process should not be made without a serious
inquiry into whether such a change in process is
warranted in
5.20 As it is the duty of the prosecutor to present evidence fairly to the court,
the Law Council has considered whether it is arguable
that prosecution witnesses
should in all cases present their argument in narrative form. However, it
believes that prosecution witnesses
should only be allowed to testify in
narrative form if there are limits upon the prosecution’s right to
cross-examine its own
witnesses and tender their prior
statements.
5.21 Support was received for the view that the ability to give evidence in
narrative form was important for Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander
It was submitted that
s 29 was under utilised in affording protection for Aboriginal witnesses in
native title proceedings.
The communication barriers faced by Aboriginal witnesses are well-known in the
criminal and investigatory context (such as through
the application of the
Anungu rules) and have been well documented in the writings of Diana Eades,
amongst others. Matters such as
the tendency of Aboriginal witnesses to agree to
leading questions in cross-examination, or to remain silent when embarrassed or
shamed by a particular line of questioning, provide as much a barrier to
eliciting the truth of a matter in native title proceedings
as they do in the
criminal context.
5.22 The Yamatji Marlpa Barna Baba Maaja Aboriginal Corporation notes that
the giving of evidence in narrative form is generally restricted
examination-in-chief. It argues that it is questionable whether other
evidentiary procedures (ie, cross-examination) result in
the extraction of the
‘best evidence’.
5.23 Some argue that the court already has the power to allow a witness to give
evidence in this way. One Northern Territory practitioner
notes that a provision
like s 29 is somewhat artificial because, in his experience, Northern
Territory courts frequently allow witnesses
to give evidence in narrative form
where it is appropriate.
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
5.24 The question and answer method for eliciting evidence may be
particularly inappropriate for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
who are not accustomed to this method of communication or to approaching a story
in a direct way in response to specific
It has been argued
that a question and answer method of eliciting information can be socially
distressing for Aboriginal witnesses,
because it is antithetical to their
culture and style of communication, which emphasises narrative and indirect
means of eliciting
information.
Studies have shown that indirectness is a definitive characteristic of
Aboriginal communicative styles.
5.25 The NSWLRC has identified a number of areas where communication difficulties
may occur between Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal
people in a courtroom
• Aboriginal society values the use of silence in conversation more
than non-Aboriginal society, which can lead to misunderstanding
in court and be
incorrectly seen as guilt, ignorance or reflection of a communication
• Aboriginal witnesses may agree gratuitously with whatever the
questioner has put to him or her. This occurs particularly where
‘yes-no’ questions are being asked by someone in a position of
• Aboriginal people frequently do not use numbers or other quantitative
means of describing events, such as days of the week,
dates or time.
Consequently, if specific answers are sought to questions like ‘how’
or ‘when’, Aboriginal
witnesses are frequently seen as
5.26 Australian courts have to a certain extent recognised that the question
and answer method is not always the most effective way
of eliciting information
from Aboriginal witnesses. For example, Blackburn J has stated that experience
has taught him not to rely
too heavily on the cross-examination of Aboriginal
O’Loughlin J in
Rose v South Australia
that the interests of justice would be best served by a witness giving their
evidence in the most convenient and comfortable
way for that
5.27 The Queensland Criminal Justice Commission recommended that the
(Qld) be amended to allow the court to direct a witness to give
evidence wholly or partly in narrative
This recommendation has
not been implemented. Instead the Queensland Government has developed a system
to assist the courts in their
communications with Aboriginal witnesses whereby
judges, magistrates, legal practitioners and court facilitators are given
regarding the appropriate ways of asking questions to elicit the
desired information accurately and effectively, including guidance
vocabulary, grammar and body
.5.28 The NSWLRC recommended that interpreters and court facilitators be used to
overcome the difficulties experienced by Aboriginal
offenders in giving
evidence. The facilitators would assist the offenders in giving their evidence
and understanding the proceedings,
and would assist the court in understanding
Aboriginal offenders’ demeanour and behaviour in
The NSWLRC also
recommended that the court should be able to exercise a discretion, wherever
possible, to allow Aboriginal offenders
to give their evidence in narrative
5.29 The question and answer method of giving evidence may be particularly
difficult for witnesses who are children, due to such factors
as the formality
of the court, legal language and procedures, and the limitations of
children’s understanding, experience and
5.30 In the Report of the inquiry into children and the legal process,
Heard: Priority for Children in the Legal Process
(ALRC 84), the ALRC
and the Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission (HREOC) looked extensively
at research into children’s
memory and the sociology and psychology of
disclosing remembered events.
ALRC 84 noted that the presumed gulf between the reliability of evidence
from children and from adults appeared to be exaggerated.
Studies demonstrated
that the ability to remember and describe an event accurately, both at the time
of questioning and at later
dates, can be dependent on the interviewing
Using misleading or
suggestive questioning techniques adversely affects young children’s
ability to recall an event accurately,
and repetition of questions can also lead
to young children changing their answers, as they may interpret the repetition
of the question
as a sign that their first answer was wrong. When children were
asked to recount, in a free recall narrative, everything they remember,
typically remember less detail than older children or adults, although the
information they do recall is equally
5.31 ALRC 84 considered that allowing children to give their evidence in
narrative form would be helpful in overcoming the problems
children face in
giving evidence in court, although it would not address the problems associated
with cross-examination.
5.32 Recommendations regarding the giving of evidence by children tend to focus on
ways to keep children out of the courtroom, rather
than the manner in which they
give evidence. Most jurisdictions now allow for alternative arrangements to be
made, such as for children’s
evidence in certain proceedings to be given
via video links, CCTV, or a recording of a previous
The Commissions’ view
5.33 The criticisms of narrative evidence raised in submissions and
consultations are essentially the same as those considered in
ALRC 26. The
Commissions do not accept that the giving of evidence in free narrative by some
witnesses will necessarily result in
inadmissible evidence being heard by the
court, or long delays in court time.
5.34 The Commissions endorse the view expressed in ALRC 26 that there is
a place for narrative evidence in courtrooms and that its
use should be
encouraged. In particular, narrative evidence may be a more culturally
appropriate form of testifying for some Aboriginal
or Torres Strait Islander
witnesses. It may also ameliorate some of the difficulties of giving evidence
for child witnesses. This
position is supported by the considerable body of
research identified above.
5.35 Two reasons have been proposed for the section’s lack of use.
First, that adducing evidence in narrative form is not an
effective method of
advocacy, and second, the requirement that a party must apply for a direction
has left the discretion in the
hands of advocates rather than the court.
5.36 The Commissions believe that more effective use may be made of
if the requirement for a party to apply for a direction is removed
and a provision closer to the ALRC’s original proposal
This would mean that
the uniform Evidence Acts would provide that the evidence may be given in
narrative form. Rather than specify
that the evidence may be given wholly or
partly in narrative form, the court should be able to use its general powers to
give directions
way in which that evidence may be given. A draft provision is set out
Appendix 1.
5.37 A court should only invoke
where it considers that giving
evidence in narrative form is appropriate. Relevant considerations in this
regard will be a witness’
age or cultural background, or, for example, the
witness’ ability to observe warnings about what evidence is admissible.
such a change may not impact on the practice of advocates, it signals a
clear legislative intention that the section should be used
where it is in the
interests of the proceedings to do so.
5.38 As noted recently by the VLRC, judicial officers play a key role in
controlling the courtroom process and the manner and type
of questions that are
put to witnesses.
noted that most lawyers, magistrates and judges are not trained in talking to
children and lack the necessary language, sensitivity
and skills to elicit a
coherent account from a child in courtroom
interrogations.
recommended that guidelines and training programs be developed to assist judges
and magistrates in dealing with child
5.39 Without an understanding of the reasons why giving evidence in narrative form
may be more appropriate for some witnesses, it
is likely that judges will fall
back on their own experience as advocates and view this practice with suspicion.
Judicial colleges
must therefore include in their programs training on the way
in which different types of witnesses may respond to traditional methods
examination in chief and cross-examination. A significant amount of work is
already being undertaken in this area. For example,
the Australian Institute of
Judicial Administration has prepared an
Aboriginal Cultural Awareness
Benchbook for Western Australian Courts
, which includes information on
cross-cultural issues that may arise in the conduct of trials involving
Aboriginal people.
Proposal 5–1
of the uniform Evidence Acts should
be amended to remove the requirement that a party must apply to the court for a
direction that
the witness may give evidence in narrative form. A court may give
directions about what evidence is to be given in narrative form
and the way in
which that evidence may be given.
Cross-examination
of witnesses
5.40 The provisions of the uniform Evidence Acts that concern the rules for
cross-examination
substantially
mirror practices under the common law. For example, s 40 adopts the rule
that where a witness has been called in error
and is not questioned, that
witness is not then available to the other party for
cross-examination.
provides that the court may disallow questions on the basis
that they are misleading or unduly annoying, harassing, intimidating,
oppressive or repetitive.
establishes that leading questions may
be asked in cross-examination. However, the court may disallow the question or
witness not to answer it, taking into account a number of factors.
Section 42(2)
Without limiting the matters that the court may take into account in deciding
whether to disallow the question or give such a direction,
it is to take into
account the extent to which:
(a) evidence that has been given by the witness in examination in chief is
unfavourable to the party who called the witness; and
(b) the witness has an interest consistent with an interest of the
cross-examiner; and
(c) the witness is sympathetic to the party conducting the cross-examination,
either generally or about a particular matter; and
(d) the witness’s age, or any mental, intellectual or physical disability
to which the witness is subject, may affect the witness's
5.42 Cross-examination on documents is regulated by
Cross-examination may be undertaken on a witness’ prior inconsistent
statement without the need to provide full particulars
or show the document in
and (3), limited cross-examination may be undertaken on the previous
representations of another person. These sections are discussed
Unfavourable
of the uniform Evidence Acts made a significant change
to the law of evidence. It states:
(1) A party who called a witness may, with the leave of the court, question the
witness, as though the party were cross-examining
the witness, about:
(a) evidence given by the witness that is unfavourable to the party; or
(b) a matter of which the witness may reasonably be supposed to have knowledge
and about which it appears to the court the witness
is not, in examination in
chief, making a genuine attempt to give evidence; or
(c) whether the witness has, at any time, made a prior inconsistent statement.
5.44 Under the common law, a party cannot cross-examine its own witness
unless the witness is declared hostile. To be declared hostile,
the court must
find that the witness is deliberately withholding or lying about material
5.45 In the original evidence inquiry, the hostile witness rule was criticised as
irrational and anachronistic.
The ALRC found that there was no satisfactory rationale for such a stringent
test and proposed that a party be permitted to cross-examine
its own witness
where the evidence being given is unfavourable to that
5.46 Justice Tim Smith and Paul Holdenson QC have discussed the limitations
of the common law in dealing with unhelpful witnesses.
Trial counsel have all found themselves in the unenviable position of having
called a witness only to find that the witness gives
evidence which is either
damaging to the client’s case or assists in the case of the other party.
Other situations arise. It
may be that there are witnesses, for example, that
the Crown would rather not call because they do not assist the Crown to advance
its case against the accused. It may be that witnesses are called who gave
detailed statements about the events in question but at
the trial claim to have
no recollection.
5.47 As Smith and Holdenson point out, apart from a limited procedure of
putting facts set out in the statement of the witness to
the witness in the form
of leading questions with the court’s
at common law there is no
remedy for this problem other than calling further witnesses to contradict that
witness or convincing the
court that the witness is hostile.
5.48 The effect of having a witness declared unfavourable under
significant. With the leave of the court, an unfavourable witness may be
questioned as if being cross-examined. That is, they
can be asked leading
questions, given proof of prior inconsistent statements, and asked questions as
limited to cross-examination on the areas of testimony in which the witness is
unfavourable, and does not create a general right
cross-examine.
Leave can be
granted to cross-examine a witness on only part of his or her evidence, even
though the rest of the witness’ evidence
is favourable to the party that
called him or her.
is a discretionary section and the factors listed in s 192
must be considered in granting
5.49 The term ‘unfavourable’ has been interpreted simply as
meaning ‘not favourable’, rather than the more
difficult test of
hostile or adverse.
, it was accepted that
allows a witness to be declared
unfavourable and cross-examined even when they genuinely cannot remember the
events in question.
5.50 There are a number of examples of the application of
Hunt CJ at CL considered that
was important in covering
the situation where the Crown is obliged to call a witness at the request of the
accused, notwithstanding
that the evidence given is likely to be unfavourable.
In such a case, it was found to be unjust for the Crown not to be given leave
cross-examine such a witness. Hunt CJ stated in
would probably prove to be one of the most worthwhile
achievements of the uniform Evidence
Randall v The Queen
the complainant alleged that she was sexually assaulted by the accused in a room
with ten to twelve men present. The Crown’s
case was that the complainant
had been given drugs by the accused and was, in effect, comatose at the time of
the offence and incapable
of consenting to sexual intercourse. A number of the
men present gave evidence consistent with the view that the complainant appeared
comatose. Two witnesses gave evidence that suggested the complainant was alert
and consented. As witnesses to the alleged offence,
the Crown was obliged to
call them. Without the ability to have the witnesses declared unfavourable under
, the Crown could not have cross-examined them, nor would they have
been cross-examined by the defence, as their evidence was favourable
5.52 A prosecutor is under a duty to call any witnesses whose evidence may
assist in determining the truth of the matter at issue.
Dawson J said in
Whitehall v the Queen
All available witnesses should be called whose evidence is necessary to unfold
the narrative and give a complete account of the events
upon which the
prosecution is based. In general, these witnesses will include the eye-witnesses
of any events which go to prove the
elements of the crime charged and will
include witnesses notwithstanding that they give accounts inconsistent with the
Crown case.
However, a prosecutor is not bound to call a witness, even an eye
witness, whose evidence he considers to be unreliable, untrustworthy
otherwise incapable of belief.
5.53 As noted above,
is not limited to the situation where a
witness unexpectedly gives hostile evidence, or unexpectedly appears not to be
making a genuine
attempt to give evidence. Therefore the section allows a party
(in practice, most likely to be the prosecution) to call a witness
they know to
be unfavourable for the sole purpose of having them available for
cross-examination and getting an inconsistent out-of-court
statement admitted
into evidence under
s 38(1)(c).
The prior inconsistent statement is only
admissible if it satisfies the requirements of Part 3 of the
5.54 The use of s 38 in this way was considered by the High Court in
v The Queen.
, the trial judge permitted the Crown to cross-examine a witness as
an unfavourable witness under s 38(1)(c), in relation to prior
inconsistent
statements made to police by the witness. The use of the statements had two
purposes. First, it related to the credibility
of the witness. Second, and
importantly, once admitted for that purpose, the statements were admissible also
for their hearsay purpose
which incriminated
the accused. The majority considered that such a practice was proper under the
(NSW) and had not resulted in unfairness to the
defence in that case as the defence was free to cross-examine the witness on the
inconsistent
5.55 The discretions under
may be employed to prevent
questioning under
, it was argued that leave should
not be given to cross-examine the witness on the ground that it was unfairly
prejudicial to the
accused to allow the witness’ prior statement into
evidence because his professed lack of memory meant that the defence could
cross-examine him on his earlier version of events given to the police. However,
after finding that the witness’ memory
loss was founded on a desire to
having regard to the circumstances of the interview, including its proximity to
the critical events, what C said to the police was
likely to be a good deal more
reliable than what he said in court. For my part, I would not regard the
probative value of the interview
as being outweighed by unfair prejudice to the
appellant; nor do I consider that there was substantial unfairness of the kind
upon by the appellant.
Submissions and consultations
5.56 Throughout this Inquiry, the Commissions have heard two views about
One is that the test to have a witness declared
‘unfavourable’ is too lenient and unfairly allows a party to call a
solely to allow a prior inconsistent statement into evidence that would
not be admitted any other way. The other view is that expressed
—that the practice ensures all relevant evidence gets in, and
that the availability of that witness for questioning by the other
overcomes any unfairness.
5.57 Views from the uniform
Evidence Act
DPP NSW submits that the provisions of
are appropriate. The
DPP NSW strongly agrees with the majority in
terms of the Acts give effect to the original intention of the ALRC and do not
produce unfairness to the accused.
The DPP NSW’s view is that
enhances the prospect that the tribunal of fact will have access to all relevant
evidence in determining the issues before it. Further,
the availability of the
‘unfavourable’ witness for cross-examination by both parties ensures
that the witness’
evidence is properly tested and that the proceedings are
fair to both parties.
5.58 In contrast, the NSW PDO argues that the section does not apply
fairly to both sides. The NSW PDO submits that:
There has been an increasing tendency for Crown Prosecutors to rely on
every occasion when a witness called for the Crown gives evidence which does not
fit in with the Crown theory of the case, even
if the witness patently is
attempting to give truthful accurate evidence.
5.59 In the NSW PDO’s view, the problem is magnified by the
operation of
, which will admit the witness’ prior statement as
evidence of the fact. It submits that paragraph (a) should be deleted from
This would confine the section to permitting applications to be
made to cross-examine only those witnesses who do not appear to be
genuine attempt to give evidence, or who have made a prior inconsistent
5.60 The Law Council is supportive of some of the features of
The first exception seeks to preserve adversarial balance by ensuring that all
testimony is tested by cross-examination and it would
seem that defence counsel
cannot complain where the prosecution is permitted to cross-examine its witness
to its case, as the defence will certainly not do
5.61 However, the Law Council argues the effect of
is to encourage the prosecution to call every witness who has made a prior
favourable statement in the knowledge that this may be
led to the court and once
before the court will be admitted as hearsay … Where the prior statement
is otherwise admissible
as hearsay within other provisions of the Acts the
Council has no objection to the practice, which permits the witness to be
cross-examined
on the hearsay evidence. However where the statement would
otherwise be inadmissible under the Act the Council is of the view that
prosecution should not be given permission to call a witness it knows will be
unfavourable simply for the purpose of leading
a prior statement. To do so
simply undermines the other hearsay provisions in the
5.62 The alternative view was also put—that prior inconsistent
statements should be allowed into evidence through s 38, as they
contemporaneous and have strong probative
However, even amongst
those who generally support s 38, it is noted that s 38(1)(c) means
that the way in which statements are provided
to police or other officials is of
importance, as they can be used against a witness who later changes his or her
It is observed that, if
the statement was obtained in an unfair manner, the discretions under
ss 135, 136 and 137 of the uniform
Evidence Acts can operate to exclude its
5.63 A number of New South Wales Supreme Court judges submit that they prefer the
common law test to the test under s 38. This is
on the basis that the
ability to cross-examine a party’s own witness should be limited to
situations where the witness is deemed
by the judge to be unwilling to tell the
truth. Some of the judges consider that the breadth of the term
‘unfavourable’
is still not
One District Court judge
also believes the common law is preferable, as ‘unfavourable’ is
unduly ambiguous.
5.64 Some New South Wales District Court judges suggest that the section be
amended to require that leave for cross-examination will
only be given where the
unfavourable evidence is unexpected. This will remove the opportunity for the
prosecution to have any tactical
advantage. The only other time
cross-examination of a party’s own witness will be allowed will be where a
party has been directed
to call that witness by the other
5.65 However, other New South Wales District Court judges support s 38. They
acknowledge that ‘the defence sees it as a free
kick’ for the
prosecution, but believe that it is appropriate to put into evidence prior
inconsistent statements. In their
view, the section is unproblematic, but has
effected a significant change to court
5.66 The views from non-uniform
Evidence Act
Commercial Bar Association of the Victorian Bar states that ‘the
availability of these
provisions under the Act ensure that a litigant aggrieved
by unreliable and incorrect evidence from their own witness is not left
very rare case at common law where a judge can be persuaded to declare a witness
“hostile’”.
maintains that the discretions granted to the trial judge under ss 135, 136
and 137 of the Acts ensure that there will be no abuse
5.67 The Criminal Law Committee of the Law Society of South Australia (Law Society
of SA) does not support s 38.
From the point of the criminal law, there is a potential for grave prejudice to
an accused if a lower threshold is adopted in relation
to whether the
Prosecution is entitled to cross-examine a witness it calls as part of its case.
In particular, the Prosecution might
call a witness primarily for the purpose of
placing before the jury by cross-examination alleged statements to the police by
witness which were highly damning of the accused but which statements were
never adopted by the witness.
5.68 Victoria Legal Aid shares the NSW PDO’s view that s 38
operates unfairly in criminal cases to permit a party to call a
witness solely
to admit a prior inconsistent statement.
The combined effect of sections 38 and 60 is to allow the prosecution to
use any out of court statement as evidence of the truth
of that statement, even
if the witness now denies the truth of the statement or is not available to give
are examples of cases where the residual
fairness discretion in the Act did not operate to exclude statements which were
and which were made in circumstances where the makers had strong motives
to exculpate themselves.
The Commissions’ view
5.69 The Commissions acknowledge, as recognised in the original ALRC evidence
inquiry, that there are differing views about the value
of the change made by
5.70 Smith and Holdenson have noted that:
Much depends on the view that is taken about the importance for the credibility
of trials, be they civil or criminal, that there
be a genuine attempt to
establish the facts on which the final decision will be based. The ALRC view was
that that attempt was of
fundamental
importance.
5.71 ALRC 26 considered whether to limit the operation of s 38 by
requiring that the unfavourable evidence was unexpected. The ALRC
rejected this
approach on the basis that it would enable criminals to defeat prosecutions by
suborning key witnesses. The ALRC also
noted the argument that the prosecution
receives a tactical advantage because, where a prior statement is used, it will
go into evidence.
ALRC 26 considered that the prosecution in that case has
already suffered the tactical disadvantage of having to call a witness to
its case and that witness has supported the
5.72 The Commissions believe that the guiding principle under which s 38 was
first recommended—improvement in fact-finding by
enabling a party who
calls a witness to challenge unfavourable evidence by cross-examining that
witness—has been upheld by
the operation of the section over the last ten
years. While there has been some criticism of the section, there has also been
judicial support, as in the
judgments noted
5.73 Furthermore, if the operation of s 38 means that evidence could be
admitted which is unfairly prejudicial within the meaning
of ss 135, 136
and 137, that evidence can be excluded or its use limited by the exercise of
those discretions.
5.74 The Commissions therefore remain supportive of the reasoning behind the
enactment of s 38 and its practical application. On this
basis, no change
is proposed.
Constraints
in the cross-examination of vulnerable witnesses
5.75 Cross-examination is a feature of the adversarial process and designed
to let a party confront and undermine the other party’s
case by exposing
deficiencies in a witness’ testimony. Under both common law and statute,
limitations have been placed on inappropriate
and offensive questioning under
cross-examination. However, it has been argued that the effect of these
provisions in practice has
not provided a sufficient degree of protection for
vulnerable witnesses.
5.76 Section 41 of the uniform Evidence Acts grants the court the power
to disallow improper questions asked in cross-examination.
(1) The court may disallow a question put to a witness in cross-examination, or
inform the witness that it need not be answered,
if the question is:
(a) misleading; or
(b) unduly annoying, harassing, intimidating, offensive, oppressive or
repetitive.
(2) Without limiting the matters that the court may take into account for the
purposes of subsection (1), it is to take into account:
(a) any relevant condition or characteristic of the witness, including age,
personality and education; and
(b) any mental, intellectual or physical disability to which the witness is or
appears to be subject.
5.77 The ALRC intended this section to bring together and clarify common law
and legislative provisions which set limits on cross-examination.
The proposals provide for the judge to disallow the question, or to inform the
witness that he need not answer but may if he wants
to do so. In this way the
judge can prevent a slanging match developing, or let the witness answer the
question nonetheless.
Child witnesses
5.78 Children are a category of witness who are particularly vulnerable in
the adversarial trial system.
In their inquiry into children and the legal process, the ALRC and HREOC heard
significant and distressing evidence that child witnesses,
particularly in child
sexual assault cases, are often berated and harassed to the point of breakdown
during cross-examination.
Concerns were raised about the role of lawyers, and also about the role of
judges and magistrates as the ‘referees’ of
the trial. ALRC 84
made recommendations for the development of guidelines and training programs to
assist judges, magistrates and
lawyers in dealing with child
5.79 Part IAD of the
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth) includes a number of
provisions that provide for the protection of child witnesses and child
complainants in certain sexual
offence cases (including in relation to child sex
tourism and sexual servitude
In particular,
there is a specific provision for the court to disallow a question put to the
child witness in cross-examination if
the question is inappropriate or
unnecessarily aggressive, having regard to the witness’ personal
characteristics, including
age, culture, mental capacity and
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth) includes specific
provisions applying to unrepresented defendants in sexual offence cases and
limitations on how and when child
witnesses and child complainants can be
cross-examined.
• Unrepresented defendants are not to cross-examine a child witness
(other than a child complainant) without leave of the court—the
for leave must be in writing and the court must consider any trauma that could
be caused by the cross-examination
• Unrepresented defendants are not to cross-examine a child complainant
except through a person appointed by the court for this
• Represented defendants must not cross-examine a child witness except
through counsel
Evidence (Children) Act 1997
provides that a child witness in any criminal proceeding or civil proceeding
arising from a personal assault offence cannot
be examined, cross-examined or
re-examined by an unrepresented defendant or accused except through a person
appointed by the court.
5.82 In its report on sexual offences, the VLRC concluded that general provisions
regulating cross-examination, such as s 41 of the
uniform Evidence Acts,
were insufficient to ensure that child witnesses are protected against
inappropriate questions.
VLRC supported a recommendation of the Queensland Law Reform Commission that
included, as well as the considerations in s 41,
consideration of the
content, manner and language of questioning, and the culture and level of
understanding of the child.
The VLRC recommended that there be a duty on the court to ensure that, in the
case of questions asked of children under 18 years
• Neither the content of a question, nor the manner in which a question
is asked is misleading or confusing, phrased in inappropriate
language or unduly
annoying, harassing, intimidating, offensive, oppressive or repetitive; and
• The questions are not structured or sequenced in a way that is
intimidating, harassing, confusing, annoying or misleading.
• In deciding whether to disallow a question, the court is to take into
account any relevant condition or characteristic of
the witness, including age,
culture, personality, education and level of understanding and any mental,
intellectual or physical disability
Complainants in sexual assault
5.83 Complainants in a sexual assault matter are in a particularly vulnerable
and distressing position in a courtroom. The NSWLRC
recognised that there are at
least three factors that make sexual offence trials particularly distressing for
complainants: the nature
of the crime; the role of consent with its focus on the
credibility of the complainant; and the likelihood that the complainant and
accused knew each other before the alleged assault took
The NSWLRC found that
the treatment of such matters in cross-examination was a particular concern,
with complainants likely to be
cross-examined for a longer period of time than
victims of other types of assaults. Complainants have appealed for greater
of cross-examination to make the process less
5.84 In all Australian states and territories, recognition of the nature of sexual
offences has led to the enactment of specific evidentiary
limitations, such as
making evidence of a complainant’s sexual experience
inadmissible.
These specific
provisions are discussed further in Chapter 18. Use of s 41 is another
way in which improper cross-examination may
be limited in sexual assault
proceedings.
5.85 R v TA
concerns a line of questioning in cross-examination that asked
the complainant to give her opinion as to her perception of her own
behaviour in
relation to events recorded on videotape. On appeal, the line of questioning was
ultimately rejected as inadmissible
on the basis that the complainant’s
perceptions of the events in the video were irrelevant to any fact in
Spigelman CJ
noted that s 41 operates on the assumption that there is an element of
relevance in the line of questioning. However,
his Honour also found that the
trial judge was entitled to reject the line of cross-examination by applying
Evidence Act 1995
expressed the view that in a sexual assault matter, it is appropriate for the
court to consider the effect of cross-examination
and the trial experience upon
a complainant when deciding whether
should be invoked.
The difficulties encountered by complainants in sexual assault cases in the
criminal justice system has been a focus of concern for
several decades. Judges
play an important role in protecting complainants from unnecessary,
inappropriate and irrelevant questioning
by or on behalf of an accused. That
role is perfectly consistent with the requirements of a fair trial, which
requirements do not
involve treating the criminal justice system as if it were a
forensic game in which every accused is entitled to some kind of sporting
5.86 Justice Wood, in his February 2003 paper
Sexual Assault and the
Admission of Evidence
expressed the view that:
Perhaps regrettably, this is a power which is seldom invoked, possibly out of
fear that the defence will use it to its advantage,
by attracting counter
sympathy from the jury that it is not being given a ‘fair run’. In
truth, such fear is misguided
because an aggressive and unfair cross-examination
can be suitably dealt with by the Judge in the absence of the
5.87 In November 2004, the New South Wales Adult Sexual Assault Interagency
Committee released its advice to the New South Wales Government
on evidential
and procedural issues regarding criminal law sexual
That report also
found that provisions in place to address improper questioning are under
The report further
notes that members of Aboriginal communities may face significant barriers in
cross-examination. In the case of
sexual assault, the high importance placed on
the privacy of the female body by some Aboriginal cultures may make women feel
vulnerable and exposed. The Committee’s report has recommended
three reforms to
• Introduction of practice directions to assist judges in utilising
Evidence Act 1995
regulate the conduct of cross-examination of the complainant;
• Amendment of
Evidence Act 1995
place greater restrictions on tone and manner of questions that may be put to
the complainant in cross-examination (in addition
to the content of
questions);
• Amendment of
Evidence Act 1977
to further allow the Court to consider whether a
question is improper having regard to the level of understanding of the witness,
cultural background or relationship to any party to the
proceeding.
Criminal Procedure Further Amendment
(Evidence) Act 2005
(NSW) was assented to on 31 May
Procedure Act 1986
(NSW) will be amended to impose a duty on a court hearing
any criminal proceeding to disallow improper questions that are put to
in cross-examination.
the amendments impose the duty for any witness, they form part of the New South
Wales Government’s ongoing program of
legislative reform in sexual assault
prosecutions.
5.89 As a result of the amendments,
Evidence Act 1995
(NSW) will no longer apply to the cross-examination of witnesses in criminal
proceedings, but will continue to apply to civil proceedings.
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
(NSW) will state that
Evidence Act 1995
(NSW) does not apply to the criminal
proceedings to which this section
5.90 The model adopted in New South Wales is similar to the model recommended by
the VLRC in relation to child witnesses discussed
above. Under the amendments, a
court must disallow a question put to a witness in cross-examination, or inform
the witness that it
need not be answered, if the court is of the opinion that
the question:
(a) is misleading or confusing, or
(b) is unduly annoying, harassing, intimidating, offensive, oppressive,
humiliating or repetitive, or
(c) is put to the witness in a manner or tone that is belittling, insulting or
otherwise inappropriate, or
(d) has no basis other than a sexist, racial, cultural or ethnic stereotype.
5.91 The factors which may be taken into account by the court in determining
whether a question should be disallowed are extended
to include the ethnic and
cultural background of the witness, the language background and skills of the
witness, and the level of
maturity and understanding of the witness.
5.92 The New South Wales legislation differs from
as it imposes a
duty on the court to disallow an improper question rather than a discretion. In
the second reading speech, the New
South Wales Attorney General stated that the
sets a new standard for the cross-examination of witnesses in criminal
proceedings, including by referring, for the first time, to
the manner and tone
in which the question is asked … This amendment places a positive duty on
judges to act to prevent improper
questions, thereby ensuring that witnesses are
able to give their evidence free from intimidation and
Vulnerable witnesses
5.93 As well as child witnesses and sexual assault complainants, there may be
other witnesses who are vulnerable in cross-examination,
for example, because of
their relationship to the other
disability, limited
intellect or lack of education. In most Australian states, legislation allows
for alternative arrangements for
hearing the testimony of vulnerable witnesses.
These arrangements include permitting a witness to testify with a support person
through closed circuit television or in a closed
5.94 Kirby J has suggested that any witness may become vulnerable in the face
of strident cross-examination on credibility. In
Whisprun Pty Ltd v
, his Honour argued that the law has advanced from the view of a trial
as a tournament between parties, where a witness’ credibility
challenged, even on peripheral or irrelevant
Most judges today understand that the evaluation of evidence involves a more
complex function, requiring a more sophisticated analysis
… Litigants are
sometimes people of limited knowledge and perception. Occasionally, they
mistakenly attached excessive importance
to considerations of no real
importance. In consequence, they may sometimes tell lies, or withhold the entire
truth, out of a feeling
that they need to do so or that the matter is
unimportant or of no interest to the court. This is not to condone such conduct.
is simply to insist that, where it is found to have occurred, it should not
deflect the decision maker from the substance of a function
assigned to a court
Submissions and consultations
5.95 IP 28 asked for comments about the experience of courts and
practitioners in relation to the use of
and about the circumstances in
which cross-examination is currently being limited, or should be limited, in
relation to all types
5.96 The Inquiry asked a number of judicial officers and senior advocates whether
was used often to limit inappropriate or offensive cross-examination.
Some New South Wales District Court judges indicate they are
more likely to use
the court’s general powers to control proceedings rather than specifically
make reference to
A number of judges of the Australian Capital Territory Supreme Court agree that
advocates can often be dissuaded from a line of questioning
without the
formality of mentioning
However, the judges consider that the section
is important where an unrepresented litigant is conducting the
cross-examination. Most
often it is repetitive questioning that is
5.97 A number of senior practitioners make the point that, in their experience,
the section is not often invoked by
In the Australian
Capital Territory, the provision has been used occasionally in cases involving
family violence.
5.98 The Law Council notes that
gives no indication as to how the
discretion to disallow questions is to be exercised—‘there is no
discernible judicial
policy in respect of the discretion and its exercise is
left to all the facts and circumstances of the individual
5.99 The DPP NSW submits that judicial use of
is inconsistent and
depends upon the particular judicial officer and prosecutor.
On some occasions judges do not use
to stop the use of harassing
or offensive questions, particularly in the context of sexual assault matters;
but as this material
is anecdotal, we are not able to quantify the degree to
which this is a problem.
5.100 The DPP NSW argue that, while it is acknowledged that defence
counsel must test the consistency and veracity of the complainant’s
evidence, the potential for improper questioning by defence counsel remains of
concern for complainants when they are considering
whether or not to pursue a
5.101 Victoria Legal Aid submit that in its experience most Victorian counsel
refrain from harassing and offensive questioning in
criminal trials as such
tactics generally alienate the jury. Victoria Legal Aid express concern about
unnecessary restrictions on
cross-examination because in some criminal cases
there may be few other methods of negating untruthful
evidence—particularly
in cases where sexual abuse in the distant past is
alleged. Its view is that the current restrictions which operate under Victorian
law (on access by the defence to potentially relevant information and on
cross-examination about various subjects) already tip the
balance between the
protection of genuine victims and the avoidance of wrongful convictions towards
the former.
5.102 There is a significant similarity in the submissions that suggest ways
should be amended. In particular, a number of submissions
indicate that the relevant considerations under
should be expanded,
and that it is important that the tone of questioning is a relevant
consideration.
5.103 As noted earlier in this chapter, one Aboriginal Land Council submits that
is under utilised in protecting Aboriginal witnesses in native title
proceedings. An amendment to
is proposed to make express reference to
the vulnerable position of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander witnesses
through the addition
of a further
subsection 41(2)(c)
which would allow the
court to take into account any cultural or customary matters arising under
Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander
5.104 The Law Society of SA raises for consideration whether the subject of
improper questions should be expanded to include ‘cultural
background’ and ‘sexual
preference’.
5.105 The DPP NSW submits that
should be amended to impose a
positive duty on the court to disallow improper questions and improper tones of
address in cross-examination
of all witnesses in all criminal matters. It agrees
that judicial education and further appellate guidance are desirable,
particularly
in relation to child
5.106 The NSW PDO does not agree that it would be worthwhile to expand the
considerations under
Adding further synonyms of the word ‘offensive’ to
not lead to greater use of the provision. It is submitted that if
under-utilised, the solution is improved education of judicial officers, rather
than amendments to
The Commissions’ view
5.107 The Commissions endorse the view of the NSW Adult Sexual Assault
Interagency Committee that ‘curbing the use of improper
questions does not
impede the cross-examination process, it simply respects the rights of the
complainant witnesses and ensures the
best evidence is received by the
5.108 The use of
to control improper questions during cross-examination
is patchy and inconsistent. The Commissions support the view of the VLRC and
others that the approach in
is too limited to provide sufficient
protection to vulnerable witnesses in some types of matters.
5.109 On that basis, the Commissions support the approach of the
Procedure Further Amendment (Evidence) Act 2005
(NSW) to the extent that it
sets out a more comprehensive and detailed list of questions that are
inappropriate. Whilst it is true
that these types of questions could (and
should) already be disallowed under s 41 as it stands, explicit reference
to these types
of questions may serve to bring them to judicial attention and
provide greater guidance as to how the discretion to limit cross-examination
should be exercised.
5.110 However, the Commissions propose a different approach from that Act in two
regards. First, the protections offered to witnesses
in criminal matters should
be no more comprehensive than in civil matters. A witness in a negligence or a
civil assault matter may
be equally vulnerable to attack in cross-examination as
a victim of a crime. Any amendment to s 41 should apply equally to civil
and criminal matters.
5.111 Secondly, the Commissions do not support imposing a general duty on the court
to disallow improper questions. It must be recognised
that examination of
witnesses occurs in the context of an adversarial system. At times, counsel may
seek to gain forensic advantage
by allowing the other party to question
witnesses in a certain manner. In the case of an ordinary witness, the
objections of counsel
and a discretionary power under s 41 will be
sufficient to ensure that appropriate questions are asked of witnesses.
5.112 However, in relation to vulnerable witnesses, such as child witnesses and
witnesses with a cognitive impairment, additional
protection must be offered.
Courts have a duty to protect vulnerable witnesses and it must be mandatory for
judicial officers to
disallow improper questions in these circumstances.
Questioning which must be disallowed includes confusing or repetitive questions
and questions structured in a misleading or confusing way. The draft provision
is set out in Appendix 1.
5.113 The VLRC noted in it sexual offences report that:
In order to maximise the effectiveness of tighter legislative controls on the
defence counsel and
judicial officers need to be aware of the rationale for those changes. Previous
experience has shown that legislative
change in isolation from attitudinal
change is not effective.
5.114 The Commissions endorse the VLRC’s recommendations regarding
judicial and practitioner education on the needs of vulnerable
witnesses in the
context of this Inquiry.
Proposal 5–2
Section 41 of the uniform Evidence Acts should
be amended to allow that the court may disallow an improper question put to a
in cross-examination, or inform the witness that it need not be
answered. An improper question should be defined as a question that
misleading or confusing, or is annoying, harassing, intimidating, offensive,
humiliating, oppressive or repetitive, or is put
to the witness in a manner or
tone that is inappropriate (including because it is humiliating, belittling or
otherwise insulting),
or has no basis other than a sexual, racial, cultural or
ethnic stereotype.
Proposal 5–3
The uniform Evidence Acts should be amended to
include a provision imposing a duty on the court to disallow any question of the
referred to in Proposal 5–2 where the witness being cross-examined is
a vulnerable witness because of their age or mental or
intellectual
disability.
Proposal 5–4
Educational programs should be implemented by the
National Judicial College, the Judicial College of Victoria and the Judicial
of New South Wales and by the state and territory law societies and
Bar which draw attention to s 41 and, if adopted, new provisions
uniform Evidence Acts dealing with improper questioning.
Questioning of a
complainant by an unrepresented accused
5.115 In 2003, the NSWLRC recommended that an unrepresented accused should be
prohibited from personally cross-examining a complainant
in a sexual offence
proceeding.
In that inquiry,
a number of submissions stated that judicial control of offensive and
intimidating cross-examination was inadequate
inconsistent.
Submissions
also argued that judges are less strict in disallowing inappropriate questioning
when the accused is
unrepresented.
submittors opposed the NSWLRC’s recommendations on the basis that
prohibiting an unrepresented accused from cross-examining
a complainant
undermines the fairness of the trial, as an accused must be able to present a
defence and test the evidence against
him or her. The view was put that the
interests of complainants in sexual offence cases would be better served by
further judicial
education and appellate
guidelines.
5.116 The NSWLRC concluded that:
Judicial control of cross-examination cannot provide systematic protection
because of the inherent nature of the proceedings and
the need for judges to
remain neutral.
5.117 The NSWLRC recommended that a legal practitioner be appointed to
cross-examine the complainant in sexual offence proceedings
where the accused is
unrepresented.
Section 294A
was added to the
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
(NSW) in 2004. Under that
section, where the accused person is not represented by counsel, the complainant
cannot be examined in
chief, cross-examined or re-examined by the accused
person, but may be examined instead by a person appointed by the court.
Section 294A
was recently found to be a valid limitation on the right to
cross-examine, and not in itself to create an unfair
5.118 However, not all of the recommendations of the NSWLRC were adopted in
For example, the NSWLRC recommended that a legal practitioner must
cross-examine a complainant and that an unrepresented accused
be warned about
the potential application in the proceedings of the rule in
5.119 In its sexual offences report, the VLRC recommended that in any
proceeding for a sexual offence, the accused may not cross-examine
complainant or a protected witness
personally.
The VLRC made
recommendations similar to those of the NSWLRC that the person able to conduct
the cross-examination must be a legal
practitioner, and that a warning regarding
the rule in
Browne v Dunn
must be given.
5.120 IP 28 asked whether the uniform Evidence Acts should be amended to
prohibit an unrepresented accused from personally cross-examining
a complainant
in a sexual offence
proceeding.
Submissions and consultations
5.121 The NSW PDO submits that it is fundamental that an accused has the
right to be unrepresented and, if unrepresented, has the
right to cross-examine
witnesses called by the Crown. In the NSW PDO’s view,
derogates from these rights, is cumbersome, and reduces cross-examination to a
reading from a list of prepared questions. It maintains
no similar provision
should be inserted into the uniform Evidence
5.122 The NSW PDO cites the judgement of Sully J in
regards to the requirement that ‘a person’ be appointed to
cross-examine on behalf of the accused.
I note that the section gives not the very slightest guidance or assistance as
to where such a person is actually to be found; as
to what qualifications,
training, experience or other characteristics it is envisaged that the appointed
‘person’ should
have; or as to the provision of any funding that
might be required in order to secure the willing cooperation and assistance of a
5.123 In contrast, the DPP NSW supports the inclusion of such a
provision in the uniform Evidence
The Commissions’ view
5.124 Chapter 18 looks at the ‘rape shield’ provisions of
the various Australian jurisdictions and considers whether,
in the interest of
uniformity and consistency between Australian jurisdictions, there may be good
reasons to recommend including
provisions dealing specifically with the
admission of evidence of sexual reputation or experience in the uniform Evidence
Acts. However,
the chapter notes that, as each jurisdiction which is part of the
uniform Evidence Acts scheme has enacted different rape shield
provisions,
uniform rape shield provisions would need to be developed.
5.125 Provisions which govern the ability of an unrepresented accused to
question a complainant in a sexual assault matter are, like
rape shield
provisions, confined expressly to sexual offences. These types of provisions
vary from jurisdiction to jurisdiction,
and to specific types of evidence. In
relation to rape shield provisions, Chapter 18 concludes that it is
consistent with the Commissions’
policy position and with the structure of
the uniform Evidence Acts (and their intended application) for specific
evidentiary provisions
relating to sexual offence cases to remain outside the
5.126 For similar reasons, the Commissions do not propose that the uniform
Evidence Acts be amended to prohibit an unrepresented
accused from personally
cross-examining a complainant in a sexual offence proceeding.
of documents in cross-examination
of the uniform Evidence Acts concerns circumstances
where a cross-examiner may question a witness about a previous representation
alleged to have been made by a person other than the witness.
Section 44(2)
allows the witness to be questioned on the representation if evidence of the
representation has or will be admitted into evidence.
Section 44(3)
limited questioning on a document that would not be admissible if the document
is produced or shown to the witness. In that
case neither the witness nor the
cross-examiner is to identify the document or disclose its contents. The witness
may only be asked
whether, having seen the document, he or she stands by the
evidence that he or she has given.
5.128 ALRC 26 concluded that there was no policy reason to preclude
cross-examination on statements that have or will be received
into evidence. In
the case of a document that cannot or will not be adduced, the ALRC approved of
the common law approach under which
the witness could be handed the document,
asked to read it and then state whether he or she still adheres to his or her
5.129 ALRC 26 acknowledged that there were criticisms of this approach on the
basis that it may be oppressive to hand a witness a
document and then
cross-examine him or her so that an inference may be drawn on its
In relation to
, Odgers notes that it was suggested in
common law)
that it would be virtually impossible for the judge or jury
not to gain the impression during cross-examination that the document
something contrary to the witness’
However, the ALRC
considered that the power of the judge to control cross-examination and the
rules contained in
were sufficient protection. A judge may also
order that the document be produced for examination by the court under
, if the judge thinks that a false impression of the contents of the
document has been given.
5.130 IP 28 asked whether there were concerns with the operation of
of the uniform Evidence Acts.
Issues concerning
were not extensively raised with the Inquiry. The
NSW PDO submits that cross-examination under
is an important tool
available to the cross-examiner, and has been available under the common law, in
limited circumstances, for
over 100 years. On this basis, the NSW PDO
suggests that no change to
The Commissions’ view
5.131 At this stage of the Inquiry, the Commissions have not identified any
significant concerns with
where the evidence has or will be
admitted into evidence and proposes no change in that regard. However, the
Commissions note both
the issue raised by Odgers and concerns raised in the
previous ALRC evidence inquiry regarding the practice under
the document is not admissible. Whilst the Acts are a reflection of the common
law in this regard,
Commissions agree that the judge or jury may be susceptible to the impression
(that cannot be refuted elsewhere) that the document
asserted something contrary
to the witness’ testimony.
5.132 In 1978, the NSWLRC noted:
It seems undesirable to have a system where documents are handed around the
courtroom without the jury hearing of their contents
directly because of a rule
of admissibility, but with the possibility open of their drawing inferences as
to their contents, particularly
where counsel has hinted at or summarised their
5.133 While this matter has not been raised as an issue of concern during
this Inquiry, the Commissions question whether there is
sufficient safeguard
against unfairness. Such cross-examination may be oppressive and unfair to a
witness and confusing for the judge
and jury. Further, the procedure offers
little towards the ultimate aim of gathering the best evidence possible on which
the case. The guiding principles for the sections of the uniform
Evidence Acts governing the presentation of evidence were improvement
finding, fairness and rendering the law more rational and easier to
cross-examination of a witness on an inadmissible document is not consistent
with any of these principles. However, repeal
and (4) of the
uniform Evidence Acts would mean that the common law would apply in this area.
As these sections were essentially
a restatement of the common law, the concerns
raised above would not be alleviated by repealing them.
5.134 It may be that judges could exercise greater control over this type of
questioning under the existing provisions. Where a judge
is concerned that
counsel is confusing or misleading the court or jury by questioning a witness on
a previous representation of another
person that is inadmissible, he or she may
call for the document to be produced under
and give directions
as to its use.
A judge could
also presumably make orders to control such cross-examination under the general
to control the questioning of witnesses. On this basis, no
is proposed at this time.
Browne v Dunn
5.135 The common law rule in
states that where a
party intends to lead evidence that will contradict or challenge the evidence of
an opponent’s witness,
it must put that evidence to the witness in
cross-examination.
essentially a rule of fairness—that a witness must not be discredited
without having had a chance to comment on or counter
the discrediting
information. It also gives the other party notice that its witness’
evidence will be contested and further
corroboration may be
5.136 There are a number of consequences arising from a breach of the rule. The
court may order that the witness be recalled to address
the matters on which he
or she should have been cross-examined. The court may also:
• prevent the party who breached the rule from calling evidence which
contradicts or challenges that witness’ evidence
• allow a party to re-open its case to lead evidence to rebut the contradictory
evidence or corroborate the evidence in chief
• make judicial comment to the jury that the cross-examiner did not challenge
the witness’ evidence in cross-examination,
when that could have
• make judicial comment to the jury that the evidence of a witness should be
treated as a ‘recent invention’ because
it ‘raises matters
that counsel for the party calling that witness could have, but did not, put in
cross-examination to the
5.137 The consequences of a breach of the rule in
Browne v Dunn
differ based on whether it is a criminal or civil matter. In
Gleeson CJ noted that failure to cross-examine may be based on
counsel’s inexperience or a misunderstanding as to instructions.
serious consequences, any judicial comment on a failure to cross-examine must
take into account these factors, rather than
allowing the jury to assume that
the contradictory evidence must be a recent
of the uniform Evidence Acts mirrors part of the rule in
Browne v Dunn,
but does not replace it. Under the section:
(1) The court may give leave to a party to recall a witness to give evidence
party, being a matter on
which the witness was not cross-examined, if the evidence concerned has been
admitted and:
(a) it contradicts evidence about the matter given by the witness in examination
in chief; or
(b) the witness could have given evidence about the matter in examination in
5.139 It was not the ALRC’s intention that
displace the
common law in relation to possible remedies for a breach of the rule in
Browne v Dunn
. ALRC 26 stated that it was not possible or
appropriate for evidence legislation to address issues such as comments that may
based on inferences drawn from a failure to comply with the rule. The
legislation, it was argued, should only allow judicial discretion
parties to recall witnesses who should have been
cross-examined.
5.140 IP 28 asked whether
of the uniform Evidence Acts dealt
adequately with the rule in
Browne v Dunn
and whether the consequences of
a breach of the rule available at common law should be included in the
5.141 The Inquiry did not receive many submissions addressing this issue. One
senior practitioner argues that
is unnecessary and should be repealed,
leaving the common law to apply. His view is that the remedy available under
is too simple and could operate
5.142 The DPP NSW submits that
does not require amendment and that
the consequences of a breach of the rule in
Browne v Dunn
at common law
are not needed under the
The NSW PDO also
does not support a statutory formulation of the consequences of a breach. It
notes that recent doubt as to whether
the rule applied in criminal proceedings
means that it would be unfortunate for the Acts to include the entirety of the
5.143 Given the flexibility required to deal with the circumstances of each case,
it was never intended that
operate as a code to the exclusion of the
common law remedies for a breach of the rule in
Browne v Dunn
Commissions have not found any significant difficulties with this approach and
therefore propose no change to
5.144 A further issue was raised regarding the form of evidence presented in
affidavits in proceedings in New South Wales. In civil
proceedings other than a
trial, such as interlocutory applications, evidence is given solely by
affidavit, unless the court agrees
to accept oral
the direction of the
5.145 Affidavits are required to be prepared in a strict manner. The Rules of the
Supreme Court of New South Wales currently require
that affidavits be made in
the first person and in direct
Deponents of
affidavits must use their own words and manner and, as a general rule, are not
allowed to draw conclusion from facts.
That is, a deponent is not allowed to say
‘I had an agreement with Mr Smith’. A new Civil Procedure Bill and
Civil Procedure Rules will shortly be introduced in New South Wales with
the aim of rationalising and simplifying the state’s
civil court
The new rules largely
follow the current rules, but do not have an express requirement of direct
5.146 Schedule 2 of the Supreme Court of Victoria standard order for setting
down proceedings in the Commercial List states that,
where a witness statement
contains conversations, they should, if recollection permits, be expressed in
direct speech.
Victorian court rules, such as the
Supreme Court (Criminal Procedure) Rules
, state that an affidavit must be in the first person, but do not
require direct speech.
5.147 A senior practitioner notes that 40–50 per cent of objections to
evidence in civil matters are about affidavits not being
expressed in direct
speech and containing a
conclusion.
He considered
that the requirement of direct speech is akin to creating a fiction. Affidavits
are often prepared years after the
events in question. To believe that a person
has remembered a conversation in the form of direct speech is a nonsense, even
the affidavit is framed in terms of ‘to the best of my
recollection’. It was suggested that what people remember is the
of conversations, and this should be the matter that they are testifying to.
There should be no requirement that these recollections
be expressed in direct
5.148 As noted above, many of the conventions regarding affidavit evidence differ
between courts and may or may not be struck out
by the court at its discretion.
Practice also differs between states.
5.149 The adducing of evidence by affidavit was not dealt with specifically in the
ALRC’s earlier evidence inquiry. It was submitted
to this Inquiry that the
uniform Evidence Acts should contain provisions governing the form and content
of affidavits on the basis
that the Acts are concerned with the presentation of
evidence generally.
5.150 The Commissions’ view at this stage is that these matters are best
dealt with by the rules of the relevant courts. However,
the Commissions would
be interested to receive further views on this matter.
Question 5–1.
Should the uniform Evidence Acts contain
provisions dealing with the form of affidavit evidence? If so, what
considerations should
be included in such a section?
J Anderson, J Hunter and N Williams,
The New Evidence Law: Annotations and Commentary on the Uniform Evidence
(2002), 59.
A Ligertwood,
Australian Evidence
(4th ed, 2004),
Defined in the uniform Evidence Acts
as a question which directly or indirectly suggests a particular answer to a
question or assumes
the existence of a fact which is in dispute:
Evidence Act
(Cth) Dictionary, Pt 1;
Evidence Act 1995
(NSW) Dictionary,
Evidence Act 2001
Evidence Act 2004
(NI) Dictionary, Pt 1.
standard questions regarding name, occupation and relationship to the parties to
proceedings.
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, ALRC 38 (1987),
Australian Law Reform Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1 (1985),
Ibid, [280];
[607]–[609].
[608]–[609].
[607]–[609].
[607]–[609].
Uniform Evidence Law
(6th ed, 2004), [1.2.2180]. See
See also S Odgers,
Uniform Evidence Law
(6th ed, 2004),
[1.2.2180].
Sandor’s Trustee (No 1)
(Unreported, New South Wales Supreme Court,
Young J, 22 April 1997). The issue of affidavit evidence is discussed further
There is no comment in the
second reading speeches or the explanatory memorandum as to why an application
is required before a direction
can be given.
Uniform Evidence Law
(6th ed, 2004), [1.2.2180], fn 82.
Ligertwood,
Australian Evidence
(4th ed, 2004),
Uniform Evidence
(6th ed, 2004), [1.2.2180].
[1987] HCA 58
(1987) 164 CLR 180
, referring to evidence given by charts or
explanatory materials, the High Court stated that in waiving the general rules
the giving of evidence, the court must consider whether there is a
risk that an altered form of giving evidence might give it undue
Evidence Act 1958
(Vic), ss 42A, 42B;
Evidence Act 1906
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004),
For example, B
Consultation
, Sydney, 21 February
Victoria Legal Aid,
18 February
New South Wales Public
P Greenwood,
11 March 2005.
Confidential,
22 February
J Orchiston,
12 April 2005.
of Public Prosecutions (NSW),
15 February
Law Council of Australia,
See, eg, Aboriginal Interpreter
Consultation
, Darwin, 1 April 2005; S Cox,
Consultation
Darwin, 31 March 2005.
Confidential,
Yamatji Marlpa Barna Baba Maaja
Aboriginal Corporation,
Consultation
Darwin, 30 March 2005. This view was confirmed by NT Department of Justice:
Department of Justice (Northern Territory),
Consultation
, Darwin, 31
March 2005.
Other issues concerning
the evidence of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander witnesses are discussed in
Queensland Criminal
Justice Commission,
Aboriginal Witnesses in Queensland’s Criminal
(1996), Ch 4.
Indigenous Witnesses and the
Native Title Act 1993
(Cth)—Occasional
Paper Series No 2/2003
(2003) National Native Title
Ibid, citing D Eades
‘Commicative Strategies in Aboriginal English’, S Romaine (ed)
Language in Australia
New South Wales Law Reform
Commission,
Sentencing: Aboriginal Offenders
, Report 96 (2000),
Milirrpum v Nabalco Pty
(1971) FLR 141
Rose v South Australia
[2002] FCA 1342
Queensland Criminal Justice
Commission,
Aboriginal Witnesses in Queensland’s Criminal Courts
(1996), Ch 4
Department of Justice,
Aboriginal English in the Court—A Handbook
New South Wales Law Reform
Commission,
Sentencing: Aboriginal Offenders
, Report 96 (2000),
Other issues concerning the
evidence of child witnesses are discussed in
P Byrne, ‘Children
as Witnesses: Legal Aspects’ in J Vernon (ed)
Children as Witnesses:
Proceedings of a Conference
Australian Law Reform Commission and
Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission,
Seen and Heard: Priority for
Children in the Legal Process
, ALRC 84 (1997),
Evidence (Children) Act
Evidence (Children and Special Witnesses) Act 2001
Evidence Reform (Children and Sexual Offences) Act 2004
Evidence Act 1929
Evidence Act 1958
(Vic), ss 37B, 37C, 42F;
Evidence Act 1906
Law Reform Commission,
, ALRC 38 (1987),
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Sexual Offences: Final Report
Australian Law Reform
Commission and Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission,
Seen and Heard:
Priority for Children in the Legal Process
, ALRC 84 (1997),
See Australian Institute
of Judicial Administration,
Aboriginal Cultural Awareness Benchbook for
Western Australian Courts
(2004) Australian Institute of Judicial
Administration <www.aija.org.au/online/ICABenchbook.htm> at 10 May 2005;
see also Victorian
Law Reform Commission,
Sexual Offences: Final Report
(2004), [5.155].
Uniform Evidence Acts
‘Examination of Witnesses under the Commonwealth
Evidence Act 1995
Queensland Law Society Journal
Uniform Evidence Acts
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1 (1985), [39]. See
McLennan v Bowyer
[1961] HCA 49
(1961) 106 CLR
Australian Law Reform Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1 (1985),
T Smith and O Holdenson,
‘Comparative Evidence: The Unhelpful Witness’
Australian Law Journal
[1977] VicRp 10
[1977] VR 98.
Harris, ‘Examination of Witnesses under the Commonwealth
Evidence Act
’ (1996) 26
Queensland Law Society Journal
[2001] NSWCCA
R v Pantoja
(Unreported,
NSW Court of Criminal Appeal, James J, 5 November
These being (non-exhaustively):
the extent to which to do so would be likely to add unduly to, or to shorten,
the length of the
hearing; the extent to which to do so would be unfair to a
party or to a witness; the importance of the evidence in relation to which
leave, permission or direction is sought; the nature of the proceeding; and the
power (if any) of the court to adjourn the hearing
or to make another order or
to give a direction in relation to the evidence.
R v Souleyman
(1996) 40 NSWLR
(Unreported,
New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal, 10 June
(Unreported,
New South Wales Supreme Court, Hunt CJ at CL, 23 April
Randall v the Queen
[2004] TASSC 42
146 A Crim R 197.
Whitehall v The Queen
[1983] HCA 42
(1983) 152 CLR 657
Advocacy: Cross-Examination: Understanding the Parameters Set by the
(2003) College of Law,
Adam v The Queen
207 CLR 96. Adam is also discussed in
evidence of a previous representation that is relevant and admitted for a
non-hearsay purpose, to be used also for a hearsay
purpose, that is, to prove
the truth of its contents. See
Adam v The Queen
(2001) 207 CLR 96, 107. However, the propriety of this practice was based on the
prior statement being admissible as evidence of
the truth of what was said. See
discussion of this aspect of
(Unreported, New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal, Gleeson CJ, McInerney and
Sully JJ, 1 April 1997), 18.
of Public Prosecutions (NSW),
15 February
New South Wales Public
Law Council of Australia,
Ibid. The view that deliberate
forensic use of
was undesirable was shared by others:
P Greenwood,
Office of the Director of Public
Prosecutions Tasmania,
Consultation
, Hobart, 15 March
Judicial Officers of the
District Court of NSW,
Consultation
, Sydney, 3 March 2005; T Game,
Consultation
, Sydney, 25 February
Judicial Officers of the
District Court of NSW,
Consultation
, Sydney, 3 March
Judicial Officers of the Supreme
Court of New South Wales,
Consultation
, Sydney, 18 March
Confidential,
22 February 2005.
South Wales District Court Judges,
22 February
Judicial Officers of the
District Court of NSW,
Consultation
, Sydney, 3 March
Commercial Bar Association of
the Victorian Bar,
These discretions are discussed
Criminal Law Committee
of the Law Society of South Australia,
Victoria Legal Aid,
18 February 2005.
T Smith and O Holdenson,
‘Comparative Evidence: The Unhelpful Witness’
Australian Law Journal
Australian Law Reform Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1
(1985), [626].
Cross-Examination and Sexual Offence Complainants
(2003) NSW Parliament,
Australian Law Reform Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1 (1985),
Issues involving child
witnesses and children’s evidence are also discussed in Chs 7 and
Australian Law Reform
Commission and Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission,
Seen and Heard:
Priority for Children in the Legal Process
, ALRC 84 (1997), [14.111]. The
Wood Royal Commission heard a number of similar complaints in relation to
treatment of child witnesses:
Royal Commission into the New South Wales Police
Final Report
, vol 5 (1997),
Australian Law Reform
Commission and Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission,
Seen and Heard:
Priority for Children in the Legal Process
, ALRC 84 (1997),
Recs 110–112. See also Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Offences: Final Report
was inserted by
Measures to Combat Serious and Organised Crime Act 2001
Crimes Act 1914
The court may choose
not to appoint such a person if the court considers that it is not in the
interests of justice to do so:
Evidence (Children) Act 1997
Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Sexual Offences: Final Report
(2004), [5.146].
Queensland Law Reform Commission,
The Receipt of Evidence by Queensland Courts: The Evidence of Children,
Summary of Recommendations
, Report No 55:
Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Sexual Offences: Final Report
(2004), Recs 143,
New South Wales Law Reform
Commission,
Questioning of Complainants by Unrepresented Accused in Sexual
Offence Trials
, Report 101 (2003),
Procedure Act 1986
Uniform Evidence Acts
Relevance is discussed further in
[2003] NSWCCA 191
J Wood, ‘Sexual Assault
and the Admission of Evidence’ (Paper presented at Practice and
Prevention: Contemporary Issues
in Adult Sexual Assault in New South Wales,
Sydney, 12 February 2003), 30–31. See also Director of Public Prosecutions
15 February
NSW Adult Sexual Assault
Interagency Committee,
A Fair Chance: Proposals for Sexual Assault Law Reform
(2004). This report was also given to this Inquiry as a submission:
Women’s Legal Services (NSW),
2005. See also NSW Health Department Child Protection and Violence Prevention
21 February
NSW Adult Sexual Assault
Interagency Committee,
A Fair Chance: Proposals for Sexual Assault Law Reform
Evidence Act 1977
states that in deciding whether a
question is an improper question, the court must take into account: (a) any
mental, intellectual
or physical impairment the witness has or appears to have;
and (b) any other matter about the witness the court considers relevant,
including, for example, age, education, level of understanding, cultural
background or relationship to any party to the
proceeding.
The commencement date
of the provisions of the Act has not yet been
proclaimed.
Criminal Procedure
Further Amendment (Evidence) Bill 2005 (NSW), Sch 1.
New South Wales,
Parliamentary
, Legislative Assembly, 23 March 2005, 14899 (B Debus—Attorney
General), 14899.
Criminal Procedure
Further Amendment (Evidence) Bill 2005 (NSW). For the purposes of the section,
‘criminal proceedings’
means proceedings against a person for an
offence (summary or indictable), including committal proceedings, bail
proceedings, sentencing
and appeals:
New South Wales,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Assembly, 23 March 2005, 14899 (B
Debus—Attorney General),
For example, a spouse,
parent or child of the accused. The compellability of certain witnesses is
considered in detail in Ch 4.
Evidence Act 1977
Evidence Act 1939
Evidence Act 1929
Evidence Act 1958
(Vic) s 37C. See J Hunter, C Cameron and T Henning,
Litigation II:
Evidence and Criminal Process
(7th ed, 2005),
Whisprun Pty Ltd v
[2003] HCA 48
(2003) 200 ALR 447
Ibid, 477–478.
Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004),
New South Wales
District Court Judges,
Consultation
, Sydney, 3 March
Supreme Court of the ACT
Judicial Officers,
Consultation
, Canberra, 8 March 2005. One magistrate
said she had successfully invoked the section: New South Wales Local Court
Magistrates,
Consultation
, Sydney, 5 April
Consultation
, Sydney, 21 February 2005; T Game,
Consultation
Sydney, 25 February 2005; Crown Prosecutors,
Consultation
, Sydney, 11
February 2005; Legal Aid Office (ACT),
Consultation
, Canberra, 8 March
Legal Aid Office (ACT),
Consultation
, Canberra, 8 March
Law Council of Australia,
Director of Public
Prosecutions (NSW),
15 February
Victoria Legal Aid,
18 February
Women’s Legal Services
24 March 2005; NSW Health Department Child
Protection and Violence Prevention Unit,
February 2005; Confidential,
27 April 2005;
Yamatji Marlpa Barna Baba Maaja Aboriginal Corporation,
9 February 2005.
Confidential,
Criminal Law Committee of the
Law Society of South Australia,
7 March 2005. See
also Legal Services Commission of South Australia,
22 February 2005.
of Public Prosecutions (NSW),
15 February
New South Wales Public
NSW Adult Sexual Assault
Interagency Committee,
A Fair Chance: Proposals for Sexual Assault Law Reform
Victorian Law
Reform Commission,
Sexual Offences: Final Report
New South Wales Law Reform
Commission,
Questioning of Complainants by Unrepresented Accused in Sexual
Offence Trials
, Report 101 (2003), Rec 1. A similar recommendation has
also recently been made by the VLRC: Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Offences: Final Report
New South Wales Law
Reform Commission,
Questioning of Complainants by Unrepresented Accused in
Sexual Offence Trials
, Report 101 (2003),
Ibid, [3.37]. See also M
Hunter, ‘Hard Cases Making Bad Law: Prohibiting Cross-Examination of Adult
Sexual Offence Complainants
by Unrepresented Accused’
(2003) 27(5)
Criminal Law Journal
New South Wales Law Reform
Commission,
Questioning of Complainants by Unrepresented Accused in Sexual
Offence Trials
, Report 101 (2003),
R v MSK and MAK
[2004] NSWCCA 308.
New South Wales
Law Reform Commission,
Questioning of Complainants by Unrepresented Accused
in Sexual Offence Trials
, Report 101 (2003), Recs 4, 8. The rule in
Browne v Dunn
is discussed
Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Sexual Offences: Final Report
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004),
New South Wales
Public Defenders,
[2003] NSWSC
, [25]. Note, however, as outlined above, on appeal the section was found to
be a valid limitation on the right to cross-examine:
R v MSK and MAK
[2004] NSWCCA 308.
Leave to appeal to the High Court has been denied in this
Director of Public
Prosecutions (NSW),
15 February
The policy framework, and
structure of the uniform Evidence Acts is discussed in
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1 (1985),
Evidence Law
(6th ed, 2004),
[1.2.4220].
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1 (1985),
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004),
New South Wales
Public Defenders,
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1 (1985),
New South Wales Law Reform
Commission,
The Course of the Trial: Working Paper
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1 (1985),
Note that under
, the mere production of a document to a witness who is being
cross-examined does not give rise to a requirement that the cross-examiner
tender the document.
(1893) 6 R 67.
has also been held to apply to a party’s failure to cross-examine their
own witness pursuant to
R v McCormack (No 3)
[2003] NSWSC 645
and may operate where the evidence is in the form of a written statement, rather
than testimony:
Nye v New South Wales
[2003] NSWSC 610.
See S Odgers,
Uniform Evidence Law
(6th ed, 2004),
[1.2.4440].
J Gans and A Palmer,
Australian Principles of Evidence
(2nd ed, 2004),
J Anderson, J Hunter and N
The New Evidence Law: Annotations and Commentary on the Uniform
Evidence Acts
(2002), [46.10].
J Gans and A Palmer,
Australian Principles of Evidence
(2nd ed, 2004),
J Anderson, J Hunter and N
The New Evidence Law: Annotations and Commentary on the Uniform
Evidence Acts
(2002), [46.10].
Ibid, [46.10].
(1990) 19 NSWLR 677
, 685. See also J Anderson, J Hunter and N Williams,
New Evidence Law: Annotations and Commentary on the Uniform Evidence Acts
(2002), [46.15]. In
R v Lisiritis
[2004] NSWCCA 287
, whilst not deciding
the point, the New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal said there was
‘much to commend’ the view
that the High Court has implied in
decisions such as
Azzopardi v The Queen
[2001] HCA 25
(2001) 205 CLR 50
[2002] HCA 45
(2002) 210 CLR 285
that the rule does not apply to an accused in a
criminal trial. However, both these cases concerned the right of the accused not
to give evidence, rather than the rule in
Browne v Dunn
in a strict
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1 (1985),
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004),
P Greenwood,
Director of Public
Prosecutions (NSW),
15 February
New South Wales Public
21 April 2005, citing the decision in
R v Lisiritis
[2004] NSWCCA 287
Australian Civil Procedure
(5th ed, 2002),
Supreme Court Rules
At the time of writing,
Procedure Bill 2005
was under consideration by the Legislative
Supreme Court of
Supreme Court of Victoria, Practice Note No 4 of 2004
Supreme Court of Victoria <www.supremecourt.vic.gov.au> at 19 May
Supreme Court (Criminal
Procedure) Rules 1998
Consultation
, Sydney, 3 March
6. Documentary Evidence
Operation of the documentary evidence provisions
Reliability and accuracy of computer-produced evidence
Electronic communications
Evidence of official records
6. Documentary Evidence
6.1 The uniform Evidence Acts introduced sweeping reforms to the rules
governing the admissibility of documentary evidence. The most
significant of
these is the abolition of the original document
Under the common law, the
contents of a document can only be proved by tendering the original document.
There are several exceptions
to this rule for situations where the original is
unavailable, but, generally, secondary evidence of the contents of the document
is not admissible. Section 51 of the uniform Evidence Acts provides that
‘the principles and rules of the common law that relate
to the means of
proving the contents of a document are abolished’.
6.2 The uniform Evidence Acts also greatly widened the definition of
‘document’. At common law, ‘a document is essentially
object upon which is visibly inscribed intelligible writing or
The uniform
Evidence Acts define ‘document’ to be any record of information,
(a) anything on which there is writing; or
(b) anything on which there are marks, figures, symbols or perforations
having a meaning for persons qualified to interpret them;
(c) anything from which sounds, images or writings can be reproduced with or
without the aid of anything else; or
(d) a map, plan, drawing or
photograph.
6.3 The wide definition of the term ‘document’ and the allowable
means of proof are said to ‘greatly increase the
flexibility of the law to
admit the contents of documents into
6.4 Other reforms introduced by the uniform Evidence Acts relate to the rules on
cross-examination on documents,
refreshment of memory from
and proving attested
6.5 This chapter examines how the provisions of the uniform Evidence Acts dealing
with documentary evidence have operated in practice.
It then examines two
specific issues raised in
proof of electronic
evidence; and evidence of official records.
Operation of the
documentary evidence provisions
6.6 Part 2.2 of the uniform Evidence
contains the principal
provisions dealing with documentary evidence. These are ss 47–51.
6.7 Section 48 sets out the ways in which the contents of a document can be
proved. In addition to tendering the document itself,
these include:
• by admissions by a party to the proceedings as to its
• by tendering a copy of the
• if the document is an article or thing that records sounds, or in which words
are recorded as code (such as shorthand writing),
by tendering a transcript of
the recording or decoded words;
• by tendering a document produced by use of a device to retrieve stored
information;
• by tendering a copy or summary of, or extract from, a business
• by tendering a copy of a public
• if the document is
‘unavailable’,
the existence and contents of the document are not in issue, by tendering a
copy, summary or extract of the document, or by
adducing oral evidence of its
6.8 Other provisions of the uniform
Evidence Acts dealing with
documentary evidence include:
• inferences as to the authenticity of a
• the hearsay rule and its
exceptions;
• documents produced by processes, machines and other
• evidence of official records, Commonwealth documents and public
• requests to produce documents or call
• proof of certain matters by affidavits or written
statements.
6.9 IP 28 questions how the provisions of the uniform Evidence Acts
dealing with documentary evidence have operated in practice and
whether any
concerns have emerged.
Submissions and
consultations
6.10 The NSW Young Lawyers Civil Litigation Committee expresses the view that
the uniform Evidence Acts, and the level of discretion
afforded the judiciary,
have worked very well.
comments that the legislation has been successful in balancing the interests of
the parties against reducing the previous level
of difficulty in having copies
and computer-stored documents admitted into evidence. As an example of an
effective provision, it
points to s 58, which allows a court to draw
inferences as to the authenticity of documents. It submits that the wide
drafting of
the provision protects ‘against the abuse of such
presumptions’.
notes that parties are free to raise evidence challenging the authenticity of
documents, such as pursuant to s 155(2). Finally,
the Committee highlights
provisions in respect of persons having responsibility for the making or keeping
of the relevant documents
(or in some cases ‘authorised’ persons as
defined in s 171(3)) as providing useful checks and balances.
6.11 The Legal Services Commission of South Australia raises the use of the
expression ‘summary document’ in s 156 of
the uniform Evidence
Acts. It submits that ‘the interpretation of that expression and the
potential for personal opinions and
interpretation to be included in any
“summary” is a matter for
6.12 The only other matter raised for consideration in submissions and
consultations is in relation to s 146 of the uniform Evidence
Acts and the
issue of ensuring that a device producing a document is in itself not prone to
error. This issue is considered later
in this chapter.
Commissions’ view
6.13 Section 156 deals with public
It provides a
rebuttable presumption that a document that purports to be a copy of, or an
extract from or summary of, a public document,
and is either sealed or certified
as such, is what it purports to be. Section 48(1)(e)(ii) and
s 48(4)(a) contain similar wording.
Section 50 allows proof of the
contents of voluminous or complex documents by tendering a summary. There are
also numerous other
pieces of legislation that contain references to a
‘summary of a document’.
6.14 Perhaps surprisingly, the word ‘summary’ is not defined in any of
the legislation in which it appears, nor has its
legislative meaning been
judicially considered in Australia. This absence of judicial consideration in
itself indicates that the
inclusion of ‘summary’ in legislation
appears not to have caused difficulties. A Canadian decision of the Alberta
of Queen’s Bench considered its meaning and held that a summary of a
document must ‘fairly represent its contents, including
any qualifications
to the statements chosen’.
6.15 The Commissions are not presently persuaded that the provision in s 156
for admitting a summary of a public document is a matter
for concern. First, the
presumption that the document is what it purports to be is rebuttable. Secondly,
requiring the summary to
be sealed or certified as such provides a safeguard in
so far as the document has been checked by a person in a position of some
authority. Thirdly, it is debatable that the word ‘summary’ can be
interpreted widely and allows, at least to any significant
degree, for personal
opinions. As a matter of commonsense, a summary is a reduced representation, or
abridgment, of the original,
which ‘fairly represent[s] its
6.16 At any rate, the Commissions’ consultations indicate that the ability
to tender a summary of a document is valued by the
legal profession, as well as
appreciated by the bench. Section 50, which allows proof of the contents of
voluminous or complex documents
by tendering a summary, has been singled out as
a particularly useful provision. The wide use of interlocutory procedures, such
discovery, in present-day litigation has enabled many evidence issues to be
resolved prior to the start of a hearing or trial. In
this context, the
provision to the other party of summaries of documents has been a useful tool in
settling the issues early on and
reducing hearing time. Objections to summaries
can be, and are, made and resolved at these pre-trial stages. The Commissions do
propose to make any amendment to s 156 of the uniform Evidence
Reliability and
accuracy of computer-produced evidence
6.17 The uniform Evidence Acts contain a number of provisions facilitating
proof of electronic evidence. For example, s 48 permits
the tendering of a
copy of a document produced ‘by a device that reproduces the contents of
documents’.
This provision
allows photocopies and computer-produced copies of documents to be admitted as
Sections 146–147 facilitate proof of ‘evidence produced by
processes, machines and other
and are intended,
among other things, to facilitate the admission of computer-produced
6.18 Section 146 of the uniform Evidence Acts creates a rebuttable
presumption that, where a party tenders a document or thing that
produced by a process or device, if the device or process is one that, if
properly used, ordinarily produces a particular
outcome, then in producing the
document or thing on this occasion, the device or process has produced that
outcome. For example,
it would not be necessary to call evidence to prove that a
photocopier normally produced complete copies of documents and that it
working properly when it was used to photocopy the relevant document.
Section 147 provides a similar rebuttable presumption in
relation to
documents produced by processes, machines and other devices in the course of
6.19 IP 28 asks whether the application of the uniform Evidence Acts to
computer-produced evidence raises any
Submissions and
consultations
6.20 The NSW Young Lawyers Civil Litigation Committee does not raise any
concerns relating to the application of the uniform Evidence
computer-produced evidence.
notes that the methodology used to present such evidence is still evolving, as
is the handling of the evidence by the courts.
It submits that the legislation
makes adequate provision for judicial discretion to operate in the handling of
computer-produced
evidence, and that court rules are flexible enough to allow
the process of evolution to occur.
6.21 Clayton Utz submits that the wide definition of ‘document’ in the
uniform Evidence Acts, and the broad interpretation
of that definition in the
can adequately
accommodate the receipt of electronic information as admissibile evidence, in
particular under ss 47–51, ss
59–75 (other than s 71,
which is discussed below) and
ss 146–152.
6.22 The Criminal Law Committee of the Law Society of South Australia and the
Legal Services Commission of South Australia make a
comparison between the
provisions of South Australia’s evidence legislation and that of the
uniform Evidence Acts dealing with
evidence produced by processes, machines and
other devices.
Both commented
that s 45C of the
Evidence Act 1929
(SA) seems to be more
comprehensive than s 146 of the uniform Evidence Acts ‘in ensuring
that a device producing a document
is in itself not prone to
6.23 Both these submissions also point out that the uniform Evidence Acts have no
direct equivalent of s 59B of the
Evidence Act 1929
(SA), which
requires a court to be satisfied that there have been no alterations made to the
machine, such as tampering with the
hard drive of the
6.24 These South Australian submissions suggest that the uniform Evidence Acts may
require a more rigorous process for ensuring the
reliability and accuracy of
computer-produced evidence.
There is empirical evidence signalling that presumptions of accuracy of
computer-produced material are often incorrect, yet errors
are not detected by
physical inspection.
submissions and further research, the Commissions have considered two
approaches.
The South Australian
6.25 Section 45C of the
Evidence Act 1929
(SA) applies to
reproductions made by ‘an instantaneous process’ or produced from a
record made by a process in which
the contents of a document are recorded by
photographic, electronic or other
Section 45C(2)
provides that, in determining whether the document sought to be tendered is an
accurate reproduction, a court is not
bound by the rules of evidence and, in
particular, the court may:
• rely on its own knowledge of the nature and reliability of the
processes by which the reproduction was made;
• make findings based on the certificate of a person with knowledge and
experience of the processes by which the reproduction
was made, or who has
compared the contents of both documents and found them to be identical; or
• act on any other basis it considers appropriate in the
circumstances.
6.26 Section 45C(4) creates a rebuttable presumption that a reproduction made
by ‘an approved
reproduces the contents of the document purportedly reproduced.
Evidence Act 1929
(SA) also has a number of provisions applying
specifically to computer evidence. Section 59B makes ‘computer
admissible subject
to the court being satisfied that:
• the computer is correctly programmed and regularly used to produce
the same kind of output;
• the data from which the output is produced is prepared on the basis
of information that would normally be admissible as evidence
of the statements
or representations contained in the output;
• there is no reason to suspect any departure from the system, or any
error in the preparation of the data;
• the computer has not malfunctioned so as to affect the accuracy of
the output;
• there have been no alterations to the computer that might affect the
accuracy of the output;
• records have been kept of alterations to the computer; and
• there is no reasonable cause to believe that the accuracy or validity
of the output has been adversely affected by the use
of any improper process or
procedure or by inadequate safeguards in the use of the computer.
6.28 These sections provide alternative approaches to the admissibility of
computer-produced evidence.
The redundancy test
6.29 Another possible approach, developed in the course of the empirical
research referred to above, has been termed a ‘redundancy
In this research,
Dr Cameron Spenceley tested the assumption of reliability of computers and
found that it cannot be assumed that
the risk of inaccuracy in computer output
due to failure is low.
explains that it is impossible to test for either the inaccuracy or accuracy of
computer operations, and impossible to give a
statistical rate of failure, and
that there is therefore no rational basis for assuming a high rate of
reliability.
He concludes that
‘all that can be demonstrated is that there is genuine uncertainty about
reliability which is operative on
both a general and a specific
6.30 Spenceley acknowledges that ‘computers are unique in terms of the
manner in which they operate and the ubiquity of their
but warns against a
preferential evidentiary treatment of their output that is not necessarily
justified. He argues that ‘there
is a need to have a rational foundation
for asserting that a source of information will be able to aid the
identification of truth’,
but that it is ‘very difficult to quantify or qualify the reliability of
computers in a way that would furnish the foundations
that are required for the purposes of evidentiary
treatment’.
Furthermore:
the argument that evidentiary treatment of computer-produced material should be
undertaken according to different standards does
not make clear if there are to
be any boundaries beyond which those different standards should not be applied.
… there is a
range of complex material in respect of which various
dispensations of proof might be superficially attractive. If the requirements
rationality are to be relaxed or discarded for computer-produced material, why
should they not be relaxed or discarded for a range
6.31 Spenceley builds a case for adopting an approach that relies on
implementing a ‘redundant mechanism’ in the environment
in which the
computer is used to address the problem of reliability of computer
A ‘redundant
mechanism’ does not increase the functional capacity of the computer
system itself, but operates to prevent
or mitigate unreliability in that
That is, it operates to
provide some level of verification that a failure in the computer has not
occurred. There is very little
that can alert a user to the fact that a failure
has occurred, but there may be at least some tell-tale signs revealed by a
mechanism. Spenceley argues that if the legal system does not at least
attempt to filter evidence by asking the question ‘how
would one know if
something has gone wrong?’ it is doing no better than guessing at the
reliability of the computer
In many cases, the cost
of admitting and relying on unreliable evidence is too great for assumptions of
reliabilty to be acceptable.
For example, in some criminal cases carrying
serious penalties, such as corporate fraud, child pornography or carrying out
activities, the prosecution can rest almost entirely, if not entirely,
on computer-produced
6.32 ‘Redundant mechanisms’ can involve hardware solutions, software
solutions, human solutions, or any combination of
the three. Examples of
‘redundant mechanisms’ are: manual verification of output by a
person with knowledge of, or at
least familiarity with, the expected output; or
comparison of the output of interest with the output from a parallel computer
A ‘redundant
mechanism’ can be as simple as a customer phoning his or her bank to query
a suspect entry on a bank statement
to something as involved as processing data
through five separate computer systems that perform the same task, as was done
American space shuttle program. If the same input data is processed by
two systems that are similar but not identical and each produces
outcome, there is a high probability it is
‘redundant mechanism’ may simply highlight that something could be
wrong, not necessarily that something is
6.33 The test of admissibility for computer-produced output that Spenceley
proposes is as follows:
It should be demonstrated that:
(a) some mechanism(s) of redundancy (however formulated and implemented) was or
were utilised in connection with the production of
particular material in the
setting in which it was produced; and that
(b) it is reasonably likely that any error(s) in the operation of that computer
that affected the accuracy of information contained
in that material would have
been detected by such
mechanism(s).
6.34 Spenceley stresses that the problem of balancing the benefits of
facilitating the admission of computer-produced evidence with
the need to ensure
its reliability is not an easy one and that what he proposes is not a
‘quick fix’.
argues, however, that a ‘redundancy test’ is the most
rationally-based test of reliability. What results from his
proposed test
is not a guarantee of accuracy, but a basis for inferring that computer-produced
material that is admitted for use in a given instance
of legal fact finding will
be more likely than not to aid the identification of truth. Of greater
importance still, the basis of
inference is one that has a rational
foundation.
Commissions’ view
6.35 In light of Spenceley’s research, the presumptions of reliability
in ss 146 and 147 of the uniform Evidence Acts may need
to be questioned
and a higher threshold for the admission of computer-produced output into
evidence established.
6.36 Section 45C of the
Evidence Act 1929
(SA) has the outward
appeal of being broad and investing the court with wide judicial discretion to
admit into evidence photographic,
electronic and other reproductions. However,
the presumption in s 45C, that ‘an approved process’ has
accurately reproduced
the tendered document, has the same shortcoming as that
which arises from the presumptions in ss 146 and 147 of the uniform
Acts. As long as an ‘approved process’ is used, concerns
6.37 On the other hand, a ‘redundancy test’ appears to offer a
more rigorous requirement for admissibility of computer-produced
material that
balances the need to ensure reliability of evidence with the need for an
efficient practice for use in litigation.
Relatively simple and cheap verifying
measures can be
built into the computer environment that can at least
mitigate the risks of computer unreliability.
6.38 The advantage of a test that requires a mechanism that verifies the
correct operation of the computer is that all that is required
describe the measures that have been put in place in a particular
The problem of
reliability is confronted not by seeking to assess reliability directly, but
rather by attempting to qualify the risk
that uncertainty
6.39 Although s 59B of the
Evidence Act 1929
(SA) goes some way to
requiring proof of a ‘redundant
mechanism’,
it falls short
of providing a basis on which the reliability of the evidence can be inferred.
On the one hand, the merit of the section
lies in its ‘specific
computer’ approach, focusing on the reliability of the computer that
produced the document rather
than the reliability of computers generally. The
approach ‘recognises in a direct way the need to address the issue of
a computer has operated correctly in producing material that is to be
However, it is
based on the
Civil Evidence Act 1968
(UK), which was criticised by the
Law Commission of England and Wales in a 1993 review of that Act. The Law
Commission observes:
there is a heavy reliance on the need to prove that the document has been
produced in the normal course of business and in an uninterrupted
activity. It is at least questionable whether these requirements provide any
real safeguards in relation to the reliability
of the hardware or software
6.40 Section 59B similarly relies on ‘normal use’ criteria.
In addition, one of the matters in s 59B of which the court
satisifed is that the computer has not malfunctioned. No indication of the
relevant time-frame is given. If this refers to
a malfunction while the data was
being produced, then it will be obvious that the output may be unreliable. If it
refers to a malfunction-free
period of time, this proves nothing. It is
inconsistent with the fact that errors are produced on a random basis. Other
which the court must be satisfied under s 59B either do not go
to the question of the relaibility of the computer, or do not effectively
advance the issue.
6.41 An alternative viewpoint argues that there are significant benefits to
be derived from the presumption of accuracy of computer
output, because this
facilitates the admissibilty of the numerous documents and business records
generated from computer stored
information.
It is suggested
that s 59B has not made it easy to have computer-produced documents
admitted into evidence.
few cases in which the section has been considered, the South Australian courts
have held that the conditions of s 59B were
not complied with in at least
three cases, and admissibility was required to be based on other
Emmanuel Laryea argues
that ss 146 and 147 of the uniform Evidence Acts, which presume proper
operation of devices and processes,
is an improvement on s 59B, which
requires proof of the proper operation of computers producing pieces of
He argues that
ss 146 and 147 eliminate the problems that arise under s 59B of
computer evidence being rejected for no apparent system
malfunctions.
In spite of this,
the author concludes by arguing that:
It must be ensured … that adequate safeguards for testing computer
evidence are put in place. Courts should be given, and use,
wide powers to
ensure that computer systems and electronic data are sufficiently tested for
integrity and reliability when
6.42 A review of the case law in which ss 146 and 147 of the uniform
Evidence Acts received judicial consideration, or were relevant
in some way,
does not reveal any problems with the operation of the section. While this could
merely mean that the possibility of
inaccuracy has not been realised, or has not
been realised in a case where it may be significant, it needs to be questioned
the sections should be amended. Evidence of there being ‘redundant
mechanisms’ or ‘error prevention techniques’
in place, such as
proper maintenance, the use of fault tolerant systems and records, and the
storage of documents and business records
on CD-Rom (to guard against corruption
of documents) would ease doubt about the accuracy of the computer
The Commissions would
welcome feedback on this issue, in particular, feedback on the advantages or
disadvantages of ss 45C and 59B
Evidence Act 1929
relation to computer-produced evidence, and Spenceley’s proposed
‘redundancy test’.
Question 6–1
Should the uniform Evidence Acts be amended to
impose a more rigorous requirement for the presumption of reliability and
of computer-produced evidence? Who should have the obligation to
establish reliability or unreliability?
6.43 An issue related to the reliability of computer output that the
Commissions would like to draw attention to is the security of
electronic data.
The integrity of a document produced by a computer cannot be assumed and its
probative value may have to be questioned.
For example, electronic data and
images can be manipulated without easy detection; computers can be hacked into
and the hacker’s
authorship of communications passed off as
another’s; or a stealth computer program can secretly log passwords,
and user names on another computer and use the information to
personalise false communications. The Commissions are not intending
to take this
issue further in this review,
but signal it as a possible matter
of concern.
communications
of the uniform Evidence Acts provides
The hearsay rule does not apply to a representation contained in a document
recording a message that has been transmitted by electronic
mail or by a fax,
telegram, lettergram or telex so far as the representation is a representation
(a) the identity of the person from whom or on whose behalf the message was
(b) the date on which or the time on which the message was sent; or
(c) the message’s destination or the identity of the person to whom the
message was addressed.
6.45 IP 28 asks whether
of the uniform Evidence Acts should be
amended to use a term broader than ‘electronic mail’, such as
‘electronic
commerce’, ‘electronic data transfer’ or
‘electronic
messaging’.
Submissions and
consultations
6.46 All submissions and consultations addressing the defintion of
‘electronic mail’ are of the view that the expression
restrictive in the context of the application of
6.47 Dr Alan Davidson suggests that
should include communications
such as SMS messages as well as possible future
technologies.
He pointed out
that the issue of appropriate terminology has been addressed in the nine
Electronic Transactions Acts passed by federal,
state and territory parliaments.
The term used in these Acts is ‘electronic communication’. Each of
these Acts defines
‘electronic communication’ in terms similar to
the definition contained in
Electronic Transactions Act
(Cth), which is as follows:
electronic communication
(a) a communication of information in the form of data, text or images by means
of guided and/or unguided electromagnetic energy;
(b) a communication of information in the form of speech by means of guided
and/or unguided electromagnetic energy, where the speech
is processed at its
destination by an automated voice recognition system.
6.48 Clayton Utz also suggests amendment of s 71 in line with the
definition contained in the
Electronic Transactions Act 1999
It argues that the
uniform Evidence Acts should, in line with the principles of the
Transactions Act 1999
(Cth), not discriminate against or between different
A definition that is too
limited may fail to cover some electronic communiations, thus discriminating
against them. Clayton Utz submits
that terms such as ‘electronic
commerce’, ‘electronic data transfer’ or ‘electronic
6.49 The NSW Young Lawyers Civil Litigation Committee favours use of the term
‘data message’ from the 1996 UNCITRAL Model
Law on Electronic
Commerce, although it does not hold a conclusive
‘Data message’
is defined in the Model Law as ‘information generated, sent, received or
stored by electronic, optical
or similar means including, but not limited to,
electronic data interchange (EDI), electronic mail, telegram, telex or
6.50 The Australian Securities and Investments Commission submits that the term
used needs to be carefully defined so as to be broad
enough to encompass other
existing methods of transmitting data and to allow for methods that may be
developed in the future.
6.51 Email is not the only way to transmit messages between computers.
Although largely superseded by the Internet, both traditional
electronic data
interchange (EDI)
application-centric EDI
other forms of data transmission via computer. In addition, communications
between computers can be by way of Internet Relay
Chats (IRCs) (‘chat
room’ correspondence) and instant
While IRCs and
instant messaging communications are generally not logged or stored, it is
conceivable that a screen shot of conversations
could be taken and kept. As
well, applications are now being developed that can record and log instant
6.52 Nor is messaging between computers the only method of electronic
communication. Increasingly, common electronic communication
is by means of
mobile phones, especially text messaging, or SMS. A PDA
can copy an SMS into an
email or word processing program document. It is also possible, though not quite
so easily done, to use a
mobile phone to forward an SMS to a computer, where it
can be printed out. At any rate, all devices that can receive an SMS can forward
the message to another device. Electronic communication can also be by way of
photos taken with a mobile phone camera, a device becoming
increasingly
6.53 Whether computer or phone communications are via wire, cable or wireless
connection, they can all be classified as electronic
communications. It is
important to be satisified of this as any reform of s 71 that centres on a
definition of ‘electronic
communication’ must include all these
technologies. In particular, modern society’s demand for mobility is
rapid growth in the use of wireless networking devices, including
mobile phones, wireless modems and wireless local area networks
understanding of messaging technologies is required before a view can be formed
language used. The following paragraphs
give a brief outline of the technical aspects of ethernet and telecommunications
technology.
6.54 When data is sent across a network, it is converted into electrical signals.
These signals are generated as electromagnetic waves
(analog signaling) or as a
sequence of voltage pulses (digital signaling). To be sent from one location to
another, a signal must
travel along a physical path. The physical path that is
used to carry a signal between a signal transmitter and a signal receiver
called the transmission medium. There are two types of transmission media:
guided and unguided.
6.55 The three most commonly used types of guided media are: twisted-pair wiring,
similar to common telephone wiring; coaxial cable,
similar to that used for
cable television; and optical fibre
6.56 Unguided media are natural parts of the Earth’s environment that can be
used as physical paths to carry electrical signals.
The atmosphere and outer
space are examples of unguided media that are commonly used to carry signals.
These media can carry such
electromagnetic signals as microwave, infrared light
waves, and radio waves.
6.57 Network signals are transmitted through all transmission media as a type of
waveform. When transmitted through wire and cable,
the signal is an electrical
waveform. When transmitted through fibre-optic cable, the signal is a light
wave: either visible or infrared
light. When transmitted through Earth’s
atmosphere or outer space, the signal can take the form of waves in the radio
including VHF and microwaves, or it can be light waves, including
infrared or visible light (for example, lasers).
6.58 Once a transmission medium has been selected, devices are needed that can
propagate signals across the medium and receive the
signals when they reach the
other end of the medium. Such devices are designed to propagate a particular
particular type of transmission medium. Transmitting and
receiving devices used in computer networks include network adapters, repeaters,
wiring concentrators, hubs, switches, and infrared, microwave, and other
radio-band transmitters and receivers.
6.59 Microwave transmitters and receivers, especially satellite systems, are
commonly used to transmit network signals over great
distances. A microwave
transmitter uses the atmosphere or outer space as the transmission medium to
send the signal to a microwave
receiver. The microwave receiver then either
relays the signal to another microwave transmitter or translates the signal to
other form, such as digital impulses, and relays it on another suitable
medium to its destination.
6.60 Infrared and laser transmitters are similar to microwave systems: they
use the atmosphere and outer space as transmission media.
However, because they
transmit light waves rather than radio waves, they require a line-of-sight
transmission path.
6.61 It is clear, then, that whatever the transmission media, the receiver of
the electromagnetic signals converts the signals to
some form of electric signal
that the device can understand. That being so, the technologies described above
can all be defined as
‘electronic communication’.
6.62 By way of an insight into the possibility of unforeseen advancements in
electronic communication and a reminder of the need for
legislative definitions
to accommodate such future developments, the Commissions note that, currently,
technology is being developed
to use the human body as a ‘wet-wire’
transmitter. The personal area network
takes advantage of the
conductive powers of living tissue to transmit signals. The PAN device, which
can be worn on a belt, in a
pocket, or as a watch, transmits extremely low-power
signals (less than 1 MHz) through the body. With a handshake, users could, for
example, exchange business cards.
Commissions’ view
6.63 The Commissions agree that the reference in s 71 to
‘electronic mail’ is too restrictive. As demonstrated above,
been overtaken by considerable developments in electronic technology. However, a
device-specific or method-specific response
to modern and developing technology
may turn out to be too restrictive in itself and a short-lived solution. Ways of
communicating
electronically are expanding and changing rapidly. A broad and
flexible approach to this technology is needed.
6.64 The Commissions consider that none of the terms ‘electronic
commerce’, ‘electronic data transfer’ or
‘electronic
messaging’ sufficiently cover the possible means of communicating
electronically. ‘Electronic commerce’
refers to electronic
communications and transactions in a commerce or business context. Internet
banking, Internet shopping and electronic
inventory control, invoicing and
account management are examples of electronic commerce. ‘Electronic data
transfer’ simply
means the transfer of data by electronic means from one
location to another, but gives rise to ambiguity as to whether it includes
or images. ‘Electronic messaging’ likewise has a particular, and
limited, meaning, restricted to software that allows
messages to be exchanged
with other computer users (or groups of users) via a communications network in
electronic form.
6.65 Nor are the Commissions convinced that the term ‘data
message’, as defined in the UNCITRAL Model Law on Electronic
Commerce, is
sufficiently broad and able to encompass future technologies. Drafted as it was
in 1996, it has been overtaken by developments
since then.
6.66 The Commissions propose amending s 71 so as to replace the
references to electronic mail, fax, telegram, lettergram and telex
‘electronic communications’, defined in accordance with the
definition in the
Electronic Transactions Act 1999
(Cth). This would
embrace all modern electronic technologies, including telecommunications, as
well as the more outmoded fax, telegram,
lettergram and telex methods of
communication. A redraft of s 71 is included in Appendix 1.
6.67 It may be useful to produce as part of any amendment to s 71 an
Explanatory Memorandum similar to that which accompanied the
Transactions Bill 1999 (Cth).
For example, the Explanatory Memorandum notes that ‘electronic
communication’, ‘communication’ and ‘information’
should all be interpreted broadly. It also explains that:
The use of the term ‘unguided’ is not intended to refer to the
broadcasting of information, but instead means that the
electronic magnetic
energy is not restricted to a physical conduit, such as a cable or wire. …
Information that is recorded,
stored or retained in an electronic form but is
not transmitted immediately after being created is intended to fall within the
of an ‘electronic communication’.
This definition should be read in conjunction with the definition of
‘information’, which is defined to mean data, text,
speech. However, as a limitation is applied on the use of speech the definition
of electronic communication is in two parts.
Paragraph (a) states that, in
relation to information in the form of data, text or images, the information can
be communicated by
means of guided and/or unguided electromagnetic energy.
Paragraph (b) provides that information in the form of speech must be
communicated
by means of guided and/or unguided electromagnetic energy and must
be processed at its destination by an automated voice recognition
system. This
is intended to allow information in the form of speech to be included in the
scope of the Bill only where the information
is provided by a person in a form
that is analogous to writing. ‘Automated voice recognition system’
is intended to include
information systems that capture information provided by
voice in a way that enables it to be recorded or reproduced in written form,
whether by demonstrating that the operation of the computer program occurred as
a result of a person’s voice activation of
that program or in any other
way. This provision is intended to maintain the existing distinction commonly
made between oral communications
and written communications. The intention is to
prevent an electronic communication in the form of speech from satisfying a
requirement for writing or production of information. For example, it is
not intended to have the effect that a writing requirement
can be satisfied by a
mere telephone call, message left on an answering machine or message left on
‘Information’ is defined to mean information that is in the form of
data, text, images or speech. … These terms
are not intended to be
mutually exclusive and it is possible that information may be in more than one
form. For example, information
may be in the form of text in a paper document
but is then transferred in to the form of data in an electronic document.
Proposal 6–1
Section 71 of the uniform Evidence Acts should
be amended to replace the words ‘a document recording a message that has
transmitted by electronic mail or by a fax, telegram, lettergram or
telex’ with the words ‘an electronic communication’,
insert as s 71(2) a definition for ‘electronic communication’
identical to that in
Electronic Transactions Act 1999
Evidence of official
Section 155
Evidence Act
facilitates proof of official records. The section provides that evidence of
Commonwealth records, or public records of a state
or territory, may be adduced
by producing a document purporting to be such a record, or a certified copy or
extract from the record,
and signed by the relevant minister, or the person who
has custody of the record.
Section 155(1)
Evidence Act 1995
(NSW) differs from
s 155(1) of the Commonwealth Act in that the former refers to evidence of a
‘public document’ of a
state or territory whereas the latter refers
to evidence of a ‘public record’ of a state or territory. In all
other respects,
the sections are the same. ‘Public record’ in the
Commonwealth provision is not defined in the Dictionary and ‘is
to be interpreted broadly’.
Nezovic v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous
Affairs (No 2)
J considered the admissibility of ministerial reasons for a decision under the
Migration Act 1958
(Cth), prepared pursuant to a statutory obligation
of that Act, but after the date of the decision
The Minister sought to
place before the court reasons for a decision made some months earlier. At the
time the applicant had originally
been notified of the Minister’s
decision, the applicant was given somewhat ambiguous material on the basis of
which it was
said the decision had been made. The decision was subsequently
challenged.
6.71 Counsel for the Minister argued that a written statement of reasons pursuant
to a statutory duty to provide such a statement
is admissible as a record of the
material before the decision maker, the findings of fact made by the decision
maker and his or her
reasons for making the particular decision. Counsel argued
that the Minister’s statement of reasons constitutes a Commonwealth
for the purposes of s 155 and could therefore be admitted under that
section, and not excluded as hearsay by virtue of
6.72 Similar arguments were relied on in an earlier Federal Court case,
v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous
In that case,
Hely J held that the effect of
Evidence Act
(Cth) is to facilitate proof of records that are otherwise admissible and that
is not a general exception to Chapter 3 in relation to admissibility
of evidence.
stated that ‘not every Commonwealth record is admissible in all
proceedings’.
French J, following the decision in
Tuncok v Minister for Immigration
and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs
, held that, while
authorises the production of evidence of a Commonwealth record, it does not
render evidence of such a record proof of the truth of
The statement of
reasons signed by the Minister would be admissible only to show that the
Minister states that these are his or her
reasons, but not to establish the
correctness or reliability of that
Given that it was
for the latter purpose that the statement of reasons was tendered, it was held
not to be admissible by virtue of
having regard to the operation of
the hearsay rule.
6.73 IP 28 draws attention to a submission made to the ALRC by Justice
French that the effect of
should be clarified,
in particular to ensure that official reasons for decisions cannot be admitted
on a non-consensual basis at
the instigation of the decision maker without the
decision maker being put to proof that these were the true reasons that he or
had for making the relevant
6.74 IP 28 asks whether the application of
of the uniform Evidence
Acts to official reasons for decision raises any problems, and, if so, whether
these should be addressed
through amendment of the uniform Evidence
Submissions and
consultations
6.75 The NSW Young Lawyers Civil Litigation Committee submits that
creates a presumption that would ultimately be very difficult for the other
party to resist, particularly as it is unlikely that
the other party would have
access to all of the background
information.
However, it
concedes that it would be unduly onerous for the test to be applied to every
document where it is not in issue. The Committee
submits that the section should
be clarified in line with the submission of Justice French. That is, the section
should be amended
to prevent the admission of evidence of official reasons for
decisions other than on a consensual basis, unless the decision maker
proof as to the authenticity of the reasons contained in the
Commissions’ view
6.76 The Commissions’ analysis of
Nezovic v Minister for Immigration
and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs (No 2)
is that French J held
did no more than facilitate proof of the record of reasons the
Minister sought to tender but did not address the question of admissibility
them as the Minister’s reasons. The evidence before French J was an
affidavit sworn by the solicitor exhibiting the alleged
reasons. As there was an
issue as to whether these were the true reasons for the original decision,
French J, correctly in the Commissions’
view, approached the tender of the
record as a question of admissibility and ruled that the hearsay rule applied
and it was not admissible.
The solution was for the Minister to swear the
requisite affidavit. In that event, there does not appear to be any need for
of the uniform Evidence Acts.
6.77 The Commissions are also of the view that the structure of the Act and
the purposes of the provisions in Chapters 3 and 4 are
clear. If there is
any uncertainty, the Commissions believe that the decision in
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs
has clarified the matter and that there is no need for further
statutory clarification.
Uniform Evidence Acts
J Gans and A Palmer,
Australian Principles of Evidence
(2nd ed, 2004),
Uniform Evidence Acts Dictionary,
Pt 1. ‘This definition needs to be coupled with that contained in
s 47(1) … which
sets the scope for the rules contained in
J Gans and A Palmer,
Principles of Evidence
(2nd ed, 2004),
J Anderson, J Hunter and N Williams,
The New Evidence Law: Annotations and Commentary on the Uniform Evidence
(2002), 105.
Uniform Evidence
See V Bell,
‘Documentary Evidence under the
Evidence Act 1995
The Judicial Review
Uniform Evidence Acts
Where the validity of a document depends on
it having been properly attested, at common law it is necessary to prove this
calling one of the attesting witnesses to testify, unless the witnesses
are unavailable or a presumption of validity applied.
Section 149
does away with
this requirement.
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004),
Qs 4–2, 4–3, 4–4.
Evidence Act 2001
Uniform Evidence Acts
s 48(1)(a).
The admission can only be used against the party who made the
admission, or who adduced evidence of it:
s 48(1)(b).
need not be an exact copy as long as it is ‘identical in all relevant
s 48(1)(c).
[1987] HCA 58
(1987) 164 CLR 180
[1999] NSWSC 436
on the admissibility of tape recordings. The latter case
considers the combined effect of the common law and
Evidence Act 1995
Uniform Evidence Acts
s 48(1)(d).
s 48(1)(e).
s 48(1)(f).
Providing that it is, or purports to have been, printed: by the
Government Printer or the state equivalent; by authority of the government
administration of the Commonwealth, a state or territory or a foreign country;
or by authority of Parliament: Uniform Evidence
s 48(1)(f).
‘public document’ is defined to mean a document that forms part of
the records of, or is being kept by or on behalf
of: the Crown; a foreign
government; or a person or body holding office or exercising a function under
Constitution
, an Australian law or a foreign law: Uniform Evidence Acts
Dictionary,
A document is
defined ‘not to be available’ if and only if: it cannot be found
after reasonable inquiry and search;
it was destroyed (not in bad faith if
destroyed by or on behalf of the party); it would be impracticable to produce
it; its production
could lead to a conviction; it is not in the party’s
possession or control: Uniform Evidence Acts Dictionary,
Section 58(1)
provides: ‘If a question arises as to the relevance of
a document or thing, the court may examine it and may draw any reasonable
inference from it, including an inference as to its authenticity or
Evidence Act
(Cth) Ch 3 Pt 3.2;
Evidence Act 1995
Evidence Act 2001
(Tas) Ch 3 Pt 2;
Evidence Act
(NI) Ch 3 Pt 3.2.
Uniform Evidence Acts
ss 146–147.
ss 155–159; except
Evidence Act 1995
which has no equivalent in the New South Wales and Tasmanian
legislation.
Uniform Evidence Acts
(except that the definition of ‘authorised
person’ differs between the
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004),
NSW Young Lawyers
Civil Litigation Committee,
7 March 2005,
Legal Services Commission of South
22 February 2005,
Section 182
gives this section a
wider application in relation to Commonwealth
Opron Construction Co v
(1994) 151 AR 241
Ibid, [507].
Uniform Evidence Acts
s 48(1)(b)(ii).
Uniform Evidence Law
(6th ed, 2004),
[1.2.4920].
Uniform Evidence Acts
Australian Law
Reform Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1 (1985),
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004),
NSW Young Lawyers
Civil Litigation Committee,
7 March 2005,
Entertainment (Aust) v University of Tasmania (No 1)
[2003] FCA 532
(2003) 129 FCR
Clayton Utz,
17 February 2005,
Criminal Law Committee of
the Law Society of South Australia,
7 March 2005,
2; Legal Services Commission of South Australia,
22 February 2005, 2.
Services Commission of South Australia,
February 2005, 2.
Ibid, 2; Criminal
Law Committee of the Law Society of South Australia,
7 March 2005, 2.
L Crowley-Smith, ‘The
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth): Should Computer Data be
Presumed Accurate?’
[1996] MonashULawRw 6
(1996) 22(1)
Monash University Law Review
C Spenceley, ‘Evidentiary
Treatment of Computer-Produced Material: A Reliability Based Evaluation’,
, University of Sydney, 2003, 130–131: ‘A software
failure can result in the production of material that appears regular
face, but which contains information that is inaccurate in some respect. It is
precisely this case of latent inaccuracy that
presents the greatest challenge to
legal fact finding. The absence of obvious irregularity on the face of given
material means that
scrutiny of that material alone cannot be an effective means
of determining the accuracy of the information that it
Evidence Act
(SA) s 45C(3).
defined by regulations: Ibid
includes definitions for ‘computer’, ‘computer output’
and ‘data’.
C Spenceley,
‘Evidentiary Treatment of Computer-Produced Material: A Reliability Based
Evaluation’,
, University of Sydney,
Ibid, Ch 4 and Ch 6,
251. The impetus for Spenceley’s thesis was his unease at an assertion
made in C Tapper,
Cross and Tapper on Evidence
(9th ed, 1999) that,
generally speaking, computers are reliable, and a general acceptance of this
assumption in legislation and in
Leaving aside the accuracy
of data input, a computer is only as reliable as its least reliable component.
This is more likely to
be the software than the hardware. It is not feasible to
carry out an empirical study of software reliability, as it is not possible
get a representative sample of how the software will be used. A software program
may contain a fault—and it is anecdotally
acknowledged by software
designers that, although programs are tested before release to minimise faults,
no software program is ever
going to be fault-free—but whether this fault
results in a failure of the program depends on the individual’s use of
computer. Particular inputs will trigger particular faults and lead to failures
in data processing; whereas other information
inputs may not trigger faults and
may result in reliable processing: see C Spenceley, ‘Evidentiary Treatment
of Computer-Produced
Material: A Reliability Based Evaluation’,
, University of Sydney,
, especially 131–132
and Figure 4–1. There are too many degrees of freedom to carry out
empirical testing. In addition,
software can change over time. The only constant
that can be assessed is the number of faults in a computer, but this information
is not enough, as it gives no indication of the percentage rate of failure
triggered by the faults.
Ibid, 254–263.
Ibid, 255. ‘System A’ is
the system that arrives at the result for which the computer is being used.
is a parallel system that verifies the result, but is
redundant in so far as it is actually needed to arrive at the
C Spenceley,
Consultation
, 20 May 2005.
example of how a failure in computer processing might manifest in such a case is
if there is a fault in a software program that
monitors and records IP (Internet
Protocol) addresses. An IP address is an identifier for a
computer or device on
a TCP/IP network.
Networks using
the TCP/IP protocol
route messages based on the IP address of the destination. The numbers in an IP
address are used
in different ways to identify a particular network and a host
on that network. If a mistake occurs in the program, the data may indicate
a particular number connects to a particular site, indicating that a particular
user has accessed a particular website. In cyber
crime, where the tracing of
activity on the Internet may be the cornerstone of the prosecution, the program
failure could wrongly
implicate someone in illegal activity. Similarly, in
Internet banking, the bank keeps a record of users logging onto the bank’s
website. A failure in this software could give rise to unreliable
C Spenceley,
‘Evidentiary Treatment of Computer-Produced Material: A Reliability Based
Evaluation’,
, University of Sydney, 2003, 255.
The ‘parallel
Spenceley argues that
computer input should be treated exactly the same way as it would be treated if
offered directly as evidence:
C Spenceley, ‘Evidentiary Treatment of
Computer-Produced Material: A Reliability Based Evaluation’,
, University of Sydney, 2003,
C Spenceley,
Consultation
, 20 May 2005.
Spenceley, ‘Evidentiary Treatment of Computer-Produced Material: A
Reliability Based Evaluation’,
, University of Sydney, 2003,
The court must be satisfied that
there is no reason to suspect any departure from the system, or any error in the
preparation of
C Spenceley,
‘Evidentiary Treatment of Computer-Produced Material: A Reliability Based
Evaluation’,
, University of Sydney, 2003,
Law Commission,
The Hearsay
Rule in Civil Proceedings
, Report 216 (1993),
L Crowley-Smith, ‘The
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth): Should Computer Data be Presumed Accurate?’
[1996] MonashULawRw 6
(1996) 22(1)
Monash University Law Review
E Laryea, ‘The Evidential
Status of Electronic Data’ (1999) 3
National Law Review
Ibid, [27]. The evidence was
admitted on other grounds in
Mehesz v Redman
(1979) 21 SASR 569
v Weatherall
(1981) 27 SASR 238.
The evidence was found inadmissible under
s 59B and at common law in
Steiner v Modbury Towing Pty Ltd
(Unreported, Supreme Court of South Australia, Matheson J, 5 August
E Laryea, ‘The Evidential
Status of Electronic Data’ (1999) 3
National Law Review
L Crowley-Smith, ‘The
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth): Should Computer Data be Presumed Accurate?’
[1996] MonashULawRw 6
(1996) 22(1)
Monash University Law Review
Evidence Act 1995
a wider application in relation to Commonwealth
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004),
A Davidson,
20 December 2004; Clayton Utz,
17 February 2005, 10; Director of Public Prosecutions (NSW),
15 February 2005, 7; Australian Customs Service,
21 February 2005, 2; Legal Services Commission of
South Australia,
22 February 2005; Australian
Securities & Investments Commission,
2005, 2; NSW Young Lawyers Civil Litigation Committee,
7 March 2005, 3; Criminal Law Committee of the Law Society of South
7 March 2005, 2; Victorian
Supreme Court Litigation Committee,
Consultation
A Davidson,
20 December 2004.
17 February 2005,
NSW Young Lawyers Civil Litigation
7 March 2005,
Australian Securities &
Investments Commission,
7 March 2005,
EDI emerged in the early 1980s and
gained some popularity in the late 1980s as a form of electronic commerce. EDI
is the exchange
of standardised document forms between computer systems for
business use. Companies who had set up similar applications could exchange
information, such as trade orders, between their computers. EDI, as well as a
Customs Interactive facility, available directly through
the internet can be
used to access the Australian Customs Service’s Integrated Cargo System, a
new integrated IT system that
will replace existing reporting and processing
procedures: Australian Customs Service,
February 2005, 2.
Application-centric
EDI is an update to traditional EDI that uses secure transmission methods to
facilitate the exchange of information
between secure applications, typically
residing at different companies (for example, vendor and customer). Deployment
of such secured
applications over their intranets and Internets is faster, less
costly, and more effective than traditional
Instant messaging, using software
programs such as ICQ, is gaining in popularity. It is a technology that combines
features of email
Consultation
, 1 April 2005; C Heunemann,
Consultation
6 April 2005.
First introduced by Apple Computer in
1993 as the Newton MessagePad, the PDA is short for personal digital assistant.
It is a handheld
device that combines
computing, mobile phone, fax, Internet, networking and personal
organiser features.
Unlike portable
most PDAs began as pen-based, using a stylus rather than a keyboard for input. This means that
they also incorporated handwriting
recognition features. Some PDAs can also react to voice input by using voice
recognition technologies. PDAs are also called palmtops,
computers and pocket computers.
Consultation
, 1 April 2005; C Heunemann,
Consultation
6 April 2005.
The Explanatory
Memorandum to the Electronic Transactions Bill 1999 (Cth) clarifies that
‘communications by means of guided
electromagnetic energy is intended to
include the use of cables and wires, for example optic fibre cables and
telephone lines’:
Explanatory Memorandum, Electronic Transactions Bill
1999 (Cth).
The Explanatory Memorandum
to the Electronic Transactions Bill 1999 (Cth) also clarifies that
‘communications by means of
unguided electromagnetic energy is intended to
include the use of radio waves, visible light, microwaves, infrared signals and
energy in the electromagnetic spectrum’:
The term PAN is also used to
describe ad hoc, peer-to-peer networks.
It is also called: MTA Servers, Messaging Servers, Electronic Messaging,
Message Transfer Agent Servers, and Messaging
Explanatory Memorandum,
Electronic Transactions Bill 1999
The New South Wales and
Tasmanian legislation refer to a ‘public document’ of a state or
Evidence Act 1995
Evidence Act 2001
Evidence Law
(6th ed, 2004), [1.4.1680]. The explanation for the differing
terminology ‘public record’ and ‘public document’
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth) and the
Evidence Act 1995
(NSW) relates to constitutional considerations. Section 51(xxv) of the
Constitution
gives Parliament the power to make laws for the
peace, order, and good government of the Commonwealth with respect to the
recognition
throughout the Commonwealth of the laws, the public Acts and
records, and the judicial proceedings of the states. ‘Public record’
in s 155 of the Commonwealth Act needs to have the same meaning as in
s 51(xxv) of the
Constitution
. There are no such
restrictions on the drafting of s 155 of the New South Wales Act. The
provision could include the broadly defined
‘document’.
Minister of Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs (No 2)
[2003] FCA 1263
(2003) 203 ALR 33.
Consequently not
falling within the
exception to the hearsay rule: Uniform
Evidence Acts s 65(2)(b).
Nezovic v Minister of Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs
[2003] FCA 1263
(2003) 203 ALR 33
Tuncok v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous
[2003] FCA 1069.
Tuncok v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous
[2003] FCA 1069
, [64]. An appeal by Mr Tuncok to the Full Court of
the Federal Court on grounds not related to the evidence point was dismissed:
Tuncok v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous
[2004] FACFC 172.
Tuncok v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous
[2003] FCA 1069
Nezovic v Minister of Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs
[2003] FCA 1263
(2003) 203 ALR 33
Ibid, [54].
8 October 2004. See Australian Law Reform Commission,
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004),
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004),
NSW Young Lawyers
Civil Litigation Committee,
7 March 2005, 4.
7. The Hearsay Rule and its Exceptions
Introduction
The hearsay rule
Uniform Evidence Acts
Unintended assertions
Evidence relevant to a non-hearsay purpose
Proceedings if maker available
Proceedings if maker not available
Representations 'fresh in the memory'
Business records
Contemporaneous statements about a person's health etc
Hearsay in interlocutory proceedings
Hearsay and children's evidence
Notice where hearsay evidence is to be adduced
Hearsay in civil proceedings
7. The Hearsay Rule and its Exceptions
Introduction
7.1 This chapter discusses the hearsay rule, as codified in
uniform Evidence Acts, and its exceptions. These exceptions fall into two
categories. The first category of exception applies
to first-hand hearsay (where
the maker has personal knowledge of the asserted
The second category applies
to more remote (or ‘second-hand’)
7.2 This chapter makes a limited number of proposals for reform of the
hearsay provisions. As discussed below, the hearsay provisions
are unclear in
certain respects and may benefit from clarification in the light of experience
since enactment, and decisions of the
courts. In some cases, existing provisions
of the uniform Evidence Acts, as interpreted by the courts, may not adequately
the intention of the legislation; in others, the Commissions propose
changes to the policy of the Acts to reflect more recent understanding
evidentiary issues.
7.3 Aspects of the hearsay rule in specific contexts are discussed elsewhere,
including in relation to evidence of Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander
traditional laws and customs (Chapter 17); evidence in sexual offence
cases, from child witnesses and in family
law proceedings (Chapter 18).
The hearsay
7.4 The hearsay rule applies to all oral and written representations made out
of court. However, while the common law and the uniform
Evidence Acts each
provide exceptions to ensure that the best available evidence is able to be
admitted, the scope of the rule and
the exceptions differ.
7.5 The common law rules of evidence exclude hearsay, subject to numerous
exceptions covering, for example, contemporaneous narrative
statements;
statements by persons who have died; public documents; and out of court
admissions and confessions. In addition, many
statutory provisions avoiding the
results of a strict application of the hearsay rule have been enacted covering,
for example, business
records and computer evidence.
7.6 The common law rules of evidence were characterised by the ALRC in its
previous evidence inquiry as capable of excluding probative
evidence and as
overly complex, technical, artificial and replete with
In addition, statutory
provisions modifying the common law at the time were stated to be overly
complex, overlapping and unrealistic
Evidence Acts
The policy of the
7.7 The ALRC stated that the continuation of an exclusionary rule for hearsay
evidence was justified on the following grounds:
• out of court statements are usually not on oath;
• there is usually an absence of testing by cross-examination;
• the evidence might not be the best evidence;
• there are dangers of inaccuracy in repetition;
• there is a risk of fabrication;
• to admit hearsay evidence can add to the time and cost of litigation;
• to admit hearsay evidence can unfairly catch the opposing party by
7.8 The policy framework for the ALRC’s hearsay evidence proposals was
set out in ALRC 26 and
The starting point
was the proposition that the ‘best evidence available’ to a party
should be received. The view was
taken that this would assist parties to present
all relevant evidence and give the courts the competing versions of the facts.
so doing, the appearance and reality of the fact-finding exercise would, on
balance, be enhanced and so, in that respect, would the
fairness of the trial
7.9 The concept of ‘best available evidence’ was said to involve
two elements—the quality of the evidence and its
availability.
7.10 Quality of evidence factors led to the distinction drawn between first-hand
and more remote hearsay. The view was taken that
more remote hearsay is
generally so unreliable that it should be inadmissible except where there were
some guarantees of reliability.
It was considered that remote hearsay would
usually be of no value to the party seeking to call it and would only add to the
and cost of proceedings and difficulties in assessing its weight. Quality
of evidence factors also led to the distinction being drawn
between statements
made while relevant events were ‘fresh in the memory’ and later
statements.
7.11 The issue of availability raises at least two issues—the physical
availability of a witness or evidence; and the difficulty
of producing a witness
or evidence to the court, if available. It was observed that what is the best
evidence may depend upon balancing
the importance and quality of evidence
against the difficulty of producing
7.12 This general policy approach was subject to a major qualification for
criminal trials. The concern to minimise wrongful convictions
requires a more
cautious approach to the admission of hearsay evidence against an accused. It
was considered important that the accused
be able to confront those who accuse
him or her. Where the maker of the representation is unavailable, it was thought
that some guarantees
of trustworthiness should be required. On the other hand,
the concern to protect people from wrongful conviction was thought to justify
fewer limits on the admissibility of evidence led by an accused
7.13 The ALRC considered that, where relaxation of the hearsay rule leads to an
increase in the hearsay evidence admissible, safeguards
should be employed to
minimise surprise and the probability of fabrication, and to enable the party
against whom the evidence is
led to investigate, meet and test the evidence,
whether by cross-examination or other
7.14 A final policy concern was the impact on costs. It was noted that while
relaxation of the hearsay rule can save costs, it can
also result in more
evidence being led and collateral issues being raised. For this reason, and the
other concerns mentioned above,
the view was taken that a cautious approach to
relaxation of the hearsay rule was
The hearsay
of the uniform Evidence Acts provides a general
exclusionary hearsay rule:
(1) Evidence of a previous representation made by a person is not admissible to
prove the existence of a fact that the person intended
to assert by the
representation.
7.16 The Acts then provide exceptions to this rule including those covering
evidence relevant to a non-hearsay
‘first-hand’ hearsay exceptions (where the maker has personal
knowledge of the asserted fact);
admissions;
‘second-hand’ hearsay exceptions, such as those relating to business
records, telecommunications and evidence of
reputation.
7.17 The first-hand hearsay exceptions distinguish between civil and criminal
proceedings and between situations where the maker of
the representation is
available to give evidence and where he or she is unavailable. Reasonable notice
in writing is required in
some circumstances where a party intends to adduce
hearsay evidence.
7.18 This chapter discusses selected aspects of the hearsay provisions of the
uniform Evidence Acts, including:
• the exclusion of unintended assertions from the hearsay rule;
• the admission of evidence relevant to a non-hearsay purpose under
• the exception applying in civil proceedings if the maker of the
representations is available;
• the exception applying in civil and criminal proceedings if the maker
of the representation is not available;
• the exception applying in criminal proceedings to representations
made when relevant events were ‘fresh in the memory’
• the business records exception; and
• the exception applying to contemporaneous statements.
7.19 Before the enactment of the uniform Evidence Acts there were
irreconcilable authorities and commentary as to whether implied
representations
of different kinds fell within the hearsay
The ALRC stated that its
proposed provision on the exclusion of hearsay evidence was meant to resolve the
issue of whether hearsay
rules should apply to implied (as well as express)
representations by recommending that a distinction be drawn between intended and
unintended assertions, with the latter outside any hearsay
of the uniform Evidence Acts excludes from admissibility
representations to prove a fact that a person
to assert by the
representation. The term ‘representation’ is defined to include
‘an express or implied
representation’.
does not exclude unintended assertions, whether express or
implied. For example, evidence that a child answered the telephone ‘Hello
Daddy’ would arguably not be hearsay when used to prove the identity of
the caller, because the child would not have intended
to assert this fact. By
contrast, at common law, the child’s statement was held to be inadmissible
hearsay by the High Court
Walton v The
7.21 It has been said that, in restricting the operation of
intended representations, the uniform Evidence Acts narrows the rationale of the
hearsay rule to ensuring that fact-finders are
assisted in detecting intentional
deception. Dr Jeremy Gans and Andrew Palmer state that this contrasts with the
common law, which
is equally committed to ‘ensuring the availability of
trial processes to resolve the possibility of ambiguity or
Gans and Palmer
express concern that, under the uniform Evidence Acts, ‘fact-finders can
be left to discern the meaning of
highly ambiguous acts without the benefit of
trial procedures such as observation or
cross-examination’.
7.22 The meaning of an ‘intended’ assertion was considered by the New
South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal in
the Court considered the application of
to a written impression on the
appellant’s notebook, which stated: ‘Am confident I have full story
after my conversations
with Mark in London; But must take Mark with me to ASC
otherwise will not be believed’. The appellant submitted, among other
things, that the note should be admitted as an implied assertion that a person
called Mark Booth existed and that the appellant had
met him in connection with
the relevant events. The prosecution’s case was that Hannes had done acts
in the name of the fictitious
Mark Booth.
7.23 In relation to whether such assertions should be considered as
‘intended’ for the purposes of
, Spigelman CJ stated
an implied assertion of a fact necessarily assumed in an intended express
assertion, may be said to be ‘contained’ within
that intention. For
much the same reasons, it is often said that a person intends the natural
consequences of his or her acts.
7.24 Spigelman CJ observed that, if the word ‘intended’ in
requires ‘some form of specific conscious advertence’ on
the part of the person making the representation, then ‘very
implied assertions considered in the case law and legal literature’ would
be included, because matters left to implication
are generally inconsistent with
that nothing in the ALRC Report or the text of the
Evidence Act 1995
(NSW) ‘suggests so restricted an operation for the hearsay rule under that
7.25 Spigelman CJ stated that it is arguable that the scope of the word
‘intended’ in s 59 ‘goes beyond the specific
subjectively adverted to by the author as being asserted by the words
used’ and that ‘it may encompass any fact
which is a necessary
assumption underlying the fact that the assertor does subjectively advert
While it was not
necessary to decide the question, the implication of this reasoning appears to
be that the previous representation
would be hearsay, if
offered to assert the existence of a person called Mark.
7.26 Stephen Odgers SC considers that the approach suggested by
Spigelman CJ should not be adopted. He states that the concern expressed
Spigelman CJ (about an overly restrictive interpretation of an
‘intended’ assertion) is ‘somewhat misplaced’
that, in these circumstances, the party arguing for admission of the evidence
would have to satisfy the court that the representation
to assert the existence of a
7.27 On the other hand, Gans and Palmer state that the wider meaning of the word
‘intended’ adopted by Spigelman CJ is
‘a desirable way of
achieving s 59(1)’s continuing rationale of ensuring that the
fact-finder is not exposed to the risk
of deliberate deception without the
assistance of the trial’s processes for assessing
witnesses’.
The United States
7.28 The distinction between intended and unintended assertions also arises
in the United States. The framing of s 59 was influenced
by the approach
taken in the United States
Federal Rules of
Rule 801 of
Federal Rules of Evidence
defines hearsay as:
a statement, other than one made by the declarant while testifying at the trial
or hearing, offered in evidence to prove the truth
of the matter asserted.
7.29 A ‘statement’ is defined as an oral or written assertion or
nonverbal conduct of a person, ‘if it is intended
by the person as an
assertion’.
The effect of
the definition of ‘statement’ is said to be to exclude from the
operation of the hearsay rule all evidence
of conduct, verbal or nonverbal, not
intended as an assertion. The key to the definition is that nothing is an
assertion unless intended
7.30 The commentary by the Advisory Committee on
states, with respect to
nonverbal conduct ‘offered as evidence that the person acted as he did
because of his belief in the
existence of the condition sought to be proved,
from which belief the existence of the condition may be inferred’,
while evidence of this character is untested with respect to the perception,
memory, and narration (or their equivalents) of the
actor, these dangers are
minimal in the absence of an intent to assert and do not justify the loss of the
evidence on hearsay grounds.
7.31 Similar considerations are said to govern non-assertive verbal
and verbal conduct
which is assertive, but offered as a basis for inferring something other than
the matter asserted.
evidence is also excluded from the definition of hearsay. Rule 801 is said
to place the burden upon the party claiming that
the intention existed, with
ambiguous and doubtful cases to be resolved in favour of
admissibility.
7.32 The distinction made by the
Federal Rules of Evidence
intended and unintended assertions has been criticised on the grounds that the
distinction results in the admission of unreliable
communications; requiring
intent to be shown unnecessarily complicates the hearsay rule; and because the
distinction between intended
and unintended communications has led to
inconsistencies in its application to unintended implications of
7.33 On the other hand, those who favour an intent-based approach to implied
assertions consider that hearsay risks are reduced greatly
where statements
intentionally asserting one thing are being used to prove something else that
the person was not trying to say.
That is, the person is unlikely to have
intended to mislead on matters that the person had no intention to communicate.
An intent-based
test also allows the hearsay rule to exclude statements that are
exaggerations, metaphor or sarcasm where these are offered to prove
the truth of
the implied and intended
7.34 Most United States commentators are said to favour an
‘intent-based’ approach toward implied
assertions.
The authors of the
Federal Rules of Evidence Manual
observe that an intent-based approach to
implied assertions is not free from difficulty:
There is some indeterminacy in the application of any intent-based test …
But any problem, we think, can be adequately handled
by an objective, rather
than subjective, test of intent. The question should be whether a reasonable
person making a statement such
as the declarant made would have intended to
communicate the implied assertion that the proponent is offering for its truth.
conduct, the burden should be placed on the nonoffering party to show
that the declarant had the intent to communicate the implied
7.35 There is much United States case law involving the distinction between
intended and unintended assertions, including in situations
not dissimilar from
that considered in
. For example, the
Federal Rules of Evidence
contrasts the outcomes in
United States v
United States v
United States v Weeks
, Weeks was charged with kidnapping. The
victims testified that their abductors used the names ‘Jimmy’ and
in addressing each other. To establish that Weeks was
‘Gato’, the prosecution called a witness who testified that he
heard others refer to Weeks as ‘Gato’ when they addressed him. The
United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit
held that evidence of these
out of court statements was properly admitted. It was not shown that these
persons were intending to
communicate an implied assertion that Weeks was
nicknamed ‘Gato’. It was more likely that they were trying to
communicate
other ideas, and were simply using ‘Gato’ as they would
any other name, that is, as a means of introduction or reference.
Therefore, the
statements were not hearsay.
7.37 In contrast, in
United States v Berrios
the prosecution had proof that a man named ‘Pablo’ was a drug
dealer, and sought to prove that the defendant went by
that nickname. The
defendant called a witness who would have testified that she was present at a
drug deal with her husband, and
her husband introduced her to the seller, saying
‘This is Pablo’. The witness would have testified that the person
as ‘Pablo’ was not the defendant. The United States Court
of Appeals for the First Circuit held that the out of court
statement of the
witness’ husband, ‘This is Pablo’, was properly excluded as
hearsay. The
Federal Rules of Evidence Manual
states that this is the
correct result because the intent of the husband was to assert to his wife that
the person went by the name
7.38 In the United States, the distinction between intended and unintended
assertions has been codified in the
Federal Evidence Code
since 1975, and
built on similar provisions in the
California Evidence Code
1965. While the matter has not been free of controversy, the Commissions’
survey of the American case law and commentary
tends to suggest that the United
States provisions have operated satisfactorily and courts have been able to
provide reasonably consistent
guidance on their interpretation.
7.39 The Commissions note that it seems more consistent with the reasoning in
these United States cases to conclude that, under an
objective test, the notes
contain an intended implied assertion that
‘Mark’ existed and was involved in the events of interest in the
notes would not be hearsay if offered as proof of these facts.
However, the prosecution could then raise the possibility of fabrication
support a contrary inference.
Submissions and
consultations
7.40 IP 28 asks whether concerns are raised by the application of
s 59 of the uniform Evidence Acts to previous representations containing
implied assertions and whether any such concerns should be addressed through
amendment of the uniform Evidence Acts, for example,
to clarify the meaning of
‘intended’ in relation to implied
assertions.
7.41 Some favour amending the uniform Evidence Acts to cover all express or
implied assertions
or to codify
the extended meaning given to the word ‘intended’ by
Spigelman CJ in
The Law Council
of Australia (Law Council) expresses concern that the existing uniform Evidence
Acts definition of hearsay means
ambiguous words and conduct containing unintended assertions of fact may fall
outside the prohibition and be admissible as relevant
evidence despite an
accused being denied an opportunity to cross-examine the maker of the
representation in an attempt to gauge what
was meant by it. If such evidence is
to be excluded an accused must persuade the court to exercise its exclusionary
discretion. In
the Council’s view this is inappropriate and the hearsay
prohibition should be drafted to cover all out of court assertions,
7.42 The Law Council states that, while a better position can be reached by
defining ‘intended’ to cover all facts necessarily
assumed in an
intended express assertion, in criminal proceedings, hearsay evidence should be
defined to encompass all out of court
assertions, express or implied, intended
or unintended, and whether made by words or conduct. Where this appears to
exclude probative
evidence it should be admitted through an exception to the
prohibition.
Others do not
consider that the existing provision can be improved in this
Commissions’ view
7.43 While s 59 does not apply to an unintended assertion so that
evidence of the representation may be received even though the maker
representation is not before the court, this is not inevitable because the
discretions contained in the uniform Evidence Acts
can still be used to exclude
the evidence.
7.44 In particular, if the judge takes the view that the assertion was not
intended and so is not excluded by the hearsay rule, the
opposing party can seek
to invoke s 135 to exclude the evidence where its probative value is
substantially outweighed by the danger
that the evidence might be unfairly
prejudicial to a party, misleading or confusing, or will cause or result in
undue waste of time.
7.45 The uncertainty of the common law had to be addressed by a definition.
The Acts’ definition may be the best that can be
provided. While the
definition raises its own issues, it is infinitely better than the present
common law uncertainty. Its interpretation
can be left to the courts and, in the
Commissions’ view, does not need further refinement.
7.46 As to the argument that the definition should apply to all express and
implied assertions, the ALRC put forward that proposal
early in its original
reference. It was demonstrated, however, that such an approach is too broad. In
ALRC 26, the problem was explained
as follows:
Every piece of human conduct is an assertion of something, even if it is only an
assertion by the actor that he intends to perform
the action that he is engaged
in. In many cases, evidence of intention or state of mind is not direct. The
intent or state of mind
is inferred or implied from the conduct engaged in by a
person. From that conduct the inference is drawn that the person intended
the act complained of. The result of including unintended implied assertions in
the definition may, therefore, be that the
hearsay proposal would embrace
evidence of relevant acts, however detailed and complicated they may be, because
it is sought to tender
such evidence to prove, inter alia, the intent or state
of mind of a relevant person … [T]rials could be seriously disrupted
much evidence excluded.
7.47 Similarly, there is a danger that the expansive interpretation proposed
by Spigelman CJ—that is, to encompass any fact
which is a ‘necessary
assumption underlying the fact that the assertor does subjectively advert
to’—would give
rise to considerable practical difficulties. There
are many such necessary assumptions implicit in any representation, whether
written or inferred from conduct.
7.48 The importance of grounding the concept of hearsay on a person’s
intention (purpose) in making a representation has been
recognised in recent
United Kingdom evidence legislation. Section 115(3) of the
Justice Act 2003
(UK) provides that the hearsay rule applies only to a
‘matter stated’ by a person, if the purpose was to cause another
person to believe the matter or act on the basis that the matter is as stated.
This reform was considered necessary, in part, because
of continuing
difficulties, at common law, in distinguishing between inadmissible implied
assertions and admissible ‘circumstantial
7.49 From one perspective, it is always possible
to identify one or more unintended assertions behind any express representation
the evidentiary relevance of such assertions may be difficult to
However, while there
will inevitably be occasions where it is uncertain whether an assertion is
intended, the Commissions do not
consider that any case has been made for
revisiting the policy basis of s 59.
7.50 It is suggested that an objective test of intention should be applied
for the purposes of s 59.
That is, the test should be based on what a person in the position of the maker
of the representation can reasonably be supposed
to have intended. The
surrounding circumstances in which the representation was made should be able to
be taken into account in applying
the test. The Commissions tentatively conclude
that the uniform Evidence Acts should provide expressly for a test of intention.
Commissions are interested in further comment on this issue and on the
proposed provision set out in Appendix 1.
Proposal 7–1
The uniform Evidence Acts
should be amended to provide expressly that, for the purposes of s 59, in
determining whether a person intended
to assert the existence of facts contained
in a previous representation, the test to be applied should be based on what a
in the position of the maker of the representation can reasonably be
supposed to have intended; and the court may take into account
the circumstances
in which the representation was made.
relevant to a non-hearsay purpose
7.51 At common law, where hearsay evidence is
admissible by virtue of its relevance for a non-hearsay purpose, the court is
not usually
permitted to use it for its hearsay purpose (that is, as proof of
the existence of a fact asserted by it). This applies, for example,
to evidence
of a prior statement of a witness inconsistent with the evidence of the witness.
By contrast, s 60 of the uniform Evidence
Acts provides that:
The hearsay rule does not apply to evidence of a previous representation that is
admitted because it is relevant for a purpose other
than proof of the fact
intended to be asserted by the representation.
7.52 This section applies where evidence is relevant for both a non-hearsay
and a hearsay purpose. The intention of s 60 was to enable
admitted for a non-hearsay purpose to be used to prove the truth of the facts
asserted in the representation, and to do
so whether or not the evidence is
first-hand or more remote hearsay, subject to the controls provided by
ss 135–137.
7.53 Given the emphasis in ALRC 38 on the application of s 60 to
evidence admitted as to the factual basis of expert opinion, it is
difficult to
argue that s 60 is not intended to apply to second-hand
Further, ALRC 38
gives detailed consideration to the policy distinctions between first-hand and
more remote hearsay. Section 60 could
have been drafted as an exception
applicable only to first-hand hearsay if this had been the intention. Instead,
it was intended
that s 60 have broad operation, subject to the residual
discretions to exclude or limit the use of evidence.
7.54 Reliance was placed on the discretionary provisions to control the
admissibility and use of such evidence because the conclusion
was reached that
rules do not provide a satisfactory approach. The change made to the law was
significant and remains so.
7.55 Several issues arise. First, the s 60 approach was and remains
controversial and its operation requires careful review. In addition,
Lee v The Queen
has construed s 60 in such a way as to limit its operation. The
implications of that decision require examination. Generally, in
considering
these matters, it is important to identify and review the reasons for the
enactment of s 60.
Areas to be
addressed by s 60
7.56 In recommending the enactment of a similar provision, the ALRC
identified two major areas where difficulties arose from the
principle that evidence relevant and admissible for a non-hearsay purpose, but
also a hearsay purpose, could not be used
for the hearsay purpose. They are:
• prior consistent and inconsistent statements; and
• the factual basis of an expert’s
Prior consistent and inconsistent
7.57 At common law, a prior statement of a witness can be used, in
prescribed circumstances, for the purpose of deciding whether
to believe the
witness but cannot be used for the purpose of deciding the truth of the facts
asserted in the statement. Extensive
criticism of this situation was identified
in ALRC 26.
focused on the following:
• the exclusion of probative
• the extreme difficulty, if not impossibility, of making the required
distinction;
• the undesirability of proceeding on the assumption that such a
distinction can be made;
• the difficulty juries have in understanding directions that have to
be given to give effect to the distinction; and
• the questionable reasoning involved in the distinction.
7.58 As to the latter, Justice Roden was quoted in ALRC 26 as providing
the following comments in relation to prior inconsistent and
prior consistent
statements respectively. In relation to prior inconsistent statements:
Illustration:
Evidence in Court: ‘I was there; I saw it happen’
Cross-examination: ‘Did you not say on a prior occasion, “I was
not there; I didn't see it happen”?’
Force of Rule: If the prior statement is admitted, or is denied but
independently proved, then, subject to considering any explanation
given by the
(a) that statement may be taken as making it less likely that the witness was
there and saw it happen (ie may be used to lessen
the weight to be given to his
testimony), but
(b) it may not be used as rendering it more likely that he was not there and did
not see it happen (ie may not be used as evidence
of the truth of the prior
statement).
7.59 In relation to prior consistent statements, a consequence of the common
law distinction is that, while a prior statement which
is adverse to a
party’s evidence is admissible as evidence of the facts stated in it, a
prior statement consistent with that
evidence which can be used to meet the
attack based on the prior adverse statements, cannot be used to confirm the
evidence. Justice
Roden commented:
The prior consistent statement is only admissible in special circumstances, and
then again not as evidence of the truth of its contents.
When it is introduced,
eg in answer to a suggestion of recent invention, it can so back-date any
‘invention’ to make
invention at any time unlikely. The effect must
be, it seems to me, to make it more likely that the evidence was truthful, and
the evidence and prior statement was to the same effect (as the term
‘consistent’ seems to require), then the statement
is being used as
evidence of the truth of its
7.60 For many years, the law in Queensland and Tasmania has been that
evidence of prior consistent and inconsistent statements is
admissible as
evidence of the truth of the facts
The Commissions are not
aware of any significant criticisms of the operation of those provisions. One
solution is to enact such provisions;
but there is another major area of
evidence to be considered—the factual basis of expert opinion
Factual basis of expert opinion
7.61 An expert’s opinion involves the application of the expert’s
special knowledge to relevant facts. At common law,
if those facts are observed
by the expert, he or she can give evidence to prove those facts. Typically,
however, the expert relies
upon statements made to him or her by others about
their observations of the relevant facts together with a wide range of factual
information from more remote sources. These can range widely and include:
• statements to a medical expert by a person injured about the
circumstances in which the injury was suffered and the subsequent
progress of
those injuries and past and present symptoms;
• information gathered by an expert valuer from a variety of people
at which they were
• information gathered by accountants and auditors for the purpose of
expert testimony from financial records and other sources
and people for the
purpose of expressing opinions about the financial position or the management of
and other matters;
• knowledge acquired by experts from reading the work of other experts and
discussion with them;
• the reported data of fellow experts relied upon by such persons as scientists
and technical experts in giving expert opinion
• factual material commonly relied upon in a particular industry or trade or
• information about the expert’s qualifications; and
• information received in the course of gaining experience upon which an
expertise is said to be based.
7.62 The common law, and the uniform Evidence
require that the facts and
factual assumptions made and relied upon be sufficiently identified and evidence
of such matters is relevant
for that purpose. The common law hearsay rule,
however, can be used to prevent the expert’s evidence on these matters
used to prove the truth of the facts relied upon. Necessity has resulted
in some ill-defined exceptions being created to cover at
• the accumulated knowledge acquired by the expert;
• the reported data of other experts; and
• information commonly relied on in a particular industry trade or
7.63 In commenting on the law allowing expert scientists to give evidence
The data of every science are enormous in scope and variety. No one
professional man can know from personal observation more than
a minute fraction
of the data which he must everyday treat as working truths. Hence reliance on
the reported data of fellow-scientists,
learned by perusing their reports in
books and journals. The law must and does accept this kind of knowledge from
men. On the one hand, a mere layman, who comes to court and alleges a
fact which he has learned only by reading a medical or
a mathematical book,
cannot be heard. But, on the other hand, to reject a professional physician or
mathematician because
the facts or some facts to which he testifies are known to
him only upon the authority of others would be to ignore the accepted
professional work and to insist on finical and impossible standards. Yet it is
not easy to express in usable form
that element of professional competency which
distinguishes the latter case from the former. In general, the considerations
which define the professional are (a) a professional experience, giving the
witness a knowledge of the trustworthy authorities
and the proper source of
information, (b) an extent of personal observation in the general subject,
enabling him to estimate
the general plausibility, or probability of soundness,
of the views expressed, and (c) the impossibility of obtaining information
the particular technical detail except through the reported data in part or
entirely. The true solution must be to trust
the discretion of the trial judge,
exercised in the light of the nature of the subject and the witness’ equipments. The
decisions show in general a liberal attitude in receiving
technical testimony based on professional
7.64 While these remarks were made in the context of expert scientists giving
evidence, the same issues arise in most areas of expertise
and the analysis is
equally applicable in those areas. It should be noted that Wigmore thought the
issues were best dealt with by
the exercise of discretion of the trial
7.65 Wigmore also maintained that the hearsay rule does not apply to certain
information commonly relied on in an industry, trade
or calling; for example,
mortality tables, the British Pharmacopoeia, or the
Prescription
Proprietaries Guide
exception was described in the following way:
In a few narrow and usually well-defined classes of cases, recognition has been
given, by way of exception to the hearsay rule, to
certain commercial and
professional lists, registers and reports … The necessity in all of these
cases lies partly in the usual
inaccessibility of the authors, compilers or
publishes in other jurisdictions; but chiefly in the great practical
inconvenience that
would be caused if the law required the summoning of each
individual whose personal knowledge has gone to make up the final
7.66 In common law jurisdictions, the hearsay issues that exist in relation
to the above material rarely seem to be raised in trials.
Attention tends to
focus on the admissibility of the evidence of an expert as to statements made to
the expert about relevant facts
in the case. Even as to such evidence, parties
do not insist upon a strict application of the hearsay rule in every case. Where
facts that are the subject of such evidence are not in dispute, issue will
usually not be taken. Issue tends to be taken where:
• the facts are significant and in dispute or there is a forensic
advantage to be gained by taking a technical objection; and
• direct evidence has not been, and will not be, called about those
facts by the party relying upon the evidence of the expert.
7.67 But direct evidence is normally called. The forensic reality is that it
is extremely important that the party relying upon the
evidence of the expert
calls direct evidence of the significant facts upon which the expert relies. A
failure to prove significant
facts may result in the exclusion of the opinion
evidence or at least a significant reduction in the weight given to it. Further,
the failure to call witnesses who can give direct evidence, especially the
plaintiff, will give rise to trenchant criticism and adverse
inferences, at
least in civil cases.
7.68 It should be noted that, at common law, a failure to prove significant
facts will not necessarily result in the evidence of opinion
being excluded.
There is no strict ‘basis rule’ at common law. The common law does
not require that every fact relied
upon by an expert be proved by admissible
The law was stated by
the High Court in
Paric v John Holland (Constructions) Pty
which held that, while
the facts upon which an expert medical opinion is based must be proved by
admissible evidence to be of any
value, that does not mean that the facts proved
must correspond with complete precision to the proposition on which the opinion
based. Rather, it is a question of fact whether the case supposed is
sufficiently like the one under consideration to render the
opinion of the
expert of any value.
Makita (Australia) Pty Ltd v Sprowles
, Heydon JA, in referring to
the common law, said that:
Complete precision in proof of facts intended to support the assumptions of an
expert is not called for; it is enough if the case
proved is sufficiently like
the case assumed to render the expert’s opinion
7.69 At common law, therefore, expert opinion evidence may be received even
though some of the facts relied upon have not been established
evidence. The question is one of degree. If important facts are not established
and, as a result, the opinion lacks probative
value, it can be excluded at
common law, for it will not be sufficiently
Under the uniform
Evidence Acts it can also be excluded in such circumstances by
This can occur even
if s 136 has not been used to limit the hearsay use of evidence that
s 60 would otherwise allow—its probative
value will be affected by
the lack of direct evidence and adverse inferences may arise because direct
evidence has not been called.
7.70 Therefore, notwithstanding the absence of a strict basis rule, under
both the common law and the uniform Evidence Acts there
is considerable forensic
pressure to prove the factual basis of the opinion by direct evidence. As noted
above, this also minimises
the occasions on which issues will arise about the
use of the expert’s evidence in relation to the factual basis of his or
her opinion.
7.71 Turning to the operation of s 60, the first issue to review is the
effect of its interpretation by the High Court. It will then
be necessary to
consider the experience of the application of s 60, and the residuary
discretions, in the courts.
v The Queen
: limiting the operation of s 60
the High Court
confirmed that s 60 is intended to change considerably the common law by
allowing what would otherwise be hearsay evidence
to be admitted. However, the
High Court identified an important limitation on the operation of s 60.
7.73 At trial, the Crown led a prior inconsistent statement of a witness
(Calin) in which he described the defendant (Lee) walking
up the street near the
scene of a robbery and making an admission about the robbery, stating
‘… leave me alone, cause
I’m running because I fired two shots
… I did a job and the other guy was with me bailed out’. The
evidence of
this out of court statement was given by the police officer who took
the statement because, at trial, Calin said that he could not
conversation and had not read or understood the prior statement. The statement
was relevant to Calin’s credibility
(as evidence of a prior inconsistent
statement). The High Court took the view that Calin may be taken as having
intended to assert
that he had heard Lee say the words attributed to him but did
not intend to assert the truth of what Lee had said.
7.74 The High Court held that s 60 did not lift the operation of the
hearsay rule in respect of the evidence of the prior statement
(orally from the
police officer or the written statement of Calin). The reasoning supporting that
conclusion, however, is subtle
and complex and commentators have found the
precise scope of the decision difficult to determine. In essence, the reasoning
to have been that s 60 does not convert evidence of what was said
out of court into evidence of some fact that the person speaking
out of court
did not intend to assert.
Section 60 operates only on representations that are excluded by s 59.
Therefore, s 60 did not allow the witness’ previous
statement to be
used as evidence of an admission by the defendant, the facts of which the
witness, Calin, never intended to assert.
7.75 The High Court may have been concerned about the possibility of such
evidence being admitted under the uniform Evidence Acts,
and about the potential
width of operation of s 60 if it was not confined. The power to exclude in
s 137 of the uniform Evidence
Acts provides another means of dealing with
these concerns. However, while the High Court noted
it relied on an
interpretation of s 60 itself. A number of difficulties flow from the
approach taken. The first concerns the difficulty
of determining the scope of
the decision.
Cross on Evidence
as confirming that:
since s 60 is an exception to s 59 and s 59(1) prevents the
admission of previous representations of a fact which the representor
to assert, s 60 operates only on evidence of such representations; it does
not convert evidence of what was said, out of
court, into evidence of what the
person speaking out of court did not intend to
7.77 Peter Bayne states:
The court held that s 60 does not permit evidence of a previous
representation made by A, which reports something said to A by B,
to be used as
proof of the existence of any fact asserted by B to A … Section 60
operates only on A’s representation,
and it is argued that A cannot have
intended to assert the existence of the fact asserted by
7.78 Another formulation is that
decided that s 60 excludes
the hearsay rule only in respect of a representation that is relevant for a
non-hearsay purpose because
of the intended assertion of fact in the
representation.
7.79 A difficulty with these interpretations is that they do not fit
comfortably with the wording of s 60. By its terms, s 60 operates
lift the hearsay rule, not by reference to the assertion that attracts the
hearsay rule, but by express reference to the evidence
of the representation
which has been admitted for the non-hearsay purpose.
7.80 There may be a further consequence of the approach taken in
Section 59 does not apply to evidence of a representation if tendered to
prove the existence of a fact that the person did not intend
Accepting that Calin did not intend to assert as a fact that Lee had run away
from ‘a job’ in which he had
‘fired two shots’, it may
nevertheless be argued that the evidence of what was said to Calin by Lee was
relevant to prove
the facts unintentionally asserted by Calin because, if
accepted, it was capable of affecting the probability that such facts
occur. However, analysed in that way, the evidence was not caught by
s 59 in the first place and, subject to ss 135–137, was
admissible to prove the facts.
7.81 It has also been said that the High Court held that, for the purposes
of ss 59 and 60, a person cannot be taken to have intended
to assert the
truth of facts of which they have no personal knowledge. However, this reasoning
has been criticised as, in reality,
people often intend to assert the truth of
facts related to them by
Lee v The Queen
has been followed in subsequent cases by applying
s 60 to prior out of court
statements.
For example,
involves a previous
statement by a witness in a murder case containing various representations about
what she said the appellant
had told her. An example was a representation that
the victim’s wife had wanted her husband killed and that she was paying
the appellant to do it. At trial the witness gave a version of the relevant
events totally at odds with her previous statement. Applying
South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal held that these statements should not have
been admitted as evidence of the truth of
the statements made to Mrs Glasby
by the appellant.
7.83 It is unclear whether and how the decision in
applies in other
situations. For example, a medical history given to a doctor by a patient and
used in the doctor’s expert
report may be admissible under s 60 as
evidence of the truth of the facts—subject to the discretions. But a
similar medical
history given to the doctor by the patient’s guardian, or
based on the reports of other medical experts, may not be so admissible.
was not concerned with the question of second-hand hearsay
generally. Rather, the High Court was dealing with the question of evidence
prior statements relevant to the issue of credibility which contained both
first-hand and second-hand material and identifying
the principle to be applied
in determining whether s 60 operated in that situation. Nonetheless, the
decision in
is often said to have the result that s 60 cannot
apply to second-hand or more remote hearsay evidence. This, of course, would
it applying to an expert’s evidence of the basis of his or her
opinion which is more remote than first-hand hearsay—such
as accumulated
knowledge, recorded data, and other factual material commonly relied upon by
people with the same expertise. IP 28
notes, however, that, in practice,
the decision in
does not appear to have prevented the application of
s 60 to second-hand hearsay evidence relied upon by
7.85 The implications of the decision in
for the admission of facts
upon which expert opinions are based are unclear. Applying the analysis outlined
above, which turns on
the question of what was the intended
representation,
the question to
be asked would arguably be—what fact or facts did the person or persons
making the previous representation
to the expert intend to assert? Even if the
previous representations are intended to pass on the representations of others,
may well be intended to assert facts on which the expert will base his or
her opinion. That is what the expert is seeking from those
representations. The expert will assess the representations of fact and may
proceed on the basis that he or she accepts
them as stating the facts. On that
analysis, s 60 could commonly apply to the expert’s evidence of the
previous first-hand
and more remote representations on which his or her opinion
has been formed; for they are relevant for a non-hearsay purpose (establishing
the basis of the opinion) and the facts intended to be asserted to the expert
are relevant for that
7.86 An alternative analysis of the factual basis of the expert’s opinion
was advanced in
Sperling J. He advanced the argument that the history obtained by an expert
is admissible only to enable the court to know the
assumptions on which the
opinion is based. Sperling J argued that the source of those assumptions is
immaterial.
The only question is
whether the assumptions are sufficiently in accord with the facts of the case to
render the opinion based on
them relevant evidence. Sperling J reasoned,
therefore, that the medical history was not a representation that was relevant
purpose ‘other than proof of the fact intended to be asserted’
and, therefore, s 60 did not apply.
7.87 It may be argued, however, that the source of an expert’s assumptions
is relevant because not only can it affect the probative
value of the opinion,
it can also assist in assessing the level of judgment exercised by the expert in
accepting the assumptions.
It may also be relevant to the conduct of civil
trials because, if a party has not called evidence from the source of an
assumptions, this may lead to an inference that the
source’s testimony would not have assisted the party’s
The Commissions take the
view, however, that evidence of an expert of representations of facts on which
the expert has relied will,
if accepted, be capable of affecting the assessment
of the probability of existence of those facts within the meaning of
7.88 Another issue referred to in IP 28 is whether different results may
follow under s 60 depending on whether the expert gives evidence
factual basis of a report in the form of a representation or in the form of an
assumption.
Section 60 does
not apply to assumptions, only to representations. In
Quick v Stoland
Branson J stated that if s 60 operates to ‘give mere form
significance in this way, the result cannot be regarded as entirely
satisfactory’.
7.89 However, Heydon J has observed that the difference between a
representation and an assumption is more than a matter of mere form
and that it
would be perjury for an expert to state as a representation (from a person with
knowledge of the facts) what were only
assumptions put to the expert, in an
attempt to gain an advantage from
Sperling J,
after expressing a similar concern to that of Branson J, also stated that,
if the facts are contentious ‘it will
ordinarily be unfair that the
opposite party is fixed with assumption evidence as evidence of the truth of the
facts stated by reason
of those facts having been stated in one form rather than
the other’.
suggested, however, that the critical question is whether the controls provided
by ss 135 and 136, in particular, provide a
satisfactory mechanism to
protect the fact-finding process and fair trial of the party against whom the
evidence is led.
7.90 Returning to the implications of the decision in
unsatisfactory and contrary to the aims of the uniform Evidence Acts to have
uncertainty as to the meaning and scope of any
provision, especially a provision
as important as s 60. Decisions must be made as to whether it should be
retained and, if so, as
to what hearsay evidence it should apply. In making such
decisions, it is critical to consider the experience of the section and
views expressed in consultations and submissions. Particular attention was
focused on the operation of s 60 in relation to evidence
of experts about
the factual basis of their opinions. The consultations and submissions also
point to judges and counsel relying
on the application of the discretionary
provisions to restrict the use of such evidence or on the judge’s judgment
weight to be given to the evidence, rather than focusing on the
interpretation of s 60 itself.
and the factual basis of expert opinion
7.91 The operation of s 60 in cases involving expert opinion evidence
has been criticised. As has been discussed, under s 60, evidence
statements made to an expert or other data upon which the expert’s opinion
is based, may be admitted to prove the facts
contained in the statements or
data, subject to ss 135 and 137. At the same time, the operation of
s 60 will often give rise to questions
exercise the general discretion contained in s 136 to limit the use to be
made of the evidence to a
non-hearsay
7.92 For example, an accountant’s expert report may summarise the
contents of financial records not otherwise received in evidence.
Such evidence
has been held admissible on the basis that its purpose is to establish the
factual basis upon which the expert held
the opinions expressed in the report.
Evidence of the factual basis of the expert’s opinion can also be relevant
as evidence
of the truth of that factual
Similarly, s 60 of
the uniform Evidence Acts may operate (subject to other provisions of the Acts,
including the discretions to exclude)
so as to lift the hearsay rule from a
medical history taken by a doctor from a patient, and upon which the doctor
bases his or her
expert opinion.
7.93 The operation of s 60 in this context has been identified as an
area of particular concern. In
commented on the dangers of allowing medical histories to be used as evidence of
the facts they contain. The trial judge
directed the jury that evidence of
sexual assault contained in the medical history could be used as evidence of the
facts stated
in the complaint. On appeal, Sperling J considered whether the
evidence might have been admissible under s 60, but stated that such
outcome would be ‘so patently contrary to sound fact finding that it
cannot have been intended as a matter of legislative
He expressed
concern that unsworn and untested histories may be able to go into evidence in
criminal trials as evidence of the fact,
to support cases of diminished
responsibility and defences of mental illness—and it may not matter who
gives the history to
the medical
practitioner.
Further, in his
view, the ‘limited discretionary powers in ss 135–137 are not a
complete answer’.
7.94 This issue is part of more general concerns about control of expert
opinion evidence under the uniform Evidence Acts. These concerns
also arise in
common law jurisdictions and various steps have been taken to address them. The
provisions of the uniform Evidence
Acts which regulate the admission of expert
opinion evidence are discussed in detail in Chapter 8.
7.95 The relevant issue in this chapter relates to the controls provided by
the uniform Evidence Acts over the admissibility of the
evidence concerning the
factual basis of an expert’s opinion. The Commissions see this issue as
one of the most significant
in this reference.
Section 60 and
the discretionary provisions
7.96 A key issue is the extent to which the discretionary provisions of the
uniform Evidence Acts are capable of addressing concerns
raised about the
operation of s 60. Under ss 135–137 of the uniform Evidence
Acts, evidence may be excluded or its use limited
by reference, in particular,
to the concept of ‘unfair prejudice’ to a
7.97 Section 136 is of particular significance because it permits the
use of the evidence to be limited if there is the danger that
that use might
cause unfair prejudice to a party or be misleading or confusing.
notes that s 60
cuts across the careful statutory scheme [of the uniform Evidence Acts] creating
a series of discriminatingly drafted hearsay exceptions
in ss 62–75:
the qualifications they apply do not apply to s 60. It is likely that wide
attempted reliance on s 60 will have
to be controlled by orders under
s 136 … ‘although the narrowness of that provision does not
provide much of a safety
7.98 The relationship between s 60 and s 136 was discussed in
Roach v Page (No.11)
Sperling J stated that an inability to test the truth of a previous
representation is a legitimate ground for rejecting or limiting
evidence which is covered by an exception to the hearsay rule and that, where
the maker of a previous representation is
available and the party tendering the
evidence does not call the person, that is a legitimate consideration in favour
of a finding
of unfair prejudice.
7.99 In addition, Sperling J said that s 60 gives rise to special
considerations because, unlike other exceptions to the hearsay rule,
the objective of s 60 to facilitate proof but rather to avoid a distinction
having to be made about evidence being used
for one purpose and not for
Representations of fact become evidence of the truth of the representation,
irrespective of whether they are first-hand or remote
hearsay and irrespective
of whether the source of the information is disclosed. Representations of expert
opinion in the document
are probative of whatever is the subject of the opinion
expressed, irrespective of whether the author of the document is qualified
express the opinion and irrespective of whether the assumptions made for the
purpose of expressing the opinion are specified.
Such consequences cannot have
been intended where the opposite party is disadvantaged by such consequences.
Section 136 serves to
unfairness.
7.100 Sperling J also stated that, where s 60 operates, and the
truth of facts stated cannot be tested by cross-examination, the consequence
admission of the evidence is ‘potentially the more unfair on that
Submissions and consultations
7.101 IP 28 seeks specific comment on the concerns raised by the
operation of s 60 in relation to the admissibility of the factual
expert opinion evidence.
particular, IP 28 notes suggestions that s 136 should be used more
often to limit the use to be made of evidence admitted for
a non-hearsay
7.102 Judicial officers, legal practitioners and academics, however, provide
a range of perspectives on the use of s 136 in this context.
concerns about whether s 136, as presently drafted, provides adequate
grounds on which to exclude evidence admissible under
s 60. Comments
include that resolving problems created by the breadth of s 60 through the
exercise of s 136 is unnecessarily complicated
‘inelegant’
overly dependent on the judicial
7.103 Some New South Wales Crown Prosecutors note that psychiatric opinion evidence
may be given by an expert who has interviewed
the accused and based on a history
given to the expert by the accused. The evidence of the accused’s history
may be admissible
under s 60, despite being untested. Different approaches
are taken. In some cases judges will not allow the evidence to be given
prevent the use of the history as evidence of the facts using s 136. In
others the evidence may be admitted but the jury’s
attention is drawn to
the fact that the evidence has not been tested. Some Crown prosecutors express
concern that, while some judges
exercise the discretion to limit the use of
evidence under s 136, this does not occur often enough and suggest that,
unless the accused
is prepared to be cross-examined on this history, the use of
this evidence should be
7.104 It may be difficult in practice to seek and obtain rulings under
s 136 in civil cases where large volumes of documents are admitted
evidence, for example, as proof of the record before the decision maker in
public law cases. Similarly, the Queensland Bar Association
notes that it is not
uncommon in civil cases for bundles of correspondence, containing a multitude of
representations, to be led
as evidence of the fact of communication between
parties. In these circumstances it is said that it can be impractical to seek
under s 136, with uncertain effects for the conduct of litigation
if admissible hearsay contained in the documents comes to have
evidentiary
significance that was not recognised earlier.
7.105 On the other hand, in relation to expert opinion evidence given in
native title proceedings, the State of South Australia submits
that the concerns
raised by the operation of s 60 can be adequately addressed by the
discretions in ss 135–136 and as matters
7.106 In addition, the New South Wales Director of Public Prosecutions
(DPP NSW) states that the discretion in s 136 is capable of
any concerns raised by the operation of s 60 in relation to prior
inconsistent statements and the factual basis of expert
Some judges and
practitioners state that it is standard practice for counsel to seek a ruling
under s 136 to limit the use of factual
evidence in expert reports, for
example, medical history information. It is said that judges routinely apply
s 136 in such cases
or, alternatively, rule that objections will affect the
weight to be given to the evidence admitted under
Some judges and
practitioners suggest that it is more typical, at least in civil proceedings,
for the evidence to be admitted with
the parties understanding that, unless the
facts are proven, the opinion of an expert will be given little, if any, weight
Parties often
consider that it is unnecessary to seek formal rulings under s 136 to
constrain the use of such evidence.
7.107 In family law proceedings, it is generally accepted that, despite
s 60, the factual basis of expert and other reports introduced
evidence have to be independently proven because s 136 will be applied to
limit their use.
However, it
is suggested that some counsel may not be sufficiently prepared to be able to
introduce the evidence used by the expert,
such as Department of Community
Services files, police and criminal records and so on.
7.108 IP 28 asks whether s 60 should apply to second-hand hearsay
evidence admitted for a non-hearsay purpose or have its operation
first-hand hearsay, as many suggest is the case under
generally, IP 28 asks whether the operation of s 60 in this regard
should be clarified or modified through amendment of the
uniform Evidence
Submissions and consultations
7.109 Submissions and consultations indicate a significant degree of concern
varies. While
some question the underlying rationale of s 60, others have concerns
relevant primarily to specific contexts. There
is some support for
or narrowing the
ambit of s 60.
7.110 Peter Bayne suggests that the only real rationale for s 60 is to
remove the need to direct juries on permissible uses of admitted
evidence and
that, as juries are readily capable of understanding such directions, s 60
serves no useful purpose and should be
7.111 The New South Wales Public Defenders Office (NSW PDO) expresses concern about
the role of s 60 in allowing records of interview
of unwilling witnesses to
be admitted where the accused cannot effectively cross-examine. The NSW PDO
observes that:
The justification for s 60 was said to be that juries could not understand
the direction given at common law that a prior inconsistent
statement of a
witness could not be used as evidence of the fact unless the witness accepted it
as the truth. This argument underestimates
the intelligence of juries. Other
parts of the Act assume that juries are capable of understanding that evidence
can be used in one
way but not another, including s 136 (limiting the use
of evidence) and s 95 (evidence not admitted to prove tendency or
co-incidence
cannot be used for that
7.112 Concerns are also expressed that s 60 tends to expand
unproductively the evidence in criminal trials—in particular, by
complainants and accused persons to introduce prior (and possibly self-serving)
statements as evidence of the truth of their
It is suggested
that evidence should be admitted under s 60 by leave
7.113 With reference to expert evidence given during native title
proceedings, the State of South Australia submits that the operation
should be limited to first-hand hearsay and supports an amendment to clarify the
scope of s 60 to this
7.114 Others suggest that s 60 should not operate in relation to the factual
basis of expert opinion
or should be amended
to adopt expressly the High Court’s approach in
suggestion is that, if retained, s 60 should operate only where the
non-hearsay purpose is
credibility-related,
example, in respect to prior inconsistent
statements.
7.115 The Law Council submits that, while the s 60 exception may be justified
in the case of prior statements of a
there is no
justification other than convenience in the case of hearsay evidence providing
the factual basis for an expert report.
The Council does not believe this is a
sufficient basis to admit hearsay evidence in criminal proceedings and expresses
that hearsay evidence tendered against an accused should be excluded,
unless one of the specific first-hand hearsay exceptions applies.
7.116 Andrew Palmer suggests that, if s 60 is to be retained, the party
seeking the admission of evidence under s 60 should have the
showing that the evidence has probative
Other submissions
state that the operation of s 60 should be clarified, without taking a
position on whether or not its application
should be limited to first-hand
Commissions’ view
7.117 The Commissions are of the view that
is not consistent with
the intention or the scheme of the uniform Evidence
and is contrary to the
original intention of the proposals in
In addition,
the decision has created confusion and uncertainty about the operation of
s 60. The uncertainty about its scope creates
major problems for the future
application of the uniform Evidence Acts unless its consequences are addressed
by amendment. The distinctions
introduced by it also run counter to one of the
major aims of the Acts, which was to remove technicality and to simplify the
and operation of rules of evidence.
7.118 The Commissions’ view is that this situation should be remedied
by amendment of the uniform Evidence Acts. There are several
options. The
uniform Evidence Acts could be amended to codify and clarify the effect of the
High Court’s interpretation of
; or conversely, to
overrule that decision and confirm that s 60 is not subject to the
limitations identified in
. The formulation of both options is
complicated by the difficulty of determining the precise ratio of
7.119 Assuming that the former option would involve limiting the operation of
s 60 to first-hand hearsay, the simplest way to achieve
this, without
introducing any new complexity, may be to relocate s 60 to the first-hand
hearsay exceptions found in Division 2 of
Part 3.2 of the uniform Evidence
7.120 Overruling
would involve ensuring that s 60 does apply
to second-hand and more remote hearsay. Such an amendment would need to be
drafted because, as discussed above, the decision in
based solely on a reading of s 60. It also rests on the High Court’s
interpretation of the relationship between s 60
and the hearsay rule in
s 59 and, in particular, limiting the application of s 60 to the
representations that are relevant for the
non-hearsay purpose (credibility).
Therefore, a simple legislative statement that s 60 also applies to
second-hand hearsay may not
be sufficient to change how s 60 is
The Commissions’ proposal
7.121 The Commissions’ view is that the uniform Evidence Acts should be
amended to confirm the original position that s 60 applies
to first-hand
and more remote hearsay, subject only to the residual discretions to exclude or
limit the use of evidence. In substance,
the proposal is intended to override
the effect of the decision in
. The Commissions invite comment on how
this may best be done and on the proposed provision set out in
Appendix 1.
7.122 As discussed above, there has been much criticism, expressed in
consultations and submissions, about the extended operation
However, it is noticeable that much of the concern about the operation of
s 60 appears to assume that the evidence is admissible
to prove the truth
of the facts asserted once s 60 is applied. The evidence, however, is not
admissible for that purpose unless ss
135–137 are not invoked or, if
invoked, are satisfied. In addition, at times the objectives have been
identified in narrower
terms than are the case. Some concerns, such as those
raised about the handling of opinion evidence in civil cases which involve
volumes of documents, apply equally in common law jurisdictions.
7.123 The challenge is to provide the most satisfactory solution in a
situation where there is no perfect solution. Where alternatives
suggested in consultations and submissions, they do not satisfactorily address
the relevant policy considerations or the
covered by any proposal. None addresses the practical problems, such as
providing a satisfactory
statutory exception to the hearsay rule covering all
aspects of the factual basis of expert opinions.
7.124 The Commissions’ view is that the policy framework and reasons
advanced for the uniform Evidence Acts’ approach
to s 60 remain valid
and should still be accepted. The ALRC in formulating its approach, involving a
combination of s 60 and ss 135–137,
commented that its
enables simpler rules and simpler operation of the law … The proposal
avoids the need to create a multiplicity of complex exceptions
dealing with, for
example, the factual material normally relied on by experts. Controls remain,
however, and in appropriate cases,
the evidence can be
7.125 The reasons for the approach taken in the uniform Evidence Acts remain
valid and flow from the policy framework. The alternatives
unsatisfactory or would effectively replicate what the uniform Evidence Acts
provide. For example, in dealing with the
factual basis of expert opinion
evidence, one option would be to make exceptions for specific categories of
information. This, however,
would be likely to result in the exclusion of
hearsay that should not be excluded. As Wigmore emphasised, flexibility is
In addition, specifying exceptions which identify categories of
information will only encourage the taking of technical and strategic
objections.
7.126 Another alternative would be to take a more general approach and
address issues of the kind identified by Wigmore, such as the
reliability of the
selection of the information by the expert and the difficulty of otherwise
obtaining it. Such an approach would
require the court to consider the need for
the evidence, the reliability of the evidence and any unfair prejudice to the
party against
whom it is led. These matters are already covered by ss 135
and 137. In those cases where there is an issue about a fact which is
subject of a statement to the expert on which the expert relies, and no direct
evidence is foreshadowed or called, s 136 can
also be used when appropriate
to limit the use—as apparently now occurs.
7.127 As discussed above, the starting point used in framing the ALRC’s
hearsay proposals was the proposition that the ‘best
available’ to a party should be
In many instances,
evidence covered by s 60 will be the best available evidence—although
views may differ.
7.128 For example, it is arguable that the evidence excluded in
best available evidence. In
, Calin’s previous statement was
made to the police and recorded by them shortly after the incident and,
arguably, was likely
to be more accurate than any evidence given at the trial.
The High Court accepted that the effect of s 60 was that Calin’s
assertions about what he saw could be used for a hearsay
—but it has been
argued that what Calin said in this regard is no less or more reliable than what
he said Lee had said.
does not appear to have been any evidence that suggested that Calin was himself
a suspect, or that there was anything untoward
in the recording of the
statement. There was evidence, however, that the reason he had changed his
evidence was that he was in fear,
having been accused of being a
‘dog’. If this was so, then the court was being deprived of evidence
by improper pressure
on the witness.
7.129 As to minimising the risk of wrongful conviction and ensuring a fair
trial, arguably what is critical is that the accused be
able to test the
evidence. In the
trial, for example, this required that both Calin
and the police be available to be cross-examined. They were so available.
7.130 Cost and time is another consideration. In most cases, the evidence the
subject of s 60 will be led and tested in the ordinary
way in any event,
because it will be relevant for a non-hearsay purpose. It must be acknowledged,
however, that, if allowed to be
used for a hearsay purpose, time and costs may
be added marginally because in some cases more time and costs may be devoted to
the evidence by cross-examination if the evidence is admissible for a
hearsay purpose.
7.131 Finally, a policy consideration of particular concern in the present
context is the quality of the rules of evidence. Anomalies,
technicalities,
rigidity and obscurity in the rules lessen the credibility and acceptability of
the trial system and should be avoided.
7.132 In determining the approach to be taken, it is important to bear in
mind that a viable alternative in many cases is to admit
the evidence in
question for a hearsay purpose and to take into account any weaknesses it may
have when deciding what weight to give
to it. It is also important to consider
the extent and frequency of the use of s 60—and that of
ss 135–137.
7.133 As to the last mentioned issue, there are concerns in relation to
evidence of prior consistent and inconsistent statements concerning
issue which are also relevant to the credibility of the witness. As presently
s 102 and the
other credibility rules do not apply to control and limit the admissibility of
such evidence. However, proposals are
advanced in Chapter 11 to ensure that
this evidence is subject to the credibility evidence regime set out in
Chapter 3.7 of the uniform
Evidence Acts.
7.134 In considering the scope and frequency of the operation of s 60 in
relation to the factual basis of expert opinion evidence,
it should be borne in
mind that, in many cases, none of those facts will be in issue and, in those
cases where they are, only some
of the facts will be in issue. Further, there is
considerable forensic pressure on a party calling expert testimony to call
evidence about any disputed facts that are relied upon by the expert. If
those facts are challenged and direct evidence of them is
not called, the party
seeking to rely on the opinion will be at a serious disadvantage. Not only will
the probative value of the
factual basis (if admitted) be slight and so detract
from the weight that will ultimately be given to the opinion, the failure to
call such evidence will, at least in civil proceedings, give rise to damning and
powerful adverse comment.
7.135 In the Commissions’ view, the critical questions are whether the
operation of ss 135–137 provide suitable controls
over evidence in
respect of which s 60 has lifted the hearsay rule; whether those controls
can be improved; and whether there is
a better solution.
7.136 The Commissions consider that a key to the satisfactory application of the
uniform Evidence Acts in this area is an awareness
of, and preparedness to
invoke, the discretionary provisions to exclude or limit the use of evidence
where appropriate. For example,
taking another view of
, it might be
argued that Lee faced being convicted on remote hearsay evidence where it was
not possible to get to the truth of the
relevant assertions. If s 60 had
been held to have operated to lift the hearsay rule, it may have been a case
where s 137 should
have caused the judge to rule the evidence inadmissible
or s 136 should have been applied to limit its use to a non-hearsay
Exceptional
7.137 Notwithstanding the considerations mentioned above, submissions and
consultations reveal strong opposition to applying s 60
to evidence of
previous representations made to an expert for the purpose of providing the
basis of an expert's opinion and, in particular,
histories’.
7.138 It is argued that there is no reason to make factual histories evidence
of the truth of the facts because, unlike in the case
of some other exceptions
to the hearsay rule,
communications made to an expert for the purpose of providing a factual basis
for the expert’s opinion have no inherent reliability.
7.139 Further, it is said that there are other reasons why factual histories should
not be admissible as evidence of the truth of
the facts. These include that:
• different results may follow under s 60 depending on whether the
expert gives evidence of the factual basis of a report in
the form of a
representation or in the form of an
assumption;
• recourse to the discretionary provisions to exclude or limit the use
of evidence covered by s 60 should be unnecessary and
involves the
determination of complex issues of fact and degree, adding to the time and cost
of proceedings and with the potential
to produce inconsistent decisions.
7.140 It is suggested that factual histories forming the basis of expert
opinion evidence should be excluded from the operation of
s 60. Other
provisions of the uniform Evidence Acts that provide exceptions to the hearsay
rule would continue to operate in relation
to such evidence.
7.141 There are also concerns about the operation of s 60 in relation to
admissions that are not first-hand and would, therefore,
be excluded by
Part 3.4 of the uniform Evidence Acts. From one perspective, concerns about
the admission of such evidence by virtue
of the operation of s 60 can be
seen as underlying the decision of the High Court in
7.142 These are important issues. The Commissions are interested in comments
on whether, if s 60 is amended to confirm that it operates
whether or not
the evidence is first-hand or more remote hearsay, the uniform Evidence Acts
should also be amended so that previous
representations forming the basis of
expert opinion evidence, or that are evidence of admissions that are not
first-hand, or both,
are excluded from the ambit of s 60. In considering
the latter issues it will be important to assess how admissibility questions
presently handled under s 60 and s 136 would be handled and whether
their determination will be made more or less difficult than
at present by the
suggested changes.
Proposal 7–2
The uniform Evidence Acts should be amended to
confirm that s 60 operates to permit evidence admitted for a non-hearsay
be used to prove the truth of the facts asserted in the
representation, whether or not the evidence is first-hand or more remote
Question 7–1
If Proposal 7–2 is implemented, should
the uniform Evidence Acts also be amended to provide that:
• a previous representation of a party to any proceeding made to an
expert to enable that expert to give evidence; or
• evidence of admissions that are not first-hand;
or both, be excluded from the ambit of s 60? If so, how should these
provisions be worded?
Proceedings if maker
7.143 Section 64 of the uniform Evidence Acts provides exceptions to the
hearsay rule where, in a civil proceeding, a person who made
representation is available to give evidence about an asserted fact. Section
64(2) provides that:
(2) The hearsay rule does not apply to:
(a) evidence of the representation that is given by a person who saw, heard or
otherwise perceived the representation being made;
(b) a document so far as it contains the representation, or another
representation to which it is reasonably necessary to refer
in order to
understand the representation;
if it would cause undue expense or undue delay, or would not be reasonably
practicable, to call the person who made the representation
to give evidence.
7.144 Questions have been raised about the relationship of s 64(2) and
s 64(3). Section 64(3) provides that:
(3) If the person who made the representation has been or is to be called to
give evidence, the hearsay rule does not apply to evidence
of the representation
that is given by:
(a) that person; or
(b) a person who saw, heard or otherwise perceived the representation being
if, when the representation was made, the occurrence of the asserted fact was
fresh in the memory of the person who made the representation.
The ‘fresh in
the memory’ requirement
7.145 While not explicitly stated, s 64(2) may be interpreted as also
requiring that the occurrence of the asserted fact be fresh
in the memory of the
person giving an affidavit.
This is because it would be inconsistent to require, under s 64(3), that
the occurrence be fresh in the memory when the person making
the representation
is being called to give evidence, but not under s 64(2), where the person
is not being called.
7.146 The intention of the ALRC’s original hearsay proposals was to
provide more lenient rules for adducing first-hand hearsay
evidence in civil, as
compared to criminal,
proceedings.
nevertheless, a clear intention to limit first-hand hearsay evidence in civil
proceedings where the witness is available
to representations ‘made at the
time or shortly after the events referred to in it’—leading to the
adoption of
the fresh in the memory test in
Commissions’ view
7.147 It is suggested that it is unnecessary and undesirable to apply the
fresh in the memory test to first-hand hearsay evidence
adduced in civil
proceedings.
In this context,
it is noted that other hearsay exceptions, such as that in s 63 and those
relating to business records, do not have
any similar temporal
qualification.
7.148 It should be noted, however, that the reason for this apparent
disparity is that, in the case of the other exceptions, the maker
representation will not be available and the objective of securing the best
available evidence is addressed by imposing no
additional qualification other
than notice,
identifying a category of evidence that will have some assurance of reliability
independent of its freshness.
7.149 It is also suggested that the requirement is generally ignored in civil
litigation where the maker of the representation is
called to give evidence.
These views tend to be expressed by lawyers who practise in jurisdictions where
civil litigation is usually
conducted before judges without juries. The
significance of that factor will need to be assessed. Other issues to be
assessed include
the extent to which the requirement is taken into account in
preparing for trial, particularly in affidavits and witness statements,
whether there may be other benefits in retaining the requirement.
7.150 However, the Commissions’ preliminary view is that the fresh in the
memory requirement should be removed from s 64(3).
The admissibility of
evidence covered by s 64 can be challenged under ss 135 and 136,
including on the basis that the probative value
of the evidence is lessened, and
its potential to cause unfair prejudice or to be misleading or confusing is
increased, because it
is not fresh.
Proposal 7–3
Section 64(3) of the uniform Evidence Acts
should be amended to remove the requirement that, when the representation was
occurrence of the asserted fact was fresh in the memory of the person
who made the representation.
Proceedings if maker
not available
Unavailability of
7.151 Sections 63 and 65 of the uniform Evidence Acts provide exceptions
to the hearsay rule, in civil and criminal proceedings respectively,
person who made a previous representation is not available to give evidence
7.152 The Acts provide that a person is taken not to be available to give
evidence about a fact for reasons including that:
(a) the person is dead; or
(b) the person is, for any reason other than the application of section 16
(Competence and compellability: judges and jurors), not
competent to give the
evidence about the fact; or
(c) it would be unlawful for the person to give evidence about the fact; or
(d) a provision of this Act prohibits the evidence being given; or
(e) all reasonable steps have been taken, by the party seeking to prove the
person is not available, to find the person or to secure
his or her attendance,
but without success; or
(f) all reasonable steps have been taken, by the party seeking to prove the
person is not available, to compel the person to give
the evidence, but without
7.153 Some practitioners suggest that the definition of unavailability could
be broadened because it is sometimes difficult to get
judges to understand when
it is not reasonably practicable to call a reluctant witness, for example, a
witness who works for the
opposing party’s
Some judges of the
New South Wales District Court express concerns about difficulties in relation
to witnesses who are
co-accused.
7.154 The DPP NSW notes that United Kingdom legislation contains a
provision permitting the admission of hearsay evidence of a person
‘unfit to be a witness because of his bodily or mental
condition’.
7.155 Hearsay evidence may also be admitted where ‘through fear the
relevant person does not give (or does not continue to give)
oral evidence in
the proceedings, either at all or in connection with the subject matter of the
statement, and the court gives leave
for the statement to be given in
7.156 By contrast, the uniform
Evidence Act
provisions do not ‘squarely
provide for this category of
DPP NSW submits that the definition should be amended to apply clearly to
the situation where a person is ‘“not available”
by reason of
his/her bodily or mental/psychological condition or for some other sound reason,
he/she is unfit to attend as a
7.157 The DPP NSW refers to then proposed New South Wales legislation to enable the
transcript of evidence given by complainants in
sexual offence trials to be
admitted as evidence of the complainant in any
Procedure Amendment (Evidence) Act 2005
(NSW), which commenced in May 2005,
amended the
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
(NSW) to permit the admission of
a record of evidence given by a complainant in a sexual assault proceeding in
any new trial that
is ordered following an appeal.
7.158 The Commissions observe that, where a complainant in the sexual offence case
is unavailable, the transcript of evidence may
be able to be admitted under the
existing provisions of the uniform Evidence Acts.
Section 65(3)
(3) The hearsay rule does not apply to evidence of a previous representation
made in the course of giving evidence in an Australian
or overseas proceeding
if, in that proceeding, the defendant in the proceeding to which this section is
being applied:
(a) cross-examined the person who made the representation about it; or
(b) had a reasonable opportunity to cross-examine the person who made the
representation about it.
7.159 The Commissions consider that an amendment to the definition of
unavailability in the Dictionary of the uniform Evidence Acts
is desirable. The
proposed provision is set out in Appendix 1. Such an amendment may
facilitate, in at least some cases, the admission
of the transcript of a
complainant’s evidence in a retrial.
Proposal 7–4
The uniform Evidence Acts should be amended to
provide that a person is taken not to be available to give evidence about a fact
a person is mentally or physically unable to give evidence about the
Representations of
complicit persons
7.160 Questions have been raised about the operation of
in relation
to previous representations from persons who are complicit in the offence with
which an accused is charged, but who refuse
to give evidence at trial. The
relevant parts of
(1) This section applies in a criminal proceeding if a person who made a
previous representation is not available to give evidence
(2) The hearsay rule does not apply to evidence of a previous representation
that is given by a person who saw, heard or otherwise
perceived the
representation being made, if the representation was:
(b) made when or shortly after the asserted fact occurred and in circumstances
that make it unlikely that the representation
is a fabrication; or
(c) made in circumstances that make it highly probable that the representation
is reliable, or
(d) against the interests of the person who made it at the time it was made....
the prosecution
to tender an electronic recording of a police
interview with an accomplice who had subsequently pleaded guilty. The person had
to give evidence at the committal, and adopted the same position at
7.162 The New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal held that the trial judge
had not erred in admitting into evidence representations
made in the police
interview as evidence of the truth of the facts asserted in those
representations and that the finding that the
witness was ‘unavailable to
give evidence’ was correct. The Court noted that counsel for the
appellant, at trial and
on appeal, had acknowledged that the Crown had taken all
reasonable steps to compel the witness to give evidence and that the trial
had regarded that acknowledgement as a recognition that the sanction of contempt
was unlikely to make the witness change his
7.163 The decision in
has provoked concern in allowing the admission
of previous representations from a person complicit in an offence to be used
a defendant who does not have the opportunity to cross-examine.
7.164 IP 28 asks whether concerns are raised by the application of
of the uniform Evidence Acts to previous representations made by
persons who are taken to be unavailable to give
7.165 The Law Council expresses concern that
may apply to
admit a prior admission without the availability of cross-examination, as
occurred in
. The Law Council submits that:
Whilst tightening the definition of unavailability might mitigate this problem,
the Council is of the view that such prior statements
do not have sufficient
guarantee of reliability to be admissible under
and should be
removed from that exception.
7.166 The Council states that other categories of statement against interest
may not justify allowing the prosecution to tender hearsay
evidence against an
accused. It notes that it is not inconsistent with this position to take the
view that an accused should be permitted
to tender out of court admissions to
avoid the risk of an innocent person being
7.167 More generally, the Criminal Law Committee of the Law Society of South
Australia expresses concern about statements by a co-offender
to a witness being
led on the basis that ‘the accused will be unable to challenge either the
truthfulness, and/or raise any
issue of voluntariness or fairness surrounding
the making of such
statements’.
7.168 The NSW PDO opposes admission of the record of interview of an alleged
co-offender. The NSW PDO submits that this problem should
be remedied by
amending the definition of unavailability in the Dictionary of the uniform
Evidence Acts so as not to include a person
who ‘was unwilling to give
The Commissions’ view
7.169 While the policy underlying the hearsay provisions is that the best
evidence available to a party should be received, in its
previous evidence
inquiry the ALRC considered that, in criminal trials where the maker of a
statement is unavailable, some guarantees
of trustworthiness should be required
before hearsay evidence is admissible against an
7.170 The assumption behind
is that where a statement was
against the interests of the person who made it, this provides an assurance of
reliability. However,
where the person who made the statement is an accomplice
or co-accused, this may be far from the case. An accomplice or co-accused
motivated to downplay the extent of their involvement in relevant events and to
emphasise the culpability of the other.
7.171 In the High Court special leave application, counsel in
argued that
should be read as requiring some assurance of
reliability.
The application
was unsuccessful, with Gleeson CJ noting that, given the discretions exist as an
‘ultimate safety net’,
then ‘you do not need to torture the
language of
7.172 While the admission and use of evidence from an accomplice or
co-accused can be controlled by
–137, there are good reasons to
suggest that
requires amendment to deal with the potential prejudice
to an accused of evidence given against interest by an accomplice or co-accused
who is not available to give evidence.
7.173 The Commissions propose
be amended to require that the
representation be made against the interests of the person who made it at the
time it was made and
in circumstances that make it likely that the
representation is reliable. The intent of the proposal is to ensure that the
rule is not lifted where a statement against interest is made in
circumstances that would not suggest reliability.
7.174 While the proposal is directed specifically to address problems
concerning the evidence of an accomplice or co-accused, it involves
an amendment
to a provision of broader application (obviously, statements against interest
can arise in many other situations). However,
amendment of
a simpler solution than drafting a new provision dealing specifically with the
evidence of accomplices, which might introduce
unnecessary new complexity into
the Acts. The proposed provision is set out in Appendix 1.
Proposal 7–5
Section 65(2)(d)
of the uniform Evidence Acts
should be amended to require that the representation be made against the
interests of the person who
made it at the time it was made
circumstances that make it likely that the representation is reliable.
‘Circumstances’
and the reliability of evidence
Sections 65(2)(b)
and (c) refer respectively to
‘circumstances’ that make it unlikely that the representation is a
fabrication; or make
it highly probable that the representation is
7.176 There has been some conflicting authorities interpreting the scope of
the circumstances that may be taken into account in assessing
Williams v The
a Full Court of
the Federal Court confirmed that the statutory test is not whether, in all the
circumstances, there is a probability
or a high probability of reliability, but
whether the circumstances in which the representation ‘was …
made’ determine
that there is such a
probability.
7.177 The court is permitted to consider any other events that are relevant
to the circumstances in which the statement was made.
However, in
, the trial judge had erred in addressing only the question of
whether the evidence contained within the transcript of interview was
rather than all the circumstances as to the making of the statement.
the New South
Wales Court of Criminal Appeal held that relevant case law, including
, established that the focus in approaching
be on the circumstances of the making of the previous representation rather than
on the accuracy of the
representation.
evidence tending only to the reliability of the asserted fact should not be
taken into account.
7.179 IP 28 suggests that injustice may result when only the
circumstances of the making of the representation can be taken into account
, for example, when the Crown seeks to lead representations
made by way of records of interview of persons who are
7.180 IP 28 asks whether concerns are raised by the limited scope of the
‘circumstances’ that may be taken into account
ss 65(2)(b)
and (c) in assessing the reliability of a previous
representation.
7.181 Some submissions state that the ‘circumstances’ able to be
taken into account under
and (c) should be broadened, for
example, to include the inherent truthfulness or otherwise of the
representation.
7.182 Others consider that the provision should be left
including for the reason that the question has been effectively settled by
v Ambrosoli
NSW PDO submits that the broader view, rejected in
lead to a situation ‘where the judge had to in effect assess the strength
of a party’s case, before being able
to determine if this particular item
was admissible’.
7.183 The Commissions’ view is that
of the uniform Evidence Acts
should be left unchanged in this respect. Bearing in mind that the reliability
of the representation
will ultimately be a question for the jury, it is
reasonable for the legislation to draw the line by reference to the
circumstances
and their bearing on reliability rather than go to the next step
and to require the trial judge to form a view as to the reliability
representation. Further, an inquiry as to whether the representation is reliable
is likely to require the trial judge to consider
the whole of a prosecution case
and determine guilt before admitting the representation as reliable.
Evidence of a
previous representation adduced by a defendant
Section 65(8)(a)
of the uniform Evidence Acts provides:
(8) The hearsay rule does not apply to:
(a) evidence of a previous representation adduced by a defendant if the
evidence is given by a person who saw, heard or otherwise
perceived the
representation being made; …
Section 65(9)
allows another party to adduce hearsay evidence that
qualifies or explains a representation admitted under
s 65(8)(a).
subsection reads:
(9) If evidence of a previous representation about a matter has been adduced by
a defendant and has been admitted, the hearsay rule
does not apply to evidence
of another representation about the matter that:
(a) is adduced by another party; and
(b) is given by a person who saw, heard or otherwise perceived the other
representation being made.
7.186 IP 28 notes that one question raised by this provision is the
scope of the term ‘the matter’, which may be interpreted
narrowly or
the accused
proposed to adduce evidence of representations by a deceased person as to
aspects of their ‘relationship’.
Sperling J observed that a
‘liberal construction’ of the term ‘the matter’ would
allow evidence of any relevant
representation by the deceased about the
relationship. A narrower construction would confine ‘the matter’ to
the factual
aspect of the relationship that was the subject of a representation
adduced by the accused, or perhaps to the issue in the proceedings
to which such
a representation related.
7.187 IP 28 asks whether there is significant uncertainty about the
scope of the term ‘the matter’ in
Submissions suggest that there is no need to clarify the meaning of this term in
For example,
the NSW PDO states that it is difficult to see how it could be
‘amended or defined in a way which would take into
account the wide range
of situations to which it might
7.188 In the Commissions’ view, the approach should be to identify the
content of the representation to be adduced by the defendant
and to consider
whether the other representations can be said to be relevant to it. As a result,
it should not be necessary to construe
the term ‘about a matter’ and
may, in fact, be preferable to avoid defining it. If it is necessary to construe
a broad construction should be adopted and, where that may cause
unfair prejudice, the discretions should be used. Narrowing the
interpretation
of any of the hearsay exceptions carries the danger of introducing
technicalities, something the uniform Evidence
Acts are intended to remove and
avoid. The Commissions, therefore, do not propose any amendment to
of the uniform Evidence Acts.
Representations
‘fresh in the memory’
of the uniform Evidence Acts provides exceptions to the
hearsay rule where, in a criminal proceeding, a person who made a previous
representation is available to give evidence about an asserted
The relevant parts of
(1) This section applies in a criminal proceeding if a person who made a
previous representation is available to give evidence about
an asserted fact.
(2) If that person has been or is to be called to give evidence, the hearsay
rule does not apply to evidence of the representation
that is given by:
(a) that person; or
(b) a person who saw, heard or otherwise perceived the representation being
if, when the representation was made, the occurrence of the asserted fact was
fresh in the memory of the person who made the representation.
Graham v The
the High Court
found that a complaint made six years after the sexual assault alleged was not
‘fresh in the memory’ for
the purpose of
The Court held
The word ‘fresh’, in its context in
‘recent’ or ‘immediate’. It may also carry with it a
connotation that describes the quality of the
memory (as being ‘not
deteriorated or changed by lapse of time’) but the core of the meaning
intended, is to describe
the temporal relationship between
‘the occurrence of the asserted fact’ and the time of making
the representation. Although
questions of fact and degree may arise, the
temporal relationship required will very likely be measured in hours or days,
was the case here, in
7.191 While the judgments in
noted that the quality or
vividness of a recollection could be relevant in an assessment of its freshness,
contemporaneity was considered
the more important
Cases in which
evidence of an event relatively remote in time will be admissible under
were said to be ‘necessarily rare and requiring of some special
circumstance or
has been applied in a large number of cases. In many of
these cases, evidence of complaint has been inadmissible because the
representations
were not considered to be
where complaints are made within months of the
This has led to some
concern about the operation of
in such cases.
7.193 Some decisions have shown a degree of flexibility in interpreting
‘fresh in the memory’. In
the New South
Wales Court of Criminal Appeal considered the application of
representations concerning a course of conduct that had originated about six
months prior to the making of the representations.
7.194 Sully J referred to the High Court’s statement in
that a particular application of
might raise ‘questions of fact
and degree’, and found that the ‘constant refreshing effect’
of repeated sexual
abuse warranted a ‘departure from the narrowest and
most literal construction’ of the expression ‘fresh in the
stated that:
Evidence Act
does not always sit easily with evidence of
complaint in sexual cases. Nevertheless, it would be absurd if the section could
apply to complaint of a pattern of behaviour when that pattern has
continued up to, or near to, the time at which the complaint was
made. Whether
the evidence would be admissible under the section might depend upon the terms
of the complaint and the length of time
over which the abuse is said to have
occurred. Obviously, each case must be judged according to its own
Criticism of the
‘fresh in the memory’ test
Sexual offences
7.195 IP 28 notes suggestions that the psychological literature on child
abuse justifies reform to ensure that hearsay evidence of
complaint may be admitted in sexual offence cases, irrespective of the time that
has elapsed between the events in
question and the hearsay statements of the
Prevalence studies are
said to show that delay in disclosure is a typical response of sexually abused
children as a result of confusion,
denial, self-blame and overt or covert
threats by offenders.
7.196 The New South Wales Health Department Child Protection and Violence
Prevention Unit note that there are many compelling and
valid reasons why
victims of sexual assault do not immediately report sexual assault to the
authorities, including the trauma, shame
and embarrassment they suffer.
The nature and impact of child sexual assault, including grooming tactics by the
perpetrators and their position of power and trust,
act as significant barriers
for child victims to disclose the assault. Perpetrators frequently use tactics
to instil fear of disclosure
in child victims, such as telling them they will
not be believed. This power dynamic can also be present in cases of domestic
and in cases of ongoing sexual
7.197 Arguments that the quality or vividness of certain memories, such as
those of sexual assault, should be considered as retaining
reliability or
staying ‘fresh in the memory’ for some longer period may be viewed
as reliant on circular reasoning. The
NSW PDO states that:
Psychological studies have increasingly emphasized the subjective nature of
memory, and the suggestibility of people, especially
psychologically damaged
people, to the idea that they must have been sexually
7.198 On the other hand, it may be suggested that the ‘hours or
days’ rubric, when applied to sexual offence cases, is
analogous to the
discredited common law requirement that complaints of rape be spontaneous (the
‘hue and cry’), and where
failure to complain at the earliest
possible opportunity could be used as evidence of consent.
7.199 If the ‘fresh in the memory’ test is considered to produce
particular problems in relation to certain offences—such
offences or offences against children—it has been suggested that, rather
than amending the uniform Evidence Acts,
it would be preferable to deal with the
issues outside the Acts, in rape shield laws or other
legislation.
Identification and
recognition
7.200 IP 28 notes that particular issues arise with respect to the
application of
to previous representations concerning
identification.
context, the New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal, in
has held that
evidence of identification should be distinguished from evidence of recognition,
where the person recognised is someone
7.201 In the case of recognition, what needs to be fresh in the memory is the
person’s continuing familiarity with the features
of the person
(where there is
obvious contemporaneity between the act of recognition and the witnessing of
this by an observer).
case of identification, where the asserted fact is that the person identified
was present at some relevant event, the ‘occurrence
of the asserted
fact’ which must be fresh in the memory is the event itself. That is,
‘the formation of the image, later
drawn upon at the time of making the
representation that the person depicted is
identified’.
7.202 The fact that
applies to identification evidence provides
additional reasons for favouring a more flexible interpretation of
can be argued that, for example, evidence of the identification of a war crimes
suspect made five years after the events to which
a prosecution relates is
likely to be more reliable than evidence given by the same witness at a trial
taking place another 15 years
7.203 The Commissions observe that, if the uniform Evidence Acts were amended
(as proposed below) to make it clear that whether a
‘fresh’ is to be determined, in part, by reference to the quality of
the memory, this would be consistent with
the distinctions made between cases of
recognition and of ordinary identification. That is, where the person recognised
previously known, it is likely that the quality of the memory will be
Submissions and
consultations
7.204 IP 28 asks whether concerns are raised by the High Court’s
interpretation, in
Graham v The Queen
, of ‘fresh in the
memory’ and whether the concept of ‘fresh in the memory’ needs
to be re-examined.
also asks whether particular concerns are raised by the application of
to evidence of
identification.
7.205 The Law Council concedes that the High Court’s approach in
, ‘may be criticised in theory as too narrow an
approach’, but submits that the test is ‘sufficiently flexible to
admit representations made when the memory was patently
The Council
states that, while the reasoning in
may exclude prior complaints
of children and victims of sexual assaults even where there are good reasons for
delay in complaining
of assault,
prior complaints carry too great a risk of unreliability (risk of convicting an
innocent accused) to be tendered unless made at a
time when a court can feel
confident that the witness retained a fresh and reliable memory of the
7.206 The existing formulation of
also receives support from the
NSW PDO, which states that ‘the probative value of an account of what
a witness said to others
the immediacy of the statement in relation to the incident
7.207 On the other hand, many consider that it should be made clear that the
time elapsed since an event is not the only factor that
considered.
The DPP NSW
consider that the test has been shown capable of yielding very different results
when applied by different judicial
does not sit easily
with evidence of complaint in sexual offence cases about patterns of abuse in
which victims do not recount specific
and places too
much emphasis on the time between the offence and the making of complaint and
too little on the quality or vividness
7.208 The DPP NSW submits that the uniform Evidence Acts should be amended to
clarify what is meant by ‘fresh in the memory’
and ‘to give
effect to the flexibility originally envisaged by the ALRC when it coined the
A more flexible approach is required which takes into account and gives due
regard to the existence of other factors affecting the
reliability of the
memory, in addition to the elapse of time between the alleged offence and the
making of complaint.
7.209 Some New South Wales judges are also critical of the term ‘fresh
in the memory’ as interpreted in
, including in relation to
evidence of patterns of sexual
The term ‘fresh in the memory’ has a tendency to conflate two
notions, one of recency and one of accurate recall. It
is clear from human
experience that the former does not of necessity underpin the latter and that to
require some temporal prerequisite
is to ignore what is sought by the court
which is reliability of the recollection of an event or conversation which in
turn is reported
by another.
7.210 The judges observe that the section appears to mean that only
representations capable of accurate recall can be recounted by
another to the
court. It was submitted that the words ‘fresh in the memory’ should
be replaced by ‘capable of accurate
recall’. This, it is said, would
allow the court to inquire as to the quality of the event and the person making
the representation
so that the likelihood of the memory being retained and
accurately recalled could be
determined.
7.211 Alternatively, it is suggested that ‘fresh in the memory’
be defined to include reference to factors such as the
‘the age and health
of the witness, the nature of the event being recalled, the circumstances in
which the event occurred and
the length of time over which the event occurred,
that govern the reliability of the
7.212 Some New South Wales District Court judges also submit that
proven difficult to apply in relation to identification where a person has made
an identification some time before, but has either
resiled from it or has
forgotten the person or picture
identified.
The DPP NSW
agrees that the complexity of the reasoning required to distinguish between
identification and recognition may provide
reasons to remove evidence of
identification from the ambit of
7.213 Some commentators are critical of
and suggest that there should be
no such exception to the hearsay rule, unless the statement would be admissible
under the common
rule; and that
should be made
more, rather than less,
restrictive.
7.214 The distinction between evidence of recognition and evidence of
identification (where the latter is made from a previous encounter)
follows from
the language of the section and is consistent with its intention. In the
Commissions’ view,
does not need to be revisited on this
Psychological
research on memory
7.215 IP 28 notes that the concept of ‘fresh in the memory’
may need to be revisited in the light of more recent psychological
research on
memory, in particular, to consider whether aspects of the quality or vividness
of certain memories should be factored
into decisions about
admissibility.
7.216 The original ALRC reports referred to the extensive material relating
to memory generally and to eyewitness
Since those
reports were published, there has been particular interest in the effects of
emotion, stress and trauma on memory. This
has resulted in a substantial body of
literature in that area.
7.217 A preliminary review of some of the old and more recent literature reveals
conflicting views about the effects of emotion or
trauma on memory. For many
years it was generally accepted that emotion and stress had a negative effect on
the ability to recall
However, there is now
persuasive evidence that generalisations about the effects of emotion and stress
on memory and rates of forgetting
developed in the context of laboratory studies
or recall of ordinary events cannot be readily extended to the memory of
to violent crimes. While some witnesses in criminal trials may be
asked to recall mundane events (eg, a witness who observed the
accused buying a
paper, thus establishing their location at a certain time), more commonly,
witnesses will be those who have observed
a violent act, or who have been the
victim of such violence. The proximity and involvement of most witnesses and
their resulting
emotional state are important factors in their perception of
events and their resultant memory and not readily replicable in laboratory
conditions.
7.218 Studies on the recall of witnesses to actual crimes suggest that there can be
greater detail and accuracy in the recall of those
witnesses and greater
retention of that memory over a period of
A number of possible
factors may account for this finding including the performance of various parts
of the brain under stress, the
exceptional nature of the events witnessed and
the re-telling of such events to others.
7.219 Research focusing on the recall of victims of crime has also identified a
number of divergent effects of trauma on memory. Such
effects include fragmented
sensory memory rather than narrative recall, attentional focusing, dissociation,
and retrograde and anterograde
It has been
recognised that Post Traumatic Stress Disorder can lead to ‘extremes of
retention and forgetting: terrifying experiences
may be remembered with extreme
vividness, or totally resist
integration’
resulting amnesia (temporary or permanent). Thus individual differences are also
a significant factor.
7.220 At present, it appears that no academic consensus on the effects of trauma on
memory has been achieved. What appears reasonably
clear, however, is that there
is a growing body of evidence that the effects of emotion, stress and trauma on
memory are both complex
and distinct from ordinary memory
7.221 The fresh in the memory test was developed in light of contemporary research
on memory. That research revealed the rapid loss
of memory within days of an
event and the many ways in which memory can change over time. While the validity
of that research is
not questioned, its limitations have been identified
particularly in relation to the memory of witnesses to crimes and traumatic
events. While a focus on ‘hours or days’ may be well founded in
relation to statements about unremarkable occurrences,
the distinct yet complex
nature of the memory of violent crime would seem to indicate that a more
flexible test is warranted. The
variability of individual responses to stress
and trauma, particularly amongst victims of crime may also warrant the adoption
a flexible test.
Commissions’ view
7.222 There is significant dissatisfaction with the ‘fresh in the
memory’ test used in
of the uniform Evidence Acts. This derives
from the decision of the High Court in
, which is perceived by many
as having taken an overly restrictive approach (that is, the ‘hours or
days’ rubric).
7.223 Since
, judges have striven to retain flexibility in the
interpretation of
In particular, passages in
to non-temporal factors are
emphasised.
One judge has
stated that the judgment in
was not intended to confine the expression ‘freshness’ strictly or
exhaustively in terms of mere hours or days …
In my view a statement made
seven weeks after an event is not one which should be regarded as being outside
the period of fresh memory.
It is in fact a relatively short period after events
of the kind here involved. Having regard to the normal expectation and
of life, I would regard a statement made at that point of time as
still being fresh in the memory of a relevant
7.224 Additional special elements in the circumstances of a case may be used
to justify departure from the ‘hours or days’
formulation. In
above, the ‘constant refreshing effect’ of a pattern of abuse was
found to justify such a departure. It is possible
that judges will find other
special elements in future cases, particularly in those involving children or
sexual offences.
7.225 In IP 28, the ALRC refers to the need to consider the balance
between admissibility under
, particularly in light of
, which refers to representations ‘made in circumstances
that make it highly probable that the representation is
Arguably, it
would be contrary to the overall scheme of the hearsay provisions if, because of
an overly restrictive interpretation
, complaint evidence were more
easily admitted under
7.226 While the decision in
may not prevent the courts from
developing more flexible approaches to the admission of evidence under
, it does create a major difficulty in situations where the relevant
time period is measured in weeks or months. The same issue and
considerations
apply to the other provisions of the uniform Evidence Acts that use the term
‘fresh in the
7.227 The Commissions’ preliminary view is that the uniform Evidence Acts
should be amended to make it clear that whether a
memory is ‘fresh’
is to be determined by reference to the quality of the memory, as well as the
temporal relationship
between the occurrence of the asserted facts and the
making of the representation. The quality of the memory can be influenced by
many factors, including by the nature of the events and the characteristics of
the witness. This reform could be implemented by a
new legislative definition of
the words ‘fresh in the memory’ or by replacing this with some other
form of words. A proposed
provision is set out in Appendix 1.
7.228 More in depth analysis is required than has been possible for the purposes of
this Discussion Paper. To inform further a discussion
of the ‘fresh in the
memory’ test and its application it is necessary to derive a more
meaningful picture of the psychology
of memory affected by emotion, stress or
trauma. Of particular significance will be studies on the accuracy of traumatic
memory over
proposed to continue with this investigation during the course of the Inquiry
and to canvass these issues further in the consultation
phase and in the context
of the final report.
Proposal 7–6
The uniform Evidence Acts should be amended to make
it clear that, for the purposes of
, whether a memory is
‘fresh’ is to be determined by reference to factors in addition to
the temporal relationship between
the occurrence of the asserted fact and the
making of the representation. These factors may include the nature of the event
and the age and health of the witness.
of the uniform Evidence Acts provides exceptions to the
hearsay rule relating to the admissibility of business
The relevant parts
(2) The hearsay rule does not apply to the document (so far as it contains the
representation) if the representation was made:
(a) by a person who had or might reasonably be supposed to have had personal
knowledge of the asserted fact; or
(b) on the basis of information directly or indirectly supplied by a person who
had or might reasonably be supposed to have
had personal knowledge of the
asserted fact.
(3) Subsection (2) does not apply if the representation:
(a) was prepared or obtained for the purpose of conducting, or for or in
contemplation of or in connection with, an Australian
or overseas proceeding; or
(b) was made in connection with an investigation relating or leading to a
criminal proceeding.
(5) For the purposes of this section, a person is taken to have had personal
knowledge of a fact if the person's knowledge of the
fact was or might
reasonably be supposed to have been based on what the person saw, heard or
otherwise perceived (other than a previous
representation made by a person about
7.230 The hearsay rule does not apply to a representation in a business
record if the representation is based on ‘personal knowledge
asserted fact’, for example, plans drawn up by an architect as part of a
development application process or a business
An ‘asserted
fact’ is defined to mean a fact the existence of which is intended to be
asserted in the
representation.
A statement
in the form of an opinion as to the existence of a fact appears to qualify as a
‘representation’.
7.231 IP 28 notes that there may be difficulty in admitting assertions
of opinion under
, given the requirement of personal knowledge as
a person, such as an expert, expresses an opinion regarding the existence of
some fact, the person often did not ‘see,
hear, or otherwise
perceive’ that the fact existed. It has been suggested that this is an
oversight in the legislation.
7.232 It was held in
Ringrow Pty Ltd v BP Australia
requirement of personal knowledge of the asserted fact is satisfied in relation
to opinions expressed out of court by experts
‘because the asserted fact
consists of opinions which they themselves had formed and
expressed’.
claims that a better answer is that the expert will still have personal
knowledge for these purposes if his or her opinion
(‘knowledge’) is
based on what the expert saw, heard or otherwise perceived. Alternatively,
evidence would be admissible
(opinion evidence) on the basis
that any previous representation involved was not caught by the hearsay rule at
all or came within
one of the hearsay
exceptions.
7.233 IP 28 asks whether concerns are raised by the application of
of the uniform Evidence Acts to opinion contained in business
7.234 A few concerns are raised about the operation of
practitioner suggests that the personal knowledge requirement can allow the
admission of ‘obvious’ business
records to be contested where it is
difficult to demonstrate that the representation was made by a person ‘who
had or might
reasonably be supposed to have had personal knowledge of the
asserted fact’.
7.235 By contrast, another senior practitioner has no problem with
but expresses concern about the breadth of the exception in
which allows the admission of a business record containing information
‘directly or indirectly supplied’ by a person.
He suggests that the
minimum requirement should be that the person who supplied the information is
identifiable.
7.236 Generally, however, the Commissions find a high level of satisfaction with
the operation of the business records provisions
of the uniform Evidence
The Commissions are
interested in further comments on whether there is sufficient reason to propose
any amendment to
of the uniform Evidence Acts in this regard.
Question 7–2
What concerns are raised by the operation of
of the uniform Evidence Acts with respect to business records?
Should these concerns be addressed through amendment of the Acts and,
7.237 In ALRC 38, it was proposed that the business records exception
not be available ‘if the representation was prepared or
obtained for the
purpose of conducting, or in contemplation of or in connection with, a legal or
administrative
proceeding’.
rationale for this proposal included that, without this provision, ‘any
note of information and rumour in police or private
records gathered during the
investigation of a crime would be
admissible’.
7.238 The DPP NSW raises issues surrounding the application of
to business records of the New South Wales Police Service. The
is said to be that:
Documents made in the ordinary course of police business, such as transcriptions
from ‘000’ calls, records made by crime
scene examiners which
account for the continuity of exhibits and routine COPS entries which are
unrelated to the offence which is
the subject of the current proceedings, are
not admissible because it is frequently not possible to locate the police
officer who
made the original entry
7.239 The DPP NSW submits that there should be a discretion to admit
records of this type, instead of the ‘blanket prohibition’
s 69(3)(b).
Vitali v Stachnik
, Barrett J stated that the purpose of
is to prevent the introduction of hearsay material
which is prepared in an atmosphere or context which may cause it to be
self-serving in the sense of possibly being prepared to assist
the proof of
something known or at least apprehended to be relevant to the outcome of
identifiable legal
proceedings.
7.241 Where documents are not covered by
often remain available. The Commissions remain to be convinced that there is any
compelling reason to depart from the existing
formulation, which provides an
important safeguard against the admission of self-serving police records.
Question 7–3.
of the uniform Evidence Acts
be amended to provide the judge with a discretion to admit documents made in
connection with an investigation
relating or leading to a criminal proceeding
and, if so, on what criteria?
Contemporaneous
statements about a person’s health etc
of the uniform Evidence Acts provides an exception to
the hearsay rule applying to certain contemporaneous statements. It states:
The hearsay rule does not apply to evidence of a representation made by a person
that was a contemporaneous representation about
the person’s health,
feelings, sensations, intention, knowledge or state of mind.
7.243 In the original evidence inquiry, the ALRC did not recommend the
inclusion of this provision in the uniform evidence legislation.
considered that such representations were covered adequately by confining the
definition of ‘hearsay’ to intended
assertions and by the first-hand
hearsay proposal.
of the uniform Evidence Acts assumes that the
contemporaneous representations covered by it are hearsay, by allowing their
as an exception to the hearsay rule. At common law such
representations are admissible either as original evidence or as hearsay
admissible under the
7.245 IP 28 notes that the breadth of this provision has been criticised in
several respects.
has been noted that if the words ‘intention, knowledge or state of
mind’ include ‘belief’ or ‘memory’,
the section
may render the Act’s hearsay exclusionary rules irrelevant to
contemporaneous statements.
7.246 However, to date, courts have not interpreted s 72 this
There is reason to
suggest that, in practice, evidence of belief or memory sought to be admitted
under s 72 would be inadmissible
under s 55 (the relevant evidence
7.247 For example, in
R v Hillier
, Gray J found that while
s 72 might permit evidence to be given of a deceased’s fear of the
accused as recounted to other persons,
that only applied ‘when the state
of mind evidenced by the statement is either itself directly in issue at the
trial or of
direct and immediate relevance to an issue which arises at the
7.248 IP 28 also notes that it may not be entirely clear whether s 72
avoids the operation of the hearsay rule solely in respect of
proving the
‘health, feelings, sensations, intention, knowledge or state of
mind’ of the maker or in respect of any use
However, the use
of the evidence of the representation will have been identified in determining
its relevance.
7.249 Finally, IP 28 notes that s 72 is not, by its terms, confined to
first-hand hearsay as it refers only to ‘evidence’
rather than to
representations made by a person who has personal knowledge of an asserted
There is some support
for amending s 72 to remedy this
7.250 The Commissions agree that there can be no justification for this provision
applying to second-hand and more remote forms of
hearsay and that the provisions
should be moved to the first-hand hearsay exceptions contained in
Division 2 of
Evidence Act 1995
Appendix 1).
Proposal 7–7
The uniform Evidence Acts should be amended so that
exception to the hearsay rule, which relates to certain
contemporaneous statements, applies to first-hand hearsay only.
in interlocutory proceedings
7.251 In interlocutory proceedings, parties often rely on affidavits, rather
than on witness testimony. Where such evidence is hearsay,
uniform Evidence Acts will apply.
provides that the hearsay rule
does not apply to evidence in an interlocutory proceeding ‘if the party
who adduces it also
adduces evidence of its source’. The rules of most
federal, territory and state courts include a similar
7.252 It has been suggested that, by the terms of
, the person
swearing the affidavit or making a written statement should be required to swear
to a belief in the information and the
reasons for that
7.253 This is the case with other provisions of the uniform Evidence Acts,
which deal with proof of certain matters by affidavit or
statements.
Section 172
states that, despite Chapter 3, evidence of certain matters may include
evidence based on the ‘knowledge and belief of the
person who gives it, or
on information that that person
7.254 IP 28 asks whether
should be amended to require that the
evidence be based on the knowledge of the person who gives it or on information
that the person
has and believes. There is some support for this
7.255 Given the existence of
, which already requires that the person set
out the source of the knowledge or information or the basis of the belief, the
that remains is whether a person should swear to a belief in the
information.
7.256 In the typical affidavit in interlocutory proceeding, the person giving the
affidavit generally states ‘I am informed
by ... and verily believe
…’. The uniform Evidence Acts do not impose this requirement but, at
the same time, do not
prevent rules of court adding such requirements. All that
the Acts do is prescribe the circumstances in which the hearsay rule does
apply. They do not purport to spell out complete requirements as to form and
content of affidavits. The Commissions do not propose
any amendment to
of the uniform Evidence Acts.
and children’s evidence
7.257 The hearsay rule is particularly significant in cases involving child
witnesses, as children are often incompetent to give sworn
or unsworn evidence,
or unwilling to give evidence due to the trauma
Moreover, children
may be unable to give satisfactory evidence due to the unfamiliarity of the
courtroom setting and procedure, and
limitations in memory, accurate recall of
events, or mental and intellectual
The lack of
evidence from child witnesses may mean that some cases are not
prosecuted.
7.258 Some previous statements, disclosures or descriptions made by children
may fall into one of the existing exceptions to the hearsay
rule, for example
where the occurrence of the asserted fact is fresh in the memory of the
Others may be
admissible for hearsay purposes (ie, proof of the truth of the contents) under
if the evidence has been admitted for a non-hearsay purpose (eg, for
credibility purposes).
7.259 In their inquiry into children in the legal process, the ALRC and the Human
Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission (HREOC)
considered the hearsay
exceptions provided by the uniform Evidence Acts are insufficient to admit all
relevant previous statements
made by children because patterns of disclosure
among child victims often involve disclosure of small pieces of information over
periods of time.
considered that the admission of a child’s out-of-court statement can
preserve the child’s account at an early
stage, making it a reliable form
of evidence, and can reduce the stress and trauma on the child of testifying in
7.260 For these reasons, in the report
Seen and Heard: Priority for Children in
the Legal Process
(ALRC 84), the ALRC and HREOC make the following recommendation (the
ALRC/HREOC recommendation) to amend the uniform Evidence Acts
children’s hearsay statements to be admitted:
Evidence of a child’s hearsay statements regarding the facts in issue
should be admissible to prove the facts in issue in any
civil or criminal case
involving child abuse allegations, where admission of the hearsay statement is
necessary and the out-of-court
statement is reasonably reliable. A person may
not be convicted solely on the evidence of one hearsay statement admitted under
exception to the rule against
7.261 The ALRC/HREOC recommendation is based on a hearsay exception created
by the Supreme Court of Canada in
In Canada, courts
may admit children’s hearsay statements about an issue at trial if the
admission is ‘necessary’
and the statement is reasonably
It is considered to
be ‘necessary’ where the child is incompetent to give evidence, or
is unable or unavailable to give
evidence, such as where they are extremely
young or cannot give a coherent or comprehensive account of events, or the judge
is satisfied
that giving evidence might be traumatic for or harm the child.
7.262 ALRC 84 notes the
necessity test provides a much
broader set of circumstances for the admissibility of a child’s statement
than the ‘unavailability’
test under the uniform Evidence Acts.
Further, the
reasonable reliability test is less stringent than
the high probability of reliability tests in
of the uniform
Evidence Acts.
7.263 This issue has also been canvassed (in a non-uniform
Evidence Act
The VLRC recognises
that direct evidence given by a child in court may not be better than hearsay
evidence of a child’s earlier
statements about sexual abuse and recommends
a child-specific hearsay exception applicable to child sexual offence
7.264 In its interim report, the VLRC proposed that the courts should have a
discretion to admit the hearsay evidence of children,
regardless of whether the
child is available to give evidence. However, the final report expresses
reservations about the fairness
of such an approach where the child’s
evidence cannot be tested in cross-examination because the child is not
available to
give evidence. The VLRC also notes that provisions allowing the
court to admit hearsay evidence of sufficient probative value where
the child is
not available to give evidence may have limited effect because courts may
routinely exercise their discretion to exclude
evidence in this
7.265 In its final report, the VLRC recommends that a hearsay exception be enacted
for evidence of statements to prove facts in issue
in any criminal case
involving child sexual assault allegations where the child is under the age of
16; available to give evidence;
and the court, after considering the nature and
content of the statement and the circumstances in which it was made, is of the
that the evidence is of sufficient probative value to justify its
7.266 A number of jurisdictions have made provision for the admission of
child witness’ hearsay statements as proof of the facts
asserted. The
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) provides that, in children’s matters
of that Act, evidence of a representation made by a child
not inadmissible solely because of the law against
7.267 In New South Wales and Tasmania, in certain criminal proceedings the
evidence of certain previous statements made by a child
legislation allows for the admission of documentary evidence of statements made
by child witnesses tending to establish
a fact as evidence of that
In Western Australia, a
statement made by a child before the proceedings were commenced that relates to
any matter in issue in the
proceedings may be admitted at the discretion of the
Northern Territory
legislation provides an exception to the hearsay rule in sexual offence
proceedings for evidence of a child’s
statement to another
Submissions and
consultations
7.268 IP 28 asks whether there should be an additional exception to the
hearsay rule regarding children’s hearsay statements
issue, making such statements admissible to prove those facts and, if so,
subject to what
restrictions.
7.269 Victoria Legal Aid opposes proposals for ‘special “child
hearsay” rules’. It states that ‘present
arrangements for
children to make statements and to give evidence-in-chief by way of a video
recorded interview adequately protect
the welfare of child complainants and
enable investigators to obtain admissible evidence without unnecessary
difficulty’.
7.270 The NSW PDO and the Law Council also oppose a new hearsay rule for child
The Law Council
The Council does not believe that such an exception can be based on necessity
where the result of admitting hearsay evidence creates
an unreasonable risk that
an innocent person may be convicted. Where possible, children should testify
orally and their testimony
be subject to
cross-examination.
Commissions’ view
7.271 There are significant barriers to the development of any recommendation
for the introduction in the uniform Evidence Acts of
a hearsay exception
directed to children’s evidence. There is no consensus on the form of any
such exception. The parameters
of existing and proposed exceptions to the
hearsay rule vary significantly in scope. For example, some apply only to
evidence in
sexual offence cases, others to family law proceedings, or to all
civil or criminal proceedings in which allegations of child abuse
7.272 As discussed above, the ALRC and HREOC recommended an exception
applicable when a child witness is unavailable (in a broad sense),
VLRC takes a different approach by restricting the ambit of its proposed
exception to situations where the witness is available
to give evidence. In
these circumstances it could be a significant task to develop a uniform
7.273 As discussed in Chapter 18, the Commissions do not propose that
evidentiary provisions relating specifically to child witnesses
included in the uniform Evidence Acts at this stage. This is because of the
Commissions’ common policy that the uniform
Evidence Acts should remain
Acts of general application and due to the close links between such provisions
and complex procedural
7.274 The Commissions will be giving further consideration to the development
of a hearsay exception directed to children’s
evidence. However, the best
way to address concerns about this issue, at least in the medium term, may be
through hearsay exceptions
specific to certain offences and located outside the
uniform Evidence Acts.
7.275 In this context, it should be noted that the Commissions’
proposals for reform of some provisions of general application
may, in some
circumstances, reduce barriers to the admission of children’s hearsay
evidence specifically. These are the proposed
amendments to the uniform Evidence
Acts in relation to the ‘fresh in the memory’ test under
s 66(2); and as to when a
person is taken not to be available to give
Notice where hearsay
evidence is to be adduced
7.276 Section 67 of the uniform Evidence Acts makes the operation of
certain of the first-hand hearsay exceptions conditional on notice
being given
by the party intending to adduce the evidence to each other party. Briefly,
notice is required:
• in both civil and criminal trials where the maker of the
representation is unavailable and reliance is placed on s 63(2) or
ss 65(2), (3) or (8); and
• in civil trials under s 64(2) where the maker is available but
the party adducing the evidence proposes not to call the maker
because it would
cause undue expense or delay or would not be reasonably practicable.
7.277 Notices are to be given in accordance with any regulations or rules of
court made for the purposes of
Section 67(4)
provides that failure to give notice may be excused by the court. The section
does not set out criteria for the exercise
of this discretion. However, the
factors set out in s 192 of the Acts will apply, including the extent to
which making a direction
would be unfair to a party or witness, the importance
of the evidence and whether it is possible to grant an adjournment.
Notice in civil
proceedings
7.278 IP 28 states that, while it is common for the Crown to give notice
where hearsay evidence is to be adduced in criminal proceedings,
provisions are largely ignored in civil
proceedings.
how s 67 of the uniform Evidence Acts has operated in civil
proceedings.
7.279 Some practitioners state that it is important to comply with the notice
requirements because New South Wales judges do not hesitate
to exclude hearsay
evidence where notice has not been
Others say that the
notice provisions are rarely
but do not call for any
change. One comment is that s 67 provides a simple procedure, the
commonsense use of which should be
encouraged.
7.280 IP 28 notes suggestions that, in civil proceedings, the prescriptive
form of notice required by the uniform Evidence Acts, regulations
and rules of
court should be replaced by a simple requirement to serve hearsay evidence on
the other party.
7.281 Section 67 simply provides that the party must give notice of the
intention to adduce hearsay evidence, and that meaningful
notice could not be
given without indicating what the evidence is, and the statutory provisions and
grounds on which the party intends
to rely. It is up to courts to decide what,
if any, additional rules are needed. The Commissions have identified no
significant need
to change the hearsay notice provisions of uniform Evidence
Acts on this basis.
Notice in criminal
proceedings
7.282 The Law Council raises a substantive issue concerning the giving of
notice in criminal proceedings. As discussed above, s 65(9)
allows another
party to adduce hearsay evidence that qualifies or explains a representation
and admitted under s 65(8)(a). The
Law Council submits:
The vagueness of the term ‘the matter’ [in s 65(9)], the
possible ignorance of the accused about the evidence available
prosecution, and the unavailability of an advance ruling by the trial judge make
it difficult for the defence to decide whether
to call hearsay evidence under
s 65(8). Section 67(1) requires the defence to give notice of its
intention to call hearsay evidence
under s 65(8) but there is no subsequent
corresponding obligation on the prosecution. The Council believes such notice
Should s 67 of the uniform Evidence Acts be amended to
require the prosecution to give notice of an intention to adduce evidence under
Hearsay in civil
proceedings
7.283 The hearsay rule and its exceptions are of much more practical
importance in criminal than in civil proceedings. From initial
consultations, it
is apparent that the hearsay rule is often ignored in civil proceedings.
7.284 In the United Kingdom, the hearsay rule was abolished in civil
proceedings by the
Evidence Act 1995
(UK). Section 1 of the
Evidence Act
states that:
(1) In civil proceedings evidence shall not be excluded on the ground that it is
(2) In this Act—
(a) ‘hearsay’ means a statement made otherwise than by a person
while giving oral evidence in the proceedings which
is tendered as evidence of
the matters stated; and
(b) references to hearsay include hearsay of whatever degree.
7.285 Under the United Kingdom legislation, the party proposing to adduce
hearsay evidence must provide notice of that fact to the
The Act also contains
detailed provisions setting out considerations relevant to the weighing of
hearsay evidence by the
7.286 The ALRC requested comments on whether the uniform Evidence Acts might
be reformed to abolish the hearsay rule or to allow the
hearsay rule to be
waived. One starting point for such a reform might be s 190 of the uniform
Evidence Acts. This provision states
that the court may dispense with the
application of certain rules of
but only if the
parties consent.
proceeding, the court may order that certain provisions of the legislation do
not apply to evidence if:
(a) the matter to which the evidence relates is not genuinely in dispute; or
(b) the application of those provisions would cause or involve unnecessary
expense or delay.
7.287 In consultations, the abolition of hearsay rules in civil proceedings
was opposed. It is considered that the breadth of the
exceptions to the hearsay
rule and the waiver provisions were sufficient to allow for appropriate use of
hearsay evidence. One New
South Wales District Court judge comments:
The hearsay provisions are, in my view, basic to the requirement of fairness in
the courts, despite the criticisms that have been
levelled at them. In some
situations it is conceivable that all parties might consent to allow the
admission of hearsay evidence,
but in my view these would be relatively rare. In
my submission it is better that the Act remain as it
7.288 In addition, some judges oppose the abolition of the hearsay rule on
case management grounds. That is, leaving aside concerns
of evidence, liberalising the admission of hearsay evidence could add to the
volume of evidence before the
court, potentially prolonging trials and
increasing costs. The Commissions propose no change to the uniform Evidence Acts
Uniform Evidence Acts
Australian Law
Reform Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1 (1985),
[329]–[340].
[341]–[345].
[661]–[675]; Australian Law Reform Commission,
(1987), [126].
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1 (1985), [676]; Australian
Law Reform Commission,
, ALRC 38 (1987),
Australian Law Reform Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1 (1985),
Ibid, [678]. See discussion of
Uniform Evidence Acts s 66 below.
Australian Law Reform Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1
(1985), [678].
Uniform Evidence Acts
See articles and texts
[2000] NSWCCA 503
(2000) 158 FLR 359
Australian Law Reform Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1 (1985),
Uniform Evidence Acts s 3,
definition of
‘representation’.
Walton v The Queen
[1989] HCA 9
(1989) 166 CLR
J Gans and A Palmer,
Australian Principles of Evidence
(2nd ed, 2004),
Ibid, 161. See, eg,
[2000] NSWCCA 195
(2000) 173 ALR 287
in which the statements ‘Too many, hey’
and ‘Hey, hey, you don't know which one, hey’ made to the accused
another person about a container load of canned pineapple were held to be
relevant to the knowledge of the accused in relation
to a heroin importation and
not excluded by s 59(1).
[2000] NSWCCA 503
(2000) 158 FLR 359.
Uniform Evidence
(6th ed, 2004), [1.3.800]. See
[2000] NSWCCA 503
(2000) 158 FLR 359
[477]: ‘Absent evidence to the contrary, it could not be inferred that the
appellant did not intend to assert by what he wrote
the very matters which the
appellant contends emerged from a reading of the document’ (Studdert J).
J Gans and A Palmer,
Principles of Evidence
(2nd ed, 2004),
Australian Law Reform Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1 (1985), [684]; S Odgers,
Evidence Law
(6th ed, 2004), [1.3.800], fn
Federal Rules of Evidence
(US), r 801.
Advisory Committee
Notes to Rule 801 of the Federal Rules of Evidence
(2004) Legal
Information Institute <www.law.cornell.edu/rules/fre/ACRule801.htm> at 2
February 2005.
The Advisory Committee
on Rules is a committee of the United States Judicial Conference’s
Committee on Rules of Practice and
Procedure. The Judicial Conference approves
rules of practice, procedure, and evidence for the federal courts, which are
then prescribed
by the Supreme Court and subject to Congressional review: L
The Rulemaking Process: A Summary for the Bench and Bar
http://www.uscourts.gov/rules/proceduresum.htm
at 2 February
Advisory Committee on Rules,
Notes to Rule 801 of the Federal Rules of Evidence
(2004) Legal
Information Institute <www.law.cornell.edu/rules/fre/ACRule801.htm> at 2
February 2005.
See, eg, the use of
nicknames in
United States v Weeks
[1990] USCA5 2173
919 F2d 248
(5th Circuit, 1990),
discussed below.
Advisory Committee on
Notes to Rule 801 of the Federal Rules of Evidence
(2004) Legal
Information Institute <www.law.cornell.edu/rules/fre/ACRule801.htm> at 2
February 2005.
Ibid. Another view is
that the Advisory Committee’s assertion is not supported by the wording of
Rule 801 and that the party
arguing for admission should have to show that
the statement is not hearsay as the witness did not intend the statement to
for an assertion. This latter position appears to be the case under
California Evidence Code
: see M Mendez,
Comparison of Evidence
Code with Federal Rules: Part I. Hearsay and its Exceptions
California Law Revision Commission <www.clrc.ca.gov/pub/2002/MM02-41.pdf>
at 2 February 2005.
See, eg, P Rice,
The Evidence Project: Proposed Revisions to the Federal Rules of Evidence
American University
(2005) American University
<www.wcl.american.edu/pub/journals/evidence> at 4 February
S Saltzburg, M Martin and D
Federal Rules of Evidence Manual
Ibid, [801.02], fn 20.
See also G Weissenberger, ‘Unintended Implications of Speech and the
Definition of Hearsay’
Temple Law Review
S Saltzburg, M Martin and D
Federal Rules of Evidence Manual
United States v Weeks
[1990] USCA5 2173
919 F2d 248
(5th Circuit, 1990) as discussed in S Saltzburg, M Martin and
Federal Rules of Evidence Manual
United States v
[1998] USCA1 2
132 F3d 834
(1st Circuit, 1998) as discussed in S Saltzburg, M
Martin and D Capra,
Federal Rules of Evidence Manual
S Saltzburg, M Martin and D
Federal Rules of Evidence Manual
(2004), [801.02]. However, if the
husband had said to his wife privately ‘watch out for Pablo, he is
dangerous’, this
would not be an intentional assertion that the person
identified went by the name Pablo—as the intent would be to warn the
to stay away from the identified
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004),
Law Council of
4 March 2005; P Greenwood,
Consultation
, Sydney, 11 March
Director of Public Prosecutions
15 February
Law Council of Australia,
New South Wales Public
See P Roberts and A Zuckerman,
Criminal Evidence
(2004), 585–596;
R v Kearley
[1992] 2 AC
Consultation
Sydney, 25 February 2005. For example, in the
case, the defence
originally sought to admit the written note as exculpatory evidence (that is,
showing that Mark existed). By the
second trial it was tendered by the Crown as
evidence of consciousness of guilt, and a plan by Hannes to make a ‘false
Consultation
, Sydney, 3 March 2005; T Game,
Consultation
25 February 2005.
See Australian Law
Reform Commission,
, ALRC 38 (1987),
[144]–[145].
(1998) 195 CLR 594.
Australian Law Reform Commission,
, ALRC 38 (1987),
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1 (1985),
For example, if the evidence is
rejected because it is believed that the prior statement is true, why should the
court not be permitted
to act upon that
See Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1 (1985),
Evidence Act 1910
Evidence Act 1977
Australian Securities
and Investments Commission v Rich
[2005] NSWSC 149
, [45]–[46];
Australian Securities and Investments Commission v Rich
[2005] NSWCA
For example, an experienced drug
user identifying a drug:
Price v The Queen
[1981] TASRp 23
[1981] Tas R
See, citations in
Australian Law Reform Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 2
(1985), [91];
PQ v Australian Red Cross Society
[1992] VicRp 2
[1992] 1 VR 19
(Unreported, Victorian Court of Criminal Appeal, Crockett, Tadgell
and Teague JJ, 12 September 1994);
[1997] SASC 6196
(1997) 93 A Crim R
J Chadbourne (ed)
(1979), Vol 2, [665b].
See discussion in Australian Law Reform Commission,
ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 2 (1985),
J Chadbourne (ed)
(1979), Vol 6,
See further
Paric v John Holland
Constructions Pty Ltd
[1985] HCA 58
(1985) 62 ALR
Makita (Australia) Pty Ltd v
[2001] NSWCA 305
(2001) 52 NSWLR 705
, [38] citing
Paric v John Holland
Constructions Pty Ltd
[1985] HCA 58
(1985) 62 ALR
R v Stephenson
[1976] VicRp 34
See Ch 14 in relation to
Uniform Evidence Acts
and the common law concept of
‘sufficient relevance’.
Lee v The Queen
(1998) 195 CLR
See J Anderson, J Hunter and N
The New Evidence Law: Annotations and Commentary on the Uniform
Evidence Acts
(2002), [60.15].
Lee v The Queen
(1998) 195 CLR 594,
(7th ed, 2004), [35440].
Uniform Evidence Law: Text and Essential Cases
Consultation
, Canberra, 9 March
For example,
[2000] NSWCCA 83
(2000) 115 A Crim R 465
(1999) 47 NSWLR 267. One view is that
the decision in
can be understood as an attempt by the High Court to
ensure that a broad interpretation of
does not allow the Act’s
constraints on evidence of admissions that are not first-hand to be
circumvented: Uniform Evidence
Acts, s 82: P Bayne,
Consultation
Canberra, 9 March 2005; P Bayne,
Uniform Evidence Law: Text and Essential
(2003), [10.520].
[2000] NSWCCA 83
(2000) 115 A Crim R 465.
However, there may be other means by which second-hand or more remote hearsay
evidence concerning previous inconsistent statements
may be adduced: See, eg
Tasmania v S
[2004] TASSC 84
, in which it was held that, where a
complainant’s friend (E) could not recall the complaint being made or E
repeating it to
her mother, evidence of the complaint could be adduced from
E’s mother using s 38(1)(a) and (c) and s 43(2). Section 60
then make the mother’s evidence admissible as evidence of the truth
of E’s statement.
Australian Law
Reform Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004),
To be distinguished also from
an intention to assert that the fact is
The same reasoning will apply to
the other sorts of hearsay on which experts rely and for which the common law
has exceptions: See
Australian Law Reform Commission,
ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 2 (1985),
[2000] NSWCCA
, [103]–[107].
[103]–[107].
That is, under the
Jones v Dunkel
[1959] HCA 8
(1959) 101 CLR
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004),
Quick v Stoland
[1998] FCA 1200
157 ALR 615
‘Commentary on Justice Einstein's Paper’
The Judicial
Roach v Page
[2003] NSWSC 907
, [74]. Assumptions, however, will include the
expert’s accumulated knowledge which is not excluded by the hearsay
Quick v Stoland
[1998] FCA 1200
(1998) 157 ALR 615
(1996) 90 A Crim
, 369, 371.
[2000] NSWCCA 214.
Ibid, [106]. See also
Roach v Page (No 11)
[2003] NSWSC 907
Or, in the case of
, to a defendant in criminal proceedings. See also Chs 3,
(7th ed, 2004), [35440] citing
(1996) 90 A Crim R
Roach v Page (No
[2003] NSWSC 907.
comments also apply to
, in relation to opinion
Roach v Page (No
[2003] NSWSC 907
Ibid, [74].
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004),
Consultation
, Canberra, 9 March
P Greenwood,
Consultation
, Sydney, 11 March
Crown Prosecutors,
Consultation
, Sydney, 11 February
State of South Australia,
16 February
Director of Public
Prosecutions (NSW),
15 February
Consultation
, Sydney, 21 February 2005; T Game,
Consultation
Sydney, 25 February 2005; New South Wales District Court Judges,
Consultation
, Sydney, 3 March 2005; Supreme Court of the ACT Judicial
Consultation
, Canberra, 8 March
Supreme Court of the ACT
Judicial Officers,
Consultation
, Canberra, 8 March 2005; ACT Bar
Association,
Consultation
, Canberra, 9 March
Judicial Officers of the
Family Court of Australia and Federal Magistrates Court,
Consultation
Parramatta, 28 February 2005.
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
(2004), Qs 5–3,
Consultation
, Canberra, 9 March 2005; P Greenwood,
Consultation
Sydney, 11 March 2005; New South Wales Public Defenders,
21 April 2005.
Bar Association,
Consultation
, Brisbane, 9 February 2005; State of South
16 February 2005; P Greenwood,
Consultation
, Sydney, 11 March
Consultation
Canberra, 9 March 2005. However, as noted above,
also avoids the need
to address defining exceptions relating to the factual basis of expert opinion
New South Wales Public
New South Wales District
Court Judges,
Consultation
, Sydney, 3 March 2005; Supreme Court of the
ACT Judicial Officers,
Consultation
, Canberra, 8 March 2005.
P Greenwood,
Consultation
Sydney, 11 March 2005.
South Australia,
16 February
Queensland Bar Association,
Consultation
, Brisbane, 9 February 2005; Crown Prosecutors,
Consultation
, Sydney, 11 February 2005; Law Council of Australia,
Queensland Bar Association,
Consultation
, Brisbane, 9 February 2005; A Palmer,
Consultation
Melbourne, 16 March 2005.
Consultation
, Sydney, 25 February
Consultation
Canberra, 9 March 2005.
basis that the maker of the statement is available for
cross-examination—although in such a case s 66 may apply: Law
of Australia,
4 March 2005. By contrast, Andrew
Kirkham QC expresses concern about the use of prior complaint evidence
(that is, prior consistent
statements) as ‘corroboration’ in
military prosecutions: A Kirkham,
Consultation
, Melbourne, 16 March
Director of Public
Prosecutions (NSW),
15 February
Also G Bellamy,
Consultation
, Canberra, 8 March
One submission states that
the interpretation given to s 60 in
‘goes against the
clear and sound policy presented by the ALRC [in ALRC 38], which the
legislature must have been intending’:
Confidential,
22 February 2005; also G Bellamy,
Consultation
, Canberra, 8
March 2005.
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, ALRC 38 (1987),
The Court also stated that,
if Calin had given evidence, his prior inconsistent statement—which could
be admitted to show
that his credibility was affected—could have been used
for the hearsay purpose:
Lee v The Queen
(1998) 195 CLR 594,
Uniform Evidence
Law: Text and Essential Cases
Jones v Dunkel
(1959) 101 CLR 289.
Such as Uniform
Evidence Acts ss 64(3), 66, 69, 70, 72,
However, see
[7.88]–[7.89] above.
Queensland Bar Association,
Consultation
, Brisbane, 9 February
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1 (1985),
See Ibid, [682]; Australian
Law Reform Commission,
, ALRC 38 (1987), App A, Evidence
Bill 1987, cl 57(3).
Consultation
, Canberra, 8 March 2005; S Finch,
Consultation
, Sydney, 3 March 2005; Queensland Bar Association,
Consultation
, Brisbane, 9 February
Uniform Evidence Acts
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth) Dictionary cl 4;
Evidence Act 1995
(NSW), Dictionary
Evidence Act 2001
Evidence Act 2004
(NI) Dictionary cl 4.
Consultation
, Sydney, 3 March
New South Wales District
Court Judges,
22 February
Criminal Justice Act
(UK) s 116(2)(b). Similarly, in Queensland,
Evidence Act 1977
(Qld) provides a hearsay exception in prescribed
criminal proceedings if the person who made the hearsay statement is unavailable
because the person is ‘mentally or physically incapable of giving the
Justice Act
(UK) s 116(2)(e).
Director of Public Prosecutions
15 February
R v Suteski
[2002] NSWCCA 509
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004),
Law Council of
Criminal Law Committee of the
Law Society of South Australia,
7 March 2005.
Similar concerns were expressed in consultations, eg, ACT Bar Association,
Consultation
, Canberra, 9 March 2005; Law Society of South Australia,
Consultation
, Adelaide, 11 May
New South Wales Public
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, ALRC 38 (1987),
Suteski v The Queen
[2003] HCATrans 493.
Section 65(2)(c) did not derive from recommendations of the ALRC but from
the judgment of Mason CJ in
Walton v The Queen
[1989] HCA 9
(1989) 166 CLR 283
293; S Odgers,
Uniform Evidence Law
(6th ed, 2004),
[1.3.2080].
Evidence Law
(6th ed, 2004), [1.3.2060];
[2000] NSWCCA 303
(2000) 118 A Crim
R v Mankotia
[1998] NSWSC
Williams v The Queen
[2000] FCA 1868
(2000) 119 A Crim R 490.
R v Ambrosoli
[2002] NSWCCA 386
Uniform Evidence
(6th ed, 2004), [1.3.2060].
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
(2004), [5.46].
Confidential,
6 September 2004; Director of Public Prosecutions
15 February 2005; Law Council of
New South Wales Public
R v Ambrosoli
[2002] NSWCCA 386
55 NSWLR 603.
New South Wales
Public Defenders,
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004), [5.49]; S
Uniform Evidence Law
(6th ed, 2004),
[1.3.2220].
R v Mankotia
[1998] NSWSC 295.
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004),
Law Council of
4 March 2005; New South Wales Public
New South Wales Public
Uniform Evidence Acts
contains a parallel provision applicable to civil proceedings. The
concept of fresh in the memory is also used in
, in relation to
reviving memory in court by reference to a
Graham v The Queen
(1998) 195 CLR 606.
For example,
[1999] NSWCCA 21
(1999) 105 A Crim R 479
[2000] NSWCCA 214.
Anderson, J Hunter and N Williams,
The New Evidence Law: Annotations and
Commentary on the Uniform Evidence Acts
(2002), [64.45],
[2000] NSWCCA 214
R v Vinh Le
[2000] NSWCCA
Ibid, [52]. The decision in
R v Vinh Le
was not unanimous on this point, and the judgments differ in
their interpretation of the decision in
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004), [5.57]
referring to A Cossins, ‘The Hearsay Rule and Delayed Complaints of Child
Sexual Abuse: The Law and the
Evidence’ (2002) 9(2)
Psychiatry,
Psychology and Law
Cossins, ‘The Hearsay Rule and Delayed Complaints of Child Sexual Abuse:
The Law and the Evidence’ (2002) 9(2)
Psychiatry, Psychology and Law
163. See also Australian Law Reform Commission and Human Rights and Equal
Opportunity Commission,
Seen and Heard: Priority for Children in the Legal
, ALRC 84 (1997), 330–333,
NSW Health Department
Child Protection and Violence Prevention Unit,
February 2005.
New South Wales
Public Defenders,
Consultation
, Canberra, 8 March
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004),
R v Barbaro
[2000] NSWCCA 192
112 A Crim R 551.
[2000] NSWCCA 198
(2000) 113 A Crim R 376.
Uniform Evidence Law
(6th ed, 2004),
[1.3.2300].
[2000] NSWCCA 198
113 A Crim R 376
[2000] NSWCCA 192
(2000) 112 A Crim R 551
[2000] NSWCCA 198
(2000) 113 A
Australian Law
Reform Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004),
Qs 5–8, 5–9.
Law Council of
4 March 2005.
New South Wales Public
Consultation
, Melbourne 16 March 2005; Office of the Director of Public
Prosecutions Tasmania,
Consultation
, Hobart, 15 March
Referring to
[2000] NSWCCA 49.
to Ibid, [125]–[126]. Also New South Wales District Court Judges,
22 February
Director of Public
Prosecutions (NSW),
15 February 2005; also P
Consultation
, Hobart, 15 March
Director of Public
Prosecutions (NSW),
15 February
Judicial Officers of the
Supreme Court of New South Wales,
Consultation
, Sydney, 18 March 2005;
New South Wales District Court Judges,
Consultation
, Sydney, 3 March
New South Wales District
Court Judges,
22 February
Ibid. By contrast, one
District Court judge submits that the test in
appears to work well
and there is no need for legislative amendment: Confidential,
22 February 2005.
South Wales District Court Judges,
22 February
Supreme Court of the ACT
Judicial Officers,
Consultation
, Canberra, 8 March
See also New South Wales
Public Defenders,
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004),
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1 (1985), [664]–[669]
(memory generally), [420]–[421] (eyewitness
identification).
B Clifford and J
Scott, ‘Individual and Situational Factors in Eyewitness Testimony’
Journal of Applied Psychology
352; B Clifford and C Hollin,
‘Effects of the Type of Incident and the Number of Perpetrators on
Eyewitness Memory’ (1981)
Journal of Applied Psychology
Loftus and T Burns, ‘Mental Shock Can Produce Retrograde
Amnesia’ (1982) 10
Memory & Cognition
Compare S Christianson, J
Goodman and E Loftus, ‘Eyewitness Memory for Stressful Events:
Methodological Quandaries and Ethical
Dilemmas’ in S Christianson (ed)
The Handbook of Emotion and Memory
(1992) 217; K Shobe, ‘Is
Traumatic Memory Special?’ (1997) 6(3)
Current Directions in
Psychological Science
Yuille and J Cutshall, ‘A Case Study of Eyewitness Memory of a
Crime’ (1986) 71(2)
Journal of Applied Psychology
291; J Yuille and
J Cutshall, ‘Analysis of the Statements of Victims, Witnesses and
Suspects’ in J Yuille (ed)
Credibility Assessment
(1989) 175; S
Porter and A Birt, ‘Is Traumatic Memory Special? A Comparison of Traumatic
Memory Characteristics with Memory
for Other Emotional Life Experiences’
Applied Cognitive Psychology
For reviews of literature
in the area, see B van der Kolk and R Fisler, ‘Dissociation and
Fragmentary Nature of Traumatic
Memories: Overview and Exploratory Study’
(1995) 8(4)
Journal of Traumatic Stress
505; S Christianson,
‘Emotional Stress and Eyewitness Memory: A Critical Review’ (1992)
Psychological Bulletin
B van der Kolk and R
Fisler, ‘Dissociation and Fragmentary Nature of Traumatic Memories:
Overview and Exploratory Study’
(1995) 8(4)
Journal of Traumatic Stress
S Porter and A Birt,
‘Is Traumatic Memory Special? A Comparison of Traumatic Memory
Characteristics with Memory for Other Emotional
Life Experiences’ (2001)
Applied Cognitive Psychology
101; J Yuille and J Cutshall,
‘A Case Study of Eyewitness Memory of a Crime’ (1986) 71(2)
Journal of Applied Psychology
291; J Yuille and J Cutshall,
‘Analysis of the Statements of Victims, Witnesses and Suspects’ in J
Yuille (ed)
Credibility Assessment
(1989) 175; J Yuille and J Daylen,
‘The Impact of Traumatic Events on Eyewitness Memory’ in C Thompson
and others (eds),
Eyewitness Memory: Theoretical and Applied Perspectives
(1998) 155; L Nadel and W Jacobs, ‘Traumatic Memory is Special’
(1998) 7(5)
Current Directions in Psychological Science
For example, the judgment
of Callinan J (with whom Gleeson CJ agreed) stated that ‘it
cannot be doubted that the quality or
vividness of a recollection will generally
be relevant in an assessment of its freshness’:
Graham v The Queen
(1998) 195 CLR 606
(1999) 47 NSWLR 267, 282. The New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal
stated that this view of the trial judge (Wood CJ at CL) had
commend it’.
[2000] NSWCCA 49.
Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004),
Uniform Evidence Acts
trauma may leave indelible sensory and affective imprints, once these are
incorporated into a persona narrative this
semantic memory, like all explicit
memory, is likely subject to varying degrees of distortion’: B van der
Kolk and R Fisler,
‘Dissociation and Fragmentary Nature of Traumatic
Memories: Overview and Exploratory Study’ (1995) 8(4)
Traumatic Stress
‘document’ falling within the terms of the uniform Evidence Acts
See J Anderson, J
Hunter and N Williams,
The New Evidence Law: Annotations and Commentary on
the Uniform Evidence Acts
Uniform Evidence Acts
See S Odgers,
Uniform Evidence Law
(6th ed, 2004), [1.3.2860]. Evidence of a previous
representation in the form of an opinion as to the existence of a fact may be
caught by both the hearsay and opinion rules:
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004), [5.65]; S
Uniform Evidence Law
(6th ed, 2004),
[1.3.2860].
Evidence Law
(6th ed, 2004),
[1.3.2860].
Ringrow Pty Ltd v BP
Australia Limited
Uniform Evidence
(6th ed, 2004), [1.3.2860].
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
(2004), Q 5–11.
11 March 2005; P Greenwood,
Consultation
, Sydney, 11 March
Consultation
, Sydney, 21 February
For example, New South Wales
Public Defenders,
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, ALRC 38 (1987), App A, Evidence Bill 1987,
Australian Law
Reform Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1 (1985),
Director of Public
Prosecutions (NSW),
15 February 2005. Also Crown
Prosecutors,
Consultation
, Sydney, 11 February
Vitali v Stachnik
[2001] NSWSC 303
Uniform Evidence Law
(6th ed, 2004),
[1.3.3400].
See J Anderson, J
Hunter and N Williams,
The New Evidence Law: Annotations and Commentary on
the Uniform Evidence Acts
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, ALRC 38 (1987),
[5.70]–[5.72].
Uniform Evidence Law
(6th ed, 2004), [1.3.3400]; J Anderson, J Hunter and
N Williams,
The New Evidence Law: Annotations and Commentary on the Uniform
Evidence Acts
(2002), [72.00];
R v Polkinghorne
[1999] NSWSC 704
(1999) 108 A Crim R
New South Wales Public
21 April 2005;
R v Polkinghorne
[1999] NSWSC 704
(1999) 108 A Crim R 189.
[2000] NSWCCA 503
(2000) 158 FLR 359
Roach v Page (No 11)
, [15]–[16].
[2004] ACTSC 81
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
(2004), [5.72] referring to J Anderson, J Hunter and N Williams,
Evidence Law: Annotations and Commentary on the Uniform Evidence Acts
(2002), [72.40].
Australian Law
Reform Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004), [5.71]
referring to S Odgers,
Uniform Evidence Law
(6th ed, 2004),
[1.3.3400].
Director of Public
Prosecutions (NSW),
15 February
Uniform Evidence
(6th ed, 2004), [1.3.3700].
Uniform Evidence Acts
It has also been
suggested that
should be amended so that it requires either knowledge
on one hand or information and belief on the other: A Hogan,
16 August 2004.
Confidential,
22 February
Australian Law Reform
Commission and Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission,
Seen and Heard:
Priority for Children in the Legal Process
, ALRC 84 (1997),
Uniform Evidence Acts
J Anderson, J
Hunter and N Williams,
The New Evidence Law: Annotations and Commentary on
the Uniform Evidence Acts
(2002), [60.00]. Although see
(1998) 195 CLR 594 and the discussion above regarding the limitation
on the operation of
Australian Law Reform Commission and Human Rights and Equal Opportunity
Commission,
Seen and Heard: Priority for Children in the Legal Process
ALRC 84 (1997), [14.79].
Law Reform Commission,
The Receipt of Evidence by Queensland Courts: The
Evidence of Children
, Report No 55:
Australian Law Reform Commission
and Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission,
Seen and Heard: Priority
for Children in the Legal Process
(1990) 2 SCR 531
, 546; Australian Law Reform Commission and Human Rights and
Equal Opportunity Commission,
Seen and Heard: Priority for Children in the
Legal Process
, ALRC 84 (1997),
[14.81]–[14.82].
(1990) 2 SCR 531:
In this case, a child’s previous representation
of sexual assault was admitted through an adult witness without calling the
child complaintant.
Australian Law
Reform Commission and Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission,
Heard: Priority for Children in the Legal Process
, ALRC 84 (1997), [14.82],
Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Sexual Offences: Final Report
[5.97]–[5.130].
[5.105]–[5.115].
[5.125]–[5.127].
Family Law Act
(Cth) s 100D.
Evidence (Children) Act 1997
: this applies only
to children who are under the age of 16 at the time the evidence is given.
Evidence (Children and Special Witnesses) Act 2001
Act applies to children under the age of
Evidence Act 1977
Statements contained in a document that were made by another person
in response to the child’s statements are also admissible:
The maker of the statements must be available to give evidence in the
proceeding. These sections apply to children under 16 years
of age, or children
aged 16 or 17 who are classed as special
Evidence Act 1906
Details of the statement must be given to the defendant
and the defendant must be given the opportunity to cross-examine the child:
The person to whom the child made the statement is to give
evidence of its making and content:
These sections apply to
proceedings relating to certain sexual and other violent offences under the
Criminal Code
(WA), and where the child was under 16 years of age when
the complaint was made.
Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004),
Victoria Legal
18 February
New South Wales Public
21 April 2005; Law Council of
Law Council of Australia,
4 March 2005. The Law Council does, however,
support modified procedures for the giving of evidence by
Proposals 7–6, 7–4.
Evidence Regulations 1995
Federal Court Rules
(Cth) O 33 r 16.
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
(2004), [5.90]. In relation to notice in criminal proceedings, the NSW PDO
states that ‘the traditional time for service
of these notices appears to
be the Friday afternoon before the trial is to commence. Judges appear not to be
prepared to apply any
sanctions for late notice of tendency and coincidence
evidence’: New South Wales Public Defenders,
21 April 2005.
Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004),
For example, B
Consultation
, Sydney, 21 February
For example, P Greenwood,
11 March 2005; S Finch,
Consultation
Sydney, 3 March 2005.
P Greenwood,
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004),
Law Council of Australia,
Evidence Act
Uniform Evidence Acts
The following provisions may be waived, in relation to particular
evidence or generally: Divs 3, 4 or 5 of
. (Part numbers differ slightly in the Tasmanian
legislation.)
Section 190(2)
contains safeguards with regard to the consent of a defendant in criminal
proceedings.
Uniform Evidence Acts
Confidential,
22 February 2005. See also P Greenwood,
Consultation
, Sydney, 11 March 2005.
8. The Opinion Rule and its Exceptions
Introduction
Lay opinion
Opinions based on specialised knowledge
Opinion on an ultimate issue
Opinion on matters of common knowledge
Expert opinion regarding children's evidence
Expert opinion regarding other categories of witness
8. The Opinion Rule and its Exceptions
Introduction
8.1 The common law rules of evidence generally render evidence of opinion
inadmissible. Consistently,
of the uniform Evidence Acts provides a
general exclusionary rule for opinion evidence:
(1) Evidence of an opinion is not admissible to prove the existence of a fact
8.2 While the Act does not attempt to define the term ‘opinion’
it has been held that an opinion is, in substance, ‘an
inference drawn or
to be drawn from observed and communicable
8.3 The distinction between evidence of an opinion and evidence of fact may
be considered artificial because there is a ‘continuum
between evidence in
the form of fact and evidence in the form of opinion, the one at times passing
imperceptibly into the
However, in its
earlier inquiry into the laws of evidence, the ALRC considered that retaining
the distinction (and a rule excluding
opinion evidence) was
‘unavoidable’ in order to exercise some control upon material at the
opinion end of the continuum
and for control of the admission of expert opinion
8.4 The uniform Evidence Acts provide a range of exceptions to the opinion
exclusionary rule.
These include
exceptions in relation to lay
and opinion based on
specialised knowledge
(‘expert opinion evidence’).
8.5 A number of concerns are raised in relation to the operation of these
exceptions, which are discussed in this chapter. The chapter
proposes amendment
of the uniform Evidence Acts to provide an exception to the opinion and
credibility rules for expert opinion evidence
on the development and behaviour
of children. A number of other possible reforms are also discussed, but
rejected, notably in relation
to requirements to prove the factual basis of
expert opinion evidence.
8.6 Aspects of the opinion rule in specific contexts, including in relation
to evidence of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander traditional
customs; evidence in family law proceedings; in sexual offence cases; and from
child witnesses are discussed in Chapters
Lay opinion
8.7 At common law, lay opinion evidence was inadmissible unless it fitted
within ‘an apparently anomalous miscellany’
exceptions.
Section 78 of the
uniform Evidence Acts was intended to reform this position. It states:
The opinion rule does not apply to evidence of an opinion expressed by a person
(a) the opinion is based on what the person saw, heard or otherwise perceived
(b) evidence of the opinion is necessary to obtain an adequate account or
understanding of the person’s perception of the
matter or event.
8.8 Examples of evidence that may be admitted as lay opinion evidence include
evidence as to the apparent age of a person, the speed
of a vehicle, the state
of the weather, a road or the floor of a
and the comparative
intelligence amongst the inhabitants of a small town of a person with whom the
witness has had dealings.
8.9 The ALRC gave consideration to including an express requirement that lay
opinion be rationally based in order to fall under s
78, but considered
that the words that now comprise s 78(b) provided sufficient
protection.
R v Panetta,
the New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal held that opinion evidence that
is not rationally based will not satisfy the test of
relevance in s 55 of
the uniform Evidence Acts.
is, the evidence must be logically probative—capable of rationally
affecting the assessment of the probability of the
existence of a fact in
8.10 IP 28 noted suggestions that:
• some approaches to the application of s 78 are overly technical,
and would tend to exclude evidence that s 78 is designed
to admit—evidence
of perceptions that cannot be communicated other than as an
• in some circumstances, it may not be entirely clear where the divide lies
between lay opinion evidence and expert opinion
evidence; and
• opinion evidence is sometimes sought to be admitted under s 78 in order
to circumvent s 79 (dealing with expert opinion evidence)
in situations
where the witness does not have the requisite specialised knowledge based on
‘training, study or
experience’.
Submissions and
consultations
8.11 IP 28 asked what concerns exist with regard to the admission of lay
opinion evidence under s 78 of the uniform Evidence Acts;
and whether any
concerns should be addressed through amendment of the uniform Evidence
8.12 Victoria Legal Aid states that it opposes allowing lay opinion evidence to be
given because such a course could lead, for example,
to the police routinely
giving opinion evidence as to the identity of an
8.13 In this context, two submissions and
consultations
refer to the
decision of the High Court in
Smith v The
police officers gave similar evidence at trial, over the objection of the
appellant. Both said that they had had previous dealings
with the appellant and
that they recognised the person depicted in the bank robbery photographs as the
accused. The High Court allowed
the appeal and ordered a new trial.
8.14 With the exception of Kirby J, the judges found that the identification
evidence of the police officers was inadmissible because
it was not relevant
under s 55—the police witnesses were in no better position to make a
comparison between the appellant and
the person in the photographs than the
The judgment of Gleeson
CJ, Gaudron, Gummow and Hayne JJ stated that, because the witness’
assertion of identity was founded
on material no different from the material
available to the jury from its own observation, it was not evidence that could
affect the jury’s determination of whether the accused was
shown in the photographs:
The fact that someone else has reached a conclusion about the identity of the
accused and the person in the picture does not provide
any logical basis for
affecting the jury's assessment of the probability of the existence of that fact
when the conclusion is based
only on material that is not different in any
substantial way from what is available to the jury. The process of reasoning
fact (the depiction of a man in the security photographs) taken with
another fact (the observed appearance of the accused) to the
conclusion (that
one is the depiction of the other) is neither assisted, nor hindered, by knowing
that some other person has, or
has not, arrived at that conclusion. Indeed, if
the assessment of probability is affected by that knowledge, it is not by any
of reasoning, but by the decision-maker permitting substitution of the
view of another, for the decision-maker’s own
conclusion.
8.15 Kirby J found that the evidence was relevant but that it was not covered
by the lay opinion exception because neither police
officer was present at the
‘matter or event’ for the purposes of s 78, which Kirby J
considered to be the robbery. Kirby
J stated that ALRC 26:
makes it clear that this provision of the Act was addressed, essentially, to the
opinion of eye-witnesses. It exists to allow such
witnesses to recount, as
closely as possible, ‘their original perception [so as] to minimise
inaccuracy and encourage
8.16 This interpretation has been criticised on the basis that the term
‘matter or event’ is not necessarily related to
the offences or
other events in question in the trial, but rather to what the person expressing
the opinion ‘saw, heard or
otherwise perceived’ and that this can
involve, for example, a photograph, the appearance of the accused and a
comparison of
8.17 Some New South Wales Local Court magistrates state that issues concerning the
admission of identification evidence from police
arise frequently and that, as a
result of the decision in
, magistrates are not able to rely on
police opinion evidence as to identification. It is said that, as a result,
magistrates are
left to reach their own opinion on identification—in
effect themselves identifying the person in police photographs and other
evidence. This determination often occurs in a very short timeframe, given the
speed with which matters are dealt with in the Local
8.18 The magistrates’ view is that the opinion of police officers, who may
be familiar with the physical appearance of the accused,
may be the most
reliable and should therefore be admissible, whether under s 78 or
otherwise. In this context, the New South Wales
Court of Criminal Appeal in
held that the evidence given by the police officers was not evidence
of an opinion but was direct evidence that a person shown in
the photograph was
the accused. As such it was not excluded by s 76; and there was no need to
consider the application of s 78 or
other statutory exceptions to the
opinion rule.
Commissions’ view
8.19 The decision of the High Court in
Smith v The Queen
constitute a barrier to the admission of police opinion evidence on
identification. The majority decision indicates that such
evidence is not
relevant, at least where there is no suggestion that the physical appearance of
the accused has changed materially,
or that the police, by reason of their
previous observations, are at some advantage in recognising the person in the
photographs.
8.20 The decision in
has implications beyond the evidence of
police officers. The reasoning also applies to others who know the
Opinion evidence
concerning identification can only be considered relevant where the witness is
at some advantage in recognising
the person in the photographs. What may
constitute a sufficient advantage is not a matter elaborated on in the majority
However, Kirby J stated that there were several grounds for upholding
the relevance of the police evidence.
In past decisions, it has been observed that such identification evidence may be
relevant if the jury require further assistance
on the interpretation of
photographs; if the appearance of the accused has changed and the witness can
testify to the specific appearance
at the time of the offence; or if the witness
has an advantage over the jury based on sufficient familiarity with the accused
other expertise.
8.21 In the circumstances, decision makers ‘could properly consider
that witnesses were better placed to recognise the person
in the photographs
than they were’.
particular, Kirby J highlighted the fact that, while the jury may have spent as
much time in the presence of the accused as the
police officers:
Members of a jury watch a person such as the appellant (especially where, as
here, that person gives no evidence) sitting immobile
in the courtroom. The
police witnesses had repeatedly viewed the appellant in daylight. They had seen
him in motion. They had observed
him from different angles. They had had the
opportunity to view him engaged in varying and more natural facial
8.22 On one view, the relevance requirement may have been set too high by the
majority decision in
. By contrast, Kirby J found that the evidence
of the police officers was relevant according to the broad test provided by
Evidence Acts.
there is room for the decision in
to be distinguished on the facts
in subsequent cases.
8.23 The reasoning of the majority in
was that the opinions of the
police officers were not based on anything in substance additional to that upon
which the jury would
base their view. If in any future case it is demonstrated
that a police officer had regard to facts or matters that were in substance
additional to, or different from, those before the jury, the evidence of the
police officer would be capable of rationally affecting
the assessment of the
probability of the existence of a fact in issue.
8.24 Similarly, in a case before a magistrate or other judicial officer
sitting alone and where the judicial officer will not have
any great opportunity
to observe the accused, opinion evidence of police officers as to identification
could be considered as rationally
affecting the probability that the accused is
depicted in photographs before the court. The admissibility of the evidence in
a case would then fall to be determined under s 78.
8.25 The Commissions would be interested in further comment on whether
amendment to the uniform Evidence Acts is required in the light
of the judgments
of the High Court in
Smith v The Queen
. However, if any problem created
is primarily attributable to an interpretation of relevance
under s 55, it may be hard to remedy.
Question 8–1
Does the decision of the High Court in
overly constrain the admission of police opinion evidence on
identification and, if so, how should this be remedied?
Opinions based on
specialised knowledge
8.26 In contrast to other witnesses, expert witnesses are permitted to offer
opinions to the court as to the meaning and implications
of other evidence.
Views differ among commentators about the rules that control the admissibility
at common law of expert opinion
evidence. Dr Ian Freckelton and Hugh Selby have
described these rules of evidence as
• the field of expertise rule: the claimed knowledge or expertise
should be recognised as credible by others capable of evaluating
its theoretical
and experiential foundations;
• the expertise rule: the witness should have sufficient knowledge and
experience to entitle him or her to be held out as an
expert who can assist the
• the common knowledge rule: the information sought to be elicited from
the expert should be something upon which the court
needs the help of a third
party, as opposed to relying upon its general knowledge and common sense;
• the ultimate issue rule: the expert’s contribution should not
have the effect of supplanting the function of the court
in deciding the issue
before it; and
• the basis rule: the admissibility of expert opinion evidence depends
on proper disclosure and evidence of the factual basis
of the opinion.
8.27 Another view is that such a reductive analysis of the law, whether under
the common law or the uniform Evidence Acts is ‘highly
artificial and
misleading’. Rather, the ‘rules’ should be regarded in
‘a more flexible way as aspects of
either the operation of the expertise
exception to the opinion rule … or the trial judge’s discretion to
exclude prejudicial
8.28 As discussed below, at common law there is conflicting authority and problems
of definition in relation to the ultimate issue
and common knowledge rules,
which have been abolished by the uniform Evidence Acts. There is also debate
content of a field of expertise and basis rule, both at
common law and under the uniform Evidence Acts. Nevertheless, in considering
admissibility of expert opinion evidence under the uniform Evidence Acts, these
‘rules’ provide useful terms of reference.
Section 79 of
the uniform Evidence Acts
8.29 Section 79 of the uniform Evidence Acts provides an exception to
the opinion rule for expert opinion evidence:
If a person has specialised knowledge based on the person’s training,
study or experience, the opinion rule does not apply
to evidence of an opinion
of that person that is wholly or substantially based on that knowledge.
8.30 In addition, s 80 of the uniform Evidence Acts abolished the
‘ultimate issue rule’ and the ‘common knowledge
Evidence of an opinion is not inadmissible only because it is about:
(a) a fact in issue or an ultimate issue; or
(b) a matter of common knowledge.
8.31 A ‘field of expertise rule’ and a ‘basis rule’
were not specifically incorporated in the uniform Evidence
Acts’ expert
opinion exception. The ALRC considered that these matters should not be
preconditions to admissibility, but be
resolved as required under the general
discretion to exclude evidence pursuant to
8.32 This chapter discusses selected aspects of the expert opinion provisions of
the uniform Evidence Acts, including:
• the ‘specialised knowledge’ requirement and related field
of expertise tests;
• the requirement that expert opinion evidence be based on
‘training, study or experience’ and the status of the
so-called ad
hoc expert;
• the extent of the requirement under the uniform Evidence Acts to show
that expert opinion evidence is ‘based on’
the application of
specialised knowledge to relevant facts or factual
assumptions.
Field of expertise
and ‘specialised knowledge’
8.33 The field of expertise rule (sometimes also referred to as the
‘area of expertise’ rule) has been a subject of contention
law, particularly in relation to admitting evidence of new scientific techniques
or theories. The criteria to be applied
in determining whether opinion evidence
from specific areas of expertise is admissible have arisen in reported cases in
to fingerprinting evidence, the use of seat belts, the causes of
traffic accidents, voice identification evidence, stylometry evidence,
evidence, bushfire behaviour evidence, DNA profiling evidence and battered woman
syndrome evidence.
8.34 While some commentators accept that, under the common law, the opinion of an
expert must derive from an area or field of expertise,
Australian law has never
clearly resolved the nature or content of the
8.35 Andrew Ligertwood identifies a ‘liberal relevancy approach’ to
expert knowledge as being that ‘traditionally
followed in common law
courts, including those in
Australia’.
This approach
downplays the significance of any field of expertise test:
By this approach, once the court determines the witness qualified by training or
practical experience in an area of knowledge beyond
that possessed by the trier
of fact, and of apparent assistance to it, then the witness may testify. There
is no further threshold
of reliability to be applied to that area of knowledge.
The expert testimony can be scrutinised in cross-examination and contradicted
opposing experts and the trier of fact is left to determine whether to act upon
the expert knowledge presented.
8.36 Ligertwood observes that, as new and sophisticated areas of knowledge
have developed, courts have been drawn increasingly into
determining the
reliability of areas of expertise. In doing so, courts commonly look to see
whether a field of expertise has ‘general
acceptance’ in the
relevant scientific discipline (the ‘
While South Australian
case law adopts the ‘general acceptance’ field of expertise
there are also authorities
that suggest courts should themselves make an assessment of the
‘reliability’ of a body of
knowledge; and authorities which adopt
both approaches.
8.37 Debate in Australia about whether courts, in considering the admissibility of
expert opinion evidence, should assess the reliability
of a field of knowledge
or expertise has been influenced by the 1993 decision of the United States
Supreme Court in
Daubert v Merrell Dow
Pharmaceuticals
held that, in applying Rule 702 of the
Federal Rules of
the court must
make an assessment of whether the reasoning or methodology underlying expert
opinion evidence is scientifically
8.38 Discussion about the possible influence of the
approach on
Australian evidence law has centred on whether the adoption of similar criteria
would usefully restrict the admission
of evidence based on ‘junk’
science. While some have supported the application in Australia of the
approach as setting more rigorous admissibility
others have concluded
that it would be unlikely to lead to any significant improvement in the quality
of scientific expert opinion
Specialised knowledge
8.39 The uniform Evidence Acts do not provide specifically for a ‘field
of expertise’ test for admissibility of expert
opinion evidence. The Acts
simply require a person to have ‘specialised
knowledge’.
recommending the provision that became s 79 of the uniform Evidence Acts,
the ALRC did not intend to introduce a field of expertise-type
test but, rather,
the general judicial discretion to exclude evidence when it might be more
prejudicial than probative, or tend to mislead or confuse
the tribunal of fact.
This could be used to exclude evidence that has not sufficiently emerged from
the experimental to the
demonstrative.
Gaudron J (Gummow J
agreeing) referred to the need, at common law, for the expert’s knowledge
or experience to be in an area
‘sufficiently organized or recognized to be
accepted as a reliable body of knowledge or
experience’.
stated that there was no reason to think that the expression ‘specialised
knowledge’ in s 79 of the uniform
Evidence Acts ‘gives rise to
a test which is in any respect narrower or more restrictive than the position at
common law’.
8.41 Together with the comments of other High Court
this leads Stephen
Odgers to conclude that, while recognition may be one basis for a conclusion of
reliability, under the uniform
Evidence Acts ‘it appears clear that the
ultimate test is
reliability’.
8.42 The rejection by the uniform Evidence Acts of a field of expertise test is
supported by decisions in the New South Wales Supreme
Idoport Pty
Ltd v National Australia Bank Ltd
, Einstein J stated that s 79 is a
‘direct rejection’ of the
test, which had required that
an expert’s opinion be related to a recognised field of expertise or
result from the application
of theories or techniques accepted in that
Lakatoi Universal
Pty Ltd v Walker
Einstein J stated that this position
is reflected in
Evidence Act
, which requires only that the
expert have ‘specialised knowledge’, with the exclusionary rules
regarding irrelevant,
prejudicial or misleading evidence presumably operating to
exclude the opinions of specialists in unreliable and unacceptable fields
8.43 The ‘specialised knowledge’ requirement of
interpreted as imposing a standard of evidentiary reliability, so that expert
opinion evidence must be derived from a reliable
body of knowledge and
experience.
8.44 Aspects of the various field of expertise tests, including ‘general
acceptance’ and
-style reliability criteria may,
nevertheless, be able to be used to help determine the probative value of
evidence in the exercise
of the general discretions to exclude or limit the use
of evidence.
There may be
concern that such an interpretation of
may restore a field of
expertise rule, contrary to legislative intent. Alternatively, there may be
concerns that, without a field
of expertise test, courts will not be able to
control effectively the admission of expert opinion evidence.
8.45 IP 28 asked for comments on whether significant problems are caused by
the admission of expert evidence from novel scientific
or technical fields and
whether reform of the uniform Evidence Acts might address these
8.46 Specifically, the paper asked whether the uniform Evidence Acts should be
amended to introduce additional criteria for the admissibility
evidence in scientific or technical fields or, alternatively, whether the Acts
should be amended to remove threshold admissibility
rules for expert opinion
evidence, leaving judges to decide on the weight to be given to such
Submissions and consultations
8.47 The Commissions received a range of comments and submissions relevant to
the field of expertise requirement. In general, however,
most people consulted
are reasonably satisfied with the way in which
is interpreted and
applied by the courts.
8.48 The Law Council of Australia (Law Council) states that while some threshold
requirement for the admission of expert evidence
may be appropriate in civil
proceedings to enable the exclusion of ‘junk experts’, it supports
an approach that focuses
on the weight to be given to expert evidence, rather
than on constraining admissibility. The Council indicates that a stricter
may be justified for expert evidence tendered by the prosecution in
criminal proceedings, but considers that
‘is adequate, and
sufficiently flexible for this
8.49 By contrast, the Criminal Law Committee of the Law Society of South Australia
(Law Society SA) submits that additional statutory
criteria are desirable and
suggests defining specialised knowledge ‘such that it encompasses the
“field of expertise
rule” while allowing for new “fields of
knowledge” to accommodate advances in
technology’.
8.50 Ian Freckelton confirms his view that, while the
approach may
provide useful guidance as to the probative value of expert opinion evidence, it
is not desirable to enact additional
criteria for
admissibility.
That is, the
criteria can be used to exclude or limit the use of dubious
expert opinion evidence under the discretionary provisions of the uniform
Evidence Acts:
In order to determine what constitutes probative value, and also unfair
prejudice, criteria are needed. Both the general acceptance
the reliability rule of the
decision offer such criteria. …
] provides a sophisticated means of distinguishing between
evidence that is not yet capable of being effectively evaluated by the
from that which is falsifiable and has been tested within the medium of peer
review and debate amongst those constituting
the intellectual
marketplace.
The Commissions’ view
8.51 There will always be debate and tension about the best means to control
the admission of expert opinion evidence. In its original
evidence inquiry, the
ALRC concluded that the attempt to deal with the underlying problems associated
with expert testimony by various
rules had not been successful and that the best
solution was to rely ultimately upon the discretions, particularly
Using the discretions directly focuses on the key issue—the probative
value of the evidence as against the disadvantages of
receiving because of
unfair prejudice, the capacity to mislead or confuse or the potential for unduly
wasting time.
8.52 The current scheme of the uniform Evidence Acts allows the courts a wide
discretion in how they assess the evidentiary value
of an expert’s
specialised knowledge; whether for the purposes of
, or in order to
determine whether the expert’s opinion evidence should be excluded under
the discretionary provisions.
8.53 The Commissions have concluded that there is nothing to be gained by
enacting additional statutory criteria dealing with permissible
fields or areas
of expertise for expert opinion evidence and, in fact, any attempt to do so may
simply introduce new uncertainties.
8.54 In particular, determining the admissibility of expert opinion evidence
by reference to the scientific validity of a field of
expertise, as suggested by
, is not always practical or appropriate. The
criteria cannot be applied easily to fields such as psychiatry, psychology or
family counselling, in which opinion evidence inevitably
relies on subjective
interpretation.
reasoning may also be criticised as an inadequate
representation of science and its methodology. Gary Edmond and David Mercer have
written that:
science cannot simply be defined by its possession of a unique transferable
method or set of behavioural norms or institutional structures.
We noted the
importance to scientists of tacit knowledge and skilled judgments, and the
diversity of norms and institutional constraints
under which scientists work. In
this context, attempts such as falsificationism, to define a set of transferable
rules for what constitutes
valid science will always face difficulties
accounting for the diversity of the ways such rules can be interpreted and
practical contexts.
8.55 It is likely that courts will continue to struggle to develop completely
satisfactory approaches to determining the validity
of fields of expertise,
especially in relation to novel scientific or technical areas. However,
resolving these issues is no more
difficult, and arguably less technical, than
it was at common law.
Training, study or
8.56 It has been held that the term ‘specialised knowledge’ is
not restrictive and expressly encompasses specialised knowledge
experience.
, Austin J held that
permits a professional expert such as a
doctor, solicitor or accountant, to give evidence about the content of general
of professionals in his or her field and to express an opinion about
the conduct of competent and careful professionals in typical
and specially
defined circumstances.
8.57 A related issue concerns the concept of an ‘ad hoc’ expert. An ad
hoc expert is a person who, while not having formal
training or qualifications,
has acquired expertise based on particular experience, such as by listening to
tape recordings which
are substantially unintelligible to anybody who has not
played them repeatedly; or by becoming familiar with the handwriting of another
8.58 The concept of an ad hoc expert was recognised by the High Court in
Cases since the
enactment of the uniform Evidence Acts have recognised that
sufficiently broad as to encompass ad hoc experts. In
prosecution sought to lead evidence from an interpreter, who had listened
repeatedly to listening device tapes and tapes of
police interviews with the
accused, that the voice on the listening device tapes was that of the accused.
It was held that, even
if such evidence fell outside the scope of
was covered by
because the interpreter’s expertise and
familiarity with the voices and languages on the tapes qualified him as an ad
hoc expert.
8.59 IP 28 suggested the current approach to ad hoc experts may create
problems in that it gives a ‘very broad, indeed almost
and to the concepts of ‘specialised knowledge’
and ‘training, study or
experience’.
Another view
is that the ‘essentially pragmatic’ scope of the opinion rule
demands an equally pragmatic approach to its
exceptions. Therefore, the lay
opinion and expert opinion exceptions should be construed as broadly as
possible, allowing borderline
cases to be dealt with through the exercise of the
discretion to exclude prejudicial
8.60 IP 28 asked whether concerns exist with regard to the admission of
so-called ‘ad hoc’ expert opinion evidence and
whether any concerns
should be addressed through amendment of the uniform Evidence
Submissions and consultations
8.61 The Commissions did not receive many comments on this question, which
raises similar concerns about the reliability and probative
value of evidence as
were discussed above in relation to the concept of specialised knowledge. Again,
the Commissions’ overall
impression has been that this element of
has not caused significant concern in practice.
8.62 However, the Law Society SA submits that
should be amended to
replace the words ‘the person’s training, study or experience’
with ‘the person’s
experience’ or,
alternatively, ‘the person’s study
experience’. It
is said that this would limit the numbers of those who could be classified as ad
hoc experts.
8.63 The Commissions disagree with this suggestion, which would rule out the
admission of opinion evidence based on specialised knowledge
obtained solely
through experience. Rather, any problems caused by the broad scope of the words
‘training, study or experience’
should be left to be dealt with
through the discretionary provisions.
The factual basis of
expert opinion evidence
8.64 Under the common law, the admissibility of expert opinion evidence is
said to depend on proper disclosure and evidence of the
factual basis of the
opinion. That is, the expert must disclose the facts upon which the opinion is
based, which must be capable
of proof by admissible evidence, and evidence must
be admitted to prove any assumed facts upon which the opinion is
8.65 In practice, much of the evidence given by experts is based on the opinions
or statements of others—for example, reports
of technicians and
assistants, consultation with colleagues and reliance upon extrinsic material
and information, such as books,
articles, papers and statistics. This means that
expert opinion evidence is often based on evidence that is technically hearsay,
and which may not comply with a basis rule.
8.66 The ALRC recommended that a basis rule (if it existed) should not be a
precondition to admissibility under the uniform Evidence
and that such matters
should be resolved under the general discretion to
The Makita decision
8.67 Under the uniform Evidence Acts, expert opinion evidence must be
‘wholly or substantially based’ on the expert’s
‘specialised
knowledge’.
South Wales Court of Appeal, this requirement was interpreted by Heydon JA in
Makita (Australia) Pty Ltd v
as meaning that, in
order for expert opinion evidence to be admissible:
• so far as the opinion is based on facts ‘observed’ by the
expert, they must be identified and admissibly proved
by the expert;
• so far as the opinion is based on ‘assumed’ or
‘accepted’ facts, they must be identified and proved
in some other
• it must be established that the facts on which the opinion is based
form a proper foundation for it; and
• the opinion of an expert requires demonstration or examination of the
scientific or other intellectual basis of the conclusions
reached; that is, the
expert’s evidence must explain how the field of ‘specialised
knowledge’ applies to the facts
assumed or observed so as to produce the
opinion propounded.
8.68 Concern has been expressed that such an approach to the admissibility of
expert opinion evidence may be too stringent, in effect
requiring the judge to
understand fully the scientific basis of an expert opinion, or to reject it as
irrelevant. It may interrupt
the smooth running of trials by requiring such
meticulous consideration of expert evidence by trial judges.
Sydneywide Distributors Pty Ltd v Red Bull Australia Pty
Branson J stated
that the approach in
should be understood as a ‘counsel of
perfection’ and that, in the context of an actual trial, it is sufficient
for admissibility
that the judge be satisfied that the expert has drawn his or
her opinion from known or assumed facts by reference to his or her specialised
criteria, it was said, should commonly be regarded as going to weight rather
than admissibility.
8.70 It has also been stated that the suggestion in
that the factual
basis of an expert report must be proven in order for expert opinion to be
admissible would amount to ‘restoring
By contrast, it has
been held that an ‘expert’s exposure of the facts upon which the
opinion is based’ should be
sufficient to establish whether the opinion is
based on the expert’s specialised knowledge in terms of
matter that is not dependent on proof of the existence of those
8.71 On the other hand, Justice Heydon has noted that such evidence to be dealt
with as a matter of weight at the end of the trial
may be difficult to reconcile
with the ‘practical exigencies of conducting litigation’ and with
the relevance requirement,
contemplates that evidence cannot be admitted unless there is some evidence
leaving it reasonably open to conclude that its
assumptions are
8.72 Applying the reasoning in
has proven problematic in some
subsequent cases. For example, in
Australian Securities and Investments
Commission v Rich
in the New South Wales Supreme Court purported to follow the decision in
. He confirmed that the requirement of proving the assumed or
admitted facts (or proving facts sufficiently like them) is a matter
admissibility. In effect, he said, ‘the basis rule has been transposed
from the common law into the
, notwithstanding the Law Reform Commission’s contrary
intention’.
8.73 Austin J observed that, if an expert fails to identify and articulate the
assumed, accepted and observed facts upon which his
opinion is based, the court
may well be unable to identify those facts, with consequences of several kinds.
First, if the court is uncertain about the factual basis used by the expert, it
may be unable to comprehend the opinion so as to
decide how much weight or
probative value to give it. Secondly, if the factual basis is not articulated,
the court may be unable
to determine whether the facts assumed or accepted by
the expert correspond to the facts proved or admitted at the hearing …
Thirdly, in extreme cases the consequence of failure to articulate the factual
basis may even be inadmissibility for
irrelevancy.
8.74 The judge noted that, given these various consequences of failure to
identify the facts upon which the expert’s opinions
are based, and
therefore the likelihood that the court will exclude the evidence under
of the uniform Evidence Acts, ‘it will seldom be necessary to
choose’ between the views of Heydon JA in
and those of
Branson J in
, as a matter of strict
admissibility.
8.75 However, in
, it was contended that the expert’s report was
strictly inadmissible because of its failure to set out comprehensively the
facts upon which the opinions were based, and that the matter was not merely one
going to discretion. Therefore, the discrepancy
between the judicial views had
to be addressed. Austin J observed that the ALRC had concluded (in ALRC 26)
that a basis rule did
not exist and that, if it did, it should go to weight
rather than admissibility.
reaching the latter conclusion, the ALRC concentrated on situations where the
basis for the expert’s opinion was
By contrast, it was
accepted a basis rule as part of the common law of
evidence and saw the requirement of proving the assumed or admitted facts (or
proving facts sufficiently like them) as a matter going to
admissibility.
8.76 On appeal, aspects of this interpretation of
were overruled by
the New South Wales Court of Appeal. Spigelman CJ (with whom Giles JA and Ipp JA
agreed) found that Heydon JA’s
analysis in
supported what
Spigelman CJ characterised as an ‘asserted factual basis approach’
rather than a ‘true factual basis
approach’ and that Austin J had
erred in adopting the latter.
8.77 The New South Wales Court of Appeal held that expert evidence is covered by
of the uniform Evidence Acts if it discloses the facts and reasoning
process that the expert
justify the opinions expressed:
The mere fact that the expert’s opinion is based on facts that are assumed
(and not proved) at the time the expert gives evidence
is no reason to exclude
the evidence at that stage. The assumed facts may be proved later by other
evidence … The fact that
the expert’s opinion was at one
time—or even still is—reinforced by undisclosed facts and reasoning
processes is
irrelevant to the admissibility of the opinion (although these
matters may go to weight).
8.78 Further, the New South Wales Court of Appeal held that, in excluding the
evidence, Austin J had not conducted the balancing exercise
required in the
exercise of the
discretion.
Submissions and consultations
8.79 IP 28 asked whether concerns exist with regard to the extent of the
requirement under the uniform Evidence Acts to show that
expert opinion evidence
is ‘based on’ the application of specialised knowledge to relevant
facts or factual assumptions
and whether any concerns should be addressed
through amendment of the uniform Evidence
8.80 This issue provoked much interest and comment in submissions and
consultations, although it was sometimes difficult to distinguish
relating to the law of evidence from procedural concerns about the way in which
courts control the adducing of expert opinion
8.81 The Commissions have received comments
approaches to the
factual basis of expert opinion evidence said to be based on the decision in
. Comments in support included those from one New South Wales
District Court judge, who states:
I do not regard the judgment of Heydon J in
as a ‘counsel of
perfection’, although there are cases where it must be applied with some
latitude. It is, however, a
sound statement of the principles which govern the
admissibility of expert evidence. In my view it would be a retrograde step to
remove the threshold admissibility rules, which, in my view are properly and
clearly stated in
8.82 Similarly, the Law Society SA submits that:
Any approach which has the capacity to erode the quality of evidence and hence
its acceptability by the Courts and the public generally
should be resisted. If
a choice needs to be made the
approach should be
8.83 The Committee states that ‘to remove ambiguity and to limit
subjectivity’ the words ‘wholly or substantially’
deleted from
and the words ‘based on’ should be defined to
encompass the guidelines set out in
Some members
of the Victorian Bar also suggest that the fundamental basis of an expert
opinion should not be a matter for discretion,
but elevated to a rule that goes
to the admissibility of
However, other
members express concern that a basis rule would lead to more lengthy disputes
evidence and that it is impractical to
expect the factual basis of every opinion to be
established.
8.84 The New South Wales Public Defender’s Office (NSW PDO) states
that there is a fundamental problem with treating objections
to expert opinion
evidence as matters going only to ‘weight’:
This approach leaves counsel in the dark about what evidence should be called to
rebut the expert evidence, which has been objected
to, and how to approach the
evidence in submissions. If expert evidence is in truth inadmissible, rejecting
it at the outset reduces
costs and delays and focuses the parties on the
material, which the judicial officer will actually take into account in reaching
his or her decision.
8.85 One Aboriginal Land Council considers that any de facto reintroduction
of a basis rule in relation to expert opinion evidence
would work against native
title claimants.
Such a rule, as demonstrated by the respondents’ approach to the expert
evidence in the
Harrington-Smith
decisions, can be
easily exploited by respondent parties who, with greater resources than
indigenous representatives, could use such
provisions in an overly technical and
pedantic fashion as a procedural weapon in undermining the substantive case of
the applicants.
8.86 However, while some counsel and judges may assert that an expert opinion
is not admissible if the factual basis of the opinion
has not been proved (and
not just identified), this is not strictly the case, at common law or under
. The purported rigour of the basis requirement in
may be questioned.
, for example, the trial judge noted the importance, in applying the
principles, of taking a ‘pragmatic approach’:
Logically every expression of expert opinion employs unarticulated assumptions
at a basic level: depending upon the expertise in
question, basic assumptions
earth, the workings of the
market economy and so on. It would be absurd to
suggest that background facts of these kinds must be stated in the
report, and the reasoning processes surrounding their application
must be explained.
The Commissions’ view
8.87 The decision in
and its subsequent interpretation in other
cases has caused some uncertainty about the admissibility criteria for expert
evidence under the uniform Evidence Acts.
8.88 Part of the problem has been the tendency of some judges to rely heavily
on the common law, laying down what appear to be strict
rules of general
application, before qualifying them. There appears to be a dichotomy between
those judges who would wish to impose
a stricter regime with regard to the
admission of expert opinion evidence and those who see the law as requiring a
more flexible
approach. Some judges require the facts upon which an expert
opinion is based to be proven. Others invariably admit such evidence,
later on the weight to be given to the relevant opinions.
8.89 In the Commissions’ view the issue should be approached simply by
reference to the provisions of the uniform Evidence
Acts. A good example of this
approach is that adopted by Branson J in
Other judgments do
not take this approach and this can result in confusion.
8.90 For example, in
, the trial judge established that the opinion at
issue was based in part on unidentified information, which was substantial, and
was never going to proven.
This, Austin J held, meant that the opinion did ‘not comply with the
requirements for admissibility set out in
’. Alternatively,
it was said, the evidence should be excluded on discretionary grounds under
8.91 In the Commissions’ view, the proper approach is to follow the overall
scheme of the uniform Evidence Acts, applying the
relevance test, followed by
the opinion rule and its exceptions and, finally, the discretionary provisions.
8.92 Applying the Acts, the first section to consider is
To enable the
judge to determine whether the expert evidence, if accepted, ‘could
rationally affect (directly or indirectly)
the assessment of the probability of
the existence of a fact in issue in the
proceeding’
necessary for the party tendering the evidence to:
• sufficiently identify the facts relied on (observed, assumed or
• lead, or foreshadow the leading, of sufficient admissible evidence of
those facts which require proof;
• sufficiently indicate the reasoning and expert basis upon which the
opinion is reached.
8.93 These matters must be established to an extent sufficient for the trial
judge to be satisfied that the opinion, if accepted,
is capable of affecting the
probabilities. If, for example, the tendering party does no more than present a
statement of the expert
setting out the qualifications of the expert and the
opinion, but makes no reference to the facts upon which the expert relies, the
evidence of the opinion should be ruled irrelevant and inadmissible because a
view could not be formed as to whether, if accepted,
it is capable of affecting
the probabilities.
8.94 However, it is not necessary that the facts be proved at the time that
is being applied. It will be enough to demonstrate that the facts are
reasonably open (that is, of provisional
relevance).
provisional relevance is established, the evidence must then satisfy
To enable the trial judge to be satisfied that the opinion evidence comes within
the description in
and is ‘wholly or substantially based’
on an expert’s ‘specialised knowledge’ requires (as Heydon JA
) that there must be sufficient:
• identification of the specialised knowledge upon which it is said the
expert has wholly or substantially relied;
• identification of the various types of facts relied upon, because
without that information it will not be possible to determine
whether the
opinion is wholly or substantially based on the alleged specialised
• explanation as to how the opinion is wholly or substantially based on
that specialised knowledge as applied to those facts.
8.95 As discussed above, aspects of the
requirements arise
under the uniform Evidence Acts; but not as rules which must be complied with
strictly and literally in all cases.
itself, Heydon JA stated
Complete precision in proof of facts intended to support the assumptions of an
expert is not called for; it is enough if the case
proved is sufficiently like
the case assumed to render the expert’s opinion
8.96 At the same time, a party preparing expert opinion evidence would be
well advised to do so on the basis of Heydon JA’s
analysis—because
to do so will both avoid any admissibility problems and provide compelling
expert testimony.
does not, however, require that the facts relied upon be
proved or that it be demonstrated that they will be
What must be
clarified is what the expert asserts as to such matters. That does not mean
that, if it becomes apparent during the
proceedings that important facts are not
going to be the subject of admissible evidence, the opposing party will be
without remedy
or the court unable to control the admission of the evidence.
Failure to prove the factual basis may be extensive enough to require
or, in extreme cases, under
itself does not, and cannot by its terms, provide the mechanism for exclusion.
of the uniform Evidence Acts does not require the factual basis
of the expert opinion to be proved.
8.98 In the Commissions’ view, if the provisions of the uniform Evidence
Acts are interpreted and applied as described above,
there is no need for any
amendment to clarify the operation of
Arguably, this approach is
consistent with case law and will be reinforced in subsequent court decisions,
removing some of the uncertainty
Expert opinion
evidence in practice
8.99 IP 28 noted that some judicial concern has been expressed about
insufficient understanding among experts and some legal practitioners
need to demonstrate that expert opinion evidence is ‘based on’ the
application of specialised knowledge to
relevant facts or factual
assumptions.
For example, a
particular problem is said to be presented by expert reports in native title
Jango v Northern Territory of Australia (No. 2)
involved two
expert reports in respect to which the government party made at least 1,100
objections. Sackville J noted that it was
apparent the reports had been prepared
with ‘scant regard’ for the requirements of the uniform Evidence
Acts; and that
this was not a new
phenomenon.
8.100 IP 28 asked whether there is insufficient understanding amongst legal
practitioners of the need to demonstrate under
of the uniform Evidence
Acts that a particular opinion is ‘based on’ the application of
specialised knowledge to relevant
facts or factual
assumptions.
8.101 In response, the NSW Young Lawyers Civil Litigation Committee
legal practitioners generally have sufficient understanding of the need to have
an expert demonstrate that their opinion is based
on the application of
specialised knowledge to facts or factual assumptions. This is buttressed by a
growing number of judgments
and academic literature and also by court rules
which make similar requirements for expert
8.102 In this context, the decision in
‘reinforcing the view that trial judges should be careful only to pay
regard to the evidence of sound experts who
can state the reasons that support
their views’.
8.103 In submissions and consultations, the Commissions received many comments
favouring stricter enforcement of rules of evidence
in relation to expert
It was clear that
serious concerns exist among some judicial officers and legal practitioners
of expert evidence. These include, but
are not limited to, concerns that the relevant specialised knowledge of experts
adequately demonstrated (for example, experts may not be formally
‘qualified’ before the court); and that the facts or
assumptions
relied on by the expert are not adequately identified.
8.104 In this context, the Commissions consider that, rather than new rules of
admissibility, the best way forward is through rules
of court and education and
training of lawyers and expert witnesses. There is a risk that, in placing
emphasis on formal admissibility
rules, courts may ‘concentrate on
technical formal compliance without proper regard to the purpose of the formal
That purpose
is, in words used in
, to address:
whether the trier of fact (the court, where there is no jury) has been supplied
with criteria enabling it to evaluate the validity
of the expert’s
8.105 IP 28 noted that judges have developed practices to help ensure
that expert opinion evidence is presented in a way that assists
assessing whether it complies with the requirements of
, including by
requiring parties to prepare schedules describing explicitly how each component
of expert opinion is connected to the
specialised knowledge of the
The increased use of
such schedules’
favoured by several judges and
practitioners.
8.106 In addition, rules of court now require expert witnesses to prepare
expert reports in such a way as to promote transparency
as to the basis of
expert opinion. For example, the Federal Court’s Practice Direction
Guidelines for Expert Witnesses in Proceedings in the Federal Court of
states, among other things, that:
• An expert’s written report must give details of the
expert’s qualifications, and of the literature or other material
making the report.
• All assumptions of fact made by the expert should be clearly and
fully stated.
• The report should identify who carried out any tests or experiments
upon which the expert relied in compiling the report,
and state the
qualifications of the person who carried out any such test or experiment.
• The expert should give reasons for each opinion.
• There should be included in or attached to the report (i) a statement
of the questions or issues that the expert was asked
to address; (ii) the
factual premises upon which the report proceeds; and (iii) the documents and
other materials which the expert
has been instructed to consider.
• The expert should make it clear when a particular question or issue
falls outside the relevant field of
The role of lawyers
8.107 IP 28 noted some judicial comments suggesting that, in order to
ensure that the legal tests of admissibility are addressed,
lawyers should be
more involved in the writing of reports by
For example, in
Harrington-Smith v Western Australia
, Lindgren J stated:
be involved in the writing of reports by experts: not, of
course, in relation to the substance of the reports (in particular, in
at the opinions to be expressed); but in relation to their form, in order to
ensure that the legal tests of admissibility
are addressed. In the same vein, it
the law that admissibility is attracted by nothing more than the
writing of a report in accordance with the conventions of an expert's
field of scholarship. So long as the Court, in hearing and determining
applications such as the present one, is bound
by the rules of evidence, as the
Parliament has stipulated in s 82(1) of the NT Act, the requirements of
s 79 (and of s 56 as to
relevance) of the
Evidence Act
determinative in relation to the admissibility of expert opinion
8.108 The Commissions received a number of divergent views about the
involvement of lawyers in the preparation of expert reports.
The dominant view
is that lawyers should be closely involved in order to ensure that expert
reports are admissible.
Lawyers are involved in drafting affidavits for lay witnesses, so there is no
logical reason why they should be excluded from assisting
in the preparation of
expert reports.
8.109 While some express concerns that this may increase the risk that expert
evidence will adopt a overly partisan
this problem can be
seen as an ethical question that should be addressed through rules of court,
legal practitioners’ rules
of professional conduct and expert witness
codes of conduct, rather than by eliminating necessary contact between lawyers
and experts.
Procedural concerns
8.110 Many of the concerns expressed in relation to opinion evidence are
primarily procedural in nature, including those relating
to costs or delay
attributable to the adducing of expert opinion evidence; or about undue
partisanship or bias on the part of expert
witnesses. For example, concerns were
expressed that measures to limit the number of expert witnesses or allowing the
use of court-appointed
may operate to
prevent the adducing of relevant evidence, for example, in personal injury
8.111 The Commissions consider that these issues do not directly concern the
operation of the uniform Evidence Acts. Issues relating
to the control of expert
evidence in federal civil proceedings were considered in depth in the
ALRC’s 2000 Report
Managing Justice: A Review of the Federal Civil
Justice System
8.112 More recently, the New South Wales Law Reform Commission has commenced
an inquiry on the operation and effectiveness of the
rules and procedures
governing expert witnesses in New South Wales. The inquiry will examine the
extent of partisanship or bias on
the part of expert witnesses and possible
measures to reduce the problem, including through the formulation of standards
of conduct, accreditation schemes for experts, restricting the use of
‘no win no fee’ arrangements and sanctions for
inappropriate or
unethical conduct by expert
8.113 A specific issue relating to the partisanship of expert evidence is raised by
the New South Wales Young Lawyers Civil Litigation
Committee. The Committee
submits that the Commissions should consider recommending that the uniform
Evidence Acts be amended ‘to
exclude parties from being able to give
expert evidence, or that evidence be prima facie
inadmissible’.
said that expert evidence adduced from a party to proceedings is likely to be
biased and in breach of obligations to assist
the court impartially.
8.114 The Committee refers to
Mulkearns v Chandos Developments Pty
in which a party,
who was a licensed real estate agent, sought to give expert evidence under
Evidence Act 1995
(NSW) as to the market value of a
property. In that case Young CJ noted that while the position has been taken in
England that where
a person is a party, or a close friend of a party, the
evidence should not be received, in Australia expert evidence is admissible,
under proper conditions, from a party or close associate who shows the
appropriate expertise.
judge noted, however, that:
when one gets the situation where a party, without even paying lip service to
[the expert witness code of conduct], gets into the
box and tries to give expert
evidence, when there is no reason why the availability of first class expert
evidence has not been presented,
then that party starts behind
8.115 The Commissions are not convinced that it is necessary to amend the
uniform Evidence Acts to deal with this issue. Attempts
to adduce expert
evidence from a party to proceedings can be expected to occur only rarely and,
in some cases, the party may not
be able to afford to engage another expert.
Further, concerns about the reliability of such evidence can be dealt with as a
Opinion on an
ultimate issue
8.116 The ultimate issue rule at common law was abolished by
uniform Evidence Acts. Under the common law, an expert witness cannot be asked
the central question or questions which the
court has to decide—that is,
the ‘ultimate issue’ in the case. The ALRC found that the
traditional formulation
of the ultimate issue rule could be criticised as
uncertain, arbitrary in its implementation and conceptually nonsensical, and
recommended
that the rule be
At common law, the
prohibition on opinion evidence containing a legal standard has almost
exclusively been applied in jury
8.117 IP 28 noted calls for the ultimate issue rule to be
while still
permitting experts to give evidence, for example, about whether the defendant in
a professional negligence claim acted
‘in a manner that was widely
accepted in Australia by peer professional opinion as competent professional
Allstate Life Insurance Co v ANZ Banking Group Ltd (No 6)
Lindgren J considered the operation of
in relation to expert evidence
on foreign law. He found that the provision left untouched the fundamental
common law principles that
exclude expert legal opinion evidence ‘as
intruding upon the essential judicial function and
The intention of
the section was to address non-legal expert evidence, whether by a non-legal
expert witness or a non-expert witness,
which applies a legal standard to
The section was
‘not apt to refer to expert legal opinion which impinges upon the
essential curial function of applying the
law, whether domestic or foreign, to
8.119 Other cases throw doubt on this view of the ambit of
Pty Ltd v National Australia
distinguished the decision in
and stated that, at least where
the effect of foreign law is relevant to the administration of domestic law, the
evidence of foreign
law experts ‘is not capable of usurping the function
of the court any more than is evidence of any other fact relevant to the
determination of the rights and liabilities of the parties under domestic
8.120 The Commercial Bar Association of the Victorian Bar submits that there is
some confusion arising as to the interpretation of
s 80 of the Act as a result
of the conflict between
and decisions of the Supreme Court of
the Australian Capital
It states that an
‘authoritative statement by a superior court will, no doubt, clarify the
confusion’.
8.121 A related issue concerns the position of expert argument under the uniform
Evidence Acts. The
Federal Court Rules
authorise the court to receive
expert opinion ‘by way of submission in such manner and form as the Court
may think fit, whether
or not the opinion would be admissible as
provision is said to permit ‘expert
8.122 In some proceedings expert argument may play a valuable role, in the same way
as legal argument, in assisting the court to reach
its own characterisation of
the evidence for the purposes of applying statutory criteria—for example,
economic evidence about
market definition in competition
8.123 IP 28 noted suggestions that expert argument should be recognised and
encouraged, for example through a saving provision to
the effect that the rules
governing the admissibility of opinion evidence do not prevent the reception of
expert opinion as a
submission.
Submissions and
consultations
8.124 IP 28 asked what concerns exist with regard to the admission of
expert opinion evidence about an ultimate issue or expert opinion
submission or argument and whether these should be addressed through amendment
of the uniform Evidence
8.125 There is some support for reintroduction of the ultimate issue rule,
including because of concerns about the possible influence
such evidence may
have on juries.
Some judges
of the New South Wales District Court submit that the abolition of the ultimate
issue (and common knowledge) rules has
led to a significant increase in the
tendering of opinion evidence which, while relevant, is redundant and that the
rules should
re-established.
8.126 Others consider that the experience under the uniform Evidence Acts does not
suggest any problems that could be remedied by
reintroducing an ultimate issue
There are comments that
the ultimate issue rule is too technical and hard to apply; is not needed in
trials before a judge alone;
and restricts the expression of expert opinion
unnecessarily.
8.127 While submissions and consultations emphasise the need to distinguish clearly
between submissions based on expert opinion and
expert opinion evidence itself,
there are no calls for amendment to the uniform Evidence Acts in relation to
expert submissions or
Commissions’ view
Cross on Evidence
suggests that there is no modern rule of
evidence that an expert ‘may not give an opinion upon an ultimate fact in
The following
statement by Giles J in
RW Miller & Co Pty Ltd v Krupp (Aust) Pty
is said to be
accurate. Giles J stated:
It is almost impossible for a rule in those terms to be applied, there are many
cases in which an expert has given such an opinion,
and a rule in those terms
has been doubted in the High Court: see
Murphy v The Queen
[1989] HCA 28
(1989) 167 CLR
at 110, 126–127. A lesser restriction has been recognised, that the
expert may not give an opinion on an ultimate issue where
that involves the
application of a legal standard—for example, that the defendant was
negligent, that a risk for reasonably
foreseeable, that a testator possessed
testamentary capacity, that a representation was likely to deceive or that a
publication was
8.129 The main justification for an ultimate issue rule is to prevent the
expert becoming involved in the decision-making process.
However, as
observes, ‘it is difficult to believe that a properly
directed jury, or a fortiori a court comprising a judge sitting alone,
allow its functions to be usurped by an expert’s answer to the question it
has to decide’.
8.130 Concerns about the influence of expert opinion on juries in criminal
proceedings may not alone be sufficient to justify an ultimate
issue rule. In
the United Kingdom, Paul Roberts and Adrian Zuckerman have written:
The policy of maintaining jury standards in criminal adjudication does not,
however, require a formal rule of admissibility forbidding
expert evidence going
to the elements of the offence. It merely dictates judicial vigilance against
allowing the scope of expert
evidence, regarding offence elements or any other
issues in criminal adjudication (including witness credibility), to extend
matters on which the community at large regards experts to be suitable
arbiters. Indeed, the modern trend in common law jurisdictions
has been towards
repudiating the existence of a formal ultimate issue
8.131 Leaving aside whether there would be any benefit in doing so, an
attempt to introduce an ultimate issue rule into the uniform
Evidence Acts would
be made more difficult by uncertainty about the existence and scope of the rule
at common law. The Commissions
do not propose any change to s 80 of the
uniform Evidence Acts in this regard.
Opinion on matters
of common knowledge
8.132 Section 80 of the uniform Evidence Acts also abolished the common
knowledge rule. IP 28 noted suggestions that, as a result,
unnecessary time
and expense are used in dealing with evidence about such matters as motor
vehicle accident reconstruction, which
may have been excluded by the application
of the common law rules.
8.133 In particular, s 80 may have facilitated attempts to introduce
expert opinion evidence in relation to identification (identification
Such evidence
involves opinion based on knowledge of research by psychologists into factors
affecting the accuracy of eyewitness
identification. The Commissions also
understand that expert evidence on ‘facial mapping’ using data from
facial recognition
information technology is increasingly being used in criminal
proceedings.
Under the common
law, expert opinion evidence in relation to identification is inadmissible
because it concerns a matter ‘within
the range of human experience which
must be determined by the
it was accepted that because the uniform Evidence Acts expressly abolished the
common knowledge rule, identification expert evidence
may be covered by
s 79 of the Act. The Crown noted that ‘the routine admission of
expert evidence in cases where identification
was the main issue would lengthen
the hearing of these cases and to some extent change the way in which they are
conducted’.
South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal held that the particular identification
expert evidence, if tendered as fresh evidence
at trial, should be excluded
under s 135(c) of the Act as likely to cause or result in undue waste of
Submissions and
consultations
8.135 IP 28 asked whether concerns exist with regard to the admission of
expert opinion evidence on matters of common knowledge, for
example, in relation
to expert identification evidence or motor vehicle accident
reconstruction.
8.136 Some judges of the New South Wales District Court submit that the common
knowledge rule should be re-established to address
the admission of redundant
expert opinion evidence.
8.137 The ACT Bar states that, in practice, s 135(c) is seldom formally
invoked in these circumstances to allow a court to refuse
to admit evidence that
might ‘cause or result in undue waste of time’. Rather, where expert
opinion evidence is unhelpful
it is either ignored by the other party or subject
only to brief cross-examination and given ‘the weight it deserves’
by the judge.
8.138 Phillip Greenwood SC considers that any problems with the abolition of
the common knowledge rule could be addressed through
the discretionary
provisions, particularly if these were broadened to allow evidence to be
excluded where it has minimal probative
Commissions’ view
8.139 The intention of the uniform Evidence Acts was to rely upon the
relevance provisions and the discretions, in order to exclude
or limit the use
of unnecessary evidence.
8.140 The effect of the uniform Evidence Acts is that evidence previously
challengeable under the common knowledge rule, for example
evidence from
psychologist or psychiatrists about human behaviour or on child development, is
admissible, subject to the discretions.
In the Commissions’ view the
important issue is whether the discretionary provisions of the uniform Evidence
Acts are capable
of addressing concerns raised about the admission of such
8.141 The decision of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal in
s 135(c) can be used to address problems attributable to the admission of
evidence that would have been challengeable
under the common knowledge rule.
8.142 There remain concerns about whether s 135, as presently drafted,
provides adequate grounds on which to exclude evidence on matters
knowledge. However, the Commissions have concluded that the answer lies in a
more robust approach to the application of
s 135(c). Such an approach
provides adequate latitude for courts to exclude evidence on matters of common
knowledge. The Commissions
do not consider that there is any reason to propose
the reintroduction of the common knowledge rule and do not propose any amendment
opinion regarding children’s evidence
8.143 The ALRC and the Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission (HREOC),
in their 1997 Report,
Seen and Heard: Priority for Children in the Legal
, concluded that changes to the law are necessary to address the
traditional view that children’s evidence is unreliable, based
perceptions regarding children’s limited memory capacity and ability to
recall events accurately.
There is growing psychological research demonstrating that even very young
children are capable of giving reliable
8.144 To help achieve this change the ALRC and HREOC recommended that the uniform
Evidence Acts be clarified to ensure that expert
evidence that may assist the
decision maker in understanding children’s disclosures, patterns of
behaviour and demeanour in
and out of court is admissible in civil or criminal
proceedings where the child is an alleged victim of
8.145 Under s 13(7) of the uniform Evidence Acts the court can inform itself
as it thinks fit in relation to questions of competence.
Arguably, this gives
the court the power to explore a child witness’ competence to give sworn,
unsworn or any evidence, including
by using an expert or a person the child
witness trusts and understands in questioning, or calling an expert witness to
court about the child witness’
competence.
8.146 However, it may also be appropriate to admit expert evidence that assists the
jury in understanding the behaviour of child witnesses
in order for the jury to
give proper weight and consideration to the evidence.
8.147 At common law, Australian courts have demonstrated a reluctance to admit
evidence of typical patterns of behaviour and responses
of child victims of
abuse as expert
There is a tendency
to exclude expert evidence about the behaviour of child victims because it is
relevant only to the complainant’s
credibility; is not an appropriate
subject for expert evidence (ie, it is not outside the ordinary experience of
the jury); or because
the expert is not properly qualified to give the
Freckelton and
Selby consider that Australian courts will continue to be cautious in admitting
expert evidence regarding patterns
of behaviour in child abuse
Evidence Act 2001
(Tas) departs from the other uniform Evidence
Acts by including an additional provision in
specifically relating to
experts in child development and behaviour.
A person who has specialised knowledge of child behaviour based on the person's
training, study or experience (including specialised
knowledge of the impact of
sexual abuse on children and their behaviour during and following the abuse)
may, where relevant, give
evidence in proceedings against a person charged with
a sexual offence against a child who, at the time of the alleged offence, had
not attained the age of 17 years, in relation to one or more of the following
(a) child development and behaviour generally;
(b) child development and behaviour if the child has had a sexual offence, or
any offence similar in nature to a sexual offence,
committed against him or her.
8.149 This provision overcomes the traditional reluctance to accept that this
kind of evidence is a subject of specialised knowledge.
However, it is arguable
that the provision does not override the credibility rule. Even if it can be
said that the legislature intended
to operate as an override in clear
contradiction to the common law, it is possible that the courts will apply a
narrow interpretation
and make such evidence subject to the credibility
8.150 The operation of the credibility rule in
and its exceptions
under the uniform Evidence Acts make it difficult for the prosecution to be able
to call an expert witness solely
for the purpose of bolstering the credibility
of a child witness.
example, there may be doubt over whether that evidence, if it is found to be
relevant only to credibility, would be admitted
to show why a child continued a
relationship with the alleged offender and delayed making a complaint, or why,
once a complaint had
been made, the complainant gave inconsistent accounts of
what had happened. If the evidence is clearly relevant beyond its credibility
use, arguably there is no credibility rule
8.151 While the exceptions are generally more conducive to admitting evidence that
discredits a witness, it may be still be difficult
for defence lawyers. The High
Court considered the application of the credibility rule in relation to
psychological evidence about
a young child’s knowledge of sexual matters
(which was beneficial to the defence case) in the case of
While Gaudron J
(with Gummow J agreeing) accepted that such evidence would not be excluded by
the opinion rule, her Honour found
that it was excluded by the credibility
8.152 The exceptions in
in particular, may provide an
avenue for defence lawyers to introduce expert evidence attacking the
credibility of a child witness.
The exception in
‘evidence that tends to prove that a witness is, or was, unable to be
aware of matters to which his or her evidence
relates’, and has been
interpreted broadly to include ‘psychological, psychiatric or neurological
considerations’.
exceptions only apply where the evidence is a rebuttal of a denial in
cross-examination of matters put to a witness that are relevant
credibility.
8.153 Prosecutors are generally limited to introducing evidence on credibility only
in relation to re-establishing credibility. While
there have been suggestions at
common law that rehabilitating evidence may be provided by an expert as long as
the subject matter
is proper for expert
the exceptions in
of the uniform Evidence Acts are more limited in application.
is restricted to the re-examination of the witness.
Section 108(3)
arguably, allow the introduction of expert evidence, but has application only
where the rehabilitating evidence is of a prior
consistent statement where an
inconsistent statement has been admitted or there is otherwise an implied or
express suggestion of
fabrication or re-construction.
8.154 The ALRC and HREOC considered that the provisions of the
Evidence Act
Evidence Act 1995
(NSW) were insufficient to ensure
that appropriate evidence about a child witness’ disclosures, behaviour or
demeanour is admitted
to explain why general assumptions about such matters may
not reflect adversely on a particular child’s credibility; and recommended
that the rules of evidence should ‘clearly indicate’ that such
evidence is admissible.
Wood Royal Commission supported this
8.155 The New South Wales Legislative Council Standing Committee on Law and Justice
recommended, in its 2002 report on child sexual
assault prosecutions, that the
Evidence Act 1995
(NSW) be amended to permit in child sexual assault
proceedings, the admission of expert evidence relating to child development
memory development) and the behaviour of child victims of sexual
assault, along the lines of
Evidence Act 2001
8.156 South Australian
Canadian courts
have allowed
the admission of expert evidence concerning child witnesses. Tasmania,
have enacted
legislative provisions that at least partially address the issue of the
admissibility of expert evidence regarding the
perceived credibility or
reliability of child witnesses.
Submissions and
consultations
8.157 IP 28 asked whether the
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth) should be
amended to allow clearly for the admission of expert evidence regarding the
credibility or reliability of child witnesses
and, if so, whether
Evidence Act 2001
(Tas) is the appropriate
8.158 Differing views were expressed in submissions and consultations. The
Law Council and the NSW PDO oppose a special provision
for expert evidence
regarding child witnesses.
The NSW PDO submits that questions regarding the credibility or reliability
of child witnesses are matter which a ‘jury can
and should be able to
consider, untainted by an expert’s
8.159 Others support the enactment in the uniform Evidence Acts of a
provision similar to that in
The New South Wales
Director of Public Prosecutions (DPP NSW) states that:
Such evidence may place in context behaviour which is otherwise perplexing, such
as the absence of complaint, or the continued association
with the alleged
offender after the alleged offence. Its purpose would be to address common
misconceptions held by jurors arising
from lack of information about or
experience of the behaviour of children
8.160 Justice Mullane notes that children are rarely witnesses in Family
Court proceedings
therefore, evidence covered by an amendment to the uniform Evidence Acts needs
to extend beyond child ‘witnesses’,
and to the credibility and
reliability of statements by
8.161 There is concern that the provision be drafted so as clearly to override the
credibility rule.
is intended to permit expert evidence about the credibility or
reliability of children in general, but not credibility evidence about
particular child witness.
Commissions’ view
8.162 In the Commissions’ view expert opinion evidence on child
development and behaviour is covered by
However, case law and
comments received by the Inquiry confirm that Australian courts continue to
demonstrate a reluctance to admit
such evidence.
8.163 The Commissions recognise that there is some danger in admitting this
category of evidence. In particular, the evidence may
invite a jury to reason
illegitimately that as some children behave in certain way when they are
sexually abused and the complainant
behaved in a similar way as others who have
been sexually abused, therefore, the complainant is likely to have been sexually
or is likely to be telling the truth about being sexually
In fact, many experts
consider that the reactions of children to sexual abuse are diverse.
8.164 However, the danger of such expert opinion evidence being misused can be
addressed adequately by judicial comments or directions.
Submissions and
consultations have identified a need for expert assistance in interpreting the
statements and behaviours of children
and, in particular, in relation to
‘counterintuitive evidence’ relevant to the credibility or
reliability of children.
8.165 In Chapter 7, the Commissions noted that the Commissions’ policy
position that evidentiary provisions relating specifically
to child witnesses
should not generally be included in the uniform Evidence Acts dictates against
the idea of introducing a hearsay
exception directed to children’s
8.166 However, the balance of convenience and policy principle may differ in the
case of expert evidence on development and behaviour
of children. The
Commissions do not see the proposed reform as constituting any major departure
from the existing law, but as highlighting
the admissibility of a particular
the Tasmanian
legislation. There are, however, some issues to resolve in the
drafting of the proposed amendment.
Evidence Act 2001
(Tas), the use of the phrase
‘may, where relevant, give evidence in proceedings’ is unclear. If
it is intended to mean
simply that the evidence can be tendered, it adds nothing
to the provision. If it is intended to mean that such evidence will be
admissible if relevant, it needs to be borne in mind that relevant evidence is
; no more is required than a mere logical connection.
Further, as drafted,
can be interpreted as overriding other
admissibility provisions. This is clearly inappropriate as, for example, the
discretions to
exclude or limit the use of evidence under
the uniform Evidence Acts should apply.
8.168 This problem arises because the drafting does not fit comfortably with the
approach taken in the uniform Evidence Acts to questions
of admissibility. To
conform with this approach, the provision should be drafted consistently with
the other exceptions to the opinion
rule. This is the approach taken in all
other admissibility rules—all evidence is potentially subject to each
exclusionary
rule. It will also be necessary to include a section to provide an
exception to the credibility rule. This aspect is addressed in
Chapter 11 in the
context of a general exception to the credibility rule applying to expert
testimony. The proposed provisions are
set out in Appendix 1 (new
and 108AA(2)).
Proposal 8–1
To avoid doubt, the uniform Evidence Acts should be
amended to provide an exception to the opinion and credibility rules for expert
opinion evidence on the development and behaviour of children.
Expert opinion
regarding other categories of witness
8.169 There may be other categories of witness in relation to whom there is a
need for expert assistance in interpreting statements
and behaviours. In
particular, assistance may be needed in relation to ‘counterintuitive
evidence’ relevant to credibility
or reliability—that is, evidence
that is capable of dispelling myths or rectifying erroneous assumptions that may
the jury on a particular
8.170 For example, the DPP NSW submits that consideration should be given to
recommending the enactment of an exception to the credibility
rule which would
permit the adducing of expert evidence in relation to complainants suffering
from an intellectual
disability.
The DPP NSW
states that:
Where the complainant in respect of a criminal proceeding suffers from an
intellectual disability, and where the disability is not
charged as an
aggravating feature and is thus not an element of the offence, the prosecution
cannot lead evidence of the nature of
the complainant’s disability and the
effect that such a disability has on behaviour and
development.
8.171 It is suggested, for example, that an intellectually disabled person
may have difficulty with dates and details or other relevant
concepts as a
result of the disability. Evidence from an expert as to a particular disability
may assist the jury in evaluating the
truthfulness and reliability of the
Otherwise the jury may assess the difficulty in recalling dates or other details
or other mannerisms commonly associated with the
disability as indicators that
the account is a fabricated
8.172 Victims of family violence may constitute another category of witness
to which similar considerations may apply. The Commissions
are interested in
further comment on this issue.
Question 8–2.
Should the uniform Evidence Acts be amended to
provide for the admissibility of expert opinion evidence on the credibility or
reliability
of other categories of witness, such as victims of family violence
or people with an intellectual disability?
See S Odgers,
Uniform Evidence Law
(6th ed, 2004), [1.3.4060];
Allstate Life Insurance Co v ANZ Banking Group
(1996) 64 FCR 73
Australian Law Reform Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1
(1985), [738].
For example, in relation to:
summaries of documents
; lay opinion
; expert opinion
; admissions
; exceptions to the rule excluding evidence
of judgments and convictions
; character of and expert opinion
Uniform Evidence
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1 (1985),
See S Odgers,
Uniform Evidence
(6th ed, 2004), [1.3.4180].
[1999] NSWCCA 66.
Australian Law Reform Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1
(1985), [740].
R v Panetta
(1997) 26 MVR 332.
J Anderson, J Hunter and N
The New Evidence Law: Annotations and Commentary on the Uniform
Evidence Acts
(2002), [78.15];
[1999] NSWCCA 287
(1999) 47 NSWLR
Idoport Pty Ltd v National
Australia Bank
[2001] NSWSC 529.
See Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004), [6.7]–[6.12].
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004),
Victoria Legal Aid,
18 February 2005. Other submissions and
consultations do not suggest any significant problem with the way in which
is operating: eg, P Greenwood,
March 2005.
Victoria Legal Aid,
18 February 2005; New South Wales Local Court
Magistrates,
Consultation
, Sydney, 5 April
Smith v The Queen
[2001] HCA 50
206 CLR 650.
Ibid, [11]. No attention had been
given to the question of relevance in the arguments advanced at trial, or on
appeal to the New
South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal:
Smith v The Queen
[2001] HCA 50
(2001) 206 CLR 650
[1999] NSWCCA 317
(1999) 47 NSWLR
Smith v The Queen
[2001] HCA 50
206 CLR 650
, [60] citing Australian Law Reform Commission,
26 (Interim) Vol 1 (1985),
[739]–[740].
Uniform Evidence Law
(6th ed, 2004),
[1.2.4180].
[1999] NSWCCA 317
Smith v The
[2001] HCA 50
(2001) 206 CLR 650
Ibid, [9]: If a member of the public had been called as a witness, ‘the
same question of relevance would have arisen’.
See Ibid, [22],
I Freckelton and H Selby,
Expert Evidence: Law, Practice, Procedure and Advocacy
(2nd ed, 2002), 2.
J Gans and A Palmer,
Principles of Evidence
(2nd ed, 2004), 243. Similarly, in the UK, Paul
Roberts and Adrian Zuckerman argue that at common law none of these criteria
‘constitutes
of admissibility constraining the
court’s reception of expert evidence at trial’ and that decided
cases on admissibility
of expert evidence ‘do not systematically conform
to any of these criteria’: P Roberts and A Zuckerman,
(2004), 306.
Australian Law Reform Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1
(1985), [743], [750].
A related issue
concerns the extent to which facts stated by an expert as forming the basis for
the expert’s opinion can be
admitted as evidence of the facts stated. This
issue is discussed in Ch 7, in relation to the operation of
the uniform Evidence Acts.
Freckelton and H Selby,
Expert Evidence: Law, Practice, Procedure and
(2nd ed, 2002),
See S Odgers,
Evidence Law
(6th ed, 2004),
[1.3.4260].
A Ligertwood,
Australian Evidence
(4th ed, 2004),
Derived from the United States
decision in
Frye v United States
293 F 1012 (1923). See Australian cases
cited in S Odgers,
Uniform Evidence Law
(6th ed, 2004),
[1.3.4260].
R v Bonython
38 SASR 45:
‘Expertise must be ‘sufficiently organized or recognized
to be accepted as a reliable body of knowledge or experience’:
Victoria, see
R v Johnson
(1994) 75 A Crim R 522
, 535: ‘Provided
the judge is satisfied that there is a field of expert knowledge … it is
no objection to the reception
of the evidence of an expert within that field
that the views which he puts forward do not command general acceptance by other
in the field’.
Uniform Evidence Law
(6th ed, 2004),
[1.3.4260].
Daubert v Merrell Dow
Pharmaceuticals
[1993] USSC 99
509 US 579 (US
Supreme Court, 1993). See, eg, S Odgers and
J Richardson, ‘Keeping Bad Science Out of the Courtroom: Changes in
American and
Australian Expert Evidence Law’
[1995] UNSWLawJl 6
(1995) 18(1)
University of
New South Wales Law Journal
; G Edmond and D Mercer, ‘Keeping
“Junk” History, Philosophy and Sociology of Science out of the
Courtroom: Problems
with the Reception of Daubert v Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals
[1997] UNSWLawJl 13
(1997) 20(1)
University of New South Wales Law Journal
Rule 702 is similar to
the uniform Evidence Acts in referring to the need for ‘scientific,
technical, or other specialized knowledge’ in
order for expert evidence to
be admitted. In 2000, Rule 702 was amended in response to the decision in
, affirming the trial court’s role as gatekeeper and
providing some general standards that the trial court must use to assess
reliability of expert testimony.
reference to factors including the ‘falsifiability’ of a theory, the
‘known or potential error rate’
associated with application of a
theory and whether the findings have been subject to peer review or publication,
as well as the
‘general acceptance’ of the scientific principles: S
Uniform Evidence Law
(6th ed, 2004), [1.3.4260]. See also
Kumho Tire Co Ltd v Carmichael
[1999] USSC 19
119 S Ct 1167
(1999); I Freckelton
and H Selby,
Expert Evidence: Law, Practice, Procedure and Advocacy
ed, 2002), 78–79.
S Odgers and J
Richardson, ‘Keeping Bad Science Out of the Courtroom: Changes in American
and Australian Expert Evidence Law’
[1995] UNSWLawJl 6
(1995) 18(1)
University of New
South Wales Law Journal
Edmond and D Mercer, ‘Keeping “Junk” History, Philosophy and
Sociology of Science out of the Courtroom: Problems
with the Reception of
Daubert v Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals Inc’
[1997] UNSWLawJl 13
(1997) 20(1)
University of
New South Wales Law Journal
Uniform Evidence Acts
Australian Law Reform Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1
(1985), [743].
HG v The Queen
(1999) 197 CLR 414.
Ibid, referring to
R v Bonython
(1984) 38 SASR 45
Clark v Ryan
[1960] HCA 42
103 CLR 486
(1999) 197 CLR 414
, 432. See also
Velevski v The Queen
187 ALR 233.
Velevski v The
(2002) 187 ALR 233
, [154] (Gummow and Callinan
Uniform Evidence
(6th ed, 2004), [1.3.4260].
Idoport Pty Ltd v National Australia Bank Ltd
[1999] NSWSC 828
Lakatoi Universal Pty Ltd v
[2000] NSWSC 633
, [8]. See also
Lipovac v Hamilton Holdings Pty
[1996] ACTSC 98
, [547]–[548], in which Higgins J said that the
correct view may be that ‘the relative novelty or eccentricity of the
field of expertise goes to weight rather than admissibility’, but that
‘combine to permit exclusion, even in civil
cases, of evidence not sufficiently based on a recognised field of expertise not
on admissibility grounds but on grounds of lack of probative value’.
See S Odgers,
Uniform Evidence
(6th ed, 2004), [1.3.4260].
Freckelton and H Selby,
Expert Evidence: Law, Practice, Procedure and
(2nd ed, 2002), 88.
example, it has been suggested that the area of expertise rule should be applied
to render evidence of repressed memory syndrome
inadmissible: I Freckelton,
‘Repressed Memory Syndrome: Counterintuitive or Counterproductive?’
Criminal Law Journal
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004),
Q 6–2; 6–3.
example, Legal Aid Office (ACT),
Consultation
, Canberra, 8 March 2005; S
Consultation
, Sydney, 3 March 2005; Judicial Officers of the
Family Court of Australia and Federal Magistrates Court,
Consultation
Parramatta, 28 February 2005.
Council of Australia,
4 March 2005.
Criminal Law Committee of the Law
Society of South Australia,
I Freckelton,
Consultation
, Melbourne, 17 March
I Freckelton and H Selby,
Expert Evidence: Law, Practice, Procedure and Advocacy
(2nd ed, 2002),
G Edmond and D Mercer,
‘Keeping “Junk” History, Philosophy and Sociology of Science
out of the Courtroom: Problems
with the Reception of Daubert v Merrell Dow
Pharmaceuticals Inc’
[1997] UNSWLawJl 13
(1997) 20(1)
University of New South Wales Law
[2003] NSWSC 1095
(2003) 48 ACSR 291
[1987] HCA 58
(1987) 164 CLR 180.
[1999] NSWCCA 287
(1999) 47 NSWLR 405.
Li v The Queen
[2003] NSWCCA 290
(2003) 139 A Crim R
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004), [6.30] citing
J Anderson, J Hunter and N Williams,
The New Evidence Law: Annotations
and Commentary on the Uniform Evidence Acts
J Gans and A Palmer,
Australian Principles of Evidence
(2nd ed, 2004),
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004),
Criminal Law
Committee of the Law Society of South Australia,
7 March 2005.
Evidence Law
(6th ed, 2004),
[1.3.4320].
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1 (1985),
Uniform Evidence Acts
Makita (Australia) Pty
Ltd v Sprowles
[2001] NSWCA 305
(2001) 52 NSWLR 705.
Ibid, [85].
Distributors Pty Ltd v Red Bull Australia Pty Ltd
[2002] FCAFC
Ibid, [16], [87]. This approach
was endorsed by the New South Wales Court of Appeal in
Adler v Australian
Securities and Investment Commission
[2003] NSWCA 131
[631]–[632].
Neowarra v State
of Western Australia
[2003] FCA 1399
(2003) 205 ALR 145
Uniform Evidence Acts
Evidence and Economic Reasoning in Litigation under
of the Trade
Practices Act: Some Theoretical Issues
(2003) unpublished
manuscript.
Australian Securities
and Investments Commission v Rich
[2005] NSWSC
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1 (1985),
Ibid, [362]–[363],
Australian Securities and
Investments Commission v Rich
[2005] NSWSC 149
, [321]–[322] referring
Makita (Australia) Pty Ltd v Sprowles
[2001] NSWCA 305
(2001) 52 NSWLR 705
Australian Securities and
Investments Commission v Rich
[2005] NSWCA 152
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004),
For example,
Confidential,
22 February 2005; Criminal Law
Committee of the Law Society of South Australia,
7 March 2005; P Greenwood,
11 March 2005; New
South Wales Public Defenders,
For example, I Freckelton,
Consultation
, Melbourne, 17 March
Confidential,
22 February 2005.
Criminal Law Committee of the Law Society of South Australia,
7 March 2005.
Also New South Wales Public Defenders,
Victorian Bar,
Consultation
, Melbourne, 16 March
New South Wales Public
Confidential,
(Australia) Pty Ltd v Sprowles
[2001] NSWCA 305
(2001) 52 NSWLR 705
Australian Securities and
Investments Commission v Rich
[2005] NSWSC 149
Sydneywide Distributors
Pty Ltd v Red Bull Australia Pty Ltd
[2002] FCAFC
Australian Securities
and Investments Commission v Rich
[2005] NSWSC 149
Uniform Evidence Acts
Quick v Stoland
[1998] FCA 1200
(1998) 157 ALR 615
Evidence Acts
(Australia) Pty Ltd v Sprowles
[2001] NSWCA 305
(2001) 52 NSWLR 705
, [38], citing
John Holland Constructions Pty Ltd
[1985] HCA 58
(1985) 62 ALR
As confirmed in
State of Western Australia
[2003] FCA 1399
(2003) 205 ALR 145
Securities and Investments Commission v Rich
[2005] NSWCA
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004),
Jango v Northern
Territory of Australia (No 2)
[2004] FCA 1004
, [8]–[9]. The
application of the opinion rule to evidence of Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander traditional laws and customs
is discussed in more detail in Ch
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004),
NSW Young Lawyers
Civil Litigation Committee,
Makita (Australia) Pty Ltd
[2001] NSWCA 305
(2001) 52 NSWLR 705.
NSW Young Lawyers Civil Litigation Committee,
March 2005, citing
Mulkearns v Chandos Developments Pty Ltd
[2003] NSWSC
P Greenwood,
11 March 2005; P Greenwood,
Consultation
Sydney, 11 March 2005; Confidential,
22 February
2005; Criminal Law Committee of the Law Society of South Australia,
7 March 2005; C Einstein,
Consultation
Sydney, 6 August 2004.
Australian Securities and Investments Commission v Rich
[2005] NSWSC
Makita (Australia)
Pty Ltd v Sprowles
[2001] NSWCA 305
(2001) 52 NSWLR 705
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004),
Such schedules are
sometimes referred to as ‘Ellicott’
C Einstein,
Consultation
, Sydney, 6 August 2004; I Freckelton,
Consultation
Melbourne, 17 March 2005; P Greenwood,
Consultation
, Sydney, 11 March
Guidelines for Expert
Witnesses in Proceedings in the Federal Court of Australia 2004
Supreme Court Rules 1970
(NSW), Sch 11,
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004), [6.42] citing
Jango v Northern Territory of Australia (No 2)
[2004] FCA 1004
[8]–[9] (Sackville J);
Harrington-Smith v Western Australia (No 7)
[2003] FCA 893
(2003) 130 FCR 424
, [19] (Lindgren
Harrington-Smith v Western
Australia (No 7)
[2003] FCA 893
(2003) 130 FCR 424
, [19] (emphasis in
P Greenwood,
Consultation
, Sydney, 11 March 2005; Department of Justice (NT),
Consultation
, Darwin, 31 March 2005.
Consultation
Sydney, 21 February 2005.
Association,
Consultation
, Canberra, 9 March 2005.
For example, see
Federal Court
(Cth) r 34.2 (appointment of a court expert); r 34.6 (restrictions on
further expert evidence).
Association,
Consultation
, Canberra, 9 March
See Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Managing Justice: A Review of the Federal Civil Justice
, ALRC 89 (2000), in which the ALRC made a number of recommendations
dealing with the use of expert evidence in Federal Court, Family
Administrative Appeals Tribunal
proceedings.
New South Wales Law
Reform Commission,
Expert Witnesses
NSW Young Lawyers Civil
Litigation Committee,
Mulkearns v Chandos
Developments Pty Ltd
[2003] NSWSC
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1 (1985),
I Freckelton and H Selby,
Expert Evidence: Law, Practice, Procedure and Advocacy
(2nd ed, 2002),
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004),
In terms of the
Liability Act 2002
introducing a modified
Bolam v Friern Hospital Management Committee
[1957] 1 WLR
Allstate Life Insurance Co
v ANZ Banking Group Ltd (No 6)
(1996) 64 FCR 79
, 84. However, while the
court is presumed to know the public laws of the State, foreign law is proved
‘as fact’: 83.
Idoport Pty Ltd v National
Australia Bank
[2000] NSWSC 1077
(2000) 50 NSWLR
John Edward
Platts v The Nominal Defendant
[1996] ACTSC 87
Walton v Corporate
Venture Pty Ltd
[1996] ACTSC 55:
suggesting that s 80 has entirely
displaced the common law relating to evidence on an ultimate
Commercial Bar Association
of the Victorian Bar,
Federal Court Rules
(Cth) O10 r 1(2)(j).
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004), [6.51]; R
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004),
P Greenwood,
11 March 2005; Confidential,
22 February 2005; Victorian Bar,
Consultation
, Melbourne, 16
March 2005.
New South Wales
District Court Judges,
22 February
Consultation
, Sydney, 21 February 2005; S Finch,
Consultation
Sydney, 3 March 2005; I Freckelton,
Consultation
, Melbourne, 17
March 2005; New South Wales Public Defenders,
April 2005.
D Byrne and JD Heydon,
Cross on Evidence: Australian Edition
, vol 1, [29125]. Also Criminal Law
Committee of the Law Society of South Australia,
7 March 2005.
RW Miller & Co
Pty Ltd v Krupp (Aust) Pty Ltd
(1991) 34 NSWLR
D Byrne and JD Heydon,
Cross on Evidence: Australian Edition
P Roberts and A Zuckerman,
Criminal Evidence
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004),
This may address historic
problems with the handling of eyewitness identification, by allowing juries and
judicial officers to be
informed by the psychological evidence about the
unreliability of eyewitness accounts.
New South Wales Local Court
Magistrates,
Consultation
, Sydney, 5 April
Smith v The Queen
(1990) 64 ALJR 588.
[2000] NSWCCA 388
(2000) 116 A Crim R 1.
Ibid, [59].
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004),
New South Wales
District Court Judges,
22 February 2005;
Confidential,
22 February
ACT Bar Association,
Consultation
, Canberra, 9 March
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1 (1985),
[2000] NSWCCA 388
A Crim R 1.
Australian Law Reform
Commission and Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission,
Seen and Heard:
Priority for Children in the Legal Process
, ALRC 84 (1997),
A Ligertwood,
Australian Evidence
(4th ed, 2004),
Australian Law Reform
Commission and Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission,
Seen and Heard:
Priority for Children in the Legal Process
, ALRC 84 (1997),
J Anderson, J Hunter
and N Williams,
The New Evidence Law: Annotations and Commentary on the
Uniform Evidence Acts
Queensland Law Reform
Commission,
The Receipt of Evidence by Queensland Courts: The Evidence of
, Report No 55: Part 2 (2000), Ch
Ingles v The
(Unreported, Tasmanian Court of Criminal Appeal, Green CJ, Crawford
and Zeeman JJ, 4 May 1993);
R v Venning
(1997) 17 SR(WA) 261
(1995) 83 A Crim R 502.
Freckelton and H Selby,
Expert Evidence: Law, Practice, Procedure and
(2nd ed, 2002), 367.
Queensland Law Reform Commission,
The Receipt of Evidence by Queensland
Courts: The Evidence of Children
, Report No 55: Part 2 (2000), 301. See also
Uniform Evidence Law
(6th ed, 2004)
[1.3.7680].
This is because of the
High Court’s literal interpretation of s 102 in
(2001) 207 CLR 96. See Ch 11 for discussion of this
interpretation.
(1999) 197 CLR 414
Ibid. The majority
excluded the evidence under
Crimes Act 1900
Evidence Law
(6th ed, 2004)
[1.3.8200].
[1993] SASC 4095
Australian Law Reform Commission and Human Rights and Equal Opportunity
Commission,
Seen and Heard: Priority for Children in the Legal Process
ALRC 84 (1997), [14.77].
Commission into the New South Wales Police Service,
Final Report
(1997), [15.131].
New South Wales
Legislative Council Standing Committee on Law and Justice,
Report on Child
Sexual Assault Prosecutions
, Report 22 (2002),
[1993] SASC 4095
, King CJ at [17] stated that expert evidence
regarding the behaviour of child sexual abuse victims may be admissible where
that behaviour
is ‘so special and so outside ordinary experience that the
knowledge of experts should be made available to courts and
Expert evidence of
the typical patterns of behaviour of child sexual abuse victims may be admitted
to assist the jury in their decision
where they might otherwise, using their
common knowledge and sense, draw an adverse inference against the child witness
due to their
behaviour: see, eg,
(1990) 74 CR (3d) 269
(1990) 57 CCC 3d 522.
Evidence Act 1977
Expert evidence is admissible about the
child’s level of intelligence, including their powers of perception,
memory and expression,
or another matter relevant to their competence to give
evidence, competence to give evidence on oath, or ability to give reliable
evidence. See, eg,
Evidence Act
(NZ) ss 23C, 23G. Expert evidence is admissible in child sexual abuse cases
on issues including the child’s mental capacity,
intellectual impairment,
and emotional maturity; the general development level of a child the same age;
and the degree of consistency
of evidence about the child’s behaviour with
the behaviour of sexually abused children of the same age: see, eg,
[1993] NZFLR 151.
Australian Law
Reform Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004),
Law Council of
4 March 2005; New South Wales Public
21 April 2005. Also P Greenwood,
11 March 2005; P Greenwood,
Consultation
Sydney, 11 March 2005.
Wales Public Defenders,
Director of Public
Prosecutions (NSW),
15 February 2005;
Confidential,
22 February 2005; I
Freckelton,
Consultation
, Melbourne, 17 March
Director of Public
Prosecutions (NSW),
15 February
In part, because
Law Act 1975
(Cth)s 100A allows the admission of childrens’
hearsay evidence.
Director of Public
Prosecutions (NSW),
15 February 2005; I
Freckelton,
Consultation
, Melbourne, 17 March
I Freckelton,
Consultation
, Melbourne, 17 March
J Dowsett and F Feld,
‘Opinion Evidence’ (Paper presented at Evidence Acts Review Workshop
for the Judiciary, Sydney,
Ibid; I Freckelton and H
Expert Evidence: Law, Practice, Procedure and Advocacy
Director of Public
Prosecutions (NSW),
15 February
9. Admissions
Introduction
Meaning of 'in the course of official questioning'
The circumstances of the admission
Section 90 discretion
9. Admissions
Introduction
9.1 An admission is a previous statement or representation by one of the
parties to a proceeding that is adverse to their interests
in the outcome of the
proceeding.
An admission that is a
representation made outside the proceedings and which is offered to prove the
truth of the assertion in the
previous representation is hearsay evidence.
Admissions are an exception to the hearsay rule under both the common law and
the uniform
Evidence Acts.
9.2 The definition of an ‘admission’ in the uniform Evidence Acts
covers admissions in both civil and criminal
proceedings.
However, given the
serious consequences of admitting evidence of admissions and
confessions
made by an accused in
criminal proceedings, a number of specific rules of admissibility apply. This
chapter will focus on admissions
in a criminal context, primarily looking at
of the uniform Evidence Acts.
9.3 Under the common law there are three grounds by which otherwise admissible
evidence of out of court admissions made by the accused
can be excluded. These
are voluntariness, unfairness to the accused and where the admission was
illegally or improperly obtained.
In order to prove unfairness, the defendant has to show that, on the basis of
the particular circumstances in which the admission
was made, it is unfair to
the accused to allow the admission into
9.4 The ALRC was critical of the notion of ‘voluntariness’ in the
common law on the basis that it provided little guidance
for resolving
individual cases. The ALRC’s Interim Report from the original evidence
inquiry (ALRC 26) maintains that it is
difficult to determine ‘the
extent to which an individual’s capacity for choice had been
Evidence Act 1995
Evidence Act
(NSW) and the
Evidence Act 2004
(NI), and Chapter 3, Division 3,
Evidence Act 2001
(Tas) deal with admissions. Admissions
and related representations are excepted from the hearsay and opinion rules.
However, evidence
of the admission must be first-hand hearsay to be
admissible.
Evidence of admissions
against a third party is not excluded from the application of the hearsay or
opinion rules unless the third
party consents. This is intended to ensure that
one defendant’s admission cannot be used against another defendant in the
proceedings without the latter’s
Sections 84
replace the common law test of voluntariness and
shift the focus to a set of conduct or circumstances likely to render an
unreliable.
Under these
sections, admissions obtained or influenced by violence, threats or oppressive
conduct are inadmissible. Admissions in
civil proceedings need meet only the
Sections 85
(which relate to records of oral
questioning) are concerned only with criminal proceedings.
is aimed at excluding admissions obtained in the course of
official questioning unless ‘the circumstances in which the admission
made were such as to make it unlikely that the truth of the admission was
adversely affected’. It foresees the situation
where a person able to
influence the decision to prosecute has induced the defendant into making an
provides a discretion to exclude admissions in a criminal
proceeding where, having regard to the circumstances in which the admission
made, it would be unfair to the defendant to use the evidence.
of ‘in the course of official questioning’
Section 85(2)
applies where the admission was made in the course of
official questioning or as a result of an act of another person who is capable
of influencing the decision whether a prosecution of the defendant should be
brought or should be
9.9 The opportunity for police to fabricate or coerce admissions and confessions
from accused persons has been a long recognised problem.
Following numerous law
reform reports and reports of various commissions and inquiries, all
seeks to protect the rights of an
accused during that period when they are being questioned or interviewed by
uniform Evidence Acts is drafted along similar lines to many of those
provisions.
9.10 ‘Official questioning’ is defined in the uniform Evidence Acts as
‘questioning by an investigating official
in connection with the
investigation of the commission or possible commission of an offence’. The
recent High Court case
Kelly v The Queen
has considered the meaning of
the words ‘in the course of official questioning’ in the context of
Criminal Law (Detention and Interrogation) Act 1995
The decision has
broader implications because of the similarity of wording used in
s 85(1)(a) of the uniform Evidence Acts.
9.11 The majority in
(Gleeson CJ, Hayne and Heydon JJ) took
a narrow view of the section. They accepted that the object of the section is to
‘the “perceived problems” with the so-called police
“verbal”’, including the possibility of fabrication
evidence by police, especially alleged admissions that are uncorroborated and
which the accused would have the practical burden
disproving.
9.12 However, their Honours held that the ‘purpose or object’
identified does not compel any particular construction of
the quite detailed
language of s 8 of the Act. The correct construction must depend on the
particular words used in the
They considered that
‘in the course of official questioning’ marks out a period of time
running from when questioning
commenced to when it
and that statements made
before a nominated time for questioning, within a reasonable time after the
conclusion of questioning, or
‘as a result of questioning’, are not
made in the course of official
questioning.
majority’s view, any broader reading of the section would include the
situation where, for example, a suspect confesses
some time after the
questioning has taken place. The majority argued that this is inconsistent with
the statutory language.
9.13 By contrast, McHugh and Kirby JJ considered that a broader
interpretation of the term is required to fulfil the policy behind
enactment. McHugh J argued that the section should be interpreted broadly
to cover the mischief at which the section is aimed,
which is ‘the attack
on the integrity of the administration of justice by false or unreliable
confessions or admissions’
regarding serious criminal offences. Defining
‘in the course of official questioning’ narrowly would ‘make
section’s operation hostage to the oral evidence of the police
officers as to when the questioning commenced and
concluded that given the purpose of the section, the words ‘confession or
an admission … made in the course
of official questioning’ refer to
a confession or admission made in connection with police
questioning.
9.14 Similarly, Kirby J favoured the purposive approach to construing
s 8(2), but gave the section an even wider interpretation. His
considered that the mischief which the section is intended to address is both
the wrongful conviction of an accused, and ‘
the protection of the
itself by ensuring that the repression of crime through the
conviction of the guilty is done in a way which reflects our fundamental
as a society’.
that the ‘course of official questioning’ begins ‘when
reasonable suspicion arose, or ought reasonably
to have arisen, in the minds of
the police officer detaining that person’, and does not conclude
at the termination of any formal interview, the termination by police of video
recording or other decisions wholly within the power
of the police officers. The
termination occurs when the investigation of the offence whilst the accused
person is in police detention
is terminated either by release of that person or
by the action of police in bringing the accused to a judicial officer upon a
laid by the police officer concerning an
9.15 It has been argued that the majority’s approach grants a wide
discretion to police to nominate when ‘official questioning’
As a consequence,
considerable court time could be spent examining the admissibility of
uncorroborated admissions or confessions
obtained in this
On the other hand, there is
an argument that the law should be such that the police would be able to
determine with some degree of
certainty as to what is considered ‘official
questioning’.
was recently considered by the High Court in
is also concerned with the failure on the part of
the police to record an alleged off-camera admission by an accused that was
tendered by the prosecution at trial. Although the legislative provisions
and the terms under consideration in
are not identical to the
, there are similarities between the two
provisions,
and the two
provisions are directed at the same
Therefore a question
has been raised as to whether the decision in
was overruled by
, the High Court considered the meaning of the term
‘interview’ under s 570D of the
Criminal Code
of the issues in the case was whether there was reasonable excuse for the
failure to videotape alleged admissions by an
accused. If there was no
reasonable excuse, the evidence is not admissible. Section 570D(2)(c) of
Criminal Code
(WA) states that ‘reasonable excuse’
includes where ‘the accused person did not consent to the interview being
videotaped’.
Under s 570 of the
Criminal Code
(WA), the term
‘interview’ is relevantly defined as ‘an interview with a
suspect by a member of the Police Force’.
9.18 The majority of the High Court (McHugh, Gummow, Kirby and
Callinan JJ) in
favoured the purposive interpretation of
the legislation. McHugh J held that both the natural and ordinary meaning
and the purposive
construction of ‘interview’ in s 570D of the
Criminal Code
(WA) support interpreting ‘interview’ to mean
‘the entirety of a discussion between a police officer and a suspect
carried out on a particular day for the purpose of eliciting statements from the
suspect concerning the commission of a serious
s 570D applies to the times when filming was
In so holding, his
Honour relied on the unanimous view of the High Court in
the mischief at which such legislation is
Furthermore, his
Honour found that the disputed admission does not constitute ‘reasonable
excuse’ given the conduct of
the police in encouraging the accused to
speak off-camera and the unfairness to the accused of permitting the tendering
of the admissions
9.19 In their joint judgment, Gummow and Callinan JJ observed that the
legislation considered in
is different from the relevant provisions
Criminal Code
However, their Honours
held that the
Criminal Code
(WA) is intended to address the same mischief
as the legislation in
and that the
assertion by police that the accused ‘was anxious to speak off-tape’
could not constitute ‘reasonable
excuse’ for their failure to record
the alleged
admissions.
9.20 Kirby J held that
did not apply because
concerned different legislation, there were different provisions for
exceptions from the recording requirement, and the facts were
He maintained his
that such legislation should be given a purposive
construction, but did not define the term
‘interview’.
agreed, for the reasons given by Gummow and Callinan JJ, that the
explanation given by the police did not provide a ‘reasonable
excuse’ for their failure to record the alleged off-camera admission by
the accused.
9.21 In their dissenting judgment, Hayne and Heydon JJ (with whom Gleeson CJ
agreed) held that there was reasonable excuse for the
accused’s admissions
not being videotaped on one of three
First, the discussion in
the period that was not videotaped was a separate interview. Second, in the
alternative, if there was a
single interview, there was reasonable excuse for
the failure of the police to record the admission under s 570(4)(c) of the
Criminal Code
(WA) because the accused consented to parts of the
interview being videotaped, but not the entire interview. Third, if
s 570(4)(c)
does not apply, the fact that the definition of
‘reasonable excuse’ in s 570D(4) commenced with the word
means that the definition is non-exhaustive, therefore
there must be other circumstances in which admissions made in interviews that
were not video-taped can be tendered in evidence, including the fact that the
accused in this case did not want the relevant part
of the discussion to be
videotaped. Although their Honours referred to
, they did not
expressly apply
9.22 The above analysis shows that
was not overruled by the decision
. First, the terms and the legislation under consideration in
the two cases are different. On one view, the meaning of ‘interview’
may be synonymous with
‘questioning’.
remarked that the Tasmanian Minister for
Justice clearly understood the term ‘in the course of questioning’
Criminal Law (Detention and Interrogation) Act 1995
(Tas) to be
‘generally equivalent’ to the expression
‘interview’.
However, as noted by the majority in
for the proposition
that ‘interview’ and ‘in the course of official
questioning’ are not
synonymous.
The majority in
did not decide whether the two terms are synonymous, but commented
that ‘either “official questioning” is identical
interview with an accused, or it is broader, because it cannot be
9.23 Second, even if the terms ‘in the course of questioning’ and
‘interview’ can be considered synonymous,
the decisions of three of
the four judges (Gummow, Kirby and Callinan JJ) in the majority in
turn on the interpretation of the term ‘reasonable
excuse’ rather than
‘interview’.
McHugh J appears to have relied on the unanimous view of the High Court in
regarding the mischief at which such legislation is directed in
order to reach a broad interpretation of the term
‘interview’.
Therefore, not only was
not overruled by
, but it is
also doubtful that
has a significant impact on the
interpretation of the phrase ‘in the course of official
questioning’.
Submissions
and consultations
9.24 IP 28 asks what, if any, concerns are raised by the definition
given to the term ‘in the course of official questioning’
High Court in
, and if these concerns require amendment of s 85
of the uniform Evidence Acts or the definition of ‘official
questioning’.
9.25 Some do not consider that s 85 requires amendment. For example, in
consultation, one judge of the New South Wales Supreme Court
observes that
s 85 was never intended to cover situations outside of interviews by
investigating officials. The New South Wales Office
of the Director of Public
Prosecutions (DPP NSW) submits that the interpretation of the majority in
is appropriate and promotes certainty and consistency of
application of the provision. It does not consider that the scope of s 85
should extend to statements made before the questioning commenced, statements
made within a reasonable time after the conclusion
of questioning, or statements
made as a result of questioning but which do not otherwise fall within the
period of official questioning
as defined by the majority in
9.26 The Australian Securities and Investments Commission (ASIC) also opposes
broadening s 85.
contends that since s 85(2) is mandatory in its application and casts the
burden of proof of admissibility upon the prosecution,
any broadening of its
scope carries with it the risk that highly probative evidence will not be
considered by the trier of fact.
Further, in ASIC’s view, no other
provisions of the uniform Evidence Acts would appear to provide a specific
mechanism for
excluding evidence of potentially untruthful admissions, made to
an investigating official, other than in the course of official
questioning.
Subject to the operation of s 88, the evidence becomes a matter for the
trier of fact. However, ASIC concedes that there
does not appear to be any
logical reason why an admission made to an investigating official, the validity
of which is in question,
should be excluded if made at one point in time rather
than at another.
9.27 Alternatively, if the scope of s 85 is to be extended, ASIC submits
that the exclusion of evidence under any such extension should
be discretionary
rather than mandatory. It suggests that a mandatory exclusion under all
circumstances is too rigid, and that any
extension of the operation of s 85
should continue to be confined to admissions made to an investigating
9.28 Others favour amending s 85 so that it covers all conversations
between suspects and the police. The Law Council of Australia
(Law Council)
submits that the best protection for an accused against fabrication of an
admission is to require that all conversations
between the police and a suspect
be electronically recorded, with the court having a discretion to admit
unrecorded admissions where
the interests of justice so demand. In the Law
Council’s opinion, s 85 needs to be amended to make clear that it
all conversations between a suspect and police, not merely
conversations which can be categorised as official
questioning.
9.29 The New South Wales Public Defenders Office (NSW PDO) submits that the
majority interpretation of the phrase ‘in the course
of official
questioning’ in
is ‘an extremely narrow one,
effectively limiting the period of official questioning to the time between the
turning on and
the turning off of the recording equipment
It is submitted
that there are ‘no good policy reasons for limiting the protections
afforded by s 85 to this period’
and that the entire phrase should be
9.30 One judicial officer
expresses concern that the majority of the
High Court in
has significantly weakened the policy that only in
the most exceptional of circumstances should an admission be admissible in the
absence of either an electronic recording or a written record signed (or
otherwise adopted) by the accused. It is suggested that
where an investigating
official asks questions and receives oral or written statements from a suspect,
the possibility of abuse or
fabrication is such that any such statements made
contrary to the policy should be rendered inadmissible in the interest of the
administration of
9.31 A third view supports a return to the common law requirement of
voluntariness. The Legal Services Commission of South
and the Criminal Law
Committee of the Law Society of South Australia (Law Society
support a reinstatement of
the common law approach to the question of voluntariness, in particular, the
importance of whether the
accused was able to exercise a genuine choice to speak
or remain silent. Alternatively, it is suggested that s 85(1) should be
to cover ‘any conversation’ or ‘every
conversation’ between the suspect and the police where the investigating
official suspects, or has reasonable grounds to suspect, a person of having
committed an offence.
Commissions’ view
9.32 There is support both for and against expanding the scope of s 85.
Those involved in investigation or prosecution of criminal
offences tend to be
against any expansion of the section, while those involved in assisting accused
persons tend to favour broadening
the scope of s 85.
9.33 In the Commissions’ view, it is significant that all the judgments
acknowledge that the mischief intended to be addressed by
s 85 is to overcome the perceived problems of the so-called ‘police
verbal’—that is, the possible fabrication of evidence by police
The point of
divergence between the majority and dissenting judgments is whether the
statutory language supports the purposive interpretation.
In addition, the
Commissions are particularly persuaded by the argument that the majority
interpretation may allow the police to
circumvent s 85 by nominating times
for the beginning and end of questioning.
9.34 Given that the purpose of s 85 is to counter the problem of
unreliable confessions and admissions and to uphold the integrity
of the justice
system, limiting the period of ‘official questioning’ to one that is
determined by the investigating officials
is unsatisfactory. Therefore, the
Commissions propose that s 85 be amended to reflect Kirby J’s
interpretation in
9.35 As regards the submission that the voluntariness rule be reinstated,
ALRC 26 and the final report of the original ALRC evidence
point out that
the voluntariness test is deficient in a number of respects. ALRC 26 states
that the test suffers from the following
uncertainties:
• the precise meaning of ‘voluntary’ and the related
concept of ‘free choice’ in the test;
• the relationship between the ‘voluntariness test’ and the
specific rules relating to threats and promise, by persons
in authority and the
context of those rules;
• the meaning and relevance of ‘oppression’;
• the relevance of the use of deception;
• the relevance of personal characteristics of the accused;
• whether the test applies only where there has been (police)
misconduct;
• whether there always needs to be a causal link between the external
conduct and the confession;
• whether the test, and its subsidiary categories, are primarily
subjective or objective.
9.36 ALRC 38 also highlights the problem that although the onus of
proving voluntariness was formally on the prosecution, the need
for the accused
to demonstrate that he or she was overborne in some way or induced to confess by
threats or promises made by a person
in authority means that, in practice, the
onus was placed on the
9.37 The Commissions are persuaded by this analysis. Due to these deficiencies of
the voluntariness test, the Commissions maintain
that there should not be a
Proposal 9–1
Section 85(1) of the
uniform Evidence Acts should be amended to provide that the section applies only
to evidence of an admission
made by a defendant (a) to an investigating official
who was at the time performing functions in connection with the investigation
the commission or possible commission of an offence; or (b) as a result of an
act of another person who is capable of influencing
the decision whether a
prosecution of the defendant should be brought or should be continued. A
consequent amendment should be made
to s 89(1) to incorporate (a)
The circumstances of
the admission
9.38 Section 85(2) of the uniform Evidence Acts provides that
‘evidence of the admission is not admissible unless the circumstances
which the admission was made were such as to make it unlikely that the truth of
the admission was adversely affected’.
9.39 Section 85(3) provides a non-exhaustive list of matters that the
court may take into account for the purposes of s 85(2):
(a) any relevant condition or characteristic of the person who made the
admission, including age, personality and education and any
mental, intellectual
or physical disability to which the person is or appears to be subject; and
(b) if the admission was made in response to questioning:
(i) the nature of the questions and the manner in which they were put; and
(ii) the nature of any threat, promise or other inducement made to the person
questioned.
9.40 In the original evidence inquiry, the ALRC considered that, in order for
an admission to be admissible, the trial judge should
be satisfied on the
balance of probabilities that it was made in circumstances not likely to affect
its truth adversely.
preliminary issue the judge would determine whether, in all the circumstances,
the way the admission was obtained may have impaired
reliability.
The circumstances
to be considered included: whether there was misconduct in the interrogation;
whether procedural safeguards were
adopted; and the characteristics of the
person making the admission, including whether their ability to make rational
decisions was
9.41 Stephen Odgers SC argues that the language used in ALRC 26 suggests
that the court should use a subjective analysis, focusing
on the actual
reliability of the admission. However, in the United Kingdom, s 76(2)(b) of
Police and Criminal
Evidence Act
(UK) (PACE) provides that:
(2) If, in any proceedings where the prosecution proposes to give in evidence a
confession made by an accused person, it is represented
to the court that the
confession was or may have been obtained—
(b) in consequence of anything said or done which was likely, in the
circumstances existing at the time, to render unreliable any
confession which
might be made by him in consequence thereof,
the court shall not allow the confession to be given in evidence against him
except in so far as the prosecution proves to the court
beyond reasonable doubt
that the confession (notwithstanding that it may be true) was not obtained as
9.42 Thus the PACE provision requires the court to consider ‘not
whether the particular admission is reliable but whether any
admission which the
accused might make in consequence of what was said or done is likely to be
rendered unreliable’.
basis for this policy is a concern with the methods used to obtain confessions,
leaving to the jury the issue of the weight given
to the truth of the
9.43 Odgers says it is arguable that such an objective test should be applied
This would allow the focus to shift to whether it was likely
that the interrogators’ conduct would affect reliability rather
whether it actually did.
9.44 There is some judicial support for the objective
For example, in
, Wood CJ stated that in considering whether the circumstances
were such that the truth of the admission might have been adversely
the question of whether an admission was in fact made, or whether it was true or
untrue, is a question for the jury rather
This decision was
referred to by Wood CJ in
and applied by
R v Fischetti &
9.45 However, Odgers points out that the general trend of cases shows a subjective
analysis of the contested admissions, with a focus
on the actual contents of a
particular admission to conclude whether the admission is
In fact, there is
authority for the proposition that the terms of the particular admission are a
relevant consideration in determining
the reliability of the admission. In
, Hidden J in the New South Wales Supreme Court held that
‘in examining whether the circumstances in which a confession was
were such as to make it unlikely that its truth was adversely affected, the
terms of the confession itself are not to be
This approach
was subsequently applied in
9.46 A further issue is what ‘circumstances’ are relevant. Should an
admission be inadmissible even where there is no
suggestion of impropriety or
influence on the part of the police? In
, Barr J stated
that the expression ‘circumstances in which the admission was made’
‘is intended to mean the circumstances of and surrounding
the making of the admissions, not the general circumstances of the
events said
to form part of the offence to which the admissions are
Furthermore, he
held that the untruthfulness or unreliability of admissions produced in
circumstances other than through official
questioning is not a question for the
judge but rather is a question for the
was followed in
In that case,
the accused had psychiatric problems and there was doubt as to whether he was
giving an accurate account of the events.
McClellan J found that because
there was nothing arising from the circumstances of the interview which would
impact upon the truth
of the admission, he was bound to follow
allow the admission. Whether the admission was considered credible was a
question for the jury.
9.48 This approach may be contrasted with that in
Higgins J in the Australian Capital Territory Supreme Court held that
‘circumstances of the admission’ under
were not limited
to those circumstances that were known to the investigating officials or
‘to any objective tendency in the
questions or the manner in which they
had been put to produce an unreliable or untruthful
observed that
makes it clear that ‘the range of such
circumstances can and will include the physical and mental characteristics of
interviewed’.
9.49 Odgers suggests that a lack of clarity in
may be the result of
changes in the ALRC’s views between ALRC 26 and ALRC 38 when it
seems that the objective test was favoured.
However, this change of policy is
not reflected in the legislation. The section may therefore require legislative
amendment to address
Submissions
and consultations
9.50 IP 28 asks whether the test under
of the uniform
Evidence Acts requires clarification to indicate whether it is a subjective or
objective test.
9.51 Both the DPP NSW
consider that
should be amended to specify an objective test. ASIC further submits that it is
quite clear from
that the circumstances that a court can have
regard to, when determining an issue pursuant to
, are very wide and
include matters that may well be beyond the knowledge or control of
investigating officials.
However, despite the lack of knowledge or control of these circumstances, it is
the investigating officials that have the task of
adducing evidence to prove
that the truth of the admission was not adversely affected. ASIC argues that
having regard to the range
of factors that may be considered by the trial judge
in determining the admissibility of the evidence, if the evidence is not
on the basis of an objective assessment of such factors, it is
appropriate that the court or trier of fact determine what weight
attached to that evidence.
9.52 ASIC accepts that it is appropriate to place on the prosecution the burden of
establishing that those acts or omissions over
which the investigating officials
have control were unlikely to have adversely affected the truthfulness of the
admission. However,
they contend that the existence of matters solely within the
knowledge of the defendant that may have had such an effect are matters
defendant should have the onus of
The Legal Services
Commission of South Australia
and the Criminal Law Committee of the Law Society of South
also expressly agree
with Odgers that the objective test is preferable.
9.53 By contrast, the submission of the NSW PDO does not consider that
amendment of
It is observed that
there are conflicting authorities concerning the extent to which the subjective
features of the accused, as distinct
from the circumstances of the interview,
are relevant to
However, the view of the NSW PDO is that
already expressly states that the characteristics of the accused,
including any mental, intellectual or physical disability, are
to be taken into
account. Therefore
does not require amendment.
9.54 On one view,
is not ambiguous and the subjective/objective
distinction is not
Any personal conditions or characteristics would clearly be included under
9.55 In consultation, Stephen Odgers SC indicates that although he considers
to be unclear as to whether the court should take an objective or a
subjective approach, given the limited amount of case law on
the issue, it might
be too early for amendment of this
9.56 Others suggest that there is some confusion as to the purpose of
The Law Council
suggests that
should be amended to make it clear that the section
concerns the reliability of the
Commissions’ view
9.57 The Commissions’ view is that the subjective/objective distinction
unnecessarily complicates discussion of this issue.
In essence, in the context
, the subjective/objective distinction raises questions about
whether its application should involve consideration of:
• the circumstances of the interrogation and their likely impact on any
person being interrogated; or
• those circumstances and their likely impact on the particular accused
when he or she was interrogated.
9.58 The latter interpretation, however, includes a degree of objectivity in
the sense that the question is not whether the circumstances
did adversely
affect the truth of the admission. Rather, the question is whether they were
likely to do so.
9.59 The Commissions consider that, consistently with ALRC 26,
is intended to enhance the truth of
admissions.
In canvassing the
various proposals to enhance the truth of the admissions, the ‘truth
test’ (which was eventually adopted
was contrasted with
the ‘ordinary man test’ (which was not adopted). The proposed
‘ordinary man test’ involves
‘an objective test based on the
hypothetical person of average or ordinary firmness, a construct of common
experience’.
However, the
ALRC indicated that a subjective test is preferable because:
there can be no doubt that the effect of various techniques of interrogation
will vary depending on the personality and condition
of the particular
interviewee. Moreover, characteristics of an interviewee which render him or her
particularly susceptible to psychological
manipulation may not be readily
apparent to the officer interrogating. A resulting admission may well be untrue
regardless of whether
the officer should or should not have been aware of those
characteristics.
9.60 The Commissions consider that it is evident from
the context of
, the circumstances of the admission includes,
amongst other things, the characteristics and conditions of the accused. Nor
confine those characteristics and conditions to those that are
known to the investigating
This is clearly the
correct view. Therefore the Commissions consider that no change to
is warranted.
provides an overarching discretion to exclude admissions
in a criminal proceeding where, having regard to the circumstances in which
admission was made, it would be unfair to the defendant to use the evidence.
This provision reflects the common
9.62 ALRC 26 criticises the fairness discretion on the basis that it is
a vague concept and had not been properly defined by the
However, ALRC 38
concludes that is necessary to cover situations that are unfair, but which do
not meet the test of an illegally
or improperly obtained
9.63 Odgers argues that the vagueness associated with ‘fairness’ under
the common law remains in the
legislation.
Nonetheless,
case law provides some guidance on the factors that may constitute unfairness.
Foster v The Queen
the High Court found that any significant
infringement of the defendant’s rights would constitute
unfairness.
Compulsion is not
required to constitute
unfairness.
Development of the
unfairness discretion
9.64 The common law has two discretionary grounds for excluding evidence:
unfairness to the accused and consideration of public
The focus of the two
discretions is different: the unfairness discretion focuses on the effect of the
unlawful conduct on the accused,
while the public policy discretion focuses on
‘large matters of public
9.65 It would appear that the reason for identifying separately the
unfairness discretion (reflected in
and the public policy discretion
(reflected in
was that the fairness discretion forms part of a
cohesive body of principles and rules specifically on evidence of confessional
statements,
whereas the discretion to exclude evidence of a confessional
statement on public policy grounds is part of a general discretion to
unlawfully obtained
9.66 Before the reformulation of the fairness discretion in
there were two
approaches to the exercise of the fairness discretion at common law—the
‘narrow approach’ that only
considers ‘whether the reception
of the evidence is likely to preclude a fair trial’, in the sense that it
risk of the wrongful conviction of an accused; and the ‘broad
approach’ which also takes into account additional factors
that do not
affect the outcome of the trial, but violate more general notions of
9.67 Dr Jonathan Clough argues that, in the exercise of the fairness
discretion, the ‘narrow approach’ is preferable to
approach’ because additional factors that do not affect the outcome of the
trial should only be justified
on the basis of the public policy discretion and
should not be dealt with under the fairness
discretion.
The admissibility
of evidence of such factors should be balanced against public interest in
conviction of the guilty, especially
where the interests of an accused have
already been largely protected by admissibility rules on voluntariness and
reliability.
9.68 In 1998, the High Court in
finally settled on the narrow
The approach
has influenced the application of the fairness
discretion under
The meaning of
9.69 In analysing the concept of fairness, the majority in
acknowledged that fairness is an inherently vague
They accepted the
criticism that the exercise of the unfairness discretion is uncertain because
the courts have not defined the policy
behind the discretion or the relevant
considerations.
Nevertheless,
they considered that ‘the very nature of the concept inhibits great
precision’.
9.70 Unfairness under
arises from the use of the admissions by the
prosecution and not necessarily whether the police treated the accused
The purpose of the
discretion is to protect the right of the accused to a fair trial, which
includes consideration of whether ‘any
forensic advantage has been
obtained unfairly by the Crown from the way the accused was
advantage obtained by the Crown constitutes a forensic disadvantage for the
accused. The meaning of ‘forensic disadvantage’
may be gleaned from
the following statement in the majority judgment in
Unreliability is an important aspect of the unfairness discretion but it is not
exclusive … the purpose of that discretion
is the protection of the rights
and privileges of the accused. Those rights include procedural rights. There may
be occasions when,
because of some impropriety, a confessional statement is made
which, if admitted, would result in the accused being disadvantaged
conduct of his defence.
9.71 It is suggested that the admission of an improperly obtained confession
into evidence would not constitute a forensic disadvantage
per se. In order for
the admission to constitute a forensic disadvantage, the disadvantage must
affect the conduct of the
in the sense that
‘the accused is forced to defend him or herself against unreliable
9.72 Although the fairness discretion primarily involves questions of
reliability,
reliability is
not ‘the sole touchstone’ of unfairness. Once the fairness
discretion involves considerations other than
reliability, ‘the line
between unfairness and policy may become
9.73 The majority in
developed a principle that merges the
unfairness discretion and the public policy (illegal or improperly obtained
evidence) discretion,
by reference to the fundamental principle of the
accused’s leave as ‘right’ to choose to speak or remain
When the freedom to
choose to speak to the police has been impugned, the court has a discretion to
exclude the evidence, on the basis
that either the circumstances were such that
it would be unfair to the accused if the confession is admitted, or
‘having regard
to the means by which the confession was elicited, the
evidence has been obtained at a price which is unacceptable having regard
prevailing community
standards’.
9.74 There is potential overlap between
and the discretion in
to exclude improperly or illegally obtained
However, the
discretion involves the court balancing two public policy
concerns—the desirability of admitting the evidence weighed against
undesirability of admitting the evidence. As stated above, the focus of the
unfairness discretion (reflected in
‘will tend to be on the
effect of the unlawful conduct on the particular accused’, whereas the
focus of the public policy
discretion (reflected in
to be on “large matters of public policy” and the relevance and
importance of fairness and unfairness
to the particular accused will depend upon
the circumstances of the particular
Section 138(3)
lists a number of matters that the court may take into
account in exercising its discretion. Questions have been raised about whether
should similarly define the circumstances when it would be unfair to
admit an admission by a defendant. This approach could possibly
resolve any
confusion as to the considerations upon which
9.76 There is no general discretion to exclude other types of evidence on the same
basis as admissions under
That is, there is no general discretion to
exclude evidence where, having regard to the circumstances in which the evidence
was obtained,
it would be unfair to the defendant to use that evidence. This
position has been contrasted with the common
Fryberg J noted that the common law fairness discretion
was generally discussed in terms of confessional evidence. However:
the purpose of that discretion is the protection of the rights and privileges of
the accused, including procedural rights. It would
be odd if such a purpose were
to be fulfilled only in relation to confessional
statements.
9.77 It has, therefore, been asked whether a broader fairness discretion that
applies to evidence beyond admissions is required under
the uniform Evidence
Odgers writes:
The discretion conferred by [s 90] applies only to evidence of an
admission. Accordingly, there is no discretion to exclude other
prosecution
evidence on the basis that, having regard to the circumstances in which the
evidence was obtained, it would be unfair
to a defendant to use the evidence.
This contrasts with the position at common law, and may require amendment of the
9.78 A number of common law authorities have held that the fairness
discretion (reflected in s 90) is not limited to evidence of admissions,
but can extend to other evidence such as identification evidence and real
, Smart AJ observed:
The question remains whether the court still retains the discretion to exclude
otherwise admissible evidence where that is necessary
to ensure a fair trial, if
the discretions conferred by the Act do not cover the position which has arisen.
As I am of the opinion
that the use of the evidence in question (the prescribed
statement) would not result in an unfair trial for the appellant the question
need not be answered and it would be best left to a case where the court
receives full argument on the
Evidence Act
… I would be reluctant
to see such a discretion disappear as it is an important aspect of a court's
ability to ensure a fair
trial. Experience has shown that it is necessary. It
enables the court to deal with new and unforeseen
situations.
9.79 The Commissions are not persuaded that
should be extended
beyond evidence of admissions. As Odgers points out, although
not expressly refer to ‘unfairness’ to the accused in criminal
proceedings as a factor in determining whether it
would be undesirable to admit
improperly or illegally obtained evidence, it is clear that fairness to an
accused may be taken into
account in the exercise of that
discretion.
However, in
, Howie J (with whom Ipp JA and Hulme J agreed) stated
section 138
is not, in its terms at least, concerned with the court
ensuring a fair trial for the accused. Certainly that is not a paramount
consideration when exercising the discretion. The discretion exercised under
seeks to balance two competing public interests, neither of which
directly involves securing a fair trial for the
9.80 Odgers comments that ‘while it must be correct that fairness is
not “paramount”, in the sense of determinative,
there is clearly a
public interest in an accused receiving “a fair trial”’, and
that admitting evidence that would
result in an ‘unfair’ trial for
the accused is clearly
undesirable.
The issue of
whether the uniform Evidence Acts should be amended to include a general
obligation to ensure a fair trial is considered
further in Chapter 2.
Submissions and
consultations
9.81 IP 28 asks if
of the uniform Evidence Acts should define
the circumstances in which it would be unfair to admit an admission against a
9.82 Some consider the fairness discretion too open-ended. There is support for
the inclusion in
of additional guidance as to the circumstances that
may constitute unfairness,
possibly in the form of a list of factors to be weighed in deciding whether
evidence is sufficiently
The DPP NSW
also supports the call for additional guidance, but suggests that that guidance
should not be prescriptive, nor should
it be exhaustive of all the factors that
would meet that description.
For example,
could state that any significant infringement of the
rights of the accused would constitute unfairness within the section.
Alternatively,
it is suggested that further guidance on the exercise of
discretions could be established through guideline
judgements.
9.83 Rather than defining the circumstances in which it would be unfair to admit
an admission, some New South Wales District Court
judges suggest that fairness
should be partially defined.
By contrast, the NSW PDO submits that any attempt to define
‘fairness’ as used in
would cause a narrowing of the
meaning of the concept. The NSW PDO does not believe that
‘fairness’ can or should be
9.84 ASIC submits that no attempt should be made to prescribe the circumstances in
which the admission of a defendant's admission
ASIC argues that any
attempt to prescribe the circumstances of unfairness is likely to result in
complex legislation, and that such
legislation would provide fertile ground for
argument as to whether a given fact situation fits within the prescribed
circumstances.
ASIC considers that a list of investigative techniques that are
considered either legitimate or unfair would be of limited value
legitimate technique may be carried out in a manner or circumstance that results
in unfairness.
9.85 The Law Council submits that it would not be helpful to define the
circumstances in which it would be unfair to admit an admission
‘unfair to a defendant’ is capable of a broad interpretation,
ensuring a fair trial by taking into account
matters going to the justice of
individual cases and to the moral integrity of the trial process.
9.86 Concerns have also been raised that the exercise of judicial discretion
might become more complex if the factors that the court
must consider
9.87 As regards the overlap between
, the Law Council
points out that there will inevitably be such an overlap, as
seeks to uphold the moral integrity of the trial. The Law Council does not see
this overlap as a problem. However the Council
is of the view that the fairness
discretion in
should apply generally to all evidence tendered against
an accused, not simply
admissions.
Council’s view is that such enactment would serve to emphasise that the
uniform Evidence Acts are based upon deep rooted
common law notions of fair
Commissions’ view
9.88 In the Commissions’ view, any attempt at definition would limit
the discretion and could have unforeseen consequences.
majority of the High Court conceded that the ALRC’s criticism in
ALRC 26 of the uncertainty of the discretion ‘has
force though the
very nature of the concept inhibits great
precision’.
9.89 The Commissions consider that it would not be appropriate for
define the circumstances when it would be unfair to admit an admission by a
defendant. As Odgers observes, given the elusiveness
of the concept of
‘fairness’, it is difficult to provide comprehensive guidance on the
relevant considerations in the
exercise of this
discretion.
9.90 A review of the case law shows that comprehensive guidance would not be
practicable. In the exercise of the fairness discretion,
examples of relevant
considerations include the nature and extent of any infringement of the
accused’s rights and privileges,
and where ‘the circumstances in
which the admission was made rendered it
unreliable’.
the discretion is not limited to such cases. Furthermore, there are certain
matters that may not necessarily be regarded
as unfair to an
accused—whether they would be so regarded would depend on the
circumstances of the case—thus making the
provision of comprehensive
guidance even more difficult. Examples of matters which would not necessarily be
regarded as unfair include:
• the use of an admission that was compelled by
• an interview conducted despite the suspect’s
• continuation of an interview despite an indication from the suspect that they
did not wish to participate
• interviewing a suspect who is intellectually handicapped or who suffers from
disease or disorder of the
• interviewing an accused who is affected by alcohol and
• admissions made to police
9.91 It has been noted that there is difficulty in being prescriptive in the
exercise of the fairness discretion because it involves
an evaluation of
circumstances.
The Law Reform
Commission of Canada noted that:
there is an undeniable advantage in granting judges discretionary power, since
it keeps the court continually in touch with current
social attitudes and may
lead to the eventual evolution of the rules as the courts adapt them to changing
social realities.
9.92 This passage was quoted with approval by the High Court in
. The Commissions consider that in order for the concept of
‘fairness’ to remain ‘broad enough to adapt to changing
circumstances as well as evolving community
should not be amended.
9.93 Finally, the aim of the
discretion is to allow the trial judge the
discretion to exclude evidence of admissions where that evidence was
‘obtained in
such a way that it would be unfair to admit the evidence
against the accused who made them’, but was not otherwise covered
discretion to exclude illegally or improperly obtained evidence. That is,
, is not confined to unlawfully obtained
As pointed out in
ALRC 38, the public policy discretion is capable of dealing with illegally
or improperly obtained evidence but
not in the way the unfairness discretion
This is because the
discretion to exclude illegally or improperly obtained evidence
requires a balancing of public interests and therefore is less effective where
the accused chose to speak to the police but on the
basis of false
assumptions.
is intended to deal with unfair
situations that are not otherwise covered by admissibility rules, the courts
should be given a wide
power in the exercise of this discretion. The
Commissions’ view is that the principles expounded in
sufficient guidance for the exercise of the fairness discretion and that further
rules or list of factors may narrow the scope
of the discretion unnecessarily.
Therefore the Commissions do not propose that
be amended.
Evidence Act 1995
Dictionary, Pt 1;
Evidence Act 1995
(NSW) Dictionary, Pt 1;
Evidence Act 2001
Evidence Act 2004
Dictionary, Pt 1.
ALRC’s intention that the definition include admissions contained in civil
pleadings: Australian Law Reform Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim)
Vol 1 (1985), [755]. See also J Gans and A Palmer,
Australian Principles of
(2nd ed, 2004), 215.
Confessions are ‘statements which amount to admissions of actual guilt of
the crime in question’:
[1950] HCA 25
(1950) 82 CLR 133
, 150. In the
context of criminal proceedings, Coldrey J in
Hazim v The Queen
(1993) 69 A Crim R 371
, 380 stated that ‘the accepted distinction between
confessions and admissions is that the former involve admissions of actual
of the crime, whereas the latter relate to key facts which tend to prove the
guilt of the accused of such crime. The category
of admissions includes relevant
false denial’.
D Byrne and JD
Cross on Evidence: Australian Edition
, vol 1, [33,605], [33,610],
[33,760]; see also P Zahra,
Confessional Evidence
(2002) Public Defenders
Office (NSW), 1.
[1950] HCA 25
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1 (1985),
Uniform Evidence Acts s 82.
Confessional
(2002) Public Defenders Office (NSW),
Evidence Act 2001
Under this section, evidence of an admission in a proceeding
for a serious offence made by a defendant during official questioning
admissible unless an audio visual record of an interview is available or the
prosecution proves on the balance of probabilities
that there is a reasonable
explanation as to why an audio visual record was not made or the court is
satisfied there are exceptional
circumstances allowing the evidence of the
admission to be led.
Uniform Evidence
Crimes Act 1914
as applied to
the Australian Capital Territory by
Crimes Act 1914
(for indictable offences);
Crimes Act 1900
(ACT) s 187(3) (for
summary offences);
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
Police Powers and Responsibilities Act 2000
Crimes Act 1958
Criminal Code
(WA) s 570D;
Evidence Act 2001
Offences Act 1953
Police Administration Act
ss 142–143.
v The Queen
(2004) 205 ALR 274.
Section 8(1)
Criminal Law
(Detention and Interrogation) Act 1995
(Tas) has now been replaced by
Evidence Act 2001
, in similar but not identical
Kelly v The Queen
[2004] HCA 12
205 ALR 274
Ibid, [146] (emphasis in
original), quoting Lamer J in
Rothman v The Queen
[1980] INSC 175
[1981] 1 SCR 640
Kelly v The Queen
[2004] HCA 12
205 ALR 274
‘The Thin End of the Verballing Wedge’ (2004) 42(6)
Law Society
[2003] NSWSC 117
Nicholls v The Queen
[2005] HCA 1
(2005) 213 ALR 1.
Criminal Law (Detention and Interrogation) Act 1995
considered in
, and s 570D of the
Criminal Code
considered in
Nicholls v The Queen
[2005] HCA 1
(2005) 213 ALR 1
, [98] per McHugh J; [154] per
Gummow and Callinan JJ; [216] per Kirby J; [331] per Hayne and
[103]–[104].
[98]–[101].
(1993) 68 A
[2004] HCA 12
(2004) 205 ALR 274
R v McKenzie
R v McKenzie
, Wright J of the Tasmanian Supreme
Court remarked that ‘“interview” seems to be used in
contradistinction to the
words “official questioning” which appear
as part of the definition of “confession or admission” used in
s 8(1) [of the
Criminal Law (Detention and Interrogation) Act 1995
(Tas)]. The words “official questioning” are not then used again in
the section. The very requirement that the “interview”
videotaped tends to confirm that it is a formal, unhurried interrogation
procedure, conducted in circumstances in which electronic
recording aids are
likely to be available, which is the real target of
Kelly v The
[2004] HCA 12
(2004) 205 ALR 274
Ibid, [54].
Nicholls v The
[2005] HCA 1
(2005) 213 ALR 1
, [152] per Gummow and Callinan JJ; [218] per
[98]–[104].
Australian Law
Reform Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004), 110,
Director of Public
Prosecutions (NSW),
15 February 2005,
Australian Securities &
Investments Commission,
7 March 2005,
Law Council of Australia,
4 March 2005,
New South Wales Public
21 April 2005,
Confidential,
22 February 2005,
Legal Services Commission of South
22 February 2005,
Criminal Law Committee of the Law
Society of South Australia,
7 March 2005,
Law Society of South Australia,
Consultation
, Adelaide, 11 May
Kelly v The Queen
[2004] HCA 12
205 ALR 274
, per Glesson CJ, per Hayne and Heydon JJ at [43]; per
McHugh J at [104]; per Kirby J at
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1 (1985),
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, ALRC 38 (1987),
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1 (1985),
Ibid, [765]. See also S Odgers,
Uniform Evidence Law
(6th ed, 2004),
[1.3.5220].
Evidence Law
(6th ed, 2004),
[1.3.5220].
Ibid, [1.3.5220]; see also
I Dennis, ‘The Admissibility of Confessions under
Sections 84
Evidence Act 1995
: An English Perspective’
[1996] SydLawRw 2
(1998) 105 A Crim R 27
, 44; see also
Inspector Wade v Mid North
Coast Area Health Service
[2004] NSWIRComm 254
R v Esposito
A Crim R 27
R v Moffatt
[2000] NSWCCA 174
(2000) 112 A Crim R 201
Fischetti and Sharma
[2003] ACTSC 9
Uniform Evidence
(6th ed, 2004), [1.3.5220].
R v Donnelly
(1997) 96 A Crim R 432
[2002] ACTSC 13
(2002) 129 A Crim R 115
(Unreported, New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal, 2 September 1997),
NSWSC 1072.
[1999] ACTSC 47
, [29]–[30]: cited in S Odgers,
Uniform Evidence Law
(6th ed, 2004), [1.3.5220].
[1999] ACTSC 47
Evidence Law
(6th ed, 2004),
[1.3.5220].
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004), 111,
Director of Public
Prosecutions (NSW),
15 February 2005,
Australian Securities &
Investments Commission,
7 March 2005,
Legal Services Commission of South
22 February 2005,
Criminal Law Committee of the Law
Society of South Australia,
7 March 2005,
New South Wales Public Defenders,
21 April 2005,
Consultation
Canberra, 8 March 2005.
Consultation
, Sydney, 9 August
C O’Donnell,
26 December
Law Council of Australia,
4 March 2005,
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1 (1985),
Uniform Evidence
(6th ed, 2004), [1.3.5260].
Australian Law Reform Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1
(1985), [761].
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, ALRC 38 (1987), [160]. See S Odgers,
Evidence Law
(6th ed, 2004),
[1.3.5760].
Evidence Law
(6th ed, 2004),
[1.3.5760].
Foster v The
(1993) 67 ALJR 550.
v Swaffield
[1998] HCA 1
(1998) 192 CLR 159
Pollard v The Queen
[1992] HCA 69
(1992) 176 CLR 177
v The Queen
(1993) 67 ALJR 550,
Pollard v The Queen
[1992] HCA 69
(1992) 176 CLR 177
[1998] HCA 1
(1998) 192 CLR 159.
Clough, ‘The Exclusion of Voluntary Confessions: A Question of
[1997] UNSWLawJl 12
(1997) 20(1)
University of New South Wales Law Journal
See B Presser, ‘Public
Policy, Police Interest: A Re-evaluation of the Judicial Discretion to Exclude
Improperly or Illegally
Obtained Evidence’
[2001] MelbULawRw 24
University Law Review
Evidence Law
(6th ed, 2004),
[1.3.5760].
R v Swaffield
[1998] HCA 1
(1998) 192 CLR 159
Van Der Meer v The
[1988] HCA 56
(1988) 35 A Crim R 232
[2003] NSWCCA 374
[2003] NSWCCA
, [104] citing
R v Swaffield
[1998] HCA 1
(1998) 192 CLR 159
R v Swaffield
[1998] HCA 1
192 CLR 159
‘Police Deception, the Right to Silence and the Discretionary Exclusion of
Confessions’
Criminal Law Journal
B Presser, ‘Public
Policy, Police Interest: A Re-evaluation of the Judicial Discretion to Exclude
Improperly or Illegally
Obtained Evidence’
[2001] MelbULawRw 24
University Law Review
A Palmer, ‘Police
Deception, the Right to Silence and the Discretionary Exclusion of
Confessions’
Criminal Law Journal
R v Swaffield
[1998] HCA 1
192 CLR 159
‘Judicial Discretion in Australia’
(2000) 19(3)
Australian Bar
[1998] HCA 1
(1998) 192 CLR 159
J Anderson, J Hunter and N
The New Evidence Law: Annotations and Commentary on the Uniform
Evidence Acts
(2002), [90.05].
Section 138
is discussed further in
Foster v The
(1993) 67 ALJR 550, [11]; cited with approval in
R v Swaffield
[1998] HCA 1
(1998) 192 CLR 159
Uniform Evidence Law
(6th ed, 2004), [1.3.5860].
R v Schuurs
[1999] QSC 176
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004), [9.78].
Uniform Evidence
(6th ed, 2004), [1.3.5860].
R v Edelsten
(1990) 51 A Crim R 397
Police (SA) v Jervis
(1998) 101 A Crim R 1
Pearsall v The Queen
(1990) 49 A Crim R 439
[2001] NSWCCA 486
, [85]. Smart AJ also referred to the following cases:
McDermott v The King
(1948) 76 CLR 501
, 506–507, 513–515;
[1950] HCA 25
(1950) 82 CLR 133
MacPherson v The Queen
[1981] HCA 46
(1981) 147 CLR 512
Cleland v The Queen
[1982] HCA 67
(1982) 151 CLR 1
18, 31, 34;
Phillips v The Queen
[1985] HCA 79
(1985) 159 CLR 45
Uniform Evidence
(6th ed, 2004), [1.3.15020].
[2003] NSWCCA 374
Uniform Evidence
(6th ed, 2004), [1.3.15020].
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
(2004), 113, Q 7–3.
Director of Public Prosecutions (NSW),
February 2005, 17; J Gans,
Consultation
, Sydney, 6 September 2004; W
Consultation
, Sydney, 17 August
Consultation
Sydney, 17 August 2004.
Director of
Public Prosecutions (NSW),
15 February 2005, 17;
Consultation
, Sydney, 6 September
Consultation
Sydney, 6 September 2004.
Wales District Court Judges,
Consultation
, Sydney, 3 March
New South Wales Public
21 April 2005,
Australian Securities &
Investments Commission,
7 March 2005,
Law Council of Australia,
4 March 2005,
Consultation
Sydney, 18 August 2004.
Law Council
of Australia,
4 March 2005,
R v Swaffield
[1998] HCA 1
192 CLR 159
Uniform Evidence Law
(6th ed, 2004),
[1.3.5770].
[1.3.5770].
Director of Public
Prosecutions (NSW) v Alderman
(1998) 104 A Crim R
[2001] NSWCCA 29
(2001) 123 A
, [54]–[55].
(1997) 97 A Crim R 414.
R v Donnelly
(1997) 96 A Crim R
R v Helmhout
[2000] NSWSC 208
A Crim R 10
[1998] HCA 1
(1998) 192 CLR 159
; see also S Odgers,
Uniform Evidence Law
(6th ed, 2004), [1.3.5840], citing
R v Pfennig (No 1)
(1992) 57 SASR 507
R v Bailey and Smith
(1993) 97 Cr App R 365
[1997] 2 VR
(2002) 129 A Crim R
B Selway, ‘Principle,
Public Policy and Unfairness: Exclusion of Evidence on Discretionary
[2002] AdelLawRw 1
Adelaide Law Review
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1 (1985), [964], citing Law
Reform Commission of Canada,
Compellability of the Accused and the
Admissibility of His Statements: A Study Paper
R v Swaffield
[1998] HCA 1
192 CLR 159
Foster v The
(1993) 67 ALJR 550, [11]; cited with approval in
R v Swaffield
[1998] HCA 1
(1998) 192 CLR 159
Australian Law Reform Commission,
, ALRC 38 (1987),
Ibid, [160].
10. Tendency and Coincidence Evidence
Introduction
Tendency evidence
Coincidence evidence
Tendency and coincidence evidence in civil proceedings
The operation of s 101
'Interests of justice' alternative for s 101
10. Tendency and Coincidence Evidence
Introduction
10.1 Tendency evidence may be relevant to proving that, because a person had
a tendency to act or think in a particular way on an
occasion, they acted or
thought in the same way on the occasion in question. Evidence may also be
relevant for a coincidence purpose
in that the evidence indicates the
improbability of an event occurring accidentally. At common law, evidence
admitted for a tendency
or coincidence purpose is commonly referred to as
‘propensity’ and ‘similar fact’ evidence
respectively.
10.2 A famous example of tendency evidence is the case of
To identify Straffen
as the killer of a young girl, evidence was admitted that:
• Straffen was in the vicinity at the time of the murder;
• he had escaped for two hours from a nearby prison where he was being
detained; and
• the detention was for killing two young girls in precisely the same
circumstances as the killing in question.
10.3 The fact that Straffen had killed the other two young girls in the
circumstances alleged was not disputed. The evidence was admitted
showed that Straffen had a tendency to kill in a particular manner and his
presence in the vicinity and the similarities
with the killing in question
identified him as the killer.
10.4 The relevance and admissibility of the evidence can also be justified
using coincidence reasoning. The situation was one where
the evidence showed
that three young girls had been killed in similar circumstances and it was
improbable that the killing would
have been the act of different people. It was
established that Straffen had killed two other young girls and therefore it was
improbable, he being in the vicinity, that he had not killed the third.
10.5 Reference is made in Chapter 3 to the dangers of this sort of
evidence, particularly when it concerns evidence of other discreditable
There is a tendency to overestimate the probative value of such evidence. Where
the evidence is of other discreditable conduct,
it will tend to prejudice
unfairly the fact finder against the person concerned.
10.6 At common law, evidence that discloses a criminal propensity must
satisfy the extremely stringent ‘no rational explanation’
Under the uniform Evidence Acts, evidence may not be admitted for tendency or
coincidence purposes unless it has ‘significant
probative value’ and
reasonable notice of intention to adduce such evidence has been given to the
other parties to the proceedings.
Where such evidence is adduced by the
prosecution against a defendant in criminal proceedings, it must satisfy the
further requirement
that the probative value of the tendency or coincidence
evidence must substantially outweigh any prejudicial effect it may have on
10.7 This chapter will consider a number of issues that have been raised
concerning the operation of each of the relevant substantive
(ss 97, 98, and 101) and the notice requirement
Attention will
then focus on a major issue raised—whether, for criminal trials,
should be replaced by a provision which relies upon
‘the interests of justice’ as the test for admissibility—for
example, s 398A of the
Crimes Act 1958
Determining whether
evidence is tendency evidence
10.8 Section 97(1) provides:
97 The tendency rule
(1) Evidence of the character, reputation or conduct of a person, or a tendency
that a person has or had, is not admissible to prove
that a person has or had a
tendency (whether because of the person’s character or otherwise) to act
in a particular way, or
to have a particular state of mind, if:
(a) the party adducing the evidence has not given reasonable notice in writing
to each other party of the party’s intention
to adduce the evidence;
(b) the court thinks that the evidence would not, either by itself or having
regard to other evidence adduced or to be adduced by
the party seeking to adduce
the evidence, have significant probative value.
10.9 IP 28 refers to the different view taken in
as to whether certain
evidence was tendency evidence.
accused had been charged with murdering Petroff. The accused maintained that he
had acted in self defence when Petroff threatened
to kill him, as he had been
genuinely in fear for his life. The prosecution’s position at the trial
was that this was a concoction.
The accused sought to have evidence admitted
that in 1978, Petroff had murdered three people and killed a dog. The
prosecution also
sought to have admitted evidence of a witness, Logounov, that
on the night in question, Petroff had threatened to put a knife in
Logounov’s head and threatened to kill him like he had three other people.
Neither matter was known to the accused prior to
the incident in which Petroff
was killed.
10.10 All judges on the New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal agreed that the
evidence had significant probative value. Hodgson
JA and Hulme J took
the view that it was not tendency evidence. Hidden J, however, held it was
tendency evidence. Hodgson JA expressed
his reasoning as follows:
In the absence of that evidence, the appellant’s evidence that the
deceased threatened to kill him in such a way as to make
him fearful for his
life, and continued to make such threats and to attack him notwithstanding the
appellant’s use of a knife,
seems on the face of it highly improbable. In
my opinion it becomes less so once one knows that the deceased had committed
murders in the circumstances outlined, albeit as long ago as 1978, and
also had made reference to those three murders in uttering
a threat to kill
Mr Logounov just a few hours
10.11 His Honour went on to say:
the main relevance of the evidence is not to prove that the deceased had
‘a tendency to act in a particular way’, but
rather to suggest that
the deceased was a person who was not subject to very strong inhibitions against
killing and contemplation
of killing in the same way as are the great majority
of people. This is not to say that the deceased had a tendency to kill, but
rather that there is less improbability in the deceased killing or making a
serious threat to kill another person, than there would
be for the great
majority of people.
10.12 Hulme J took a similar view, stating:
in my view the only basis upon which the evidence was admissible was that it
rendered less improbable the Appellant’s account
that the deceased had
threatened to kill him. Killing, and thoughts and threats of killing another
human being are sufficiently extreme
or unusual that the fact that the deceased
had killed people in the past was relevant because it rendered more probable, or
more accurately, less improbable, that the deceased uttered the threats
the Appellant attributed to him.
10.13 Hidden J reached the same conclusion but with a different analysis. His
Honour said:
I agree that the evidence had probative force for the reasons identified by
their Honours, that is, that it lent some credence to
the appellant's account of
the deceased's behaviour, which otherwise would have seemed highly improbable.
However, in my view, it
did so because it demonstrated a propensity on the part
of the deceased to retaliate in an extremely violent way against anyone who
crossed him. (Whether he was affected by alcohol is not the point.) This, it
appears to me, is necessarily tendency evidence. The
incident involving Mr
Logounov although of a very different character, might be seen as a
demonstration of the same
propensity.
10.14 The judgments demonstrate that views can differ as to the reasoning
processes involved in determining the relevance and probative
value of evidence
and the characterisation of those reasoning processes. The difference of view
does not point to any problem with
the uniform Evidence Acts definition of
tendency evidence. Legislative amendment cannot resolve in advance the
resolution of such
differences of opinion as may occur from case to case. The
only submission addressing this issue expresses the view that the definition
satisfactory.
The Commissions’ view
10.15 Although pointing to potential problems in characterising the reasoning
R v Cakovski
provides an example of the robustness of the
package provided by the uniform Evidence Acts. For, while the construction of
JA and Hulme J had the result that ss 97 and 101 did not
control the admissibility of the evidence because it was not tendency evidence,
the uniform Evidence Acts provided the means to control admissibility through
s 135. It should also be noted that all members of
the New South Wales
Court of Criminal Appeal agreed that the evidence should have been admitted at
the trial and a new trial was
ordered. The Commissions do not propose any change
to the definition of tendency evidence in s 97.
requirements
10.16 The Director of Public Prosecutions New South Wales (DPP NSW)
express concerns that the notice requirements in relation to tendency
are too onerous. Clause 6(2) of the
Evidence Regulation 2000
A notice given under section 97(1)(a) of the Act (relating to the tendency rule)
must state:
(a) the substance of the evidence of the kind referred to in that subsection
that the party giving the notice intends to adduce,
(b) if that evidence consists of, or includes, evidence of conduct of a person,
particulars of:
(i) the date, time, place and circumstances at or in which the conduct
occurred, and
(ii) the name of each person who saw, heard or otherwise perceived the conduct,
(iii) in a civil proceeding—the address of each person so named, so far
as they are known to the notifying
10.17 The DPP NSW, quoting from the case
, notes that it is
sufficient compliance with the regulation if the notice states ‘either in
its own body or by reference to
documents readily identifiable, the nature and
substance of the evidence sought to be
DPP NSW submits that:
the notice provisions are interpreted such that where the Crown wishes to rely
on tendency evidence in an alleged sexual assault
prosecution involving a number
of complainants, the Crown must nominate in the notice each paragraph of each
complainant’s
statement which refers to the alleged offences against the
other complainants. In our view notice by the Crown that it intends to
the alleged offences committed against complainants A, B and C as set out in
their statements dated x, y and, z respectively,
should constitute adequate
The Commissions’ view
10.18 The construction of the regulations and the practice developed in New
South Wales,
if complied with,
is onerous. However, the detail required has the benefit of requiring careful
thought on the part of the prosecution
in identifying the evidence on which it
seeks to rely. It is critical in determining the admissibility of this class of
to identify the evidence with precision, and then to identify with
precision the relevance of the evidence and the way the prosecution
rely upon it. Precise identification of the evidence should also enable defence
lawyers to prepare, with reasonable confidence,
the evidence sought to be led.
It should also limit the scope for misunderstanding between the prosecution and
the defence and reduce
time spent in court while clarification is given. The
benefit of the detailed process can be seen from reported cases where it is
common to read in reasons for judgment lists of tendency evidence and lists of
coincidence evidence.
10.19 It is suggested, therefore, that the advantages to all parties and to the
trial system of the present rules and practice outweigh
the burden placed upon
the prosecution. The Commissions consider there is no change required to the
notice provisions under s 97
of the uniform Evidence Acts or the
regulations.
Coincidence
The scope of
s 98—is it too narrow?
10.20 The critical provisions of s 98 of the uniform Evidence Acts are
as follows:
(1) Evidence that 2 or more related events occurred is not admissible to prove
that, because of the improbability of the events occurring
coincidentally, a
person did a particular act or had a particular state of mind if:
(a) the party adducing the evidence has not given reasonable notice in writing
to each other party of the party’s intention
to adduce the evidence; or
(b) the court thinks that the evidence would not, either by itself or having
regard to other evidence adduced or to be adduced
by the party seeking to adduce
the evidence, have significant probative value.
(2) For the purposes of subsection (1), 2 or more events are taken to be
related events if and only if:
(a) they are substantially and relevantly similar; and
(b) the circumstances in which they occurred are
substantially similar.
10.21 For the section to apply, the evidence must satisfy the definition of
‘related events’. As pointed out in IP 28,
that definition has
the effect that the intended controls on admissibility only apply if the events
and circumstances are substantially
As a result, the
section will not apply to exclude evidence where the events are not
substantially and relevantly similar, or the
circumstances are not substantially
similar. Such evidence, however, is likely to be of little probative
significance or value and
may be highly prejudicial. Not only will s 98 not
be available in that situation but, the other intended control, s 101, will
no application. The only controls left are those contained in ss 135
to 137. Paradoxically, therefore, there will be a high test
of admissibility for
‘related events’ (which by definition will be satisfied) but not for
unrelated events.
The Commissions’ view
10.22 Two options for amendment were suggested in IP 28. One was to
delete the word ‘related’ from ss 98(1) and (2). Another
suggested was an amendment to make it clear that evidence of the events will not
satisfy the requirements of the section unless
the conditions of similarity set
out in s 98(2) are satisfied.
10.23 The provision relating to coincidence evidence proposed in the final
report of the original ALRC evidence inquiry is in the
following terms:
88. Evidence that 2 or more events occurred is not admissible to prove that,
because of the improbability of the events occurring
coincidentally, a person
did a particular act or had a particular state of mind unless it is reasonably
open to find that—
(a) the events occurred and the person could have been responsible for them; and
(b) all the events, and the circumstances in which they occurred, are
substantially and relevantly
10.24 A problem with the original proposal was that it could operate
inappropriately to exclude circumstantial evidence except where
substantially and relevantly similar. The same problems could arise if s 98
is amended to delete the references to related
events. The other option
mentioned in IP 28 does not address this issue or the problem created by
the present drafting.
10.25 One option may be to remove the words ‘substantially and’
from s 98(2)(a). However, the definition may still be
too limiting,
particularly in requiring similar circumstances. The Commissions prefer a wider
option, treating circumstances as relevant
definitive.
A draft provision
appears in Appendix 1.
10.26 The Commissions are concerned about another issue in s 98, namely,
the difficulty in understanding the provision which arises
from the use of the
word ‘if’ in the text immediately before subparagraphs (a) and (b)
and the resulting need for double
negatives in the section. The same concerns
arise in relation to s 97. If the word ‘unless’ is substituted
the double negatives can be removed. The revision of
s 98, set out in Appendix 1, takes this into account.
Proposal 10–1
Section 98(1) of the uniform Evidence Acts
should be amended to provide that evidence that 2 or more events occurred is not
to prove that a person did a particular act or had a particular state
of mind on the basis that, having regard to the similarities
in the events and
the similarities in the circumstances surrounding them, it is improbable that
the events occurred coincidentally
unless the party adducing the evidence gives
reasonable notice in writing to each other party of the party’s intention
the evidence; and the court thinks that the evidence, either by itself
or having regard to other evidence adduced or to be adduced
by the party seeking
to adduce the evidence, has significant probative value.
Proposal 10–2
Section 97 of the uniform Evidence Acts
should be amended to replace the word ‘if’ in s 97(1) with
and to replace the word ‘or’ in
s 97(1)(a) with ‘and’.
98—‘2 or more’ events
10.27 Another issue raised is whether the events referred to by the
expression ‘2 or more’ events include the event in
question in the
proceeding. Commentators suggest that the section is ambiguous on that
10.28 It was the intention of the original ALRC proposals that the events which are
the subject of the charge would be included in
appropriate cases. That is, in
fact, typical of cases where coincidence reasoning is employed. It was the
approach taken in
For example, if the
issue in a trial is whether the accused was the person who committed the
particular crime alleged and: (i) it
and another crime were of a similar kind;
and (ii) the two crimes were committed in a similar manner and in similar
circumstances,
an inference would arise from that coincidence that they were
committed by the same person.
10.29 If the Crown has evidence that the accused committed the other crime, it
could go to the jury on the basis that, if it is satisfied
beyond reasonable
doubt that: (i) the accused committed the other crime; and (ii) the same person
committed that crime and the crime
charged, the jury should be satisfied that
the accused committed the crime with which he or she is charged.
The Commissions’ view
10.30 Having taken into consideration the opinion of expert commentators, the
Commissions take the view that there is, in fact, no
ambiguity. The Commissions
consider there is no need for amendment to s 98 to change the expression
‘2 or more’, and
the proposed restatement of s 98, outlined in
Appendix 1, includes this expression.
Tendency and
coincidence evidence in civil proceedings
10.31 The issues discussed above were considered in the context of criminal
proceedings. The Law Council of Australia (Law Council)
submits that, in civil
proceedings, the rules of evidence should be kept to a minimum, and the
admission of tendency and coincidence
evidence should be left to principles of
‘sufficient relevance’. The Law Council also refers to the
difficulty of defining
tendency evidence and coincidence evidence, as discussed
above, and argues that those matters only serve to distract the court from
central issue of determining whether such evidence is of sufficient relevance to
10.32 The Law Council does not identify the way in which its proposal might be
implemented. The concept of ‘sufficient relevance’
is the common law
requirement of relevance. It is reasonable to proceed on the basis, therefore,
that what is proposed is that the
issue of probative value will be considered
under s 135—the relevance discretion. That is, s 135 will be
available to determine
whether the evidence has sufficient relevance. Implicit
in the Law Council’s recommendation is that there be no notice
requirement.
10.33 The approach has the merit of simplifying the statement of the rules to be
applied in civil proceedings. It will not, however,
remove the need to argue and
consider the probative value of the evidence in question. Removing ss 97
and 98 in civil proceedings
could in fact increase the scope for argument
because they will not be available to sift out and exclude evidence at the
the basis of insignificant probative value. As a result, in all civil
cases, admissibility would be dealt with by a balancing process
s 135. The absence of a notice requirement may not pose a problem in those
cases which proceed using witness statements or
affidavits. It would, however,
be problematic in those cases where the evidence is given orally.
10.34 Removal of the provisions also has the potential to inject its own
uncertainty into the admissibility process, an uncertainty
reduced by the
provisions which in effect require that before evidence of prior conduct is
admissible, it has to have significant
probative value.
10.35 It should be borne in mind that the concerns giving rise to the uniform
Evidence Acts approach were that the typical evidence—prior
conduct—may have minimal probative value, raise collateral issues, take
parties by surprise and have a significant impact on
the time and costs of
litigation.
There was also found
to be uncertainty and a range of approaches to the control of the admission of
such evidence.
The absence of a
notice requirement has the potential to put the party against whom the evidence
is led at a disadvantage.
10.36 At present, therefore, the Commissions do not consider that there will
be any advantage gained in ss 97 and 98 not applying
in civil proceedings.
The next phase of the Inquiry will explore the issue further with judges and
practitioners to determine which
approach, on balance, is the most sound in
principle and practice.
The operation of
10.37 Section 101 is in the following terms:
101 Further restrictions on tendency evidence and coincidence evidence
adduced by the prosecution
(1) This section only applies in a criminal proceeding and so applies in
addition to sections 97 and 98.
(2) Tendency evidence about a defendant, or coincidence evidence about a
defendant, that is adduced by the prosecution cannot be
used against the
defendant unless the probative value of the evidence substantially outweighs any
prejudicial effect
it may have
on the defendant.
(3) This section does not apply to tendency evidence that the prosecution
adduces to explain or contradict tendency evidence adduced
by the defendant.
(4) This section does not apply to coincidence evidence that the prosecution
adduces to explain or contradict coincidence evidence
adduced by the defendant.
10.38 IP 28 raises two issues:
• whether the common law requirements developed by the High Court in
Hoch v The Queen
Pfennig v The
be applied when determining, under s 101, whether the ‘probative
value’ substantially outweighs any prejudicial
• whether that test should be replaced by an ‘interests of justice’
test articulated by McHugh J in
10.39 A further issue raised after the publication of IP 28 is whether
s 101 should be amended to apply in terms to any relevant evidence
misconduct of the defendant.
Application of Hoch
and Pfennig to s 101
10.40 IP 28 refers to the common law test of admissibility for
propensity evidence developed in
, namely, that
the evidence must possess sufficient ‘probative value or cogency such
that, if accepted, it bears no reasonable
explanation other than the inculpation
of the accused in the offence
10.41 IP 28 then sets out the history of the interpretation of the section,
which reveals that the courts of the Australian Capital
Territory and the
federal courts
have taken the
position that this common law test is not to be applied when applying
s 101, but that the New South Wales Court of
Criminal Appeal has taken a
contrary view.
IP 28 notes
that subsequently the New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal, in the case of
rejected the
previous line of authority in New South Wales in holding that the common law
test referred to above is not applicable
10.42 At the time IP 28 was published, the High Court had given leave to
appeal the decision in
Subsequently, that
leave was rescinded and the High Court when revoking leave indicated that it
agreed with the decision of Spigelman
construction of the uniform Evidence
10.43 In the leading judgment in
, Spigelman CJ, among
other things, emphasised the fact that the High Court in
Papakosmas v The
rejected the argument
that the language of the uniform Evidence Acts should be construed in a manner
that conforms to the pre-existing
common law. Spigelman CJ went on to
demonstrate convincingly the inconsistency between the
requirements and the requirements of
It should be noted,
however, that his Honour commented that:
My conclusion in relation to the construction of s 101(2) should not be
understood to suggest that the stringency of the approach,
culminating in the
test, is never appropriate when the judgment for which the
section calls has to be made. There may well be cases where, on the facts,
would not be open to conclude that the probative value of particular evidence
substantially outweighs its prejudicial effect,
unless the ‘no rational
explanation’ test were
10.44 Following
, the relevance of the possibility of concoction
to the balancing test of s 101 was considered by Underwood J, as he
then was, in
Tasmania v S
Underwood J referred to the above quoted passage and, after referring to
some discussion in pre-
cases, commented that:
it seems to me that [in] the proper exercise of the balancing act that is
demanded by the Act, s 101(2) requires that evidence of
possibility of
concoction be taken into account, and if there is a reasonable possibility of
concoction, then the prejudicial effect
will ordinarily outweigh the probative
value of the tendency or coincidence
10.45 Underwood J noted that for the possibility of concoction to be
considered in applying s 101, there needs to be ‘a reasonable
possibility, based upon some factual foundation and not merely fanciful
possibility’, and that the question for the judge is
whether there is
‘a real chance of concoction or contamination rather than a merely
speculative chance’. His Honour held
on the issue and
in light of the evidence received on the
, concluded that there
was no rational factual basis to suggest a possibility of
concoction.
10.46 The decision in
has also been applied in the Supreme Court of
the Australian Capital
The Commissions’ view
10.47 A number of submissions and consultations support the adoption of the
test for the admission of tendency and coincidence evidence in a
criminal case.
On the other
hand, it is suggested that the
test starts with a premise of
guilt and then works backwards, and that the
test makes more
It is also noted that the
test essentially puts the judge in the position of the jury, thus
taking away from the jury the responsibility of determining the
innocence of the accused in stipulated
10.48 The present view of the Commissions is that the
too narrow and should not be the test for admission. The Commissions consider
that the reasoning of Spigelman CJ in
is to be preferred both
as a matter of construction and as a matter of policy. This approach is
supported in the majority of submissions
and consultations addressing the
Given that the recent
comments of the High Court support the decision of Spigelman CJ in
, the Commissions do not propose that any amendments be made to the
legislation.
10.49 A further issue is raised. In assessing the probative value of evidence
of prior disreputable conduct, should the assessment
proceed on the basis that
the evidence is correct? Alternatively, should the assessment of the probative
value of such evidence take
into account other matters, for example whether the
evidence is credible?
issues are discussed in detail in Chapter 14. No proposals are put forward
at this stage of the Inquiry. The issues will be
discussed further in the next
phase of the reference.
10.50 Finally, reference should be made to the discussion in IP 28 about
whether the law should be amended in its application to proceedings
offences against children.
Commissions are of the view that the decision in
addresses this issue.
the categories of evidence to which s 101 applies
10.51 An issue is raised as to whether s 101 should be extended to apply
to any evidence tendered against a defendant which discloses
disreputable
conduct although allegedly tendered for a non-tendency or coincidence purpose.
An example given is evidence of prior
conduct relevant to establish the
relationship between the defendant and the victim of the crime charged in sexual
assault cases.
Reference should also be made to evidence said to be relevant as
setting the context in which the alleged events occurred.
10.52 Such evidence will be subject to the control of s 101 if it is
adduced to show a tendency or a coincidence. Sometimes, however,
it is sought to
avoid s 101 by limiting the purpose of the tender to the establishment of
the relationship or the context, disavowing
any intention of using it to
establish any tendency or coincidence, and arguing that an appropriate warning
can be given that the
evidence not be used for any tendency or coincidence
purpose. Thus, to that extent, s 101 will not have an impact on the
and use of such evidence. The issue requires further investigation and
discussion to determine whether s 101 should be amended to
cover any evidence
led against an accused person which reveals disreputable behaviour.
Question 10
Should s 101
apply to any evidence led against an accused person which reveals disreputable
behaviour whether or not relevant as showing
a tendency or coincidence and
whether or not tendered for such purposes? If so what form should the provision
‘Interests of
justice’ alternative for s 101
10.53 Another issue raised in relation to ss 97 to 101 is whether the
uniform Evidence Acts should take a different approach by incorporating
‘interests of justice’ test to control admissibility of tendency and
coincidence evidence in criminal trials. In considering
this issue, it is
relevant to consider the criticisms of the uniform Evidence Acts provisions by
the Law Commission of England and
Wales and others, Victorian legislation which
was enacted to incorporate an interests of justice test, and the proposals of
Commission of England and Wales which combine elements of the uniform
Evidence Acts and Victorian approaches.
Overseas criticism
of the uniform Evidence Acts
10.54 In October 2001, the Law Commission of England and Wales (Law
Commission) published the Report
Evidence of Bad Character in Criminal
Proceedings
considers, amongst other things, the admissibility of tendency and coincidence
evidence tendered against an accused person.
It includes an analysis of the
English common law ‘justice’ test and of the uniform Evidence Acts
provisions, which it
looked at as an option. The Law Commission rejects both
approaches. The discussion in the Report instructively revisits the longstanding
10.55 In analysing the uniform Evidence Acts provisions, the Law Commission refers
to the concerns it expressed in its consultation
paper. The concerns were
• the Law Commission was ‘unsure what it might mean for the
probative value of evidence to outweigh the risk of prejudice
substantially, or
for evidence to have significant probative value as opposed to some probative
• it considered ‘the effect of the rules was that tendency and
coincidence evidence would sometimes be inadmissible even
if its probative value
outweighed its prejudicial effect’; and
• it considered ‘the Australian statutory scheme unnecessarily
complicated’.
10.56 In its Report, however, the Law Commission indicates that it is
persuaded that there should be an ‘enhanced relevance’
requirement
before such evidence can be admitted and choses a requirement that the evidence
have ‘substantial probative value’
(not ‘significant’).
It notes that ‘we now accept that there is a meaningful difference between
evidence having
some probative value and having substantial probative
10.57 Turning to the question of the appropriate balance between prejudicial effect
and probative value, the Law Commission states
that it considered as an option
an exclusionary rule with a single exception for evidence whose probative value
outweighs its likely
prejudicial
This option was
subsequently rejected. It offered no scope for excluding evidence whose
probative value did outweigh its likely prejudicial
effect but it was of
‘negligible significance’, and introducing such evidence would
simply distract the fact-finders
from the real
The Law Commission also
argues that such an option amounts to an abandonment of any attempt to minimise
reliance on judicial discretion,
‘the unpredictability of which we have
identified as a defect of the present
10.58 The Law Commission indicates that its preference is for ‘an
exclusionary rule subject to exceptions which are not wholly
dependent on
judicial discretion, but, are as far as possible objectively
concerned, however, that the uniform Evidence Acts’ requirement that the
probative value of the evidence in question
substantially outweigh the risk of
prejudice will have the result that, on occasion, evidence will be rendered
inadmissible even
though its probative value outweighed the risk of prejudice.
The Law Commission notes that ‘we see no reason why it should
be excluded
merely because it does not
substantially
outweigh that
10.59 On that issue, the Report refers to an argument advanced in justification of
the uniform Evidence Acts provision—that
it is needed as the minimum
requirement if the concern is to minimise wrongful conviction. The Law
Commission then comments:
The point made … is that the judge may underestimate the prejudicial
effect of the evidence and, if he or she does so, then
the risk of wrongful
conviction is greatly increased. If, on the other hand, the evidence is only
admissible if there is a significant
margin between its probative value and its
prejudicial effect then a minor under-estimation will not result in the
admission of evidence
which is in fact more prejudicial than
10.60 It might be said, however, that it is not just the risk of
underestimating the prejudicial effect that poses the danger of wrongful
conviction. It is also the risk of overestimating the probative value of the
evidence. Further, the prejudicial effect of the evidence
has the capacity to
affect the assessment by the judge of the probative value and prejudicial effect
and whether the former outweighs
the latter, in a manner adverse to the accused.
The word ‘outweigh’ means no more than to exceed in weight, value,
or influence.
the requirement ‘substantially’, the balancing test would be
satisfied by the merest excess of one over the other.
Having regard to the
difficulties and dangers of the balancing task, the possibility of wrongful
conviction is very great unless
the balancing task is weighted.
10.61 In support of its concern that ‘if there has to be a significant
margin, it is possible for evidence which is more probative
than prejudicial to
be excluded’,
Commission quotes the following example of a situation where the higher standard
will, it thinks, lead to the exclusion of
evidence which should not be excluded:
the fact-finders might already know (perhaps because the fact has been admitted
as ‘background evidence’, or because
the defendant is notorious)
that the defendant has a long history of serious crime. The additional prejudice
likely to result from
the revelation of one more minor offence is very small,
and would be outweighed by a comparatively small degree of probative value.
such a case we think that the evidence ought to be admissible, even if the
probative value of the evidence is not ‘significant’.
Similarly, if
the evidence’s probative value outweighs the risk of prejudice, we see no
reason why it should be excluded merely
because it does not
substantially
outweigh that risk.
10.62 The Law Commission acknowledges in its Report that the example is not
so convincing in view of the fact that it was now proposing
a test of enhanced
relevance and comments that:
if the prejudice attaching to the evidence is indeed slight then given that the
character evidence must be of substantial probative
value, it is likely that the
probative value
substantially outweigh the
10.63 The Law Commission returns to the question of what degree of risk of
wrongful conviction is acceptable. It acknowledges the
reality that views will
differ on whether one fact tends to prove or disprove another and the degree to
which one fact tends to do
It adds that if the test ‘is that the probative value must substantially
outweigh the prejudice, then a court will exclude
evidence which it might have
let in after hesitation’.
The Law Commission concludes:
Our view is that such an approach runs the risk of focusing on a question which,
though it might be useful to ask, is not the real
issue to be addressed. The
purpose of a trial is to do justice. We believe that there is no better way to
express the test than in
terms of this central purpose. Thus the test is best
expressed in qualitative rather than quantitative terms, that is, what the
of justice require.
10.64 Thus the Law Commission proposes a test for admissibility in terms of
what it describes as the ultimate policy objective and
not a test of
admissibility couched in terms that would guide the court towards that
Australian criticism
of the uniform Evidence Acts
10.65 The Law Council is critical of the uniform Evidence Acts provisions and
expresses a preference for the more flexible approach
Its concerns about the
uniform Evidence Acts provisions appear to turn on two issues.
10.66 The first is the view expressed that the sections apply only to evidence that
is ‘tendered as tendency or coincidence
evidence’. As noted above,
the construction placed on these provisions by the Commissions is that they
apply to control the
admissibility, and so the use of such evidence, according
to what it discloses, and are not confined to the purpose for which the
is ostensibly tendered. The language does not so limit the operation of the
10.67 The other matter raised is that, properly construed, the views of the
majority expressed by Spigelman CJ in
have the effect
that there is
no presumption against the admissibility of tendency and coincidence evidence
and courts must simply look to the words of the Act,
not previous common law
authority, in deciding whether the probative value of the evidence substantially
outweighs any prejudicial
10.68 The Law Council expresses its concern that the approach of the majority
articulated by Spigelman CJ would ‘undermine the
common law principle
which ensures an accused a fair trial by presumptively regarding evidence
revealing an accused’s misconduct
prejudicial’.
10.69 The Law Council proposes that the uniform Evidence Acts should be
redrafted to ensure
that every accused is given the benefit of such a presumption through the
exclusion of such evidence unless the prosecution can demonstrate
its reception
will not unfairly prejudice the accused … a value judgement needs to be
made in each case with the onus on the
prosecution to persuade the court that if
the evidence is admitted the accused can still receive a fair
10.70 The language of the provisions does not appear to justify these
concerns. In fact the sections do exactly what is sought. In
particular,
s 101 plainly puts the onus on the prosecution to show that the probative
value substantially outweighs the prejudicial
effect. The source of the concern
appears to be a perceived conflict between the judgment of Spigelman CJ and
that of Hidden and
Buddin JJ in
10.71 After indicating agreement with Spigelman CJ as to the orders he
proposed and his reasons, Hidden and Buddin JJ stated:
We would add only this. Underlying the various formulations of the test for
admission of similar fact or propensity evidence in the
common law authorities
is the recognition that evidence of that kind is likely to be highly
prejudicial, and of the need to ensure
that it is admitted only when the
interests of justice require it. Its admission at common law is exceptional for
reasons of policy,
not of logic. These considerations should guide the balancing
exercise required by the statutory provision, so that the test for
admissibility
under that provision remains one of very considerable
stringency.
10.72 Spigelman CJ (with whom Sully and O’Keefe JJ agreed)
Since writing the above I have read the additional observations of Hidden and
Buddin JJ. I do not agree with their Honours. In my
opinion, the statutory
formulation should operate in accordance with its terms. There is no need for an
assumption that all such
evidence is ‘likely to be highly
prejudicial’, nor for guidance that the test for admissibility is
‘one of very
considerable
stringency’.
10.73 Spigelman CJ was stating that it is inappropriate to go outside
the language of the sections and to seek to add assumptions
and guidelines. He
went on, however, to make the point that there was no ‘need’ to do
so in the manner suggested. The
Commissions agree with this analysis. Obviously,
evidence of discreditable conduct is likely to be highly prejudicial. That is
principal reason for the provisions. Further, the requirements of
ss 97, 98 and 101 are very stringent. For the prosecution to have
evidence admitted, it must have significant probative value and the probative
value must substantially outweigh the prejudicial
effect. The accused is
adequately protected.
Section 398A of the
Crimes Act 1958 (Vic)
10.74 Section 398A of the
Crimes Act 1958
(Vic) provides as
(1) This section applies to proceedings for an indictable or summary
(2) Propensity evidence relevant to facts in issue in a proceeding for an
offence is admissible if the court considers that in all
circumstances it is
just to admit it despite any prejudicial effect it may have on the person
charged with the offence.
(3) The possibility of a reasonable explanation consistent with the innocence of
the person charged with an offence is not relevant
to the admissibility of
evidence referred to in sub-section (2).
(4) Nothing in this section prevents a court taking into account the possibility
of a reasonable explanation consistent with the
innocence of the person charged
with an offence when considering the weight of the evidence or the credibility
of a witness.
(5) This section has effect despite any rule of law to the contrary.
10.75 ‘Propensity evidence’ is not defined but has been held to
include evidence which discloses the commission of offences
other than those
with which the accused is charged. It is not confined, however, to such evidence
and covers any evidence which,
if accepted, discloses conduct which is
discreditable or reflects badly on his or her
It covers what has
been called in the past ‘similar fact evidence’ and can also include
relationship evidence. It may
go to the identity of the offender or reliance may
be placed on the improbability of a number of similar incidents occurring
coincidentally.
10.76 Section 398A was enacted in 1997 to overrule the common law principle,
referred to above, that propensity evidence is inadmissible
if there is a
reasonable view of the evidence that is consistent with the innocence of the
Typically, that issue
arises where there exists a possibility of concoction, collusion, or infection
of the evidence or it can be
explained on the basis of mere coincidence.
10.77 Section 398A(2) is said to adopt the test that applied in England in
determining the admissibility of evidence of this
It is accepted, however,
The flexibility of the test in subs (2) means that, properly applied, it will
not greatly alter the conduct of criminal trials. Propensity
evidence will be
admissible whenever it is just to do so ‘in all the circumstances’.
Those circumstances will sometimes
include the impossibility of conducting a
trial in a sensible fashion unless the evidence is received. Its probative value
is correspondingly
high. Similar fact evidence will still be received with great
caution because, as McHugh J pointed out in
case at 530,
the risk of prejudice is ordinarily at its highest in such cases. The area of
practice that will change is that affected
by subs (3) and
10.78 Thus, the courts in applying s 398A will look to English and
Australian common law authorities in resolving the ultimate question—the
justice, in all the circumstances, of admitting the evidence. It should be noted
that the section, while it involves questions of
degree and value judgments,
states a rule of admissibility not a
discretion.
The interpretation
of s 398A is considered in detail in Appendix 2.
Criticism of the
‘interests of justice’ alternative
10.79 The Law Commission Report
Evidence of Bad Character in Criminal
Proceedings
also includes an analysis of the English common law
‘justice’ test which forms the basis for s 398A of the
Crimes Act 1958
(Vic). It rejects that test.
10.80 In considering the common law, the Law Commission is critical of the
difficulties for parties and courts in establishing exactly
what the law is in
the area. It argues that ‘this area of the law is ripe … for
codification which would bring greater
clarity, certainty and
accessibility’.
10.81 The Law Commission criticises the justice test set out in
Director of
Public Prosecutions v P
as being ‘too
After referring to
the test it notes:
To state that the evidence is admissible when it is ‘just’ to do so
does not settle the question of how the probative
value ought to relate to the
prejudicial effect in order for it to be
10.82 After discussing a number of possibilities the Law Commission states
In a matter requiring the exercise of judgment in an individual case, it is
impossible for a test based on what is just to be so
precise that there is no
room for argument in individual cases, but we do think that there is scope for
more guidance. For example,
there is no indication of the factors that are
relevant in assessing the probative value of similar fact evidence (such as
similarities in the evidence), or in assessing its likely prejudicial
10.83 The Law Commission also expresses concern about recent developments in
the law concerning evidence that is relevant only because
it reveals a
propensity.
It refers to
that evidence of
possession of homosexual pornographic magazines by a person charged with
indecent assault of young persons was not
admissible because his defence was
that there had never been any sort of indecency, and therefore the only basis
upon which the evidence
could be said to be relevant was via propensity
reasoning. The Law Commission comments that while in the particular case the
may have lacked sufficient probative value, the authorities went too
far in stating that propensity evidence could never be
10.84 The Law Commission Report identifies as another area of difficulty a recent
line of cases concerning evidence that might be
regarded as similar fact
evidence, but which was categorised as ‘background evidence’ and
held to fall outside the test
Director of Public
Prosecutions v P
comments that it is admitted because it is ‘so closely entwined and
involved with the evidence directly relating
to the facts in issue that it would
amount to distortion to attempt to edit it
10.85 The Law Commission comments that this approach can be used to ‘smuggle
in similar fact evidence which would otherwise
inadmissible’.
states that it is not clear when evidence ‘counts as’ background
evidence and when it does not and there is also
contrary authority as to
whether, if it does count as background evidence, the test in
Director of
Public Prosecutions v P
should still be
10.86 The Report goes on to examine other areas, including the cross-examination of
accused persons and concludes that:
it can be seen from all the defects set out above that the law is not
satisfactory as it stands. We conclude that the law is in need
of reform, and we
recommend that all the rules on the admissibility of bad character evidence in
criminal proceedings be contained
in a single statute, and that the common law
rules (including the hearsay exception for evidence of reputation) be
Recommendation of
the Law Commission of England and Wales
10.87 In light of the Law Commission’s analysis and criticisms of the
interests of justice test and the uniform Evidence Acts
provisions, it is
relevant to consider in more detail what is recommended by the Law Commission.
Putting to one side the distinction
drawn in the Law Commission’s proposed
Bill between evidence with explanatory value and evidence going to matters in
in essence, the Bill requires leave to be obtained and that, in
particular, before leave is given, that:
• the evidence in question has substantial probative
• taking account of the risk of prejudice, the interests of justice
nevertheless require the evidence to be
admissible.
10.88 The proposed Bill also attempts to give guidance in the assessment of
the interests of justice by requiring consideration of
the following:
(i) how much probative value [the evidence] has in relation to the matter in
(ii) what other evidence has been, or can be, given on that matter, and
(iii) how important that matter is in the context of the case as a
10.89 The trial judge is also directed, in determining whether the two
conditions are met, to consider the following matters:
(2) In assessing the probative value of evidence for the purposes of this
section the court must have regard to the following factors
(and any others it
considers relevant)—
(a) the nature and number of the events, or other things, to which the
evidence relates;
(b) when those events or things are alleged to have happened or existed;
(i) the evidence is evidence of a person’s misconduct, and
(ii) it is suggested that the evidence has probative value by reason of
similarity between that misconduct and other alleged
misconduct,
the nature and extent of the similarities and the dissimilarities between each
of the alleged instances of misconduct;
(i) the evidence is evidence of a person’s misconduct,
(ii) it is suggested that that person is also responsible for the misconduct
charged, and
(iii) the identity of the person responsible for the misconduct charged is
the extent to which the evidence shows or tends to show that the same person was
responsible each time.
10.90 Thus the Law Commission concludes that there should be an enhanced
relevance requirement, as occurs in the uniform Evidence
Acts. However, the Law
Commission also decides to retain an ultimate ‘interests of justice’
test and to address its criticisms
of the ‘interests of justice’
approach by providing detailed guidelines concerning the assessment of probative
These guidelines are also relevant to the question of whether the
evidence has ‘substantial probative value’.
10.91 The analysis and resulting recommendations confirm the difficulty of
this area of evidence law and the challenge of providing
satisfactory rules of
admissibility. All solutions can be criticised, and the same criticisms often
apply equally to the alternatives
The Commissions’ view
10.92 The Commissions do not see, at present, any benefit in adopting the
approach recommended by the United Kingdom in preference
to the uniform Evidence
Acts. The basic difference between the approaches appears to be whether the
balancing test should be expressed
in terms of probative value substantially
outweighing prejudicial effect or in terms of admission ‘in the interests
of justice’
having regard to the probative value and the prejudicial
effect. Whatever its failings, the uniform Evidence Acts test gives trial
a defined task and a two-stage test. The problem of the lack of guidance in the
‘interests of justice’ approach
is borne out by the need to include
guidelines. The guidelines, however, focus on the issue of probative value and
do not attempt
to address the issue of prejudice. If guidelines were to be used
this should be done. The uniform Evidence Acts approach is preferable
the Law Commission of England and Wales.
10.93 The issue remains whether the uniform Evidence Acts approach or the
Victorian s 398 approach should be applied. These approaches
need to be compared
to see which best serves the policy objectives.
The uniform Evidence
Acts and the Victorian approach
Focus on disclosure or purpose
10.94 The uniform Evidence Acts, like the common law and s 398A, require
initially that the ways in which the evidence could be relevant
identified.
This involves
consideration of what the evidence discloses and how it relates to what is in
issue in the trial. It will then be necessary
to consider the purpose or
purposes for which it is tendered; for this will provide a focus for the ruling
on admissibility and use
of the evidence. But the starting point is what the
evidence discloses.
Extent to which evidence is accepted as
reliable in determining probative value
10.95 Research to date has not identified any detailed discussion of this
issue in the authorities determined under the uniform Evidence
Consideration of the
admissibility and use of tendency and coincidence evidence, however, tends to
proceed on the assumption that
the evidence is accepted. Reference should be
made, however, to the comment of Spigelman CJ in
possibility of cases where the prejudicial effect was such that the probative
value required would be of such a high order
that it would be insufficient if
there was a reasonable explanation of the evidence consistent with
The points noted in
Appendix 2 in relation to s 398A are also applicable; namely, about
disputed evidence having less probative value
than undisputed evidence, and the
obligation to consider the reliability of the evidence should there be an issue
raised as to whether
no reasonable jury could accept it. It is to be expected
under both approaches, however, that in the normal case issues of assessment
the credibility of witnesses whose evidence is in question will be assumed in
favour of the witness at the time of admissibility
and left to the jury to
Relevant to facts in issue?
10.96 Section 398A expressly requires that the evidence be relevant to
facts in issue. The uniform Evidence Acts require relevance
to facts in issue
through the general relevance provisions, s 55 and following (the primary
admissibility provisions). Relevance
is the first requirement stated in
s 398A. A reading of the decided cases points to the same types of facts in
issue being raised,
and the same
arguments advanced to support the relevance of the evidence to those issues
including corroboration of the evidence
of each complainant by the testimony of
‘Probative value’ compared with
‘just in all the circumstances’
10.97 While the uniform Evidence Acts require a consideration of whether the
evidence has ‘significant probative value’
and whether probative
value substantially outweighs prejudicial effect, s 398A requires a
consideration of what is just in all the
circumstances.
10.98 Decisions under the two schemes, however, do not reveal that the
application of the different tests has produced, or is likely
to produce,
different outcomes.
This is not
surprising because statements in the Victorian authorities support the
propositions that the evidence must have strong
probative value and the
probative value must clearly transcend the prejudicial effect and similar
propositions.
10.99 A reading of the decisions, however, does reveal a difference in approach. As
might be expected, judges applying the uniform
Evidence Acts tend to follow a
structured approach involving, particularly, the application of ss 97, 98
Under s 398A,
judges assess probative value and prejudicial effect and determine what is just
in all circumstances.
Onus of proof
10.100 The drafting of both sets of provisions places the onus on the party
tendering the evidence to establish its admissibility.
On appeal, where the
defendant is the appellant, an onus inevitably falls on the appellant to
establish error and that affects the
form of the discussion on appeal. Under
s 398A, the Court of Appeal reviews the decision on the basis that the
trial judge applied
a rule of admissibility not a discretion. Under the uniform
Evidence Acts, it has been held that the appellant is required to demonstrate
that it was not reasonably open to the trial judge to reach the conclusion that
the test prescribed by s 101 of the uniform Evidence
10.101 The adoption of this test in appeals about whether evidence should
have been admitted under s 101 may make it more difficult
for appellants
successfully to challenge the admission of such evidence. A benefit may be a
reduction in appeals. But this test reduces
the scope of one of the protections
of the trial system against miscarriages of justice and arguably makes it even
more important
to require that, before such evidence can be admitted, its
probative value substantially outweighs its prejudicial effect.
Relationship evidence
10.102 Evidence of the relationship between the accused and another person
may be relevant for a variety of
It may simply
provide a background or context to the events in issue. It may, however, be
relevant to the issue of the likely state
of mind of the accused or, for
example, the victim of an assault. It may reveal a relevant ‘guilty
passion’ of the accused
for a victim of an alleged sexual assault.
10.103 Under both legislative approaches, if such evidence discloses a
relevant propensity or tendency, it must comply with the statutory
before it can be admitted to prove such propensity or tendency. If it does not
comply with the statutory provisions, it
may still be admissible for a
non-propensity or non-tendency purpose but cannot be used for a propensity or
tendency purpose.
10.104 If the evidence does not disclose a relevant propensity or tendency,
then the admissibility of the evidence will depend ultimately
on the application
of the exclusionary discretions. Section 137 of the uniform Evidence Acts
deals with the issues addressed by the
(see discussion
below). Section 135 of the uniform Evidence Acts mirrors the concealed
discretion contained in the common law requirement
of sufficient relevance. It
is unlikely, therefore, that relationship evidence will be approached
differently under the two legislative
10.105 A question is raised as to whether s 398A would apply to evidence
properly described as
It is difficult
to see why it would not apply, just as it is difficult to see why the uniform
Evidence Acts provisions would not
apply. Any evidence which reveals a
‘propensity’ (s 398A) or a ‘tendency’ or related
events (uniform Evidence
Acts) must satisfy the provisions. The fact that the
evidence is of matters which were part of the criminal transaction, however,
will give such probative value to the evidence that the evidence will ordinarily
be admissible under both sets of provisions.
The common law Christie
10.106 The equivalent provision in the uniform Evidence Acts to the common
discretion is s 137, which, strictly speaking, does not
provide a discretion but provides a rule obliging the trial judge to refuse
admit evidence adduced by the prosecution if its probative value is outweighed
by the danger of unfair prejudice to the defendant.
In practice, that should not
affect outcomes at trial level but could theoretically affect consideration of
decisions by appellate
courts because of the different rules applying to the
review of the exercise of discretions and the application of rules. Bearing
mind the language of s 101 of the uniform Evidence Acts and the language of
s 398A of the
Crimes Act 1958
(Vic), if evidence passes the
admissibility tests contained in those provisions, it is difficult to envisage a
situation in which
there would be scope for the common law
discretion (although left open by the authorities) and s 137 of the
uniform Evidence Acts. If evidence fails to satisfy the admissibility
where tendered for propensity, tendency or coincidence purposes, but is tendered
and admissible for other purposes, the
discretion, in common law
operation. Again, however,
it is difficult to conceive of a situation where the
result would differ depending on which regime is applied.
Evidence led by the accused
10.107 Under the common law, the rules of admissibility that were developed
for evidence revealing a propensity were applied to evidence
adduced by the
prosecution against the
It has been held
that the criterion for admissibility is somewhat lower where an accused seeks to
lead such evidence because the
accused ‘need only raise a reasonable doubt
as to guilt’.
Section 398A does not distinguish between evidence led on behalf of the
prosecution and evidence led on behalf of the accused. The
uniform Evidence Acts
provisions contained in ss 97 and 98 are of general application and apply
in both civil and criminal proceedings
and to an accused who adduces such
Section 101,
however, distinguishes between the prosecution and the accused and in terms
applies only to evidence adduced by the
prosecution.
The question
arises, therefore, whether this may result in different outcomes for such
evidence when adduced by an accused depending
on which sections are applied.
Research to date has not identified any appellate cases in which consideration
has been given to the
application of s 398A where evidence is tendered by
an accused. The fact that it is the accused tendering the evidence would
need to be taken into account when considering the overriding
requirement—‘just in all the circumstances’.
Comparison in addressing policy
Fact finding.
The uniform Evidence Acts provisions use
language that might be expected to result in a more stringent approach than that
by s 398A of the
Crimes Act 1958
(Vic) and produce
different admissibility results in similar cases. But this cannot as yet be
discerned, probably because of the way
in which s 398A has been
interpreted. In particular, the requirements of strong probative value and that
the probative value clearly
transcends the prejudicial effect. This also appears
to be the situation in relation to
and relationship evidence.
There is a greater potential for different results where the accused tenders the
Fair trial.
To the extent that the uniform Evidence Acts
provisions require the trial judge to apply rules with less value selection and
structure, there will be seen to be a trial by rules, rather than judicial
whim, and in that regard a fairer trial. As to the effect
of unfair prejudice,
it is difficult to form a judgment as to whether in particular cases a fairer
trial will be had pursuant to
one set of provisions or the other. It may be
said, however, that the more precise and structured approach of the uniform
Acts may better enable judges to deal with the impact on them of the
prejudicial effect of the evidence when considering its admissibility.
Minimising risk of wrongful conviction.
Again it is
difficult to form a judgment as to whether in particular cases one set of
provisions or the other is likely to increase
the risk of wrongful conviction.
Arguably, that risk would be less under the uniform Evidence Acts provisions
because the requirements
are more specific. Professor CR Williams, however,
argues that s 101 of the uniform Evidence Acts may ‘raise the bar to
admissibility
unduly high’. He indicates a preference for the English
approach, and the s 398A approach, which he describes as ‘the
suitable’, recognising ‘the wide measure of discretion called for in
determining the admissibility of similar fact
Williams has
also, however, commented:
As a means of describing the situation where the probative force of evidence is
sufficient to warrant admissibility, the word ‘just’
is appropriate.
There is a real danger, however, that if regarded as a test rather than the word
used to describe the situation where
admissibility is warranted, it will come to
serve as a substitute for factual analysis and may perhaps lead too readily to
admissibility.
10.111 It should be noted that the English approach, followed in s 398A,
has its critics. Professor Colin Tapper, commenting on
Director of Public
Prosecutions v P
It is not satisfactory that so important a principle of English criminal
evidence should be diluted in this way. Every effort should
be taken to ensure
that the prejudice inevitably attaching to the accused through the revelation of
discreditable conduct on other
occasions alleged against him should be admitted
only if clearly established, only when of central relevance to an issue, and
subject to every effort to minimise its prejudicial effect. It is far from
clear that in [
] the House of Lords advanced such an
aspiration.
10.112 On balance, it is suggested that there is a greater risk of wrongful
conviction under s 398A and the requirements of the uniform
Evidence Acts
appropriately address that issue without raising the bar too high.
Accessibility.
Experience of the uniform Evidence
Acts has demonstrated that it provides a more accessible law of evidence than
the common law approaches.
It is like a ‘pocket bible’. If a
provision along the lines of s 398A was included in the uniform Evidence
Acts in substitution
for the present provisions, it would make the law less
accessible in this particular area because anyone applying such a section
have to go back to the decided cases, Victorian and English, to establish its
content—defeating the purpose of having
a statutory statement of law.
Predictability.
Because of the difficulty of the issues
in some cases, it will on occasions be difficult for persons to prepare for
trial confident
as to the admissibility or otherwise of propensity, tendency or
coincidence evidence, whichever approach is used. Where the uniform
Acts apply, the language used is flexible and it may be that views will differ
as to the proper exercise of the relevant
provisions in some cases. The
application of the ‘just in all the circumstances’ standard used in
s 398A, however, has
the potential to be less predictable. Everything will
turn on what the trial judge considers ‘just’.
Cost and time.
This is another issue that is difficult
to assess. It is suggested, however, that it is likely that there will be less
cost and time
involved in the structured debate that occurs under the uniform
Evidence Acts compared with the unstructured debate involved in the
‘just in all circumstances’. In addition, under the latter system it
is always worth the defence objecting
to the evidence and challenging its
admission on appeal; for there is always a chance that the judges constituting
the appeal court
will be persuaded that the evidence should not have been
Uniformity.
The less structure and direction given by
the legislation, the greater the scope for variation in the application of the
provisions.
Accepting uniformity as an objective, it is likely to be better
served by the uniform Evidence Acts.
Commissions’ view
10.117 As noted above, the Commissions consider that the uniform Evidence
Acts approach is to be preferred to the proposal of the
Law Commission of
England and Wales for a hybrid approach.
10.118 In considering the uniform Evidence Acts, as compared to s 398A
Evidence Act 1958
(Vic), the Commissions find that the impact of
the two approaches on the fact-finding process is difficult to assess on the
of the current authorities and that it cannot be said that the two
approaches have produced significantly different outcomes. However,
Commissions’ view, the uniform Evidence Acts better serve a number of
other policy objectives, notably: a fair trial;
minimising the risk of wrongful
conviction; accessibility; predictability; cost and time; and
uniformity.
The Commissions
prefer the approach of the uniform Evidence Acts.
R v Straffen
[1952] 2 QB
Uniform Evidence Acts
R v Cakovski
[2004] NSWCCA 280
(2004) 149 A Crim R 21.
Australian Law
Reform Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004),
R v Cakovski
[2004] NSWCCA 280
(2004) 149 A
Director of Public Prosecutions
15 February
The same wording appears in
Evidence Regulations 1995
(Cth) cl 6(2) and
Evidence Regulations
(Tas) cl 5(2).
of Public Prosecutions (NSW),
15 February 2005,
[2001] NSWCCA 496
Director of Public Prosecutions
15 February
See Judicial Officers of the
Supreme Court of New South Wales,
Consultation
, Sydney, 18 March
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004),
J Anderson, J Hunter and N
The New Evidence Law: Annotations and Commentary on the Uniform
Evidence Acts
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, ALRC 38 (1987), App A,
This approach is supported in
consultations: Judicial Officers of the District Court of NSW,
Consultation
, Sydney, 3 March 2005 and also in Confidential,
22 February
Jill Anderson, Jill Hunter and
Neil Williams,
The New Evidence Law: Annotations and Commentary on the
Uniform Evidence Acts
(2002), [98.20].
(Unreported, New
South Wales Supreme Court, Hunt CJ at CL, 5 September 1996) cited in
J Anderson, J Hunter and N Williams,
The New Evidence Law: Annotations
and Commentary on the Uniform Evidence Acts
(2002), [98.25]
Law Council of Australia,
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1 (1985),
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 2 (1985), App C,
[172]–[175]; Australian Law Reform Commission,
(1987), App C, [24].
expression ‘prejudicial effect’ is not qualified by the word
‘unfair’. One commentator, Peter Bayne,
considers the significance
of this omission but concludes, correctly it is suggested, that properly
construed the prejudice in question
is unfair prejudice: P Bayne,
Evidence Law: Text and Essential Cases
(2003), [6.260], citing
[2001] FCA 1648
(2001) 115 FCR 41
, [61], [89];
(1997) 42 NSWLR 702
[1999] NSWCCA 261.
v The Queen
[1988] HCA 50
(1988) 165 CLR 292.
Pfennig v The Queen
[1995] HCA 7
(1995) 182 CLR
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004),
Pfennig v The
[1995] HCA 7
(1995) 182 CLR 461
, 481. See also
Hoch v The Queen
[1988] HCA 50
[2001] FCA 1648
(2001) 115 FCR 41
91 A Crim R 356
(1997) 42 NSWLR 702
R v Fordham
A Crim R 359
[2002] NSWCCA 210
(2002) 130 A Crim R 89
[2002] NSWCCA 354
133 A Crim R 90.
[2003] NSWCCA 319
(2003) 58 NSWLR 700.
[2003] NSWCCA 319
(2003) 58 NSWLR 700
, [70], [74], [83].
Ellis v The Queen
[2004] HCATrans
Ellis v The Queen
HCA Trans 488.
Papakosmas v The
[1999] HCA 37
(1999) 196 CLR 297
, 302, 312.
[2003] NSWCCA 319
(2003) 58 NSWLR 700
Tasmania v S
[2004] TASSC
[2004] ACTSC 63
(2004) 146 A
Crim R 503.
It has also been applied subsequently in NSW in
(2003) 140 A Crim R 274
[2004] NSWCCA 195
R v Folbigg
[2005] NSWCCA 23.
Criminal Law
Committee of the Law Society of South Australia,
7 March 2005; Confidential,
22 February 2005. See
also E Kerkyasharian,
4 February 2005 who
draws attention to the absence in
of the expression ‘and other
evidence to be adduced’ which is found in
. This issue of
construction does not appear to have been raised in litigation. It is suggested
that the absence of the expression
should not result in an
approach where the weighing of the probative value and prejudicial effect of the
evidence is made by focusing
solely on the evidence in question. The balancing
test involves the consideration of all the evidence. It seems likely that the
are included in
out of an abundance of
Crown Prosecutors,
Consultation
, Sydney, 11 February 2005. See also T Game,
Consultation
, Sydney, 25 February
Law Council of Australia,
Director of Public Prosecutions
15 February 2005; Crown Prosecutors,
Consultation
, Sydney, 11 February 2005; G Bellamy,
Consultation
Canberra, 8 March 2005; P Bayne,
Consultation
, Canberra, 9 March 2005; P
Consultation
, Hobart, 15 March 2005; A Palmer,
Consultation
, Melbourne, 16 March
For example, the approach taken
Tasmania v S
[2004] TASSC 84.
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
(2004), Qs 8–8, 8–9.
Law Commission of England and Wales,
Evidence of Bad Character in Criminal
Proceedings
, Report 273 (2001).
Ibid, [11.19].
This consideration is dealt
with under Uniform Evidence Acts
Law Commission of England
Evidence of Bad Character in Criminal Proceedings
, Report 273
(2001), [6.66].
This definition is taken from
The Shorter Oxford Dictionary: On Historical Principles
Law Commission of England and
Evidence of Bad Character in Criminal Proceedings
, Report 273
(2001), [11.27].
Citing J McEwan, ‘Law
Commission Dodges the Nettles in Consultation Paper No 141’ (1997)
Criminal Law Review
Commission of England and Wales,
Evidence of Bad Character in Criminal
Proceedings
, Report 273 (2001),
Law Council of Australia,
[2003] NSWCCA 319
(2003) 58 NSWLR
Law Council of Australia,
4 March 2005,
[2003] NSWCCA 319
(2003) 58 NSWLR
[1998] 4 VR 603
Pfennig v The Queen
[1995] HCA 7
182 CLR 461
, 483, 485, 506–507;
Hoch v The Queen
[1988] HCA 50
(1988) 165 CLR
Director of Public
Prosecutions v P
[1991] 2 AC 447
[1998] 4 VR 603
[1998] 4 VR 603
612, citing
R v Tektonopoulos
[1999] VSCA 93
[1999] 2 VR 412
, [19] and see discussion
R v Tektonopoulos
[1999] VSCA 93
[1999] 2 VR 412
Law Commission of England and
Evidence of Bad Character in Criminal Proceedings
, Report 273
(2001), [4.2].
(1990) 90 Cr
[2009] EWCA Crim 139
[1997] 2 Cr App R
Law Commission of England and
Evidence of Bad Character in Criminal Proceedings
, Report 273
(2001), [4.8]–[4.9].
[4.11]. For more detail see Law Commission,
Evidence in Criminal Proceedings:
Previous Misconduct of a Defendant
, CP 141 (1996),
[2.70]–[2.84].
Law Commission of
England and Wales,
Evidence of Bad Character in Criminal Proceedings
Report 273 (2001), [4.11], quoting C Tapper,
Cross and Tapper on Evidence
(9th ed, 1999), 343.
Law Commission of
England and Wales,
Evidence of Bad Character in Criminal Proceedings
Report 273 (2001), [4.11], quoting C Tapper,
Cross and Tapper on Evidence
(9th ed, 1999), 343.
Law Commission of
England and Wales,
Evidence of Bad Character in Criminal Proceedings
Report 273 (2001), [4.12].
It states that the term
‘substantial’ means ‘more than minor or trivial’: Ibid,
It does not in terms require
a balancing of probative value and prejudice: Ibid, [11.46], Draft Bill
ss 7 and 8.
See Ibid, Draft
Bill s 8(3)(b) in relation to evidence going to a matter in issue, not
explanatory evidence.
See Ibid, Draft
Bill cls 8(4), 5(2).
Jacara Pty Ltd v Perpetual Trustees WA Ltd
[2000] FCA 1886
(2000) 106 FCR 51
While much of the debate in the
cases focuses on the purpose of the tender of the evidence, that occurs for at
least two reasons.
First, the purpose of the tender is often the only relevant
use. Second, when the evidence discloses more than one relevant use,
the purpose
of the tender will shape the debate on the admissibility of the evidence and
what use or uses will be permitted if the
evidence is admitted. See, eg,
discussion in
W v The Queen
[2001] FCA 1648
(2001) 115 FCR 41
, [46]–[50];
[2004] NSWCCA 364
possibility of concoction and collusion was raised on appeal in
as new evidence but it was not necessary to determine whether such
evidence would be relevant to the question of admissibility:
[2004] NSWCCA 229
was apparently held in
in which the learned trial judge found the evidence of the
complainants to be ‘clear and compelling’, and this was said,
appeal, to provide a firm basis for the trial judge’s ruling that the
probative effect of the evidence substantially outweighed
the danger of likely
prejudicial effect:
W v The Queen
[2001] FCA 1648
(2001) 115 FCR 41
, [56]. A similar
procedure was followed in
Tasmania v S
[2004] TASSC
[2003] NSWCCA 319
(2003) 58 NSWLR
Issues of intent, identity,
and/or the alleged criminal act and reliance on the argument that the evidence
demonstrates a relationship,
a tendency, an improbable coincidence and/or
corroborates other disputed evidence.
[2004] NSWCCA
For cases on s 398A see:
R v Tektonopoulos
[1999] VSCA 93
[1999] 2 VR 412
(relevance/probative value);
[2002] VSCA 183
(2002) 6 VR 53
(relevance/probative value);
R v Rajakaruna
[2004] VSCA 114
(relevance/probative value). For cases on the uniform Evidence
Symss v The Queen
[2003] NSWCCA 77
(relevance/probative value);
[2004] ACTSC 63
(2004) 146 A Crim R 503
(evidence not relevant);
[2001] FCA 1648
(probative value);
[2003] NSWCCA 407
(relevance and probative value).
[1998] 4 VR 603
R v Tektonopoulos
[1999] VSCA 93
[1999] 2 VR 412
[2004] VSC 253
(2004) 148 A Crim R 185.
W v The Queen
[2001] FCA 1648
[2003] NSWCCA 319
58 NSWLR 700
, [31]ff. Note that the practice of counsel is not at times as
rigorous as it might be: Judicial Officers of the District Court of
Consultation
, Sydney, 3 March
, [33]. See also
W v The Queen
[2001] FCA 1648
[2003] NSWCCA 407
example, evidence of the nature of the de facto relationship between the
deceased and the accused showing its violent nature,
relevant to the issue of
self-defence (as in
(1997) 91 A Crim R
The discretion to exclude
evidence where its prejudicial effect outweighs its probative
See discussion in T Smith
and O Holderson, ‘Comparative Evidence: Admission of Evidence of
Relationship in Sexual Offence
Prosecutions—Part 1’
Australian Law Journal
Evidence of conduct forming
part of the transaction giving rise to the crime
A Ligertwood,
Australian Evidence
(4th ed, 2004), [3.7]–[3.8]; K Arenson,
‘Propensity Evidence in Victoria: A Triumph for Justice or an Affront to
Liberties?’
[1999] MelbULawRw 12
(1999) 23(2)
Melbourne University Law Review
Cheney v The Queen
[1991] FCA 37
(1991) 28 FCR 103
, [18] and the cases
Symss v The Queen
[2003] NSWCCA 77
under the uniform Evidence Acts provisions, the accused failed
to satisfy ss 97 and 98.
R v Lockyer
(1996) 89 A Crim R 457
R v Cakovski
[2004] NSWCCA 280
(2004) 149 A
C Williams,
‘Approaches to Similar Fact Evidence: England and Australia’ in P
Mirfield and R Smith (eds),
Essays for Colin Tapper
Cited in Ibid,
Director of Public
Prosecutions v P
[1991] 2 AC
C Tapper, ‘The Probative
Force of Similar Fact Evidence’
Law Quarterly Review
The DPP NSW submits that
the uniform Evidence Acts provisions should not be replaced by an
‘interests of justice’ test:
Director of Public Prosecutions (NSW),
15 February 2005.
11. The Credibility Rule and its Exceptions
Introduction
The credibility provisions
Evidence relevant only to a witness' credibiity
Substantial probative value
Credibility and the character provisions
Leave to cross-examine the defendant
Rebutting denials in cross-examination by other evidence
Credibility of persons making a previous representation
Expert evidence going to credibility
Unsworn statements by a defendant
Credibility issues in sexual offence cases
11. The Credibility Rule and its Exceptions
Introduction
11.1 Part 3.7 of the uniform Evidence
contains the credibility rule
and its primary exceptions. Section 102 of the uniform Evidence Acts provides
Evidence that is relevant only to a witness’s credibility is not
admissible.
11.2 The rationale for the credibility rule is often explained in terms of
‘case management’; that is, the need to keep
the trial process
within manageable confines to prevent side issues from being
Relevant considerations in
this regard include preventing proceedings from being burdened by detailed
investigation of collateral
issues and, on the other hand, allowing a judge or
jury sufficient information to assess the reliability of a witness.
11.3 The application of the credibility rule depends upon a distinction between
evidence relevant to the credit of a witness and evidence
relevant to the facts
in issue in a proceeding. At times, this distinction may be difficult to
determine. For example, where a person
is the sole eyewitness to an event, the
reliability of that person’s testimony is inseparable from the
person’s credibility.
rules relating to the admissibility of credibility evidence have, therefore,
been described as being based upon pragmatism rather
The credibility
11.4 The term ‘credibility of a witness’ is defined in the
uniform Evidence Acts
the credibility of any part or all of the evidence of the witness, and includes
the witness’s ability to observe or remember
facts and events about which
the witness has given, is giving or is to give
11.5 The exclusionary rule for credibility evidence therefore applies to both
evidence that bears on the reliability of a witness
generally, and evidence that
bears on the reliability of particular testimony of that
11.6 The credibility rule is subject to specific exceptions that apply when
• is adduced in cross-examination (s 103);
• is led in rebuttal of denials made in cross-examination
• is admitted to re-establish credibility (s 108);
• relates to the credibility of accused persons (s 104); and
• relates to the credibility of a person who made a previous
representation of which evidence has been admitted.
11.7 This chapter discusses selected aspects of the credibility provisions of
the uniform Evidence Acts where issues have been identified,
• the interpretation of ‘evidence that is relevant only to a
witness’s credibility’ under ss 102, 103 and
• the interpretation of ‘substantial probative value’ in
s 103 and whether the Acts should specify additional matters
to which the
court may have regard in deciding whether evidence has substantial probative
• the interaction of the credibility rule and its exceptions and the
character provisions contained in
• the limits on cross-examination in criminal proceedings of a defendant as to
the defendant's credibility;
• rebutting denials in cross-examination by other evidence under
• the admission under s 108A of evidence of the credibility of a person
who has made a previous representation;
• whether there should be further exceptions to the credibility rule;
• the provisions relating to unsworn statements by the accused; and
• aspects of credibility issues in sexual offence cases.
Evidence relevant
only to a witness’ credibility
11.8 IP 28 refers to the interpretation of s 102 of the uniform
Evidence Acts by the High Court in
The High Court held that
the section should be interpreted literally. As a result, it will not apply if
evidence is relevant both
to credibility and evidence of facts in
issue—for example, prior inconsistent or consistent statements about the
question. The majority in
expressly rejected the
interpretation that had until then been applied by the Court of Criminal Appeal
in New South Wales,
namely, that
the section applied to evidence which was not admissible on any basis other than
relevance to the credibility of a witness.
As IP 28 notes, in so
concluding, the High Court implicitly overruled aspects of its decision in
Graham v The Queen.
11.9 Prior to the decision in
, the provisions in Part 3.7 had been
used to control the admissibility of evidence relevant for more than one purpose
but admissible
only on the issue of the credibility of a witness. This approach
provided an important control over such evidence. As a result of
that control no longer exists. Stephen Odgers SC identifies two areas where
Part 3.7 will not now apply, with significant negative
consequences.
11.10 First, evidence of a prior statement, consistent or inconsistent with a
witness’ evidence, may not be admissible to prove
the facts stated in it
because it does not come within one of the hearsay exceptions. It is likely,
however, also to be relevant
to the witness’ credibility. The literal
interpretation of s 102 has the result that Part 3.7 is not available
to control the
admissibility of such evidence in those circumstances, so that it
will be admissible for a credibility use without having to satisfy
requirements of that Part. Having escaped the controls of Part 3.7, and
being admitted for credibility purposes, s 60 will then
apply to lift the
hearsay rule so that the evidence is admissible as evidence of the facts
11.11 Secondly, there are consequences where an accused person gives evidence.
Evidence of the accused’s prior convictions for
offences can be relevant
to show a tendency to commit such offences and so may be relevant both to the
issues of the case and to
the assessment of the credibility of the accused. Such
evidence, however, may be inadmissible to prove a tendency or coincidence
because of the operation of ss 97 or 101. At the same time, Part 3.7 will
have no application to control the admission of the evidence
for credibility
purposes—as the dual relevance renders ss 102, 103 and 104
inapplicable. Each of those sections is needed to
control the admissibility and
use of the evidence for credibility purposes.
11.12 The result of the decision in
is that control of evidence,
relevant for more than one purpose including credibility, will depend entirely
upon the exercise of
the discretions and exclusionary rules contained in
ss 135 to 137. This is unsatisfactory and has the potential to lead to
uncertainty in the preparation of cases and the conduct of
11.13 Concern has also been expressed generally about the difficulty of
distinguishing between evidence going to credibility and evidence
fact in issue.
The distinction
is sometimes a difficult one and is made more critical by narrowing the scope of
s 102 to evidence that is relevant
only to credibility. The issue would be
less critical if s 102 applied also to evidence relevant to facts in issue
but which is not
admissible to prove such facts.
Submissions and
consultations
11.14 There is support in submissions and consultations for amending the
uniform Evidence Acts to address the consequences of the
decision in
The Law Council of
Australia (Law Council) states that the decision in
seriously undermines the entire structure of the credibility rule and its
exceptions … It is left to the court to control the
situation through
exercise of discretion. One could tolerate this situation in civil cases where
the more extensive reception of
relevant hearsay evidence might be seen as
desirable, but in criminal cases rules of evidence need to ensure that the
accused knows
in advance how evidential rules are likely to operate at trial.
And the important protections in s 104 against cross-examination
accused about credibility are seriously
undermined.
11.15 The Law Council submits that s 102 should be amended to read:
Evidence is not admissible that is either (a) relevant only to credibility; or
(b) relevant to credibility and, insofar as it is
also otherwise relevant,
inadmissible under this Act.
11.16 By contrast, others submit that the decision in
justify any amendment to
The Director of
Public Prosecutions New South Wales (DPP NSW) considers that s 136
provides a sufficient safeguard.
The New South Wales Public Defenders Office (NSW PDO) criticises as
‘alarmist’ the view that
renders otherwise inadmissible
evidence admissible, so long as it is
Commissions’ view
11.17 In the Commissions’ view, while ss 135 to 137 provide a
mechanism to cope with the effect of a literal interpretation
of s 102, it
is preferable to have rules applying prior to the application of those sections.
Section 102 should be amended to enable
it to operate as was originally
11.18 IP 28 identifies a further problem arising from the literal
construction of the s 102.
Substantially similar terminology (‘relevant only because it is relevant
to the defendant’s credibility’) is used
to define the evidence
which attracts the additional protections provided in s 104 to an accused
person when cross-examined.
Limiting this provision to the situation where the evidence is not admissible
for another purpose reduces the protection available
to the accused. The
Commissions consider that this issue also needs to be addressed; and should be
addressed in conjunction with
the consideration and redrafting of
11.19 It is suggested that the preferable solution is to reword the rule to
apply simply to ‘evidence that is relevant to a
credibility’ and to define such evidence. Draft provisions s 101A
(defining credibility evidence) and a reworded
s 102 are included for
discussion in Appendix 1. In the subsequent provisions, ss 104 and
108A in particular, the phrase ‘evidence
relevant to a witness’s
credibility’, amended where appropriate to reflect the context, could be
substituted for the
phrase ‘evidence relevant only to a witness’s
credibility’ or similar phrases.
11.20 The suggested changes address the problems created by the literal
interpretation of s 102. For example, evidence of a prior
statement which
is relevant for both a credibility purpose and a hearsay purpose, but not
admissible for a hearsay purpose, will
be controlled under Part 3.7. The
changes also have the potential to make the subsequent sections easier to follow
and apply because
it will be clear whether the evidence is evidence to which
those sections apply before consideration is given to their application.
Proposal 11–1
The uniform Evidence Acts should be amended to
ensure that the credibility provisions apply to evidence:
• relevant only to the credibility of a witness; and
• relevant to the facts in issue, but not admissible for that purpose,
which is also relevant to the credibility of a witness.
Substantial
probative value
The definition of
substantial probative value
11.21 IP 28 notes debate as to the interpretation of the expression
‘substantial probative value’ in
At present,
s 103 provides:
103(1) The credibility rule does not apply to evidence adduced in
cross-examination of a witness if the evidence has substantial
probative value.
11.22 The expression ‘probative value’ is defined in the uniform
Evidence Acts as meaning:
the extent to which the evidence could rationally affect the assessment of the
probability of the existence of a fact in
11.23 It has been argued that this definition cannot apply to the phrase in
s 103 because the definition refers to the relationship
between evidence
and a fact in issue, rather than to issues of credibility. The interpretation of
‘probative value’ in
s 103 was the subject of a decision of the
New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal. In
, Hunt CJ at CL
suggested that the context in which the phrase appears and the subject matter of
indicate that the definition does not apply … Evidence adduced in
cross-examination must therefore have substantial probative
value in the sense
that it could rationally affect the assessment of the credit of a
11.24 The approach in
to the interpretation of
‘probative value’ in s 103 is plainly open because
Interpretation Act
(NSW) states that the expressions
defined by statutes apply to their construction ‘except insofar as the
context or subject
matter otherwise indicates or
11.25 There is some support for further defining the term ‘substantial
probative value’ for the purposes of
However, the Law
Council states that:
The exact probative limits are impossible to define in the abstract and must
necessarily depend upon the circumstances of the individual
case. The Council
feels that the current formulation of s 103 gives trial judge’s
appropriate discretion and that any further
attempt to define the probative
value required would be counterproductive. However it would not be inappropriate
to amend s 103 to
make it clear that the substantial probative value
required is either to the witness’s credibility or the material facts in
interpretation has stood for some seven years. It is
practical and simple and does not appear to have given rise to any difficulty.
It has the consequence, however, that to understand the meaning of the
expression, people need to be aware of the above case law
which requires the
departure from the definition in the Dictionary of the uniform Evidence Acts.
The Commissions consider that this
detracts from the utility of the uniform
Evidence Acts as a ‘pocket bible’ and it would be desirable to amend
the section
to incorporate expressly the construction that has been adopted by
the courts. A draft rewording of s 103, and consequential amendments
s 108A, are included in Appendix 1.
Is the test too
R v Lockyer
, Hunt CJ at CL indicated that
‘substantial probative value’ seems to impose a higher standard of
relevance than ‘significant
probative value’, which requires the
evidence in question to be ‘important’ or ‘of
consequence’.
11.28 There are some suggestions that the requirement of substantial probative
value is too high and might exclude evidence relevant
to credibility, which on
its own would not have substantial probative value but in combination with other
evidence would do so.
the Commissions have not identified any cases in which credibility evidence has
been excluded on this basis.
11.29 In the Commissions’ view, like all other evidence, the probative value
of credibility evidence is not determined in isolation
but in the context of
other related evidence, and the combination of the evidence in question with
such other evidence is a matter
relevant to its probative value. The Commissions
do not propose any amendment to redefine the expression ‘substantial
value’ in s 103 to make it easier to admit credibility
Proposal 11–2
Section 103(1) of the uniform Evidence Acts
should be amended to read as follows: ‘The credibility rule does not apply
to evidence
adduced in cross-examination of a witness if the evidence could
substantially affect the assessment of the credibility of the
Matters to which the
court may have regard
11.30 Section 103 of the uniform Evidence Acts controls
cross-examination of witnesses as to credibility. Section 108A provides
who made a previous representation which has been admitted
into evidence. Each
section imposes a requirement of ‘substantial probative value’ and
contains a subsection (ss 103(2)
and 108A(2)) which lists, by way of
example, the following matters as relevant to the issue of substantial probative
• whether the evidence tends to prove that the person in question
knowingly or recklessly made a false representation when the
witness was under
an obligation to tell the truth; and
• ‘the period that has elapsed’ since the events to which
the evidence in question relates or, in the case of a
representation, the period
between the events and the representation.
11.31 Odgers notes that there are many more examples of evidence that may
satisfy the requirements of s 103(1). Cross-examination
may be permitted
regarding such matters as bias, opportunities of observation, powers of
perception and memory, special circumstances
affecting incompetency and prior
statements inconsistent with
In this context,
IP 28 asks whether further examples of evidence capable of having
substantial probative value should be listed in
legislation.
11.32 In ALRC 26, the ALRC expressed concern about the failure to use
appropriately the common law power to control cross-examination
credit—particularly the tendency to permit any negative aspect of
character or misconduct to be explored on the basis
that it was relevant to
credibility.
It considered
including a narrowly defined section but regarded that as too limiting. To
address these concerns, the requirement
of substantial probative value was
included. In addition, the first example in ss 103(2) and 108A(2) was
included to emphasise the
importance of the circumstances in which prior alleged
dishonest behaviour occurred. Again, the ALRC was influenced by extensive
psychological research demonstrating the dangers of seeking to rely upon prior
conduct as a predictor of future conduct unless there
was significant similarity
in circumstances surrounding that conduct.
11.33 There is no evidence that the lack of other examples of matters affecting
whether evidence has substantial probative value is
causing any significant
Adding further
examples carries the risk of undermining the purpose of the sections which is to
limit the situations in which evidence
can be admitted relevant to credibility.
Doing so also carries the danger that attention and debate will tend to focus on
the examples
rather than the rule. In the Commissions’ view, there is no
clear benefit in adding to the provisions and the Commissions do
not propose
that any further examples be added to ss 103 or 108A.
Credibility and the
character provisions
11.34 Sections 104 and 110 of the uniform Evidence Acts operate in
criminal proceedings. Section 104(4)(a) permits a court to consider
granting leave for the prosecution to cross-examine a defendant about the
defendant’s credibility when evidence has been adduced
that tends to prove
that the defendant is a person of good character. Section 110 is also
relevant in that context.
11.35 Section 110 excludes the operation of the credibility, hearsay,
opinion and tendency rules with respect to ‘evidence adduced
defendant to prove (directly or by implication) that the defendant is, either
generally or in a particular respect, a person
character’.
11.36 Such evidence admitted under s 110 may be relevant to both the
facts in issue and the credibility of the defendant. Section
110 continues
the common law exception for accused persons arising from the concern to
minimise the risk of wrongful
conviction.
Sections 110(2)
and (3) exclude the operation of the credibility, hearsay, opinion and tendency
rules with respect to rebuttal evidence
and cross-examination that seek to rebut
evidence of a defendant’s good character. The effect of ss 110(2) and (3)
is to limit
the prosecution’s rebuttal evidence to the same features as
were adduced in evidence for the defendant.
The interaction of
ss 104 and 110
11.37 IP 28 highlighted certain differences between the conditions
imposed by s 104(4)(a) with respect to cross-examination of a defendant
under s 110 on the admissibility of evidence to rebut
good character
evidence adduced by a
11.38 Leave is required before a defendant can be cross-examined under
s 104(4)(a) or s 110. However, under s 110 the prosecution
with leave, cross-examine the defendant only if the defendant has adduced
evidence with the positive intention of proving that
he or she is a person of
good character.
In addition,
cross-examination of a defendant under s 110 must respond as a
‘mirror image’ to the good character evidence
adduced by the
defendant. Section 104(4)(a) does not appear to be confined in these ways.
In particular, it applies where evidence
has been adduced by the defendant
‘that tends to prove’ that the defendant is of good character and is
not confined to
the parameters of the character evidence adduced on behalf of
the defendant. Thus, as to those aspects, a wider power is given to
prosecution in cross-examination relevant only to credit under
s 104(4)(a).
11.39 At the same time, cross-examination under s 104 must satisfy the
requirements of s 103, with the result that leave can only
be given under
s 104 where the cross-examination relates to evidence of ‘substantial
probative value’. That requirement
is not laid down in s 112, the
leave provision applying where the accused has deliberately adduced evidence of
good character.
Commissions’ view
11.40 The principal reason for these differences between the credibility and
character provisions is that ss 110 to 112 deal with
a situation where the
accused has deliberately led evidence intending to prove that he or she is of
good character, which evidence
is relevant both to the issues of fact and to
credibility. That is, the defendant has deliberately chosen to open the issue of
or her good character. By contrast, ss 103 and 104 deal with
cross-examination relevant only to credibility.
11.41 Therefore, as presently drafted, where the defendant produces evidence
with the intention of proving his or her good character
under s 110,
ss 103 and 104 should have no
application.
construction is correct, a question arises as to why s 110 purports to
exclude the operation of the credibility rule. This
may reflect the original
assumption that s 102 would also apply to such
Alternatively, the
explanation may be that it was done out of an abundance of caution.
11.42 In practice, the interaction of these provisions is a source of confusion and
uncertainty.
The potential
overlap is undesirable. One option to address these concerns would be to remove
s 104(4)(a), which allows leave for
cross-examination to be given
evidence has been adduced by the defendant that tends to prove that the
defendant is, either generally or in a particular respect,
a person of good
character …
11.43 This would have the consequence that where the defendant has put his or
her character in issue by adducing and having admitted
evidence as to character,
s 104 would have no application and cross-examination on matters going to
credibility would be controlled
by ss 110 and 112. In that case,
cross-examination would be confined to cross-examination on evidence which
mirrors that which the
defendant had adduced; and the evidence sought to be
adduced in cross-examination going to credibility would not have to pass a
substantial
probative value test. Where the defendant has not put his or her
character in issue, any cross-examination as to credibility will
continue to be
controlled by ss 103 and 104.
11.44 It may be questioned whether this change would make any real difference
in practice. Under the character evidence provisions,
leave is required and
cross-examination will be confined to situations where the defendant has
intentionally put his or her character
in issue. As a result, cross-examination
allowed under s 110 is likely to be cross-examination on evidence which has
substantial
probative value on the question of credibility. Under s 104,
substantial probative value is
and leave is also
required. Whether the defendant has deliberately put his or her character in
issue will be particularly relevant
to both of those aspects. On the other hand,
the proposed change is likely to make the sections and the two Parts of the
Evidence Acts easier to understand and
11.45 The deletion of s 104(4)(a) also has to be considered in the light
of any changes to ss 102 to 104 to deal with the use of the
‘relevant only to a witness’s credibility’, discussed above.
For example, if Proposal 11–1 is implemented,
ss 103 and 104
will apply to:
• cross-examination on evidence relevant only to the credibility of a
witness; and
• evidence relevant to the facts in issue, but not admissible for that
purpose, which is also relevant to the credibility of
11.46 Where an accused has adduced evidence under s 110, such evidence
is admitted for both credibility and non-credibility purposes.
As a result,
ss 103 and 104 would have no operation and cross-examination in that
situation will be controlled by s 112, which requires
11.47 Therefore, it will continue to be necessary for s 110 to provide
that the credibility rule not apply in the circumstances described
its subsections. That is needed to remove any argument about whether, in a
situation where the defendant deliberately
adduces evidence with the intention
of proving good character, the provisions of
are the provisions to
which reference should be made.
11.48 In the Commissions’ view, the uniform Evidence Acts should be
amended to delete s 104(4)(a), so removing the reference
to evidence
adduced by the defendant that tends to prove that the defendant is a person of
good character.
11.49 At the same time, a minor drafting inconsistency between the language
used in ss 104(2) and 112 should be remedied. As suggested
by Associate
Professor Sue McNicol, s 112 should be amended, consistently with
s 104(2), to substitute the words: ‘A defendant
must not be
cross-examined’ for the words: ‘A defendant is not to be
cross-examined’.
of s 104(2) incorporating this change is set out in Appendix 1.
Proposal 11–3
Section 104(4)(a) of the uniform Evidence
Acts should be deleted from s 104(4).
Proposal 11–4
Section 112 of the uniform Evidence Acts
should be amended by substituting ‘A defendant must not be
cross-examined’ for
‘A defendant is not to be
cross-examined’.
cross-examine the defendant
11.50 Under s 104 of the uniform Evidence Acts, cross-examination in
criminal proceedings of a defendant as to the defendant’s
credibility can
only occur with court leave, except in limited
circumstances.
However, there is
a difference between s 104 of the Tasmanian legislation and the other
uniform Evidence Acts, which is discussed
The Tasmanian
11.51 Section 104(4) of the uniform Evidence Acts states that leave must
not be given for cross-examination of the defendant by the
prosecutor on
credibility issues unless certain specified circumstances exist. The first
circumstance, discussed above, is that:
(a) evidence has been adduced by the defendant that tends to prove the defendant
is, either generally or in a particular respect,
a person of good character;
11.52 The approach of the Tasmanian legislation then diverges.
Section 104(4)(b) of the other uniform Evidence Acts states:
evidence adduced by the defendant has been admitted that tends to prove that a
witness called by the prosecutor has a tendency to
be untruthful, and that is
relevant solely or mainly to the witness’s credibility.
Evidence Act 2001
(Tas) substitutes the following provisions
(referred to in this chapter as the Tasmanian provisions):
(b) the defendant or the person representing the defendant has questioned the
witnesses for the prosecution to prove that the defendant
is, either generally
or in a particular respect, a person of good character; or
(c) the nature or conduct of the defence involves imputations on the character
of the prosecutor or any witness for the
prosecution.
11.54 Thus, under the
Evidence Act 2001
(Tas), leave may be given to
cross-examine where the conduct of the defence includes questioning of
prosecution witnesses to establish
the good character of the defendant, or an
attack on the character of the prosecutor or any witnesses for the prosecution,
Under the other uniform Evidence Acts, leave is confined to situations
where evidence is adduced by the defendant relevant solely
or mainly to the
credibility of prosecution witnesses, and it has been admitted.
11.55 The Law Reform Commissioner of Tasmania explained the different
approach as follows:
under the [uniform Evidence Acts], the accused can cross-examine Crown witnesses
uphill and down dale with respect to their bad character
or his own good
character but so long as their answers consist of denials the accused will not
be exposed to loss of the character
shield. This seems inherently unfair,
particularly where the cross-examination relates to the witnesses’
possible bad character.
The process is equally harrowing, demeaning and
potentially damaging for the witness in terms of the jury’s perceptions
the witness simply denies the accused’s suggestions as where the
evidence is actually adduced.
Submissions and
consultations
11.56 IP 28 asks whether the uniform Evidence Acts should be amended to
Evidence Act 2001
The Commissions received
divergent views in response to this question.
11.57 The Tasmanian provisions are supported by the DPP
The DPP NSW submits
that the restrictions contained in the other uniform Evidence Acts (on the
circumstances in which an accused’s
character may be put in issue) are
‘too onerous and illogical’:
The present restrictions have the potential to leave the jury with a misleading
impression of the character of the witness and the
character of the accused;
because it allows the accused to cross-examine the Crown witness as to character
(and impugn character)
without adducing any evidence at all that the witness has
a tendency to be untruthful.
11.58 The DPP NSW considers that it is unfair that an accused can
cross-examine Crown witnesses in relation to their bad character
accused’s good character when the Crown is prevented from cross-examining
an accused as to character unless the accused
actually adduced evidence to prove
the Crown witness ‘has a tendency to be untruthful’ and the Crown
obtains leave to
cross-examine.
The potential impact of such cross-examination on the jury is to impugn the
credit of the Crown witness. The jury is left with an
unfavourable impression of
the witness, without the accused actually having adduced any evidence of
11.59 The rationale behind
s 104(4)(b)
is said to be to allow the Crown
to cross-examine the accused as to character when the accused impugns the
character of the Crown
witness, irrespective of how this is
The DPP NSW
submit that if the section is amended in line with the Tasmanian provisions, it
would further discourage an accused from
cross-examining Crown witnesses as to
11.60 The Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions Tasmania (DPP Tasmania)
observes that the Tasmanian provisions are based,
in part, on provisions
contained in the
Evidence Act 1910
and had, therefore,
already been part of evidence law in Tasmania. The DPP Tasmania considers that
these provisions are justifiably
fairer to the Crown than those under the other
uniform Evidence Acts.
Consultations confirm that cross-examination under s 104(4)(c)—on the
basis that the defence has raised ‘imputations
on the character of the
prosecutor or any witness for the prosecution’—is very
11.61 The NSW PDO opposes any suggestion that the Tasmanian provisions should
be adopted, characterising them as ‘alarming’
because they appear
to mean that:
in any case where it was suggested that prosecution witnesses were lying, the
accused could be cross-examined about his or her criminal
record. It would
follow that in many, if not most, trials the defendant’s criminal record
would be admitted.
11.62 The Law Council expresses support for the existing uniform Evidence
Acts provisions which, it is said, permit an accused to
question prosecution
witnesses about the circumstances of the events in issue and its investigation
without running the risk of ‘losing
the shield’:
This ensures a fair trial by allowing an accused to fully test prosecution
evidence without running the risk of a prejudicial past
considerations
11.63 The stated rationale for the Tasmanian provisions, and some of the
comments discussed above, raise issues that were considered
in developing the
original ALRC proposals. ALRC 26 refers to the special position of an
accused person as a witness and the need
for control of credibility evidence
before considering the appropriateness of loss of the accused’s protection
where an attack
is made on the credit of prosecution witnesses. ALRC 26
Attack on Prosecution Witnesses
. The exception permitting the prosecution
to cross-examine the accused as to bad character and prior misconduct where the
has attacked the character of a prosecution witness has been justified
on the basis that the jury ‘is entitled to know the
credit of the man on
whose word the witness’ character is being impugned’, and as a
disincentive to unjustifiable attacks
on prosecution witnesses. But it is
suggested that the first argument, founded on a ‘tit for tat’ basis,
has little merit.
The attack on the credibility of prosecution witnesses may not
be based on the accused’s instructions. Furthermore, the purpose
cross-examination is to suggest that such witnesses are unworthy of credit. The
question of their credibility is altogether
unrelated to the existence of a
record of misconduct on the part of the accused. The fact that the accused has
been guilty of past
misconduct does not in any way reduce the danger of
convicting him on the testimony of witnesses whose vulnerability as to
credibility
is demonstrable. The second argument has some merit, in that the
approach provides some disincentive to unjustifiable attacks on
prosecution
witnesses. But objectionable methods of defence ought not to be punished by the
admission of prejudicial evidence. More
important, the rule is a disincentive to
justifiable attacks on credibility. The mechanism for solving the problem is too
effect. It is suggested that there are other methods which do not
entail unjustifiable detriment to the accused. Apart from doubting
the validity
of the traditional rationales of this exception, a number of very powerful
criticisms may be made of it … In addition,
to permit such evidence
underestimates its prejudicial
11.64 ALRC 26 notes criticism of laws that take a lenient approach
towards permitting cross-examination where the accused has attacked
character of a prosecution witness. In this context, the report records the
United Kingdom Criminal Law Revision Committee’s
summary of the major
arguments against this approach, which state
• it discourages an accused with a criminal record from attacking the
credibility of Crown witnesses. If the Crown witnesses’
credibility is
properly open to attack, then the jury should know about it;
• the admissibility of evidence adverse to the accused will depend on
the tactics of the defence. This is wrong. The legal advisers
are placed in the
invidious position of having to choose between leaving the tribunal of fact in
ignorance of the facts behind the
evidence given by the prosecution witnesses
and revealing such facts, but allowing the prosecution as a result to introduce
prejudicial
evidence against the accused including evidence of prior
convictions. Whether the accused is convicted or not may depend on the way
which this choice is made, but it is not one that legal advisers should be
called on to make. A Rule that operates in this way
turns a criminal trial into
a kind of game;
• the sanction will apply whether the attack made is necessary for the
accused’s defence or not and whether the attacks
made on the prosecution
witness are true or not;
• if a sanction is required for false attacks on prosecution witnesses,
the sanction should not be one which will make it more
likely that the accused
will be convicted because of prejudice that may be raised against him because of
the allegations made in
cross-examination to demonstrate his bad character;
• if cross-examination of an accused as to his bad character is not
permitted because it would be prejudicial, it does not become
prejudicial because the accused makes an attack on the character of prosecution
• the law allows an attack on the accused’s credibility where he
does not in his evidence attack the character of a prosecution
witness, but his
complete defence involves such an attack. If ‘tit for tat’ is the
justification, the law goes further
than is warranted …
11.65 The Law Commission of England and Wales (Law Commission), in its 2001
Evidence of Bad Character in Criminal Proceedings
similar criticisms of the English equivalent of the Tasmanian
In particular, the
Law Commission does not support the ‘tit for tat’ argument and notes
a lack of clarity as to what
constitutes an imputation, how the allegation has
to be made to count as an imputation, and uncertainty as to the circumstances in
which the judicial discretion to exclude the cross-examination can or will be
11.66 ALRC 26 also notes a further compelling objection to the broader
it could tempt the police to extract confessions by violence from persons of bad
character who cannot set up the violence at their
trial for fear of exposing
their records.
11.67 ALRC 26 comments that evidence as to the credibility of the
accused is generally
not of the same importance as that of Crown witnesses. What the accused says in
his own defence is naturally suspect in any case.
What is important is not the
accused’s bare assertion, but the extent to which his version of the facts
may cast doubt on the
prosecution's version. It helps very little in arriving at
a just conclusion to know that the accused is an habitual liar, because
circumstances in which he is placed even a normally honest person would be
strongly tempted to lie and would quite possibly
Commissions’ view
11.68 In the Commissions’ view, there are strong arguments in favour of
retaining the approach taken by the uniform Evidence
Acts and for rejecting the
Tasmanian provisions. The reasons articulated in ALRC 26 and by reports of
United Kingdom law reform bodies
for rejecting a more permissive approach
towards allowing cross-examination of defendants remain applicable.
11.69 It should be noted that the ALRC originally recommended an approach
narrower than that eventually taken in the uniform Evidence
Acts. The ALRC
proposal was limited to the situation where:
evidence has been admitted that—
(i) was given by the defendant;
(ii) tends to prove that a witness called by the prosecutor has a tendency to be
untruthful; and
(iii) was adduced solely or mainly to impugn the credibility of that
11.70 By contrast, the uniform Evidence Acts provision applies where evidence
is adduced by the defendant from any witness, including
the defendant, and
admitted. Nonetheless, the relevant policy concerns support a much more limited
approach than that adopted in
the Tasmanian Act.
11.71 Turning to the justifications advanced for the Tasmanian provisions,
several points may be made. First, it is asserted that
under the other uniform
Evidence Acts, Crown witnesses can be cross-examined ‘uphill and down dale
with respect to their bad
character’.
This should
not happen having regard to the sections in the uniform Evidence Acts which
limit cross-examination
further limit cross-examination as to credibility through the requirement of
substantial probative value.
Properly applied, these provisions should prevent cross-examination of the kind
suggested and limit such cross-examination to appropriate
cross-examination.
11.72 It is also suggested that it is unfair that the defendant can put allegations
and not lose the character shield when those allegations
are denied. However, in
that situation there is no evidence before the jury of any blemish on the
witnesses’ character—only
an allegation. Further, the jury will be
told that allegations in questions are not evidence and it is the answers that
are the evidence.
11.73 It is, of course, extremely unpleasant, and can be ‘harrowing,
demeaning and potentially
for witnesses
to face allegations reflecting badly on their character. However, it is both
unethical and imprudent for counsel to
put such allegations to witnesses if they
are without reasonable foundation or there are no reasonable grounds for
believing that
the suggestion would diminish the witness’
credibility.
Putting allegations
of bad character to witnesses which the witnesses deny can prejudice the
attitude of the tribunal of fact towards
the case of the party putting the
allegations—particularly if that is repeated.
11.74 Particular concerns have arisen about attacks on the credibility of witnesses
in sexual assault cases. These concerns have,
to some extent, been addressed by
rape shield laws, which are discussed in Chapter 18.
11.75 In the Commissions’ view, the arguments in support of the
Tasmanian provisions are significantly overstated and the relevant
concerns support the narrower approach of the other uniform Evidence Acts. The
Commissions do not propose any amendment to
s 104 of the uniform Evidence
Acts in this regard.
Rebutting denials in
cross-examination by other evidence
11.76 Section 106 of the uniform Evidence Acts replaces the
‘collateral facts rule’—or ‘finality
exists under the common law. The collateral facts rule
provides that, subject to certain exceptions, an answer given by a witness
question in cross-examination relating to a collateral issue (such as credit) is
final, and may not be contradicted by other
11.77 Explaining the proposal on which s 106 of uniform Evidence Acts is
based, the ALRC considered that the collateral facts rule
should not be retained
in the same form that existed at common law. The ALRC considered that the common
law ‘finality rule’
is ‘an artificial and inflexible
limitation which may result in the court being
commented that:
Such a strict rule, although it is subject to exceptions, does not reflect the
general concern to admit relevant evidence and is
incompatible with a flexible
approach on matters of
credibility.
11.78 Whether s 106 provides greater scope than the common law for
evidence to be admitted to rebut denials of matters in cross-examination
witness is a matter of debate.
As discussed below, certain of the exceptions provided in s 106 may be
broader in scope than equivalent exceptions to the collateral
facts rule at
common law. However, s 106 may be more restrictive than the common law in
the extent to which a judge may permit contradiction
of collateral matters by
other evidence.
11.79 Section 106 provides that the credibility rule does not apply to certain
categories of evidence that tend to rebut denials in
cross-examination of
matters put to a witness that are relevant only to credibility, provided that
the witness has previously denied
the substance of such evidence.
Section 106 allows the following categories of evidence to be adduced
otherwise than from the witness:
• the witness’ bias or motive to be untruthful;
• the witness’ ability to be aware of matters to which his or her
evidence relates;
• the making of a prior inconsistent statement by the
• the witness’ conviction of an offence, under Australian law or the law
of another country; or
• the making of a knowingly or recklessly false representation by the witness
while under an obligation (imposed under Australian
law or the law of another
country) to tell the truth.
11.80 IP 28 notes that,
while the list of exceptions in s 106 appears to be exhaustive, courts
have suggested that the list of exceptions to the collateral
facts rule under
the common law is not closed, and a flexible approach to the rule should be
The uniform Evidence
Acts may have ‘fallen behind the developments achieved at common
law’ in this area
more restrictive than the common law.
11.81 It is suggested that s 106 could be amended to ‘include a general
discretion to allow proof of collateral matters where
the probative value
outweighs the disadvantages of time, cost and
inefficiency’.
Professor Sue McNicol argues that such an amendment would be consistent with the
general tenor of the uniform Evidence
Developments at
11.82 McHugh J has highlighted the difficulty on occasions in drawing
the distinction that the common law requires, between evidence
relevant to
credibility and evidence relevant to facts in issue, and in determining whether
a matter is properly to be regarded as
a collateral matter for the purposes of
the collateral fact rule.
recent case of
Nicholls v The Queen
, McHugh J stated:
Given the problems with the finality rule and the cases that are not explicable
in terms of the rule, common law courts should now
regard that rule as a rule of
convenience—a rule for the management of cases—rather than a fixed
rule or principle. Once
it is recognised that it is a rule of convenience,
courts should take a more liberal approach to admitting evidence showing a lack
of credit or credibility of a witness than the traditional approach of the
common law.
11.83 McHugh J later continued:
The finality rule is important to the efficient conduct of litigation. Without
it, the principal issues in trials would sometimes
become overwhelmed by charge
and counter-charge remote from the cause of action being litigated. In many
cases, the finality rule
also protects witnesses from having to defend
themselves against discreditable allegations that are peripheral to the issues.
the common law should not have any
categories concerning the
cases where the collateral evidence rule should or should not be relaxed. It
should be regarded as a flexible
rule of convenience that can and should be
relaxed when the interests of justice require its relaxation. Avoiding
miscarriages of
justice is more important than protecting the efficiency of
11.84 The judge concluded:
The collateral evidence rule should therefore be seen as a case management rule
that is not confined by categories. Because that
is so, evidence disproving a
witness’s denials concerning matters of credibility should be regarded as
generally admissible
if the witness's credit is inextricably involved with a
fact in issue. Consistently with the case management rationale of the finality
rule, however, a judge may still reject rebutting evidence where, although
inextricably connected with the fact in issue, the time,
convenience or expense
of admitting the evidence would be unduly disproportionate to its probative
force. In such cases, the interests
of justice do not require relaxation of the
general rule that answers given to collateral matters such as credit are
11.85 The other judges in
declined the opportunity to
redefine the collateral evidence
However, similar policy
reasoning to that employed by McHugh J could be used to support broadening
s 106 of the uniform Evidence
Submissions and
consultations
11.86 IP 28 asks whether s 106 of the uniform Evidence Acts should
be amended to expand the categories of rebuttal evidence relevant
witness’ credibility that are
admissible.
11.87 Some submissions and consultations agree that the common law may provide a
broader basis on which to admit such
and there is some
support for amending s 106 to add a broader discretion to cover situations
where the evidence does not fall within
the existing
exceptions.
11.88 The DPP NSW submits that (as suggested by Associate Professor McNicol)
s 106 should be amended to include a general discretion
to allow proof of
collateral matters where the court is satisfied that the probative value
outweighs the disadvantages of time, cost
inefficiency.
The Law Council
agrees with this position and comments that:
Such a provision will focus the attention of the court on the substantial issues
in the case rather than upon the requirements of
a technical rule seeking to
define the indefinable. This approach should avoid the sophistry of discussion
found in the recent High
Court decision of [
]. It would also
importantly give the court a discretion to admit expert evidence relating to the
credibility of a witness where it
was felt this would usefully contribute to an
ultimate determination of the material facts in
Commissions’ view
11.89 The debate in this area is a product of the tension between certainty
and predictability on the one hand and flexibility and
uncertainty on the other.
Is a rules approach to be preferred to a discretionary approach?
11.90 In the Commissions’ view, the need is for more flexibility. One
option is to include a balancing discretion to allow proof
of collateral matters
where the probative value outweighs the disadvantages of time, costs and
inefficiency that may flow from its
A variation of that
option would be to require that the probative value substantially outweigh the
various disadvantages. Another
option is to allow such evidence to be led with
the leave of the court. That would import the provisions contained in
s 192, in particular,
the following inclusive list of matters would need to
be considered:
(a) the extent to which [granting leave] would be likely to add unduly to, or to
shorten, the length of the hearing; and
(b) the extent to which [granting leave] would be unfair to a party or to a
witness; and
(c) the importance of the evidence in relation to which the leave, permission or
direction is sought; and
(d) the nature of the proceeding; and
(e) the power (if any) of the court to adjourn the hearing or to make another
order or to give a direction in relation to the evidence.
11.91 The Commissions’ present view is that the latter option should be
adopted. The issue is one of case management and the
leave requirements are
directed precisely to that issue. To adopt a balancing test in either form may
impose a test that is too high
and may be confusing because of the similarities
of its language to that of s 135. It is also suggested that the best
approach is
to combine a leave requirement with the current provision, so that
the trial judge and parties have the predictability and trial
advantage of a list of categories to which regard can be had while, at the same
time, having the opportunity in appropriate
cases to have evidence admitted that
is not within those categories.
11.92 Another issue raised in IP 28 is whether s 106 should be amended
to allow rebuttal evidence in respect of the credibility of
a witness to be
adduced if the witness has ‘not admitted’, rather than denied, the
substance of particular evidence put
to the witness on
cross-examination.
should s 106 also apply where the witness has not admitted the substance of
the evidence put to him or her—for example,
where the witness does not
11.93 While some opposed this
suggestion,
the Commissions
accept that unless a broad interpretation is given to the requirement of denial,
there will be cases where witnesses
claim a lack of recollection and other
evidence supporting the allegation put should be received. The view is expressed
courts may give the requirement of denial a broad
interpretation.
But it would be
unwise to rely upon broad interpretation of such a provision in light of the
past strict literal interpretation of
a number of other
Accordingly, the
provision should include the words ‘or not admitted’ after the words
‘has denied’. A draft
rewording of s 106 is included in
Appendix 1.
11.94 Another concern raised is the interpretation of the phrase ‘a false
representation while under a legal obligation …
to tell the truth’
in s 106(2)(e). Plainly, this phrase refers to situations where it is
alleged that someone has lied in previous
legal proceedings. An issue has been
raised, however, as to whether the language of the subsection would enable the
admission of
evidence to prove that any answer given by a witness in
cross-examination was a lie.
is suggested that this would make all other exceptions in s 106
11.95 Accepting for present purposes that the suggested construction is open, it
should, applying the rules of statutory construction,
be rejected because it
would render the rest of the section redundant. That could not have been the
intention of the legislature.
In those circumstances, the Commissions consider there is no need to change
these words.
Proposal 11–5
Section 106 of the uniform Evidence Acts should be
amended to enable evidence to be adduced with the leave of the court to rebut
and non-admissions in cross-examination.
11.96 Finally, an issue has been raised as to whether a provision should be
included to permit the calling of evidence relevant to
meet the rebuttal
evidence adduced under s 106. Section 108 limits such evidence to
evidence from the person whose credibility has
been attacked and to evidence of
prior consistent statements. The need for widening the scope of s 108 needs
to be investigated and,
if necessary, the appropriate changes identified.
Question 11–1
Should s 108 be extended to refer to any
evidence relevant to rebuttal evidence adduced under s 106? If so, in what
way should it
be extended?
Credibility of
persons making a previous representation
11.97 As discussed in Chapter 7, the uniform Evidence Acts adopt a more
flexible approach to the admissibility of hearsay evidence
than the common law.
However, concerns may arise in relation to the reliability of hearsay evidence
admitted in proceedings. Section
108A of the uniform Evidence Acts is
directed to this issue.
Section 108A permits a party against whom hearsay evidence has been
admitted, without the maker of the previous representation being
called as a
witness, to have admitted evidence relevant to the credibility of the person who
made that representation.
11.98 Concern has been expressed about whether s 108A extends to evidence
relevant to re-establishing the credit of the person who
made the previous
representation after evidence has been admitted attacking that
11.99 Research and consultations have not revealed any examples pointing to such a
problem in practice. The Commissions suggest that
the problem does not in fact
arise because s 108A is not limited by reference to the particular phase of
the credibility issue—it
applies to evidence led both to attack credit and
to rehabilitate credit. It is the view of the Commissions that the section
evidence to be admitted in either situation as long as it ‘could
substantially affect the assessment of the credibility of
the person who made
the representation’.
Expert evidence
going to credibility
11.100 Issues have been raised about the need to provide further
exceptions to the credibility rule to allow expert opinion evidence
from witnesses in examination in chief on matters going to the credibility of
other witnesses.
11.101 In this context, reference has been made to
Toohey v Metropolitan Police
Commissioner
case, the House of Lords held that an accused person should be permitted to
adduce medical evidence as to the hysterical
and unstable nature of the alleged
victim of an assault. Pearce LJ commented:
Human evidence shares the frailties of those who give it. It is subject to many
cross-currents such as partiality, prejudice, self-interest
and, above all,
imagination and inaccuracy. Those are matters with which the jury, helped by
cross-examination and common sense,
must do their best. But when a witness
through physical (in which I include mental) disease or abnormality is not
capable of giving
a true or reliable account to the jury, it must surely be
allowable for medical science to reveal this vital hidden fact to them.
witness purported to give evidence of something which he believed that he had
seen at a distance of 50 yards, it must surely
be possible to call the evidence
of an oculist to the effect that the witness could not possibly see anything at
a greater distance
than 20 yards, or the evidence of a surgeon who had removed a
cataract from which the witness was suffering at the material time
would have prevented him from seeing what he thought he saw. So, too, it must be
allowable to call medical evidence of
mental illness which makes a witness
incapable of giving reliable evidence, whether through the existence of
delusions or otherwise.
11.102 Pearce LJ stated that it is ‘obviously in the interests of
justice that such evidence should be available’:
The only argument that I can see against its admission is that there might be a
conflict between the doctors and that there would
then be a trial within a
trial. But such cases would be rare and, if they arose, they would not create
any insuperable difficulty,
since there are many cases in practice where a trial
within a trial is achieved without difficulty. And in such a case (unlike the
issues relating to confessions) there would not be the inconvenience of having
to exclude the jury since the dispute would be for
their use and their
instruction.
11.103 While reservations have been expressed about admitting such
it appears from
more recent authority to be well established that, at common law, expert
testimony can be admitted into evidence
where it is relevant to the assessment
of the credibility of a
or relevant to the
reliability of evidence such as the intellectual capacity of an accused person
to answer questions put during
11.104 The revised s 106 might enable the situation that arose in
to be addressed. The question of the mental state of the alleged victim could be
made the subject of cross-examination and, depending
upon the response, might be
the subject of expert testimony. If, however, the alleged victim admits the
matters put in cross-examination,
it would not be possible to lead additional
evidence such as expert evidence to give a complete picture of the alleged
disabilities. In addition, there will be cases where the evidence
to be given by the expert could not be put to the witness and so
could not be
brought within s 106.
There will also be cases where a party will want to lead evidence from an expert
relevant to the credibility of the witness it has
called and whom it cannot
cross-examine.
11.105 The issue was touched on in
a case tried
under the uniform Evidence Acts. The defendant Rivkin gave evidence at trial. He
was convicted. An appeal was brought
on the basis that fresh evidence had
emerged, namely, that when he gave evidence at the trial he was suffering from a
brain tumour.
It was argued that this raised the possibility that the jury may
have misinterpreted his behaviour while giving evidence and this
adversely affected their view as to his credibility.
11.106 The New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal did not have to resolve the
question of the admissibility of such evidence. Assuming,
however, that expert
evidence as to the effect of the brain tumour could only be said to be relevant
to the credibility of the accused,
the credibility rule would have excluded it.
11.107 The case is an extreme one. In the vast majority of cases, a party calling a
witness will not wish to call evidence as to the
credibility of the witness to
suggest that there may be some weaknesses in that witness’ credibility.
However, there may be
cases where there is a critical witness, who a party must
call, who suffers from mental or physical disabilities which may be
misinterpreted
in the absence of expert testimony.
11.108 Cases such as these need to be addressed. Great care is required, however,
because of the potential for a proliferation of
issues, evidence and arguments
which could add seriously to the time and cost of trials with only marginal
benefit to the fact-finding
task. It is suggested, however, that provided the
exception is limited to expert testimony capable of substantially affecting the
assessment of the credibility of the witness, and it is also made subject to the
leave of the court, the need can be addressed with
minimal risk of disadvantages
for the conduct of trials.
11.109 In the Commissions’ view, the uniform Evidence Acts should be amended
to include a new exception to the credibility rule
relating to expert testimony
of substantial probative value, subject to the leave of the court. The new
provision should be drafted
so as to attract the admissibility requirements of
s 79 of the uniform Evidence Acts. A draft provision (s 108AA) is set
out in Appendix
1. The Commissions considered requiring that the evidence
have substantial probative value. However, it is desirable to maintain
test as applies elsewhere in Part 3.7. Should an issue arise in any trial
as to whether such evidence should be admitted
in relation, for example, to the
credibility of a minor witness, that issue can be addressed by the use of
11.110 This proposal will also remove an obstacle in appropriate cases to the
receipt of expert testimony relevant to the victims
of crime, such as sexual
offences, where their behaviour during and subsequent to the alleged offences
may be relevant to the assessment
of the credibility of their
Proposal 11–6
The uniform Evidence Acts should be amended to
include a new exception to the credibility rule which provides that, if a person
specialised knowledge based on the person’s training, study or
experience, the credibility rule does not apply to evidence
given by the person,
being evidence of an opinion of that person that: (a) is wholly or substantially
based on that knowledge; and
(b) could substantially affect the credibility of a
witness; and (c) is adduced with the court’s leave.
Unsworn statements
by a defendant
11.111 Sections 105,
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth) contain provisions addressing credibility issues that could arise where a
defendant in criminal proceedings gives an unsworn
11.112 These provisions are not found in the other uniform Evidence Acts.
They were included in the
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth) because the right to
adduce evidence in these circumstances continued to exist in criminal
proceedings on Norfolk Island. However,
these rights have now been abolished in
Norfolk Island law by the
Evidence Act 2004
As there is no longer
any need for these provisions in the
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth), they should
be repealed.
Sections 105 and
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth) should be repealed.
Credibility issues
in sexual offence cases
11.113 As discussed in Chapter 18, all states and
territories have passed legislation that deals specifically with the admission
evidence in criminal proceedings where someone is charged with a sexual
offence. One of the aims of these ‘rape shield laws’
is to exclude
the use of a complainant’s sexual history as an indicator of his or her
credibility.
11.114 Chapter 18 also discusses whether evidentiary provisions found in rape
shield laws should be incorporated into the uniform
Evidence Acts and, if so, in
what form. In addition, aspects of evidence law relating to credibility in
sexual offences are also
discussed in the chapters on hearsay evidence, opinion
evidence, and warnings and directions to juries (Chapters 7, 8 and 16).
The equivalent Tasmanian provisions are
Evidence Act 2001
(Tas) Ch 3,
J Anderson, J Hunter and N Williams,
The New Evidence Law: Annotations and Commentary on the Uniform Evidence
(2002), [102.05].
McHugh J (in dissent) in
Palmer v The Queen
[1998] HCA 2
(1998) 193 CLR 1
J Gans and A Palmer,
Principles of Evidence
(2nd ed, 2004) 307;
Palmer v The Queen
[1998] HCA 2
, [51]–[53].
Evidence Acts Dictionary, Pt 1;
Evidence Act 2001
Uniform Evidence
(6th ed, 2004), [1.3.7640]; J Anderson, J Hunter and N Williams,
New Evidence Law: Annotations and Commentary on the Uniform Evidence Acts
(2002), [102.10].
The equivalent
Tasmanian provisions are labelled
Evidence Act 2001
(Tas) Ch 3,
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004),
[9.9]–[9.14], referring to
Adam v The Queen
(2001) 207 CLR
See discussion, T Smith and O
Holdenson, ‘Comparative Evidence: The Uniform Evidence Acts and the Common
Australian Law Journal
Graham v The Queen
(1998) 195 CLR 606.
Uniform Evidence Law
(6th ed, 2004),
[1.3.7660].
Crown Prosecutors,
Consultation
, Sydney, 11 February 2005.
Law Council of Australia,
4 March 2005; T Game,
Consultation
Sydney, 25 February 2005; Confidential,
February 2005; A Palmer,
Consultation
, Melbourne, 16 March 2005; S Finch,
Consultation
, Sydney, 3 March 2005; Supreme Court of the ACT Judicial
Consultation
, Canberra, 8 March
Law Council of Australia,
Director of Public Prosecutions
15 February 2005; New South Wales Public
21 April 2005; P Bayne,
Consultation
, Canberra, 9 March
Director of Public Prosecutions
15 February
New South Wales Public
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004),
See uniform Evidence Acts
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
(2004), [9.19]–[9.21].
Evidence Acts, Dictionary Pt 1;
Evidence Act 2001
(Unreported, New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal, Gleeson CJ, Hunt CJ at CL
and Hidden J, 13 August 1997).
Evidence Act 1995
Director of Public
Prosecutions (NSW),
15 February
Law Council of Australia,
R v Lockyer
(1996) 89 A
, 459. See also S McNicol, ‘Credit, Credibility and Character
under the Evidence Acts 1995 (NSW) and (Cth)’
Criminal Law
Queensland Bar Association,
Consultation
, Brisbane, 9 February
[2004] NSWCCA 227
A Crim R 220
for a recent case in which
was applied to limit
cross-examination of a witness by the accused’s
Uniform Evidence
(6th ed, 2004), [1.3 7760].
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
(2004), [9.21].
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1 (1985), [817]–[819]
For example, see
R v Lumsden
[2003] NSWCCA 83.
Uniform Evidence
Australian Law
Reform Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1 (1985),
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004),
[9.29]–[9.30]; see S Odgers,
Uniform Evidence Law
2004), [1.3.7920]; J Anderson, J Hunter and N Williams,
The New Evidence Law:
Annotations and Commentary on the Uniform Evidence Acts
(2002), [104.50];
S McNicol, ‘Credit, Credibility and Character under the Evidence Acts
1995 (NSW) and (Cth)’
Criminal Law Journal
For example,
Gabriel v The
(1997) 76 FCR 279.
McNicol, ‘Credit, Credibility and Character under the Evidence Acts 1995
(NSW) and (Cth)’
Criminal Law Journal
Applying the interpretation of
that was accepted prior to
Adam v The Queen
(2001) 207 CLR
Legal Aid Office (ACT),
Consultation
, Canberra, 8 March
Uniform Evidence Acts
s 104(4)(a)
is retained, another issue arises. The subsection refers to the
situation where evidence has been ‘adduced’ by the defendant.
shield available to the defendant should only be lost when evidence of the kind
referred to has been ‘admitted’.
In the Commissions’ view, if
s 104(4)(a)
is retained, it should be amended to require that the evidence
has been admitted. This would, in turn, simplify the
S McNicol, ‘Credit,
Credibility and Character under the Evidence Acts 1995 (NSW) and (Cth)’
Criminal Law Journal
Uniform Evidence Acts
provides that ‘leave is not required for cross-examination
by the prosecutor about whether the defendant: (a) is biased or
has a motive to
be untruthful; or (b) is, or was, unable to be aware of or recall matters to
which his or her evidence relates; or
(c) has made a prior inconsistent
statement’.
Provisions to
similar effect are to be found in
Crimes Act 1958
(Vic) s 399(5)(b).
Evidence Act 2001
(Tas), consistently with its
s 104(4)(b)
(c), does not include
of the Commonwealth and New South Wales
Law Reform Commissioner of
Report on the Uniform
Evidence Act
and its Introduction to
, Report 74 (1996), 24.
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
(2004), Q 9–4.
Director of
Public Prosecutions (NSW),
15 February
Evidence Act 1910
Office of the Director of
Public Prosecutions Tasmania,
Consultation
, Hobart, 15 March
Ibid; P Underwood,
Consultation
, Hobart, 15 March
New South Wales Public
Law Council of Australia,
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1 (1985),
Criminal Law Revision Committee
England and Wales,
Evidence (General)
, Report 11
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1 (1985), [411] citing
Criminal Law Revision Committee England and Wales,
Evidence (General)
Report 11 (1972).
Law Commission of
England and Wales,
Evidence of Bad Character in Criminal Proceedings
Report 273 (2001), [4.24]–[4.84].
Ibid, [4.68].
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1 (1985), [411] citing
Curwood v The Queen
[1944] HCA 40
(1944) 69 CLR 561
Australian Law Reform Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1 (1985),
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, ALRC 38 (1987), Appendix A, Evidence Bill 1987,
cl 97(4)(b).
Commissioner of Tasmania,
Report on the Uniform Evidence Act and its
Introduction to Tasmania
, Report 74 (1996),
Uniform Evidence Acts s 41
gives the judge wider powers of control than those under the previous Tasmanian
Evidence Act 1910
The Law Commission of England and
Wales recommends an enhanced relevance requirement of ‘substantial
probative value’
to address concerns about inadequate protection of
prosecution witnesses in preference to the loss of shield approach: Law
of England and Wales,
Evidence of Bad Character in Criminal
Proceedings
, Report 273 (2001),
[4.55]–[4.56].
Commissioner of Tasmania,
Report on the Uniform Evidence Act and its
Introduction to Tasmania
, Report 74 (1996),
See, for example,
The Victorian
Bar Inc Practice Rules
Australian Law
Reform Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1 (1985),
Gans and Palmer comment that
s 106 both adds to and reduces the exceptions to the collateral issues rule
at common law: J Gans and
Australian Principles of Evidence
(2nd ed, 2004), 317.
Uniform Evidence Law
(6th ed, 2004), [1.3.8120]; S McNicol,
‘Credit, Credibility and Character under the Evidence Acts 1995 (NSW) and
Criminal Law Journal
Compare s 104(3)(b) which
also includes an express reference to the inability to ‘recall’
matters to which the witness’
evidence relates: see further,
(2001) 51 NSWLR 736.
See also S Odgers,
Uniform Evidence Law
ed, 2004), [1.3.8200]; J Anderson, J Hunter and N Williams,
The New Evidence
Law: Annotations and Commentary on the Uniform Evidence Acts
Sections 43
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth) impose procedural requirements in relation to
cross-examination on a witness’ prior inconsistent statement. If the
is relevant to a fact in issue, the statement will not be caught by
(see above) so
Compare with Uniform Evidence
s 103(2)(a)
, which does not require the witness’ obligation to
tell the truth to be imposed by law.
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
(2004), [9.45].
Natta v Canham
[1991] FCA 470
(1991) 104 ALR 143
R v Lawrence
[2001] QCA 441
[2002] 2 Qd R 400
R v Lowrie and
[2000] QCA 405
Kurgiel v Mitsubishi Motors Aust Ltd
(Unreported, New South Wales Supreme Court, Hunt CJ
at CL, 7 April 1996).
(Unreported, New South Wales Supreme Court, Hunt CJ at CL, 23 April 1996),
S McNicol, ‘Credit,
Credibility and Character under the Evidence Acts 1995 (NSW) and (Cth)’
Criminal Law Journal
Nicholls v The Queen
[2005] HCA 1
(2005) 213 ALR 1
, [42]–[43].
Ibid, [53].
Ibid, expressly: Gleeson CJ,
[2]; Kirby J, [204] (referring to the existence of the uniform Evidence Acts;
the fact that the Acts
are under consideration in common law jurisdictions; and
the inappropriateness of the High Court embarking on a significant task
reform when adoption of the Acts would solve at least some of the problems);
Hayne and Heydon JJ, [289] (rejecting the suggestion
discretion).
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004),
Queensland Bar
Association,
Consultation
, Brisbane, 9 February 2005; Law Council of
Queensland Bar Association,
Consultation
, Brisbane, 9 February 2005; Law Council of Australia,
4 March 2005; Director of Public Prosecutions
15 February
Director of Public Prosecutions
15 February
Law Council of Australia,
S McNicol, ‘Credit,
Credibility and Character under the Evidence Acts 1995 (NSW) and (Cth)’
Criminal Law Journal
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004),
Director of Public
Prosecutions (NSW),
15 February
J Anderson, J Hunter and N
The New Evidence Law: Annotations and Commentary on the Uniform
Evidence Acts
(2002), [106.40]–[106.45], relying on
(Unreported, New South Wales Supreme Court, Levine J, 5 September
There might be legitimate
concerns as to the opening of ‘floodgates’ save for the requirement
that the initial cross-examination should be as to matters having
substantial probative value and the requirements of the suggested
discretion to
C Maxwell, ‘Credibility,
Collateral Facts and the
Evidence Act
’ (1996) 8(7)
Judicial Officers
51, 51–52. Note: the section presumably applies to non-curial
situations—eg, statutory
declarations.
J Anderson, J Hunter
and N Williams,
The New Evidence Law: Annotations and Commentary on the
Uniform Evidence Acts
(2002), [106.35]; S Odgers,
Uniform Evidence
(6th ed, 2004), [1.3.8220]. This point was left open in
[2004] NSWCCA 321
, [50]–[51]: Crown Prosecutors,
Consultation
, Sydney, 11 February 2005.
Cooper Brookes (Wollongong) Pty
Ltd v Commissioner of Taxation (Cth)
(1981) 147 CLR 297, 303, 311, 321;
Norton v Long
[1968] VicRp 23
[1968] VR 221
, 223—applying the maxim,
magis valeat guam pereat
provision replaced s 107 of the
Evidence Act 1995
Evidence Act 1995
(NSW), which were repealed. In Tasmania, the equivalent
provision is
Evidence Act 2001
‘credibility of a person who has made a representation’ that has
been admitted in evidence is defined in the
uniform Evidence Acts. The
definition is similar to that of the ‘credibility of a witness’
under the Acts.
Uniform Evidence Law
(6th ed, 2004),
[1.3.8580].
Evidence Acts Review
Workshop for the Judiciary,
Consultation
, Sydney, 30 April
Toohey v Metropolitan
Police Commissioner
For example,
[1975] QB 834
[1987] VicRp 74
Farrell v The Queen
(1998) 194 CLR 286.
Murphy v The
[1989] HCA 28
(1989) 167 CLR 94.
Farrell v The Queen
(1998) 194 CLR 286
was a case where the expert
testimony concerned the nature of the mental disorders from which the
complainant suffered, matters about
which the complainant could not be
questioned.
Murphy v The
[1989] HCA 28
(1989) 167 CLR 94.
[2004] NSWCCA 7
(2004) 59 NSWLR 284.
admission of such expert opinion evidence in relation to child witnesses is
discussed in Ch 18.
Evidence Act 2004
12. Identification Evidence
Introduction
Identification evidence under the uniform Evidence Acts
Definition of identification evidence
Picture identification
Directions to the jury
In-court identification
12. Identification Evidence
Introduction
12.1 The uniform Evidence Acts address a number of issues concerning
prosecution evidence that identifies a defendant as being present
at or near a
place where an offence for which the defendant is being prosecuted was
committed. This chapter discusses selected aspects
of the identification
evidence provisions of the uniform Evidence Acts, including:
• the definition of identification evidence and whether it covers DNA
evidence and exculpatory evidence;
• identification using pictures kept for the use of police officers
(‘picture identification evidence’); and
• directions to the jury regarding identification evidence.
Identification
evidence under the uniform Evidence Acts
12.2 Part 3.9 of the uniform Evidence Acts (except the Tasmanian
legislation) requires visual identification of an accused to take
place in an
identification parade, subject to certain
exceptions.
Picture identification
is permitted in limited circumstances only and is subject to limitations that
seek to minimise the prejudicial
effect to the
Evidence Act 2001
(Tas) does not contain equivalent
provisions. Tasmania has, however, enacted
of the uniform
Evidence Acts, dealing with directions to the jury and the associated definition
of ‘identification
Section 116
requires directions be given to juries if identification evidence has been
admitted, informing them about the special need for caution
before accepting
such evidence.
Definition of
identification evidence
12.4 The definition of ‘identification evidence’ in the uniform
Evidence Acts constrains the field of operation of the
identification evidence
provisions:
identification evidence
means evidence that is:
(a) an assertion by a person to the effect that a defendant was, or resembles
(visually, aurally or otherwise) a person who was,
present at or near a place
(i) the offence for which the defendant is being prosecuted was committed; or
(ii) an act connected to that offence was done;
at or about the time at which the offence was committed or the act was done,
being an assertion that is based wholly or partly on
what the person making the
assertion saw, heard or otherwise perceived at that place and time; or
(b) a report (whether oral or in writing) of such an assertion.
Identification and
DNA evidence
12.5 It has been said that the words ‘or otherwise perceived’ may
be intended to cover ‘such unusual cases as identification
by touch or
identification by the sound of a person’s particular
12.6 IP 28 notes suggestions that the breadth of the definition of
identification evidence—in referring to resemblance ‘visually,
aurally or otherwise’—means it may inadvertently encompass DNA
evidence and fingerprint evidence. If so, admission of
these forms of evidence
in a jury trial would require directions to be given to the jury under
12.7 On the other hand, identification evidence is limited to identification
‘by a person’, which has been said to exclude
arising from an identification made by a tracker dog or a machine-based
identification’.
requirement may exclude DNA evidence—which requires the use of machinery
such as thermal cyclers and chemical primers
and reagents to produce a DNA
It may not be as easy to
exclude fingerprints from the definition of identification evidence.
Submissions and consultations
12.8 IP 28 asked whether the definition of identification evidence in
the uniform Evidence Acts inadvertently encompasses DNA and
fingerprint evidence
and, if so, whether this position should be
12.9 One view is that the definition does not cover DNA evidence. The
definition requires that the evidence be ‘an assertion
by a person’
to the effect that a defendant was, or resembles, a person who was present at a
place where an offence or related
act was committed.
12.10 It can be argued that experts in DNA or fingerprint analysis do not
usually make any such assertion. Rather, such experts make
a comparison between
samples obtained at the relevant scene and samples obtained from the defendant
and express opinions about the
degree of similarity between the samples. The
prosecution then invites the judge or jury to accept that evidence and draw the
from it that the defendant was in fact present or at or near the place
12.11 The New South Wales Public Defenders Office (NSW PDO) states that
the suggestion that the definition of ‘identification
covers DNA evidence and fingerprint evidence is ‘ingenious’ but
highly unlikely to be accepted by the
12.12 However, another view is that it may depend on how the evidence is presented
The Director of Public
Prosecutions New South Wales (DPP NSW) submits that, given directions under
of the uniform Evidence Acts are not suitable to this type of
evidence, the position should be placed beyond doubt by excluding DNA
fingerprint evidence.
12.13 The Law Council of Australia (Law Council) states that the admissibility of
DNA raises complexities that should be dealt with
uniform Evidence Acts. The Council also submits that the Commissions should
consider extending the protection provided by
‘beyond visual
identification by
witnesses’.
The Commissions’ view
12.14 In the Commissions’ view, the definition of identification
evidence in the uniform Evidence Acts does not, and was not
intended to, cover
DNA or fingerprint evidence used in identification.
12.15 There are two reasons for this conclusion. First, it would be most
unusual for a witness to give evidence in the form of an
assertion along the
lines required by the definition. Secondly, at least in the case of DNA
evidence, identification evidence is
limited to identification ‘by a
person’. There have been no judicial decisions considering this issue.
This is consistent
with the view that, despite some academic commentary, the
problem is conjecture.
12.16 In relation to DNA evidence specifically, Commonwealth, state and
territory forensic procedures legislation, such as
regulates aspects of
the admissibility of DNA evidence.
provides that evidence obtained from a forensic procedure (such as the
taking of a DNA sample) is inadmissible if there has been a
breach of, or
failure to comply with, its provisions in relation to the forensic procedure or
in relation to recording or use of
information on the DNA database system.
12.17 However, the court has a discretion to admit the evidence if it is satisfied
on the balance of probabilities of matters that
justify its admission in spite
of the non-compliance; or if the person who is the subject of the forensic
evidence does not object
These exclusionary
provisions do not apply to DNA evidence obtained outside the framework of
—for example, a crime scene sample or an informally obtained
In that case,
admissibility will be determined under the uniform Evidence Acts or other
evidence laws of the relevant jurisdiction.
12.18 In ALRC 96, the ALRC noted concerns that, due to the highly
probative nature of DNA evidence, judges might tend to exercise
their discretion
in favour of admission rather than properly balancing each of the relevant
interests, including the privacy of the
accused. This would undermine the value
of the protection intended by forensic procedures
legislation.
Therefore, the ALRC
recommended that the Commonwealth amend the
to provide that,
with the exception of crime scene samples, law enforcement officers may collect
genetic samples only from: (a) the
individual concerned, pursuant to
; or (b) a stored sample, with the consent of the individual
concerned (or someone authorised to consent on his or her behalf), or
to a court order.
Exculpatory
identification evidence
New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal confirmed that, where visual
identification evidence is exculpatory of the accused,
such evidence does not
come within the definition of ‘identification evidence’ in the
Dictionary of the
Evidence Act 1995
(NSW). Therefore,
requires directions to be given to a jury where identification evidence has been
admitted, did not apply.
Section 165
of the uniform Evidence Acts deals with warnings to juries
evidence’ (which is specified in
s 165(1)(b)
as a kind of unreliable
Wood CJ and Howie J found that it was appropriate for the judge to
give an unreliable evidence warning under
, notwithstanding that
exculpatory evidence was not covered by the term ‘identification
12.21 The judges noted that visual identification evidence of a particular
person is no more reliable because the person being identified
accused and rejected the conclusion of Smart AJ that, because of the
specific reference to identification evidence in
s 165(1)(b)
intended that the section would not apply to other kinds of evidence of visual
identification.
12.22 IP 28 asks whether concerns are raised by the application of the
uniform Evidence Acts to identification evidence that is exculpatory
The NSW PDO does
not propose any amendment of
, but is critical of the decision in
. It is said that
does not sufficiently take into account
the fact that exculpatory identification evidence ‘needs only to raise the
possibility
of a mistake, whereas identification evidence tendered by the Crown
needs to affirmatively prove that the accused was the
12.23 Others who address the matter consider that the uniform Evidence Acts
provisions, as interpreted in
, are adequate and do not require
The Commissions share
this view and do not propose any change.
identification
Section 115
of the uniform Evidence Acts (except the Tasmanian
legislation) places limitations on the admissibility of picture identification
evidence. Picture identification evidence means identification evidence relating
to an identification made wholly or partly by the
person who made the
identification examining pictures kept for the use of police
Section 115
seeks, among other things, to address the possible
unfairness to a defendant accused where a photograph received in evidence
to be a police ‘mug-shot’, implying that the accused has a
criminal record.
identification evidence is not admissible if the pictures examined suggest that
they are pictures of persons in police
Section 115
provides, subject to a number of exceptions, that picture identification
evidence is not admissible where the defendant was
in police custody when the
pictures were examined.
12.26 The terms ‘in the custody of a police officer’ and
‘police custody’ are not defined but have been interpreted
meaning ‘under physical
restraint’.
It has been
stated that, in consequence, the police may be able to avoid the operation of
this provision by defining a person as
voluntarily co-operating or by releasing
an arrested person on bail before attempting picture
identification.
Submissions and
consultations
12.27 IP 28 asks whether the
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth) should be
amended to ensure that the provisions relating to the admission of picture
identification evidence where defendants
are in ‘police custody’ are
not able to be avoided by
12.28 The DPP NSW submits that the uniform Evidence Acts should be
amended, and states:
This could be partly achieved by including a broad definition of ‘police
custody’ which extends to situations where the
accused is either under
physical restraint or voluntarily co-operating with police. The circumstances in
which picture identification
evidence is not admissible could be extended beyond
situations where the defendant was in police custody when the pictures were
so as to further discourage the use of picture
identification.
12.29 The NSW PDO observes that, given that an accused person is only in
the custody of the investigating police for a short time
before being either
granted bail or taken to prison, the safeguards in
‘to the short period when the accused is still at the police
station’. The NSW PDO submits that this limitation
12.30 Some judges of the New South Wales District Court criticise the
drafting of
If the intention of
is to preclude a jury arriving at an inference
adverse to an accused by propensity reasoning then it is clumsily drafted and
the use of photographs taken in the course of investigation where
defendants have been under observation for
12.31 The judges state that situations involving picture evidence are usually
dealt with by an explanation from the bench to the jury
as to how the police
came into possession of the photograph used—for example, that the picture
was the photograph taken by
police at arrest or taken prior to arrest but in the
course of the investigation.
Commissions’ view
12.32 The picture identification provisions give primacy to identification
evidence from an identification parade and are structured
accordingly. The
policy objective is to ensure that where a person is in police custody (the
police having established the identity
of the offender to their satisfaction),
any attempt to secure identification evidence should be by an identification
parade, that
being the best method available for that
12.33 It would be a serious cause for concern if the policy objective of
were able to be deliberately avoided by the police. However, it is
hard to evaluate whether this situation occurs. Submissions and
consultations do
not indicate that police deliberately avoid the application of
12.34 The case
has been cited as
an example of the problem. In
, the police officer investigating
a robbery had made intensive efforts to find people in Bourke who were
sufficiently similar to
the appellant and willing to participate in an
identification parade.
was unsuccessful, he determined to conduct identification using a photograph of
the appellant taken by police while the appellant
was at the police station
following his arrest on another matter. Picture identification took place after
the appellant had been
released on bail and was held to be no longer in police
is far from a clear cut example of police deliberately
avoiding the application of
and has not been cited in subsequent
cases to justify picture identification.
12.36 The case also highlights some of the difficulties involved in developing a
reform to place additional constraints on the use
of picture identification. In
, counsel for the appellant argued that the words ‘in the
custody of a police officer’ in
should be construed in a
broad way to cover any kind of ‘legal power or influence over the
person’. The New South Wales
Court of Criminal Appeal observed that, even
under the widest possible interpretation, it is hard to assert that, once the
had been released on bail from the police station, the police had any
additional ‘legal power or influence’ over the
appellant than they
had over any other member of the
As recognised by
Whatever interpretation is given to the term ‘police custody’, it is
clear that it does not extend to a situation where
the police suspect that the
defendant committed a crime but choose to engage in picture identification
before asking or compelling
the defendant to come to a police station. It
follows that, in such circumstances, the picture identification evidence will
excluded by
, no matter how unreasonable this decision was
(unless the pictures used suggest that they are pictures of persons in police
12.37 An alternative formulation was considered by the ALRC in the original
evidence reports.
The provision
could focus on the state of knowledge of the police and on whether, for example,
the person to be identified was a
, decided under the common law, Hunt CJ at CL noted with
respect to police picture identification that:
The accused will have a harder task in persuading the exercise of the
judge’s discretion to exclude such evidence if the police
did not then
know that he was the person to arrest and charge, notwithstanding that it may at
that time have been reasonable and
practicable to have requested him to
participate in such a parade.
12.38 Under the uniform Evidence Acts, where investigating police have
deliberately sought to avoid the picture identification constraints,
may be able to be used to exclude the
This may be a
sufficient safeguard and reduces the need to consider possible reforms to
Subject to any further information received on this issue, the
Commissions do not intend to make any proposal for reform relating
to police use
of picture identification.
Directions to the
Section 116
of the uniform Evidence Acts states:
(1) If identification evidence has been admitted, the judge is to inform the
(a) that there is a special need for caution before accepting identification
evidence; and
(b) of the reasons for that need for caution, both generally and in the
circumstances of the case.
(2) It is not necessary that a particular form of words be used in so informing
Dhanhoa v The Queen
, the High Court noted that, if read
could be taken to mean that a judge is always required to
inform the jury that there is a special need for caution before accepting
identification evidence whenever identification evidence has been admitted, even
if the reliability of the evidence is not in
12.41 The High Court found that to give
a literal meaning would produce
a consequence that is wholly unreasonable and stated that the requirement
‘is to be understood
in the light of the adversarial context in which the
legislation operates, and the nature of the information the subject of the
requirement’.
understood, the provision means that directions must be given only where the
reliability of the identification evidence is
12.42 IP 28 asks whether
of the uniform Evidence Acts should
be amended to clarify that directions to the jury in relation to identification
evidence are
not mandatory.
12.43 The NSW PDO states that warnings about identification evidence
are ‘so fundamental that they should be given whether or
not the accused’s counsel remembers to ask for them’ and
amendment of
12.44 The DPP NSW submits that
should be amended to make it
clear that directions under
are mandatory only where the reliability
of the identification evidence is
The Law Council notes
that any ‘technical demand’ for a mandatory warning under
can be dealt simply ‘under appellate rules which make it clear that such a
technical error cannot give rise to a substantial
miscarriage of
12.45 While
may solve the problem, the option remains, for example,
by adding after the words ‘if identification
evidence has been admitted’ the words ‘and the reliability of that
evidence is in dispute’.
12.46 However, the Commissions consider that this could create problems of
interpretation in the future, which could only be avoided
by ensuring that other
provisions in the uniform Evidence Acts which assume the operation of the
adversarial system contain similar
riders. Therefore, it is preferable to rely
and not amend
identification
12.47 The NSW PDO notes that
of the uniform Evidence Acts
does not deal with the question of in-court identification:
No doubt the drafters of this provision assumed that practitioners would take it
as read that in court identification was impermissible.
However this was not the
case, and initially the Crown argued that ‘visual identification
evidence’ did not include in
identification.
12.48 The NSW PDO submits that a new provision should be inserted into
the uniform Evidence Acts, making it clear that, subject to
the exceptions set
, in-court identification is inadmissible.
12.49 The Commissions’ view is that the definition of visual
identification evidence, as defined in
, clearly covers in-court
identification—for example, an identification of the defendant sitting in
the dock by a witness who
observed the offender at the scene of the
—and that no
amendment is necessary.
12.50 The extent to which in-court identification is currently used in court
proceedings, and in what contexts, is unclear. Subject
to any further
information received on this issue, the Commissions do not intend to make any
proposal for reform relating to in-court
identification.
Question 12–1.
To what extent is in-court identification used in
practice and is this a problem? Should
of the uniform Evidence
Acts be amended to make it clear that, subject to the exceptions set out in
, in-court identification is inadmissible?
Evidence Act 1995
Evidence Act 1995
Evidence Act 2004
(NI) s 114.
Evidence Act 1995
Evidence Act 1995
Evidence Act
(NI) s 115.
Evidence Act
[2000] NSWCCA 357
(2000) 52 NSWLR 451
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
(2004), [10.6].
J Anderson, J Hunter and
N Williams,
The New Evidence Law: Annotations and Commentary on the Uniform
Evidence Acts
(2002), [114.15]. Therefore, the definition may not cover
identification based on ‘facial mapping’ using data from facial
recognition information technology.
Australian Law Reform Commission and Australian Health Ethics Committee,
Essentially Yours: The Protection of Human Genetic Information in
, ALRC 96 (2003), [39.5].
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
(2004), Q 10–1.
Wales Public Defenders,
I Freckelton,
Consultation
, Melbourne, 17 March
Director of Public Prosecutions
15 February
Law Council of Australia,
Crimes (Forensic Procedures)
Crimes (Forensic Procedures) Act 2000
Forensic Procedures Act 2000
Crimes Act 1958
Criminal Law (Forensic Procedures) Act 1998
Investigation (Identifying People) Act 2002
Crimes Act 1914
The legislation provides a list of matters that a court may
consider in making this decision:
Crimes Act 1914
If the judge admits the evidence, he or she must inform the jury of the breach
or failure to comply with the legislation and give
whatever warning about the
evidence the judge thinks appropriate in the circumstances:
Evidence obtained as a result of a forensic
procedure is not admissible in proceedings against a person if it is required to
be destroyed
Crimes Act 1914
For example, DNA evidence
obtained on the analysis of a cigarette butt discarded by the accused at a
police station: see
[2005] NSWSC
Australian Law Reform Commission
and Australian Health Ethics Committee,
Essentially Yours: The Protection of
Human Genetic Information in Australia
, ALRC 96 (2003),
[2002] NSWCCA 455
(2002) 55 NSWLR 701.
Ch 7, in relation to hearsay evidence of
identification.
[2002] NSWCCA 455
55 NSWLR 701
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
(2004), Q 10–2.
Wales Public Defenders,
For example, Director of Public
Prosecutions (NSW),
15 February
Evidence Act 1995
Evidence Act 1995
Evidence Act
(NI) s 115(1).
Australian Law Reform Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 2
(1985), [189].
Evidence Act
Evidence Act 1995
Evidence Act 2004
Evidence Act
Evidence Act 1995
Evidence Act 2004
R v McKellar
[2000] NSWCCA 523.
It has also been held that an accused who is in gaol is not
‘in the custody of a police officer’ for the purposes of
(Unreported, New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal,
McInerney, Abadee and Bruce JJ, 6 August
Uniform Evidence
(6th ed, 2004), [1.3.9800].
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
(2004), Q 10–3.
Director of
Public Prosecutions (NSW),
15 February 2005. The
DPP NSW states that it is not implying that it is aware of any occasion on
which police have avoided the application
of the picture identification
provisions.
New South Wales Public
New South Wales District Court
22 February
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1 (1985),
R v McKellar
NSWCCA 523.
Ibid, [16]. In this he was
assisted by the appellant’s father, an Aboriginal Community Liaison
Officer and a message on local
radio stations seeking
volunteers.
Ibid, [34]. It was not a
condition of the appellant’s bail that he attend an identification parade
nor could such a condition
legitimately have been imposed. The bail
determination and the conditions, if any, imposed upon the appellant related to
other offences
unconnected with the robbery.
Uniform Evidence Law
(6th ed, 2004), [1.3.9800].
Law Reform Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1 (1985), [838],
fn 32; Australian Law Reform Commission,
, ALRC 38 (1987),
[188]–[190].
See S Odgers,
Uniform Evidence Law
(6th ed, 2004), [1.3.9800], referring to the
minority judgment of Stephen and Murphy JJ in
Alexander v The Queen
[1981] HCA 17
(1981) 145 CLR 395
(1997) 92 A Crim R 52
Uniform Evidence Law
(6th ed, 2004),
[1.3.9800].
Dhanhoa v The Queen
[2003] HCA 40
(2003) 199 ALR 547
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004),
New South Wales
Public Defenders,
Director of Public Prosecutions
15 February
Law Council of Australia,
New South Wales Public
21 April 2005, citing
(Unreported, New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal, Priestley AP,
James and Barr JJ, 11 November 1996).
Uniform Evidence Law
(6th ed, 2004), [1.3.9500].
13. Privilege
Introduction
Client legal privilege
Privileges protecting other confidential communications
Privilege in respect of self-incrimination in other proceedings
Religious confession
Evidence excluded in the public interest
Exclusion of evidence of settlement negotiation
13. Privilege
Introduction
13.1 A privilege is essentially a right to resist disclosing information that
would otherwise be ordered to be
Privileges are generally
established as a matter of public policy. For example, client legal privilege is
premised on the principle
that it is desirable for the administration of justice
for clients to make full disclosure to their legal representatives so they
receive fully informed legal advice. Privileges are not only available as part
of the rules of evidence, but also apply outside
court as a substantive doctrine
wherever information may be compulsorily acquired, including by administrative
Privilege may, therefore,
be claimed in the production of documents before a trial (including with respect
to an application for
discovery or the issue of a subpoena), the answering of
interrogatories, the giving of testimony or in the course of an administrative
investigation.
13.2 Under the
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth), the following privileges are
• client legal
• privilege in respect of religious
confessions;
• privilege in respect of self-incrimination in other
proceedings.
13.3 In addition, there are three types of evidence which may be excluded in
the public interest:
• evidence of reasons for judicial
• evidence of matters of state (public interest
• evidence of settlement
negotiations.
Evidence Act 1995
(NSW) contains these and two additional
privileges: a professional confidential relationship privilege and a sexual
assault communications
Evidence Act 2001
(Tas) has the same privileges as the federal Act
and also ss 127A and 127B, which cover medical communications and
communications
to a counsellor (by a victim of a sexual offence in the course of
receiving counselling or treatment for any harm suffered in connection
offence) respectively. Section 127A operates only in civil proceedings and
s 127B operates only in criminal proceedings.
13.6 The privileges under the uniform Evidence Acts (with the exception of
s 127 which concerns religious confessions) apply only
of evidence, thus separating the privilege rules under the
legislation from the application of the common law in pre-trial evidence
gathering processes such as discovery and subpoenas. The Terms of Reference of
the original evidence inquiry limited the extent to
which the ALRC could deal
with privileges in the pre-trial context. However, the ALRC suggested that it
was not necessarily unreasonable
that, for example, access could be granted to
documents under the common law at the investigation stage that were then
in the courtroom by the
13.7 There has been criticism of the uniform Evidence Acts in this regard:
The ALRC Reports failed to come to terms in any meaningful way with the
practical consequences that would flow from the enactment
of detailed provisions
governing privilege that would apply only to the admission of evidence once
privilege had, under the different
common law rules, been determined not to
apply to that evidence at the pre-trial process
13.8 Kirby J has stated that a ‘great deal of inconvenience would
be avoided if the bringing forward of evidence for use in
a later trial (as by
responding to an order for discovery, a subpoena or some other ancillary
process) were held to fall within the
Potential areas for
13.9 It has been suggested that the major area for potential reform of the
operation of the privilege provisions of the uniform Evidence
Acts is in their
application only to proceedings in a relevant
In its original evidence
law inquiry, the ALRC confined its consideration of privileges to the trial
phase on the basis that the
Terms of Reference limited it to considering
‘the laws of evidence applicable in proceedings in federal courts and the
territories’.
13.10 In IP 28, the ALRC asked whether the client legal privilege section of
the Acts should be extended to cover pre-trial matters,
and whether the other
privilege sections of the Acts should similarly be
Submissions and
consultations to date have indicated such a move is widely supported.
13.11 Since the commencement of the Commonwealth and New South Wales
legislation in 1995, a number of appellate cases have applied
the privilege
provisions to discovery and inspection of documents on the basis that the
uniform Evidence Acts have a derivative application
to the common
However, in
Commissioner of Taxation
the High Court rejected this approach and found that the uniform Evidence Acts
applied to the adducing of evidence only in relevant
proceedings. The High Court
took particular notice of the fact that the uniform Evidence Acts
had been adopted only by the Commonwealth and certain states. To
common law only in those states which had adopted the uniform legislation was
considered by the court to be an unacceptable
fragmentation of the common
13.12 The Supreme Court of New South Wales and the District Court of New South
Wales have amended their rules to provide specifically
Evidence Act
(NSW) applies
inconsistencies also operate in this regard as the rules apply the Act
only to civil proceedings and not, for example, to subpoenas in criminal
matters. In the Australian Capital Territory, the Supreme
Court has also amended
its rules in line with the Supreme Court of New South
13.13 Client legal privilege is the area identified in this Inquiry as being most
significantly affected by the operation of two legal
regimes. As noted below,
there are some significant differences between the rules of legal professional
privilege under the common
law and the client legal privilege sections of the
uniform Evidence Acts
The privileges available under the
Evidence Act
(NSW) and the
Evidence Act 2001
(Tas), such as the sexual
assault communications privilege, have no common law equivalents and are
therefore not currently available
in any form at the pre-trial stages, except
where provided for in other
legislation.
13.14 Most of the submissions dealt with issues regarding privileges separately (or
were only concerned with client legal privilege),
although there was the general
support noted above. On that basis, in this chapter the possible extension of
the Acts to pre-trial
proceedings will be discussed in relation to each of the
privileges, starting with client legal privilege.
13.15 The chapter then proposes amendments to some of the client legal
privilege sections with the aim of clarifying unclear terms
or, in some cases,
aligning the Acts with developments at common law that are supported by the
Commissions.
13.16 The chapter then looks at the confidential communications, sexual
assault communications and medical communications privileges
available under the
Evidence Act 1995
(NSW) and the
Evidence Act 2001
(Tas) and asks
whether one of these models should be adopted by the Commonwealth Act.
13.17 The chapter also considers criticisms of the certification process
available under the sections dealing with the privilege against
self-incrimination. Finally, the chapter briefly considers submissions received
regarding the three types of evidence that may be
excluded in the public
interest, but makes no proposal for change.
Client legal
13.18 At common law, legal professional privilege (now characterised as
client legal privilege under the uniform Evidence Acts) protected
confidential
communications between a lawyer and client from compulsory production in the
context of court and similar proceedings.
13.19 The rationale for the creation of the privilege was to enhance the
administration of justice and the proper conduct of litigation
by promoting free
disclosure between clients and lawyers, to enable lawyers to give proper advice
and representation to their
The privilege may also
be considered a human right. Wilson J in
Baker v Campbell
that ‘the adequate protection according to law of the privacy and liberty
of the individual is an essential element
of a free society and … [the]
privilege … is an important element in that
protection’.
13.20 On balance, the benefits of this freedom are considered to outweigh the
alternative benefit of having all the information available
to facilitate the
trial process. In
Baker v Campbell
, Deane J described legal
professional privilege as ‘a fundamental and general principle of the
common law’.
protection only applies where it is intended for a proper
purpose—communications made in furtherance of an offence or an
action that
would render a person liable for a civil penalty are not
13.21 In the Interim Report of the original ALRC evidence inquiry (ALRC 26),
the rationale for the privilege was set out according
to the types of
communications it protected.
Communications between the Lawyer and Client
. Privilege
attaches where advice only is sought in addition to the situation where
litigation is pending or anticipated. The privilege
has been regarded as that of
the client and the rationale has been the need for frank and complete
communication between lawyer and
client so that the client can receive adequate
assistance in the protection, enforcement or creation of legal rights.
Third Party Communications
. Three arguments were advanced for
this protection. First, it has been argued that it is necessary that the client
be able to prevent
disclosure by the lawyer of anything obtained by him or her
when employed by the client. If information obtained by a solicitor for
promoting his or her client’s cause were not privileged, it would be
impossible to employ a solicitor to obtain the evidence
and information
necessary to support a case. Secondly, the principle of protection of the
lawyer’s brief. Thirdly, and integral
to the adversary system, the need
not to disclose a party’s evidence to an
The restriction of the privilege to the legal profession serves to emphasise
that the relationship between a client and his legal
adviser has a special
significance because it is part of the functioning of the law itself.
Communications which arise out of that
relationship are of their very nature of
legal significance, something which would be coincidental in the case of other
confidential
relationships.
13.22 At common law, the doctrine has been subject to a number of key
modifications over time, including the extension of the privilege
investigative and administrative proceedings, such as notices to produce
information under s 264 of the
Income Tax Assessment Act 1936
13.23 A key development in the common law in this area was the shift from a
‘sole purpose’ test to a ‘dominant purpose’
test. Until
1995, for a communication to be protected, it had to be made for the sole
purpose of contemplated or pending litigation,
or for obtaining or giving legal
advice, as enunciated in
In 1999, the High
Esso Australia Resources Ltd v Commissioner of
Grant v Downs,
holding that the common law test for legal professional
privilege was the dominant purpose test. This was in line with the ALRC’s
recommendation and with the uniform Evidence
13.24 The ALRC recommended that, under the uniform Evidence Acts, the ‘sole
purpose’ test be replaced with a ‘dominant
purpose’ test,
reflecting the formulation proposed by Barwick CJ (in the minority) in
Grant v Downs.
Section 118
creates a privilege for legal advice. ALRC 26
recommended changing the name of the privilege from the common law term,
professional privilege’, to ‘client legal
privilege’, reflecting the view of Murphy J in
The privilege is commonly described as legal professional privilege, which is
unfortunate, because it suggests that the privilege
is that of the members of
the legal profession, which it is not. It is the client’s privilege, so
that it may be waived by
the client, but not the
Section 118
provides that evidence is not to be adduced if, on
objection by the client, the court finds that adducing the evidence would result
in disclosure of:
(a) a confidential communication made between the client and a lawyer; or
(b) a confidential communication made between two or more lawyers acting for the
(c) the contents of a confidential document (whether delivered or not) prepared
by the client or the lawyer;
for the dominant purpose of the lawyer, or one or more of the lawyers, providing
legal advice to the client.
Section 119
allows a ‘litigation privilege’,
protecting confidential communications between a client and another person, or a
acting for a client and another person, or the contents of a confidential
document that was prepared for the dominant purpose of
a client being provided
with legal services related to an Australian or overseas proceeding or
anticipated proceeding in which the
client is or may be a party. The ALRC
considered that confidential communications between a lawyer or client and third
parties are
a part of adversarial litigation and therefore should also be
protected by client legal
13.28 Although there is alignment of the common law with the uniform Evidence Acts
in relation to the dominant purpose test, IP 28
identified some differences
between the two approaches. For example:
• Under the common law, the client must be genuinely seeking legal
advice for the privilege to attach, and the privilege does
not attach when a
communication is made for an illegal or improper
The uniform Evidence
Acts contain two formal exceptions to the privilege: s 125(1)(a) which
excepts communications made in furtherance
of a crime or fraud or an act for
which there is a civil penalty; and s 125(1)(b), which applies to
communications made knowingly
or negligently in furtherance of a deliberate
abuse of power.
• There may be a difference between the common law and the uniform Evidence
Acts as to whether a lawyer must have a current
practicing certificate.
• In relation to waiver of the privilege, s 122 applies if the client or
party has knowingly and voluntarily disclosed the substance
of the evidence. The
common law, in contrast, imposes an ‘inconsistency’ test, whereby
the privilege will be lost where
the disclosure is incompatible with the
retention of
confidentiality.
Application to
pre-trial proceedings
13.29 Legal professional privilege at common law can be claimed in civil
proceedings at the interlocutory stage, during the course
of a criminal or civil
trial, and in non-judicial
proceedings.
13.30 Associate Professor Sue McNicol has described the history of legal
professional privilege under Australian law as follows:
Prior to the enactment of the
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth), legal professional
privilege was governed by the sole purpose test at common law due to the 1976
decision of the High Court
Grant v Downs
. Then, since 1983 in
Australia, legal professional privilege has applied not only in curial and
quasi-curial contexts, but also in
non-curial contexts, such as administrative
and investigative proceedings, and in the extra-judicial processes of search and
and in proceedings before bodies having the statutory power to require
the giving of information. This was mainly due to the landmark
4:3 decision of
the High Court in
Baker v Campbell
which proclaimed legal professional
privilege as more than just a mere rule of evidence capable of applying in
judicial proceedings
but as a fundamental and substantive common law principle
capable of applying to all forms of compulsory disclosure, unless some
legislative provision expressly or impliedly abrogated it. Then, in 1995, the
Evidence Act
(Cth) created a privilege, known as client legal privilege,
with a dominant purpose test that applies only in the ‘adducing
evidence’ in a curial context (in the Federal courts to which the Act
applies) and remained silent on other, especially
pre-trial contexts. Such a
course of action has led to both much litigation and confusion, especially on
the question whether the
Act has an indirect or implied effect on pre-trial
13.31 In the case of client legal privilege, one evidence text notes that in
all but a small proportion of cases, all of the privilege
issues will arise in
relation to pre-trial
procedures.
McNicol notes that
most claims of privilege are raised in the interlocutory stages of civil
proceedings.
13.32 As outlined above, in
Commissioner of Taxation
the High Court found that the uniform Evidence Acts applied to the adducing of
evidence only in relevant proceedings.
13.33 In New South Wales, the Supreme Court and the District Court have amended
their rules to provide specifically that the
Evidence Act 1995
applies pre-trial.
These rules
Evidence Act 1995
(NSW) to discovery,
interrogatories, subpoenas, notices to produce and oral examinations. For
example, Rule 23 of the
Supreme Court Rules
‘privileged document’, in part, as a ‘document of which
evidence could not be adduced in the proceedings
over the objection of any
person, by virtue of the operation of
Division 1 of the
Evidence Act
’. These rules apply the Act
only to civil proceedings
and not, for example, to subpoenas in criminal
Submissions and consultations
13.34 IP 28 asked whether the uniform Evidence Acts should make express
provision for client legal privilege to apply in contexts,
such as pre-trial
discovery and the production of documents in response to a subpoena, and
non-curial contexts such as search warrants
and s 264 notices under the
Income Tax Assessment Act 1936
13.35 There was general support for this proposition in the submissions and
consultations.
judicial officer told the Inquiry that if the uniform
Evidence Act
were considered good for trials, then they should be applied
13.36 The Law Council of Australia (Law Council) can see no justification for
different privilege rules applying at trial and prior
The difficulties posed by the failure of the Acts directly to cover pretrial
proceedings can be seen in litigation concerning client
legal privilege where
parties have sought to apply the statutory privilege at the important discovery
and inspection stage of civil
litigation. With this stage being crucial to
decisions about settlement and trial it is here that in practice issues of
are necessarily fought. In the Council’s opinion it makes little
sense for discovery and inspection to be governed by common
law privilege rules
which may enable litigants to obtain discovery and inspection of documents
which, under the uniform Evidence
Acts, will be unavailable at
13.37 The Australian Government Solicitor (AGS) argues that the case for
applying one set of rules on disclosure of information (in
whatever form) at all
stages of a legal proceeding is
‘overwhelming’.
However, the AGS does not argue that this means the uniform
Evidence Act
should necessarily be extended, but rather that the approach of all
13.38 The Director of Public Prosecutions in New South Wales (DPP NSW) agrees
that the Acts should be extended to apply pre-trial,
subject to concerns
regarding the availability of client legal privilege to prosecutors under
of the Uniform Evidence Acts, which are discussed
13.39 The view of the Australian Securities and Investments Commission (ASIC) is
that uniform application of client legal privilege
is a sensible approach,
provided this does not represent an extension of the circumstances in which
those privileges currently arise.
The extension of the regime under the uniform Evidence Acts to replace the
common law regime in circumstances where it now applies
would assist in
simplifying the legal terrain upon which ASIC, and other litigants, currently
13.40 However, in relation to other privileges, ASIC considers that extension
of each privilege to contexts such as pre-trial procedure
should be considered
on a case by case basis, having regard to the underlying policy of the privilege
and the development of the
law related to the privilege.
13.41 The CPA Australia and Institute of Chartered Accountants in Australia
(Australian Accounting Bodies) consider that it would
be equitable for client
legal privilege to apply, in particular, in response to s 264 notices under
Income Tax Assessment
13.42 There may be sound policy reasons why client legal privilege should not apply
at investigatory stages. In the context of developing
effective regulatory law
systems, it is important to consider the different approaches to regulatory
procedure by agencies such as
the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission
(ACCC), the Australian Taxation Office (ATO) and the Australian Customs Service.
It was suggested that this question is ‘worth a whole other
The Commissions’ view
13.43 The Commissions strongly support the view that a dual system of client
legal privilege operating in any one jurisdiction is
undesirable. As well as
producing inevitable confusion, there is increasing disparity between the common
law and the uniform Evidence
Acts. As outlined below, client legal privilege is
the subject of extensive litigation and the law continues to develop in response
to changing business and legal practices. Should the common law continue to
operate pre-trial and the uniform Evidence Acts at trial,
the disparity between
the two systems is likely to increase.
13.44 As noted above, the civil courts in New South Wales currently apply the
Evidence Act 1995
(NSW) sections to pre-trial matters, via rules of
court. There has been no suggestion to this Inquiry that any issue or difficulty
has arisen from this application. Some New South Wales District Court judges
express the view that if the rules applying the Act
to pre-trial matters are
working well in a civil context, there is no reason why they should not be
applied pre-trial in criminal
13.45 It is, therefore, the Commissions’ view that the client legal privilege
sections of the uniform Evidence Acts should apply
to pre-trial contexts and to
any situation where a person is requested to produce a document. One particular
concern regarding s
123 in the pre-trial context is addressed below.
13.46 Some legislation that gives administrative agencies investigative powers,
such as those exercised by the ACCC and the ATO, seeks
to abrogate legal
privilege. In
Daniels v ACCC
the High Court held that
Trade Practices Act 1974
did not abrogate legal
professional privilege, because the privilege is an important common law right
that can only be abrogated
with express words to that
13.47 The ALRC considered this issue in its report
Principled Regulation:
Federal Civil and Administrative Penalties in Australia
that Report, the ALRC acknowledged that there may be circumstances where it is
appropriate that legal professional privilege not
be available due to the
particular investigatory difficulties of commercial regulators (such as ASIC or
ACCC). However, the ALRC
said that the approach to that difficulty should be
abrogation of the privilege by clear legislative statement. The ALRC argued
given the importance of these issues, Parliament should consider and
debate the circumstances where legal professional privilege
should not be
ALRC 95 also
noted the huge disparity between the investigative powers of regulators and
advocated that a review be undertaken of
federal investigative powers and the
operation of legal professional privilege with a view to providing greater
certainty and consistency.
13.48 It is the clear position of the courts in Australia since
professional privilege is a fundamental right that applies both to court and
administrative and investigative proceedings.
The Commissions’ view is
that, in the interests of clarity and uniformity, the client legal privilege
sections of the uniform
Evidence Acts should be extended to apply to these
pre-trial contexts, as currently regulated by the common law rules of legal
professional
13.49 The Commissions acknowledge that further consideration will be required
to determine how the client legal privilege provisions
should best be applied to
pre-trial processes. In terms of drafting amending legislation, each section
will need to be considered
carefully to determine the effect of such an
extension. Whilst a majority of the provisions of this part of the uniform
Acts are in line with the common law, and therefore amendment should
not produce a significant change in practice, there are some
exceptions, such as
s 123, discussed further below. Therefore, at this stage of the Inquiry,
the Commissions make the general proposal
below as a matter of policy. Further
consideration will be given to the specific legislative amendments required to
give effect to
the proposal in the Inquiry’s final report.
Proposal 13–1
The client legal privilege provisions of the
uniform Evidence Acts should apply to pre-trial discovery and the production of
in response to a subpoena and non-curial contexts such as search
warrants and notices to produce documents, as well as court proceedings.
Definitions
13.50 Commentators suggest there are a number of drafting difficulties with
the client legal privilege provisions of the uniform Evidence
Section 117 defines
the terms used within the division dealing with client legal privilege.
IP 28 asked whether the definitions of
‘lawyer’ and ‘party’ in s 117 of the uniform
Evidence Acts required reconsideration
redrafting.
Definition of
13.51 Under the Division, the term ‘client’ includes:
(a) an employer (not being a lawyer) of a lawyer;
(b) an employee or agent of a client;
(c) an employer of a lawyer if the employer is:
(i) the Commonwealth or a State or Territory; or
(ii) a body established by a law of the Commonwealth or a State or Territory;
(d) if, under a law of a State or Territory relating to persons of unsound
mind, a manager, committee or person (however described)
is for the time being
acting in respect of the person, estate or property of a client—a manager,
committee or person so acting;
(e) if a client has died—a personal representative of the client;
(f) a successor to the rights and obligations of a client, being rights and
obligations in respect of which a confidential communication
13.52 The major issue raised in this Inquiry regarding the definition of
‘client’ under the Acts is why the private employer
of a lawyer may
not be a lawyer themselves in order to qualify as a ‘client’,
whereas the government employer is not
restricted.
Submissions and consultations
13.53 It has been put to this Inquiry that, provided sufficient independence
is established, there is no sound policy reason why legal
advice cannot be
provided to a lawyer, that lawyer being a client of a lawyer in their
One commentator notes
that, with increasing fields of specialisation, it is not unreasonable to think
that law firms will want to
seek advice on particular matters perhaps from their
own specialists.
13.54 The DPP NSW submits that the definition of ‘client’ under
the Act should be amended to include:
• an employer of a lawyer if the employer is a statutory officer
holding office under an Australian law (so as to include ‘clients’
such as the Director of Public Prosecutions who is appointed under the
Director of Public Prosecutions Act 1986
• the private employer of a lawyer who is a
13.55 The original ALRC evidence inquiry did not make specific reference to
this issue and, in the drafting of the Bill, the proviso
that a private employer
of a lawyer not be a lawyer was added.
Waterford v Commonwealth
, the court
considered the
issue of whether the government could claim legal professional privilege in
respect of legal advice from its own salaried
legal officers, and found that the
privilege did apply.
this case involved a specific context of government employees exercising
statutory functions, the judges also considered
the case of the employed legal
advisor more generally. Independence and competence were established as the
basis on which the privilege
could be granted. To show the requisite
independence, Deane J said that salaried legal advisors should be
‘persons who, in
addition to any academic or other practical
qualifications, were listed on a roll of current practitioners, held a current
certificate, or worked under the supervision of such a
13.57 In the case of government employees, Brennan J drew a distinction
between salaried employees of government and non-government
agencies. His Honour
considered that the professional independence of government lawyers was
protected by the statutes under which
lawyers in the public service are
It is presumably on
this basis that the distinction currently drawn in the uniform Evidence Acts is
ASIC v Rich,
Austin J stated that independence may be construed as something to be proved
as a matter of fact in each circumstance. He cited with
approval the summation
of Debelle J in
Southern Equities Corporation Ltd (in Liq) v Arthur Anderson
& Co (No 6)
the question whether the relationship between the employed solicitor and his
employer is such that the communications between them
will give rise to legal
professional privilege is a question of fact. The party claiming the privilege
has the onus of proving that
13.59 Provided the requisite independence exists between the lawyer employer
and the legal advisor, it is arguable that the privilege
The Commissions are
sufficiently persuaded that the increasing complexity of legal practice is such
that it is appropriate for legal
advice provided to a private employee lawyer to
be covered by the privilege. A proposed provision is set out in Appendix 1. To
that the privilege is not used inappropriately the lawyer must be
operating to a requisite degree of independence from his or her
employer. The
issues of independence and competence are discussed below.
Proposal 13–2
Section 117(a) of the uniform Evidence Acts should
be amended to allow that a ‘client’ is an employer of a lawyer,
may include lawyers who employ other lawyers.
Definition of
13.60 Section 117(1) defines a lawyer as including an employee or agent of a
lawyer. The Acts further define a lawyer as meaning a
barrister or
Whether that
definition of a ‘lawyer’ means that a person must hold a current
practicing certificate was raised in a
number of consultations, particularly
with reference to the increasingly common scenario of the in-house lawyer
employed by a corporation
or government department who does not have a
practising certificate.
13.61 It is unclear under the Act whether ‘a barrister or solicitor’
means that the lawyer must hold a current practicing
certificate or whether it
is sufficient to be admitted as either type of legal practitioner on the roll of
the relevant court. Given
that most legal professional privilege matters occur
pre-trial, case law regarding the definition under the uniform Evidence Acts
not developed. ASIC submitted that it would be preferable for confusion over
this issue to be settled by
legislation.
13.62 At common law, whilst there have been conflicting authorities, it has been
considered that a lawyer for the purpose of the privilege
barrister or
This position was
confirmed in
Vance v McCormack
, where Crispin J in the Australian
Capital Territory Supreme Court found that privilege did not attach where the
lawyer concerned
did not hold a current practising certificate or have a
statutory right to practice.
Crispin J based this finding on the rationale for legal professional
being the public
interest in proper representation of clients. Where a legal advisor has no right
to represent a client, no privilege
His Honour noted that,
in Australian jurisdictions, the statutory right to
generally depends on the holding of a practising
certificate.
The only other
example of a statutory right to practice noted by his Honour was that conferred
on certain Commonwealth officers by
Judiciary Act 1903
(Cth) or Acts
granting powers to the holders of specified positions such as a Director of
Public Prosecutions or Solicitor-
13.63 The Criminal Law Committee of the Law Society of South Australia (Law Society
of SA) argues that the uniform Evidence Acts may
need to be amended to bring
them in line with the common law and define a lawyer to include a barrister or
solicitor with a practising
certificate.
13.64 However, Downes J in the Administrative Appeals Tribunal has stated that
he does not agree with the reasoning in
, preferring other
authorities which state that, provided the advice given met the criteria of
independence, it does not matter that
the lawyer does not have a practising
certificate.
The real test is whether the advice had had the necessary quality of being
independent advice. Whether or not legal professional
privilege is attracted
should be determined by the substance not the form. The rise of requirements for
practicing certificates is
relatively recent and is associated primarily with
regulatory considerations and matters associated with lawyers holding themselves
out to the public as qualified.
13.65 Downes J cited
Australian Hospital Care v Duggan (No 2)
support of this view.
concerned advice given by an in-house company lawyer who had been admitted to
practice and held a practising certificate
in the past, but did not hold a
current Victorian practising certificate. In that case, Gillard J extensively
outlined the case law
establishing independence as a crucial element of the
features that must be present for legal professional privilege to apply in
respect of a confidential communication between a private sector employer and
its own employee lawyer.
[I]n my opinion there is sufficient dicta to support the proposition that the
employee legal adviser when performing his role in
a communication concerning a
legal matter must act independently of any pressure from his employer and if it
is established that
he was not acting independently at the particular time then
the privilege would not apply or if there was any doubt the court should
those circumstances look at the
13.66 Gillard J came to the conclusion that ‘the facts of
qualification and entitlement to practice are safeguards against a
practitioner failing to act independently’ but were not conclusive.
In some circumstances the failure to have a practising certificate would carry
substantial weight on the question of lack of independence
but each case must
depend on its own particular circumstances and no doubt a court would be more
concerned with the qualifications
and experience of the lawyer in question more
so than the question of
registration.
13.67 The views of Gillard and Downes JJ identify the key criterion behind
the privilege—that it is the substance of the relationship
importance, rather than a strict requirement that the lawyer hold a practising
certificate. It is at the time of admission
that professional standards and
obligations are conferred on a practitioner and it is these professional
obligations that serve as
a mark of the lawyer’s independence. The
foundation for the availability of the privilege goes beyond just the individual
provided to the client—the privilege is also granted to
‘enhance the function of the adversarial system of
On this basis,
the privilege should be flexible enough to take into account changing practices
and contexts in which lawyers are
13.68 The impetus to limit the privilege to lawyers with current practising
certificates may stem from fears that lawyers providing
general policy or risk
management advice might have the entirety of their work covered by the
privilege. However, the dominant purpose
test remains the ultimate limitation on
the operation of the privilege. The Commissions believe that, provided the
communication
meets the test of being provided for the dominant purpose of
providing legal advice, the fact that the lawyer does not have a practising
certificate will not extend the scope of the privilege in an unwarranted
the Full Federal
Court considered whether legal professional
could apply to advice
obtained from an overseas lawyer. Allsop J (with whom Black CJ and
Emmett J agreed on this point) found that
the rationale of the
privilege—serving the public interest in the administration of
justice—and its status as a substantive
right meant it should not be
limited to serving the administration of justice only in
His Honour stated
that the nature of modern commercial life and the increasingly global
interrelationship of legal systems ‘make
the treatment of the privilege as
a jurisdictionally specific right, in my view, both impractical and contrary to
the underlying
purpose of the protection in a modern
unnecessary to show that the overseas lawyer has the same ethical and legal
responsibilities as an Australian lawyer. Black
CJ and Emmett J stated that, in
the ordinary case of a client consulting a lawyer about a legal problem, proof
of those facts would
be a sufficient basis for a conclusion that legitimate
legal advice is being sought and given, irrespective of the particular legal
ethical obligations of an Australian
13.70 The Commissions agree that the privilege under the uniform Evidence Acts
should apply to advice sought from an overseas lawyer,
for the reasons stated by
Allsop J in
13.71 In order to clarify the definition of a lawyer under the uniform
Evidence Acts, the Commissions propose that the current definition
‘barrister or solicitor’ in the Dictionary of the Acts should be
amended to read a ‘person admitted to practice
as a legal practitioner,
barrister or solicitor in an Australian jurisdiction or in any other
Proposal 13–3
The definition of a ‘lawyer’ in the
Dictionary of the uniform Evidence Acts should be amended to allow that a lawyer
a person who is admitted to practice as a legal practitioner, barrister or
solicitor in an Australian jurisdiction or in any other
13.72 The Australian Accounting Bodies submit that, in view of the
significant role accountants now have in advising on tax and financial
matters, the definition of ‘lawyer’ should be extended to include
accountants who are members of an approved
professional body who are giving
taxation and financial advice for which the main purpose is the giving or
receiving of advice on
taxation and financial
13.73 The rationale for client legal privilege, as outlined above, relates
specifically to the administration of justice and the particular
role of the
lawyer in the adversary process. In
Baker v Campbell,
Dawson J justified
the protection on this basis:
The restriction of privilege to the legal profession serves to emphasise that
the relationship between client and his legal advisor
had a special significance
because it is part of the functioning of the law itself. Communications which
establish and arise out
of that relationship are of their very nature of legal
significance, something which would be coincidental in the case of other
confidential
relationships.
13.74 In the Commissions’ view, the accountant and client relationship
is best considered in terms of the confidential relationship
privilege currently
available in New South Wales, discussed later in this chapter, rather than
through amendment to the client legal
privilege provisions.
Availability of
client legal privilege to corporations
13.75 In its submission, ASIC raises an additional issue in its submission
regarding the exclusion of companies or corporations from
the definition of
‘client’ under s 117. ASIC notes that the decision of the High
ended debate
regarding the ability of corporations to continue to claim legal professional
privilege. However, ASIC believes that
this question should be considered
13.76 In ASIC’s view, the same policy arguments upon which the privilege
against self-incrimination is denied to corporations
can be applied to deny them
client legal privilege. In support of this position, ASIC cites Mason CJ and
Toohey J’s comments
Environmental Protection Authority v Caltex
Refining Co Pty Ltd
on the availability to corporations of the privilege
against self-incrimination
In general, a corporation is usually in a stronger position vis-a-vis the state
than is an individual; the resources which companies
possess and the advantages
which they tend to enjoy, many stemming from incorporation, are much greater
than those possessed and
enjoyed by natural persons. The doctrine of the
corporation as a separate legal entity and the complexity of many corporate
and arrangements have made corporate crime and complex fraud one of
the most difficult areas for the state to regulate
effectively.
13.77 ASIC’s position is supported by Wilcox J, in the Full Federal
Court decision in
[T]he policy considerations that influenced the High Court in
in relation to self incrimination, are equally apposite to legal professional
privilege. Conduct that involves a contravention of
Trade Practices
often comprises many separate acts, some of which may be effected
through lawyers. Without information about contacts between the
person under
investigation and that person’s lawyer it may be impossible for ACCC to
see the whole picture.
13.78 However, whilst not directly commenting on the availability of the
privilege to corporations, on appeal, the majority of the
High Court found that
legal professional privilege is ‘not merely a rule of substantive law. It
is an important common law
right or, perhaps more accurately an important common
law immunity’.
13.79 Kirby J in
noted the argument that the right to the
privilege as a ‘fundamental human right’ should only apply to
acknowledged that the interests of the public may be well
served in some cases by allowing these documents to be in the public realm.
However, he ultimately drew a distinction between the privilege against
self-incrimination and legal professional privilege, based
on their very
different historical origins.
Occasionally, in any case, a fundamental human right is an expression of an even
larger concept, namely a fundamental civil right
belonging also to artificial
persons such as corporations. Protection from self-incrimination rests upon
different historical, legal
and policy considerations almost all related to
individual human beings. The entitlement to sound legal advice, immune from
disclosure to investigating or prosecuting public authorities, is
arguably necessary both for natural and artificial
The Commissions’ view
13.80 The ALRC considered this issue in
Report, the ALRC did not advocate that legal professional privilege be abrogated
for corporations, preferring the position
of the High Court in
that the privilege be available to both individuals and corporations, subject to
express abrogation.
13.81 As noted above, the ALRC acknowledged that there may be circumstances where
it is appropriate that legal professional privilege
not be available due to the
particular investigatory difficulties of commercial regulators (such as ASIC or
ACCC). However, the ALRC
said that the approach to that difficulty should be
abrogation of the privilege by clear legislative statement rather than by
implication
circumlocution.
Commissions adopt and support the ALRC’s views as expressed in
13.82 At common law, the extent to which copies of documents are afforded
privilege has been a question of some
contention.
It is clear that
when a copy is made of an original that attracts privilege (ie, for the purpose
of record keeping or administration)
the copy is also privileged. The position
is more difficult where the original is not privileged but a copy of that
document, which
is communicated for the purpose of seeking or giving advice or
in preparation for litigation, may
13.83 The majority of the High Court in
Australian Federal Police v Propend
privilege could exist in copies of documents made for the purpose of seeking
legal advice or pending
litigation.
Where a copy is
made for the purpose of seeking legal advice or pending litigation the copy
becomes a separate communication in its
own right to which the dominant purpose
test is applied.
Ligertwood has noted ‘the practical effect of
is to protect
copies of unprivileged documents that find their way into a lawyer’s brief
for litigation’.
Ligertwood further notes that the position under the uniform Evidence Acts in
relation to copies is likely to be similar to that
under the common
13.84 The decision in
was based on the then existing common law sole
purpose test.
If privilege were denied to a copy of an unprivileged document when the copy is
produced solely for the purpose of seeking advice
from a solicitor or counsel or
for the purpose of use in pending, intended or reasonably apprehended litigation
there would be a
risk that the confidentiality of solicitor–client
communications would be breached. The way would be open for the execution
files and counsels’ briefs. That would undermine
the adversary system
under which most litigation is
a significant part of the argument rested on the fact
that the copy would have to have been made solely for the purpose of providing
advice or in the course of litigation. As noted above, the common law test is
now the dominant purpose test, as in the uniform Evidence
Submissions and consultations
13.86 There is some support in submissions for the uniform Evidence Acts to
make reference to the
situation. The DPP NSW submits that,
in the interests of clarity and certainty, it would prefer the uniform Evidence
Acts to reflect
the position at common law as stated in
13.87 The AGS states that, in its view, the majority in
was correct
in finding that client legal privilege could exist in copies of documents made
for the purposes of seeking legal advice
or pending litigation. In support of
this position, the AGS cites the case where disclosure of a group of documents
not otherwise
privileged would disclose a legal strategy being adopted,
recommended or considered by a party’s lawyers. However, the AGS
indicate whether the uniform Evidence Acts should be amended in this
13.88 Others do not consider that the Acts require amendment in this
The Australian
Accounting Bodies consider that that the issue of whether a copy of a document
can be privileged where the original
document is not privileged, is currently
reflected in the common law and each matter needs to be decided on its own
facts. Given
that the courts have not had any problem with deciding whether
copies are privileged, to amend the legislation may lead to an unnecessary
broadening of the
13.89 In ASIC’s view, there is no need for a specific provision which
applies client legal privilege to copies of non-privileged
documents which have
been made for a privileged purpose. ASIC argues that in many cases, such
documents will have been produced in
order to be included in briefs to counsel
or other compilations of documents prepared in order to seek advice on a
particular issue
or in support of another privileged communication.
Where the nature of the document copied or the compilation provides evidence as
to nature of the advice sought or received or as
to some other form of
privileged communication, the copy or compilation would already be subject to
client legal privilege under
sections 118
of the uniform
Evidence Act
In circumstances where the creation of the copy or its existence in a particular
compilation provide no indication of the nature
of communications attracting
privilege under
sections 118
, there is no basis for attaching client
legal privilege to the
13.90 The Commissions agree with ASIC’s view that
uniform Evidence Acts already contemplate the situation where a copy is made for
the dominant purpose of providing legal advice
or in relation to
litigation.
The Commissions
also note the important qualification made by Brennan J in
that where the original document is destroyed, the copy loses its privilege.
Brennan J argued that if legal professional privilege
were accorded without
qualification to a copy of an unprivileged document where the copy is brought
into existence for a privileged
purpose, the privilege might well frustrate the
power to search and seize and undermine the administration of justice. A person
make a copy for the purpose of litigation, and then destroy the
unprivileged original.
this basis, no amendment to the uniform Evidence Acts is proposed in relation to
copies of documents.
Communications with
third parties under the common law
13.91 There has been a significant development under the common law regarding
the extension of legal advice privilege to cover communications
parties. This change reflects divergence between the common law and the uniform
Evidence Acts (which were intended to
replicate the common law in this regard).
If the proposal to extend the client legal privilege sections of the Acts to
proceedings is adopted, the question arises whether the Acts should
remain as they are now, or be amended to mirror common law developments.
13.92 In 2004, in
Pratt Holdings v Commissioner of Taxation
Federal Court held that a third party’s communication with a client, even
where there is no litigation pending, could
potentially be protected by legal
professional
Previously, it was
thought that the protection would only apply where the third party was not
independent, but was acting as the client’s
agent in making the
communication.
13.93 Two related issues arose in
. First, as noted above, the chief
question was whether communication with a third party, who was not operating as
an agent could
be protected. Secondly, under the common law, as with the uniform
Evidence Acts, legal professional privilege encompasses both a
communication or
advice privilege and a litigation privilege. The rationale for the two types of
privilege, as expressed in ALRC
26, is noted above. With the extension of
the concept of an ‘agent’ under
, the question is asked
whether the distinction between the two types of privilege is meaningful.
concerned whether legal professional privilege could be extended
to cover documents prepared by a firm of accountants for the client.
documents were prepared on the basis that the client would provide them to a
firm of solicitors for legal advice.
13.95 At first instance, Kenny J articulated the principles relating to legal
professional privilege:
The common law in Australia is, therefore, that legal professional privilege
attaches to:
(1) confidential communications passing between a client and a client’s
legal advisor, for the dominant purpose of obtaining
or giving legal advice
(legal advice privilege); and
(2) confidential communications passing between a client, the client’s
legal advisor and third parties, for the dominant purpose
of use in or in
relation to litigation, which is either pending or in contemplation (litigation
privilege).
13.96 Traditionally, different principles have governed legal advice
privilege to those which have governed litigation privilege,
in particular, that
a client’s communication with a third party could only be protected if the
third party was ‘not truly
a third party but, rather, the client’s
“agent” in making the
communication’.
basis, Kenny J rejected Pratt Holdings’ claim to privilege over the
accountant’s
13.97 On appeal, this position was rejected by the Full Federal Court who took the
view that, even though the accountants were not
the client’s
‘agent’, this did not mean that their communications with the client
could not be privileged.
J argued that it was not the relationship but the function which the third party
performed which was of importance. Where that
function was to enable the client
to make the communication necessary to obtain legal advice, the third party
‘has been so
implicated in the communication made by the client to its
legal adviser as to bring its work product within the rationale of legal
privilege’.
13.98 Stone J argued that the requirement that a third party be an agent led to an
artificial distinction between situations where
that expert assistance is
provided by an agent or alter ego of the client and where it is provided by a
third party. In her Honour’s
view, provided the dominant purpose
requirement is met, there is no reason why privilege should not extend to the
communication to
the expert by the
13.99 Finn and Stone JJ considered that it may be difficult for a person seeking
legal advice to communicate the problem in respect
of which advice is sought
without the input from a third
Extending legal professional privilege to protect communications made for the
dominant purpose of obtaining legal advice does not
require all communications
between legal adviser and client to be protected. If, however, the policy
implicit in the rationale for
legal professional privilege is not to be
subverted, the dominant purpose criterion must be applied recognising that the
in which people need legal advice are increasingly complex and that
the client may need the assistance of third party experts if
he or she is to be
able to instruct the legal adviser
appropriately.
13.100 Both judges viewed the dominant purpose test as the appropriate
limitation on the availability of privilege. Stone J argued
that the rationale
would not be likely to extend the boundaries of client legal
privilege as the dominant purpose test would still need to be met. Her
noted, for example, that advice about commercially advantageous ways to
structure a transaction are extremely unlikely to
attract privilege because the
purpose in putting the advice together will, in most cases, be independent of
the need for legal advice.
Even if the parties intend that the advice will be
submitted to a lawyer for comment, the purpose is still unlikely to be
the dominant
purpose for seeking the
Maintaining a distinction between advice and
litigation privilege
13.101 It is suggested that the decision in
is indicative of a
move away from distinguishing between legal advice and litigation privilege.
Arguably, the Full Court’s approach represents a significant extension of
the advice privilege, to a point where there is now
little theoretical
distinction between the advice privilege and the litigation
13.102 On this view the correct formulation of client legal privilege would
be ‘a communication made for the dominant purpose
of providing legal
Court’s description of legal professional privilege in
cited as support for this position.
It is now settled that legal professional privilege is a rule of substantive law
which may be availed of by a person to resist the
giving of information or the
production of documents which would reveal communication between a client and
his or her lawyer made
for the dominant purpose of giving or obtaining legal
advice or the provision of legal services, including representation in legal
proceedings.
13.103 By determining that the case could be decided under the head of legal
advice privilege, the Full Court did not have to resolve
this issue. However,
Stone J indicated that the High Court’s exposition of the rationale for
legal professional privilege in
was consistent with the
appellants’ submission that there is a single rationale in Australia for
legal professional privilege.
Her Honour found that the rationale applies to
both litigation privilege and legal advice privilege, although she did not
that accepting a single rationale meant that the distinct categories
should no longer be
recognised.
The Commissions’ view
13.104 The ALRC’s view in the original evidence inquiry was that the
justifications for allowing privilege for third party communications
outlined above) should be limited to a situation where litigation is pending or
in contemplation, and did not apply to the advice
However, there have
been considerable developments in common law thinking since that time.
at first instance argued that the
precedents were clear, but acknowledged the artificiality and narrowness of the
Australian position.
After surveying other jurisdictions, her Honour said that
the ‘more functional’ approach adopted in the United States
Canada (and, to a lesser extent, in New Zealand) may produce a more rational, or
less artificial, result.
In the United States and Canada, a finding that a party is an agent for advice
privilege purposes is resolved by finding that a communication
was made by the
agent for the dominant purpose of obtaining legal advice where the communicator
was not acting entirely independently
and ‘under his own steam’. On
the other hand, this more flexible approach puts some strain on the orthodox
understanding
of privilege, by extending its scope to a wider range of
‘agency situations’ than that presently accepted in English
Australian law.
13.106 The Full Court’s judgment has been contrasted with the English
the current position under Australian law [after
] appears more
coherent and, in its more vigourous use of the dominant purpose requirement,
more attuned to the realities of the increasing
intermingling of commercial
advice with managerial and operational issues in the undertakings of commercial
corporations.
13.107 The Law Council submits that it is not clear under the uniform
Evidence Acts whether privilege arises where the lawyer obtains
information in
confidence from a third person for the purposes of advising the client.
The position under
is that confidential documents
prepared by the
client or a lawyer
for the dominant purpose of the lawyer providing legal
advice to the client are privileged. Literally this privileges such documents
when they contain information obtained from third parties for such purposes
although some courts have doubted this (
Newcastle Wallsend Coal Pty Ltd v
Court of Coal Mines Regulation
(1997) 42 NSWLR 351
at 389 (Powell JA); 393
(Smart AJA disagreeing)). But confidential communications
prepared by third
to clients for the purposes of the client obtaining advice are
certainly not privileged unless the third party is the employee or
agent of the
13.108 The Law Council supports the reasoning of the court in
and believes such communications should fall within the scope of the privilege
to encourage clients to seek all information required
in order to receive proper
legal advice.
13.109 The Commissions are inclined to accept the reasoning of Finn and Stone
—that the policy upon which the privilege is granted is
consistent with allowing a third party to prepare documentation for
for the dominant purpose of providing legal advice. Where the Acts are intended
to mirror the common law it is important
that they do not fall behind
developments in judicial thinking that are consistent with the overall
philosophy on which their provisions
are based. The Commissions believe this is
one of those examples.
13.110 Section 118(c) should therefore be amended to provide legal advice
privilege to extend to information provided by a third party
to the client or
lawyer for the dominant purpose of providing legal advice. The proposed
provision is set out in Appendix 1.
13.111 The Commissions are of the view, as espoused by Stone J in
, that there remain crucial differences between the two types of
client legal privilege. Legal advice privilege exists to protect
relationship between a lawyer and client, litigation privilege respects the
important functions of the adversarial system. Therefore
the distinction should
not be abandoned.
Proposal 13–4
Section 118(c) of the uniform Evidence Acts should
be amended to replace the words ‘the client or a lawyer’ with
client, a lawyer or another person’.
Loss of client legal
13.112 Client legal privilege can be lost in circumstances such as: where a
party has died; where the court would be prevented from
enforcing an order from
an Australian court; where the communication affects the right of a person;
through waiver of the privilege;
where the communication may be adduced by a
criminal defendant; where there are joint clients; and where the communication
in furtherance of the commission of an offence or fraud.
13.113 Section 122 concerns loss of client legal privilege by consent, either
by express or implied waiver of the privilege. The section
is drafted as a
general rule, whereby the evidence can be adduced if a client or party has
knowingly and voluntarily disclosed the
substance of the evidence. There are a
number of exceptions to this rule including where the evidence has been
disclosed under duress
or under compulsion of law.
13.114 The basis for the test of ‘knowingly and voluntarily
disclosed’ was to address uncertainty about the effect of
disclosure by the client, and not to allow waiver where a person may have
inadvertently disclosed or been compelled to
disclose the
communication.
Newcastle Wallsend Coal Co Pty Limited v Court of Coal Mines
it was held
that giving a recording of interview to a client for the sole purpose of
checking its accuracy and prohibiting retention
of a copy was not ‘knowing
and voluntarily disclosing’. However, loss of privilege did occur where a
record of interview
was given to a witness for his or her own purposes and
without the condition that it not be disclosed. In
Department of Public
Prosecutions (Cth) v Kane
it was held that inadvertent disclosure of a
document due to a clerical mistake did not constitute a ‘knowing and
disclosure.
This was also the position in
Ampolex v Perpetual Trustee Co Limited
where it was held that disclosure by mistake does not amount to voluntary
disclosure.
Waiver at common law
13.116 The approach in s 122 is different to the common law, where
traditionally waiver is imputed where the circumstances are such
unfair for the client to say that the privilege has not been
What is unfair in the
circumstances is determined by the conduct of the client.
Attorney-General (NT) v Maurice
, Mason and
Brennan JJ stated the principle as:
in order to ensure that the opposing litigant is not misled by an inaccurate
perception of the disclosed communication, fairness
will usually require that
waiver as to one part of a protected communication should result in waiver as to
the rest of the communication
on that subject
13.118 Waiver may be express or implied. Waiver of the privilege is implied
or imputed where it is considered that particular conduct
is inconsistent with
the maintenance of the confidentiality that the privilege is intended to
it was said that the basis of an imputed waiver will be some act or
omission of the persons entitled to the benefit of the privilege.
That act or
omission will ordinarily involve or relate to a limited (actual or purported)
disclosure of the contents of the privileged
13.119 In 1999,
Mann v Carnell
focused the common law test on inconsistency,
rather than fairness alone.
What brings about the waiver is the inconsistency, which the courts, where
necessary informed by the consideration of fairness, perceive
between the
conduct of the client and the maintenance of confidentiality; not some
overriding principle of fairness operating at
DSE (Holdings) Pty Ltd v Interan Inc
Allsop J noted
that by subordinating the notion of fairness to possible relevance in the
assessment of the inconsistency between the
act and the confidentiality of the
communication,
Mann v Carnell
had produced an important change to the
existing law.
13.121 This approach was recently restated by the Federal Court in
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Ethnic
where it was
found that waiver occurs ‘when a party does something inconsistent with
the confidentiality otherwise contained
communication’.
‘Substance’ of the
13.122 There have been number of cases which have discussed the meaning of
‘substance’ under s 122.
Adelaide Steamship Co Limited v
held that the
test of substance is a quantitative one—meaning, has there been sufficient
disclosure to warrant the loss of
the privilege? In
ACCC v Australian Safeway
it was further held that qualitative assessment should also be
incorporated into the test of
‘substance’.
13.123 For example, in
NRMA Limited v Morgan (No 2)
Giles J held that a reference to instructing counsel to advise on liability was
insufficient to amount to disclosure of the substance
of the otherwise
privileged communication. However, disclosure of a summarised account of what
counsel had said was
sufficient.
has stated that, ‘when the subsection is referring to the substance of
advice it is not talking about the, as it
were, bottom line of the advice, but
to what its content is and possibly even the reasoning which led to
Inconsistent interpretation of
13.124 The courts have interpreted s 122 inconsistently, in some cases
attempting to import the common law notion of fairness into
the section.
Telstra Corporation v Australasia Media Holdings [No
it was held
appropriate to extend the scope of the section to include ‘imputed’
waivers and, accordingly, apply notions
of fairness in accordance with previous
common law decisions. This was also the position taken in
Perpetual Trustees
(WA) v Equuscorp Pty
13.126 Conversely, in
Federal Court held that notions of fairness (the common law) did not apply under
13.127 However, in
Telstra Corporation v BT Australasia Pty
the majority of the
Full Federal Court found that consent under s 122 could be taken to extend
beyond express consent (to include
consent that was real and voluntary, although
implied) and therefore that the section could be taken to apply to imputed
The AGS submits that
this would give s 122 a similar test to the
Mann v Carnell
inconsistency waiver.
13.128 Another way of importing ‘fairness’ into the question of
waiver under s 122 is to use the discretion in s 135 to
exclude the
evidence on the basis of considerations of fairness taken into account under the
common law.
Stephen Odgers SC
has argued that:
If this approach is correct, in circumstances where the common law would
conclude there has not been waiver (and the privilege continues
to operate), the
evidence may be excluded under s 135, even if the privilege were lost by reason
of the operation of this
13.129 Odgers notes that this approach could only apply to exclude the
privileged material. The discretion cannot allow the court
to admit otherwise
inadmissible evidence where it would be unfair not to do
This view, however,
appears to conflate the notions of fairness under the common law and
‘unfair prejudice’ in s 135.
In Chapter 3 of this Discussion
Paper, the Commissions note that the notion of ‘unfairness’, both at
common law and under
the uniform Evidence Acts, is broader than that of
‘unfair prejudice’.
Carnell v Mann
, the Full Federal Court stated that
‘the application of the section may well, in any given case, produce an
entirely different
outcome to that which would follow under the common law
13.131 In IP 28, the ALRC asked whether any concerns are raised by the
operation of s 122.
13.132 The major issue identified is whether the prescriptive approach taken in the
legislation fails to allow sufficient room for
flexibility. One suggested
advantage of the common law approach is that it allows the court to decide that
there has been an imputed
waiver of privilege despite the fact that there has
not been an ‘express intentional general waiver of
privilege’.
13.133 Odgers has argued that when the courts do not incorporate notions of fairness
into s 122:
the provision might result in loss, or retention, of the privilege in
circumstances where fairness to the parties would suggest a
different result. If
that were the case, the adoption of the more flexible common law approach may be
preferable, despite the consequent
uncertainty it
13.134 In contrast, it has been suggested that one of the greatest
disadvantages of applying fairness considerations is that it is
too subjective.
What could be unfair or fair to one person could be completely the opposite to
another. McHugh J argued this point
at length in his dissenting judgement
Mann v Carnell
To use an ‘unfairness’ test for determining waiver after disclosure
to a third party also changes the fundamental nature
of privilege. It changes
privilege from something which inheres in communications as a matter of law to a
state of affairs which
exists between the parties as a kind of equitable
Submissions and consultations
13.135 The DPP NSW supports the view that s 122 should be amended
to reflect the common law test, and to make it clear that a prescriptive
approach is not to be taken.
The AGS agrees, arguing that, although it appears that
waiver under s 122 can extend to imputed waiver, ‘it would appear
appropriate to insert an express provision to
that effect, rather than relying
on the Federal Court judgement [in
13.136 A number of people express the view that s 122 would be improved by the
inclusion of the common law test in
Mann v Carnell
test allows the court to consider the idea of conduct
inconsistent with maintenance of the privilege and to consider all the
circumstances.
Some suggest
that the words ‘knowingly and voluntarily disclosed’ should be
removed from the section, effectively replacing
the current test with the common
law approach.
13.137 Others consider that s 122 has not presented many problems in practice,
and that amendment could lead to unintended
consequences.
One submission
said that deletion of the section would allow the common law to
The Commissions’ view
13.138 In relation to potential reform of s 122, the question is whether a
residuary discretionary power should be included to impose
a waiver on a party
whose behaviour is inconsistent with the maintenance of the privilege. Section
122 as it is presently drafted
is concerned with the
holder of the privilege. Under the common law, the intention of the holder of
the privilege may or may not be of relevance,
rather it is the
of the holder of the privilege that is of
13.139 Rather than replacing the test of ‘knowingly and voluntarily
disclosed’—which the Commissions believe is
an appropriate part of
the test—the Commissions favour the inclusion of additional criteria for
waiver of ‘an act inconsistent
with the maintenance of the
privilege’.
proposed provision is set out in Appendix 1. The Commissions agree that a
fairness test alone, as was a feature of the common
law during the previous
evidence inquiry, is inherently subjective. The test of inconsistency under
Mann v Carnell
sits well with the underlying rationale the ALRC expressed
for s 122—that the privilege should not extend beyond what is
and that voluntary publication by the client should bring the
privilege to an end.
addition of that criterion for waiver gives the section greater flexibility to
consider all the circumstances of the case.
Proposal 13–5
Section 122(2) of the uniform Evidence Acts
should be amended to allow that evidence may be adduced where a client or party
has knowingly
and voluntarily disclosed to another person the substance of the
evidence or has otherwise acted in a manner inconsistent with the
maintenance of
the privilege.
Section 123: Loss of client legal
13.140 Section 123 of the uniform Evidence Acts states that:
In a criminal proceeding, this Division does not prevent a defendant from
adducing evidence unless it is evidence of:
(a) a confidential communication made between an associated defendant and a
lawyer acting for that person in connection with the
prosecution of that person;
(b) the contents of a confidential document prepared by an associated defendant
or by a lawyer acting for that person in connection
with the prosecution of that
13.141 The result of s 123 is that the right of a party to claim client
legal privilege is lost where the evidence is sought to be
adduced by an accused
in a criminal proceeding, unless the accused is seeking the evidence from a
co-accused.
In most cases,
the party claiming the privilege will be the prosecution.
13.142 ALRC 26 proposed that one of the circumstances in which the privilege
should be lost is when it would result in the withholding
of evidence relevant
to the defence of an accused.
This position was based on the 1972 case of
established an exception to legal professional privilege in criminal matters,
where an otherwise privileged document might establish
the innocence of the
13.143 In ALRC 38, following submissions which argued that the original
statement was too broad, the recommendation was narrowed from
the position in
to evidence
by a defendant in a criminal
proceeding. The ALRC’s proposed provision also did not operate in respect
of communications made
between associated defendants and their lawyers. In
ALRC 38, the ALRC stated ‘it is proposed that the privilege should
apply to communications to the prosecution unless a client/legal adviser
relationship is shown to exist between those involved in
communications’.
13.144 In 1995, in
Carter v The Managing Partner Northmore Hale Davy and
(a common law case), the High Court disapproved of
holding that a person who is in possession of documents, which are subject to
legal professional privilege, cannot be compelled
to produce them on a subpoena
issued on behalf of an accused person in criminal proceedings, even though they
may establish the innocence
of the accused or materially assist his or her
13.145 Section 123 was considered by the New South Wales Court of Criminal
Appeal in the 1996 case
observed that counsel had agreed that the practical effect of s 123 (when
read together with s 118) was that legal professional
privilege does not
stand in the way of obtaining access to subpoenaed documents ‘in
circumstances where a legitimate forensic
purpose of the accused at a criminal
trial is served by being given access to such documents for the purpose of
potential use at
13.146 In its submission, the DPP NSW notes that the position is not entirely
clear because the ALRC reports did not canvass this
particular issue and,
despite the comments in
, s 123 has not been the subject of
any further judicial
consideration.
Director of Public Prosecutions (Cth) v
Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions made a claim for legal professional
privilege in regards to an advice prepared by
one of its solicitors.
Section 123 was not considered in depth because it was conceded that an
application for a stay was not a ‘criminal
proceeding’ under the
Evidence Act 1995
However, Hunt CJ at CL stated that, under
, the ability to uphold the privilege against a defendant (which was
available under the common law) was now lost. His Honour further
noted that in
order to override client legal privilege the communication must be relevant to
the defendant’s criminal
proceedings.
communication sought was not deemed to be relevant to the committal
proceedings.
13.148 As it presently stands,
overides client legal privilege in
relation to evidence that is adduced by a defendant in criminal proceedings, and
not, for example,
the pre-trial production of documents on subpoena although, as
noted above, there is some confusion arising from the decision in
Legal professional privilege under the common law might still provide a
basis for resisting production of documents to an accused
in criminal
proceedings on the basis of the decision in
13.149 The DPP NSW is concerned that if the client legal privilege sections of
the uniform Evidence Acts are extended to pre-trial
remove the current common law right to claim legal professional privilege over
documents prepared for the purpose of providing
legal advice to the Director of
Public Prosecutions. The DPP NSW submits that privilege arises most
commonly in the context of pre-trial
subpoenas, rather than in the context of
the adducing of evidence by the defence at
13.150 The DPP could lose the common law right to claim legal professional privilege
in relation to confidential documents containing
advice from Crown Prosecutors,
the private Bar and the DPP’s solicitors. If the DPP did lose the right to
claim privilege,
the DPP NSW anticipates that ‘the defence will
routinely subpoena such documents on the basis that it is “on the
that the advices will serve some legitimate forensic purpose in
relation to the
proceedings’.
A fertile area for pre-trial applications will be created when our expectation
is that very rarely, if ever, will the legal advice
to the Director contain any
relevant material which has not already been disclosed to the defence (in other
documents, such as the
statements of witnesses) pursuant to the
prosecutor’s duty of
disclosure.
13.151 The DPP NSW submits that, if the uniform Evidence Acts are
extended to pre-trial proceedings,
should be amended to preserve the
existing common law legal professional privilege of the prosecutor in pre-trial
proceedings.
13.152 The concerns raised by the DPP NSW were echoed in
consultations.
be extended pre-trial, one senior practitioner argues that
the addition of a ‘substantial probative value’ test to
would stop baseless claims for documents being made by the
13.153 Some New South Wales District Court judges argue that the requirement of
disclosure on the prosecution means that there will
be nothing relevant in the
briefs that the defence is not already aware of. They consider that the DPP
should be entitled to claim
There is, however,
also support for the abrogation of the privilege for prosecutors, on the basis
that defendants should be able
to access any evidence that is
exculpatory.
The Commissions’ view
Section 123
overrides the client legal privilege created by
Client legal privilege only applies to communications
between staff of a prosecutor or Crown prosecutors where a client and legal
advisor relationship is shown to exist. ALRC 26 noted that where
renders client legal privilege unavailable, it does not mean that communications
cannot be otherwise protected in appropriate cases,
possibly by the operation of
public interest immunity or a confidential communications
13.155 ALRC 26 did not directly canvass the issue of whether
the defendant to obtain legal advice provided to a prosecutor. However, it may
be inferred from the above comment regarding
public interest immunity that it
was not envisioned that the defence would be able to adduce any such
communication.
13.156 The Commissions agree with the submission of the DPP NSW that it would
be undesirable if the extension of the privilege sections
of the uniform
Evidence Acts to pre-trial proceedings had the effect of abrogating client legal
privilege in relation to any legal
advice given to the DPP. The foundation of
client legal privilege—frank and complete communication between lawyer and
client—should
apply equally to the DPP. Given the obligation on the
prosecution to reveal all material evidence, significant court time could be
spent in applications by the defence to gain access to advice that would have
little bearing on the substantive issues in the case.
Counsel or solicitors may
also feel constrained in the provision of their advice for the DPP if such
information could be made available
13.157 The extension of
to pre-trial contexts may also have an impact
beyond the difficulties for prosecutors described above. It would effectively
the decision in
and remove the basis on which any person
could claim the privilege in reponse to a subpoena to produce documents from an
This would go against the narrowing of the proposal in ALRC 38,
which expressly sought to
limit the section to evidence adduced
a defendant in a criminal proceeding. At this stage the Commissions are of the
view that the limitation on
intended by the original ALRC inquiry
should remain. However, the Commissions are interested in further comment.
13.158 On that basis, two alternate proposals are put forward for consideration. The
first proposal only addresses the issue of the
availability of the privilege to
a prosectutor. That is, if Proposal 13–1 is adopted,
amended to preserve the availability of client legal privilege to any legal
advice provided to a prosecutor. A draft provision
is set out in
Appendix 1. In the alternative, if Proposal 13–1 is adopted,
could be exempted from the general extension of the client legal
privilege sections to pre-trial matters and continue to apply only
to evidence
adduced at trial.
Proposal 13–6
If Proposal 13–1 is adopted,
the uniform Evidence Acts should be amended to preserve the availability of
client legal privilege to any legal advice—as
provided in
professional legal services as provided for in
—provided to the
Director of Public Prosecutions and to non-DPP prosecutors.
Alternative Proposal 13–6
If Proposal 13–1 is adopted,
of the uniform Evidence Acts should remain applicable only to the
adducing of evidence by an accused in a criminal proceeding.
13.159 Under
of the uniform Evidence Acts, privilege does not
apply when a communication is made or document created in furtherance of the
of a fraud, an offence, an abuse of power or an act that renders a
person liable for a civil penalty. The term ‘fraud’
is not limited
to the criminal offence of fraud, but also includes a wider sense of dishonesty
or deception.
The onus of
proof rests with the party alleging that the privilege has been lost.
states there must be ‘reasonable grounds’ for the court to
find that the fraud, offence or abuse of power was committed
and that the
communication was made in furtherance of it.
Kang v Kwan
, Santow J stated:
The standards for establishing reasonable grounds will depend on the
circumstances, though must still be sufficient to ‘give
colour to the
charge’, that is at a prima facie level. Thus if a person challenging
privilege is clearly not in a position
to lead very much evidence concerning
purpose, as where the other party has exclusive access to that evidence, the
Court may be satisfied
with relatively less evidence. In contrast, much more
evidence may be required where the party challenging improperly obtained access
to that evidence.
13.161 Further, it has been held that ‘a submission that client legal
privilege has been lost by reason of misconduct pursuant
viewed seriously and should not be made
In accordance
, the court may inspect the document in question for the purpose
of establishing whether reasonable grounds have been established.
13.162 In IP 28, the ALRC suggested that the onus of proof under
a high one, and asked whether concerns were raised by the operation of
, in particular the proof of
misconduct.
13.163 One submission argues that the standards established in
Kang v Kwan
are appropriate and that amendments to the uniform Evidence Acts are
unnecessary.
The AGS submit
that the normal rules of evidence in establishing misconduct should
13.164 The Commissions agree with the submissions and the reasoning in
On this basis, the Commissions do not propose any amendment to
of the uniform Evidence Acts.
Client legal
privilege and government agencies
13.165 The New South Wales Ombudsman submits that serious thought should be
given to whether client legal privilege should continue
to be a basis for
denying a watchdog body access to
13.166 The Ombudsman argues that, in the context of public sector
accountability, there are two sides to client legal privilege:
• on the one side, client professional privilege is said to assist
justice by allowing communications between public officials
and their lawyers to
be kept confidential on the assumption that this will promote frankness and
candour in communications between
those officials and their lawyers, and
• on the other side, the effect of client professional privilege is to
reduce the accountability of public sector agencies and
officials by allowing
them to keep often vital information from a watchdog body.
13.167 The submission states that:
it is open to question whether in fact client professional privilege is either
necessary or effective in achieving its objective
of ensuring frank and candid
communication where public sector agencies and public officials are concerned.
Further, the experience
of the NSW Ombudsman has shown that the privilege can be
abused and often serves little or no good purpose in
13.168 Examples of situations where agencies may have inappropriately claimed
legal professional privilege (as reported in Annual
Reports of the New South
Wales Ombudsman) include:
• in response to requests to produce and review agency legal advice
that has been the subject of a complaint under the
Freedom of Information Act
• in refusing to provide information, access to which may promote the
accountability of public officials and agencies.
13.169 To address these issues, the New South Wales Ombudsman proposes two
options for amending the uniform Evidence Acts:
• incorporation of provisions of the uniform Evidence Acts that clearly
abrogate the privilege in relation to investigations
being conducted by watchdog
bodies set up by Commonwealth, state or territory governments; or
• amendments to be made to the uniform Evidence Acts to provide that
information and documents relating to accountability of
government may not be
withheld from disclosure to a statutory watchdog—for example information
and documents relating to the
affairs of an agency or the conduct of public
officials which (i) contain or disclose information likely to contribute to
and informed debate about issues of serious public interest; and (ii)
contain or disclose information likely to assist the investigation
misconduct or illegality by public sector agencies or
13.170 The Commissions accept the New South Wales Ombudsman’s argument
that the rationale for client legal privilege must be
balanced against the clear
public interest in open and accountable government. This balancing act has been
discussed by judges in
many of the major cases where legal professional
privilege has been claimed by government agencies, for example, in
v Commonwealth.
13.171 The uniform Evidence Acts are acts of general application. An analogy can be
drawn between the investigatory concerns of the
Ombudsman and the arguments
raised by regulatory agencies such as ASIC and the ACCC in relation to their
investigations. As noted
above, ALRC 95 acknowledged that there may be
times when the public interest in the conduct of investigations overrides the
interest in client legal privilege. In those circumstances, the ALRC
recommended that the privilege be expressly
13.172 At this stage of the Inquiry, the Commissions’ preferred model is that
the New South Wales Ombudsman’s concerns,
if substantiated, should be
addressed through express abrogation of the privilege via the
Information Act 1982
(Cth) or the
Ombudsman Act 1977
equivalent state and territory legislation). However, the Commissions would be
interested in receiving further submissions
on this issue.
Question 13–1.
Should the uniform Evidence Acts abrogate client
legal privilege in relation to investigations being conducted by watchdog
such as the Commonwealth Ombudsman and state and territory ombudsmen?
Alternatively, should the client legal privilege sections of
the Acts be amended
to create an exception for information and documents relating to the
accountability of government?
protecting other confidential communications
13.173 In ALRC 26, the ALRC proposed the creation of a further
discretionary privilege that would cover confidential relationships.
privilege would cover communications and records made in circumstances where one
of the parties is under an obligation (legal,
ethical or moral) not to disclose
them. These relationships could include, for example, doctor and patient,
psychotherapist and patient,
social worker and client or journalist and
The ALRC determined
that there were many relationships in society where a public interest could be
established in maintaining
confidentiality.
noted that, for example, there are circumstances in which confidentiality is
crucial to the furtherance of an accountant
relationship.
controversial nature of the some of these categories, and the aim of the uniform
Evidence Acts to allow as much evidence
as possible to be made available, the
ALRC proposed that such a privilege be granted at the discretion of the court,
The public interest in the efficient and informed disposal of litigation in each
case will be balanced against the public interest
in the retention of
confidentiality within the relationship and the needs of particular and similar
relationships.
13.174 This proposal was not adopted as part of the
Evidence Act
(Cth). However, the
Evidence Act 1995
(NSW) provides for a
professional confidential relationship privilege and a sexual assault
communications privilege in civil
proceedings.
A sexual assault communications privilege applies in criminal proceedings
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
Sections 127A
Evidence Act 2001
(Tas) cover medical
communications and communications to a sexual assault counsellor respectively.
Section 127A
operates only in civil proceedings and
operates only in
criminal proceedings. The two models operate differently. In New South Wales,
the privileges are discretionary,
whereas in Tasmania, they are absolute.
13.175 The ALRC’s Report
Recognition of Aboriginal Customary Laws
whether the law should compel a witness to answer questions in court where the
answer would disclose a past violation
of Aboriginal customary laws which might
bring ‘shame’ to the witness, or render the witness liable to some
retaliation.
This issue is discussed in Chapter 17 as part of a broader
discussion dealing specifically with the admissibility of evidence of
traditional laws and customs.
Confidential relationships privilege: New
South Wales
13.176 Under s 126A of the
Evidence Act 1995
‘protected confidence’ for the purpose of the section means a
communication made by a person in confidence to
another person (the
confidant):
(a) in the course of a relationship in which the confidant was acting in a
professional capacity, and
(b) when the confidant was under an express or implied obligation not disclose
its contents, whether or not the obligation arises
under law or can be inferred
from the nature of the relationship between the person and the confidant.
13.177 Section 126B provides that the court may direct that evidence not be
adduced in a proceeding if the court finds that adducing
it would disclose:
(a) a protected confidence, or
(b) the contents of a document recording a protected confidence, or
(c) protected identity information.
(2) The court may give such a direction:
(a) on its own initiative, or
(b) on the application of the protected confider or confidant concerned
(whether or not either is a party).
(3) The court must give such a direction if it is satisfied that:
(a) it is likely that harm would or might be caused (whether directly or
indirectly) to a protected confider if the evidence
is adduced, and
(b) the nature and extent of the harm outweighs the desirability of the
evidence being given.
(4) Without limiting the matters that the court may take into account for the
purposes of this section, it is to take into account
the following matters:
(a) the probative value of the evidence in the proceeding,
(b) the importance of the evidence in the proceeding,
(c) the nature and gravity of the relevant offence, cause of action or
defence and the nature of the subject matter of the proceeding,
(d) the availability of any other evidence concerning the matters to which
the protected confidence or protected identity information
(e) the likely effect of adducing evidence of the protected confidence or
protected identity information, including the likelihood
of harm, and the nature
and extent of harm that would be caused to the protected confider,
(f) the means (including any ancillary orders that may be made under section
126E) available to the court to limit the harm
or extent of the harm that is
likely to be caused if evidence of the protected confidence or the protected
identity information
is disclosed,
(g) if the proceeding is a criminal proceeding—whether the party
seeking to adduce evidence of the protected confidence
or protected identity
information is a defendant or the prosecutor,
(h) whether the substance of the protected confidence or the protected
identity information has already been disclosed by the
protected confider or any
other person.
13.178 Although the ALRC’s reports were canvassed in the context of the
New South Wales amendments, Odgers cites the source
of the privilege as the New
South Wales Attorney General’s Department 1996 Discussion Paper
Protecting Confidential Communications from Disclosure in Court
Proceedings
discretionary approach to such a privilege, as advocated by the ALRC, was
adopted in the New South Wales amendments.
The evidence must be excluded if there is a likelihood that harm would be or
might be caused, whether directly or indirectly, to
the person who imparted the
confidence and the nature and extent of that harm outweighs the desirability of
having the evidence given
or the documents
13.179 Division 1A does not create a true privilege, but allows the court a
discretion to direct that evidence not be adduced where
it would involve the
disclosure of a protected
confidence.
The court must
balance the matters set out in s 126B(4), including the probative value of
the evidence in the proceeding, the nature
of the offence, with the likelihood
of harm to the protected confider in adducing the evidence, and then decide if
it is appropriate
to give a direction under the
13.180 Odgers notes that there has been criticism of the section because it is not
clear how the court should exercise the
discretion.
The New South
Wales Bar Association has argued that there appear to be two discretions within
the section. That is, even if the court
is not satisfied that the harm that may
be caused if the evidence is adduced outweighs the desirability of the evidence
being given,
there is still a discretion to direct that the evidence not be
13.181 There have not been a significant number of cases concerning
Division 1A. In
Urquhart v Latham
, Campbell J considered how the
test in s 126B should be exercised. His Honour noted that ‘there is a
policy concerning the
protection of confidences which underlies s 126B,
which requires matters favouring the protection of professional confidences, of
the type defined in s 126A, to be taken into account in the exercise of
discretions about what evidence should be admitted in a
Sexual assault communications privilege: New
South Wales and Tasmania
13.182 A privilege for sexual assault communications is available under
Division 1B of the
Evidence Act
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
Division 1B was
first inserted into the
Evidence Act 1995
(NSW) by the
Amendment (Confidential Communications) Act
(NSW). In 1999, part
of Division 1B became
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
The chief reason
for re-enacting the provisions in the
Criminal Procedure Act
decision in
that Division 1B applied only to the adducing of evidence and could not protect
sexual assault communications in relation to discovery
and production of
documents. Division 1B now applies only to civil proceedings ‘in which
substantially the same acts are in
issue as the acts that were in issue in
relation to a criminal
proceeding’.
evidence is found to be privileged under
Criminal Procedure
the evidence may not be adduced in civil proceedings to which
Division 1B applies.
13.183 At the time of enacting the confidential communications privilege, the
New South Wales government argued that the records of
the relationship between a
sexual assault victim and a counsellor required a particular
Criminal Procedure Act
renders counselling records inadmissible unless
the defence can show the evidence has substantial probative value and that the
interest in protecting the confidentiality of the document is
substantially outweighed by the public interest in allowing its inspection.
requirement that that the public interest in protection be
substantially
by the public interest in allowing inspection is a higher test
than, for example, the similar balancing exercise under
in relation
to public interest
13.184 Central to the granting of the privilege is the existence of a counselling
relationship. Under
Criminal Procedure Act
definition of counselling is given, including a requirement that the counsellor
have undertaken study or have relevant experience,
and that support,
encouragement, advice, therapy or treatment is
The counselling must
also be given in relation to any harm the person may have suffered. Under
, ‘harm’ includes physical bodily harm, financial loss,
stress or shock, damage to reputation or emotional or psychological
as shame, humiliation or fear).
13.185 The privilege for communications to sexual assault counsellors under
Evidence Act 2001
(Tas) differs from the privilege
Criminal Procedure Act
as the former provides absolute
protection of the communications, unless the complainant consents to their
production. Section 127B
applies only to criminal proceedings and was
enacted following a review of sexual offences in
After examining the
New South Wales legislation, the Tasmanian government determined that, given the
nature of the material, an absolute
protection was
13.186 In August 2004, the VLRC released its final report on sexual
In that report, the
VLRC considered both the New South Wales and Tasmanian models. Although
considerable support was received for
the Tasmanian approach, the VLRC
recommended that the Victorian evidence legislation adopt a model closer to the
New South Wales
model for trial or plea proceedings. Under this recommendation,
a counselling communication must not be disclosed in any trial or
proceedings except with the leave of the
Where a person objects
to production of a document which records a counselling communication in
relation to a trial or plea proceedings,
they cannot be required to produce the
document unless the document is produced for examination by the court for the
purposes of
ruling on the objection; and the court is satisfied that:
• the contents of the document have substantial probative value;
• other evidence of the contents of the document or the confidence is
not available; and
• the public interest in preserving the confidentiality of the
communication and protecting the confider from harm is substantially
by the public interest in allowing disclosure of the
communication.
13.187 However, the VLRC recommended that a counselling communication must
not be disclosed in committal proceedings. At committal
a person could not be
required (whether by subpoena or otherwise) to produce a document that records a
counselling communication;
and evidence of a counselling communication cannot be
admitted or adduced.
13.188 The VLRC considered that these recommendations struck the right balance
between protection of the communication and the rights
of the accused.
Our recommendations will allow evidence of confidential communications to be
accessed by counsel and used in evidence where specified
criteria are satisfied.
These criteria balance the competing public interests of ensuring a fair trial
for the accused and preserving
the confidentiality of protected communications
to the greatest extent
Medical communications privilege:
13.189 Under
Evidence Act 2001
(Tas), a medical
practitioner must not divulge, in any civil proceeding, any communication made
to him or her in a professional capacity
by the patient that was necessary to
prescribe or act for the patient (unless the sanity of the patient is the matter
in dispute).
13.190 This privilege was carried over from the
Evidence Act 1910
(Tas) and can also be found in the evidence legislation of Victoria and the
Northern Territory. In these jurisdictions, the privilege
is only available in
civil proceedings. The ALRC considered this privilege in ALRC 26 and found
three main benefits—protecting
patients’ privacy, encouraging people
to seek treatment, and promoting the public interest in effective treatment of
The ALRC noted that many of the arguments in favour of the privilege
focused more on a right to privacy, rather than on whether problems
by the absence of the privilege or benefits that would follow on its
implementation.
13.191 The ALRC found that this rationale suggested a need for a power to excuse
medical witnesses in certain cases rather than a
blanket privilege, or primary
rule of privilege with
exceptions.
It contrasted the
position of a doctor with that of a lawyer. While each relationship is aided by
confidentiality, and confidentiality
would encourage both groups of professional
services to be sought, unlike the doctor, the lawyer’s role could not be
if he or she could be compelled to give evidence against a
As such, the ALRC
proposed that the doctor–client relationship could fall under the general
privilege proposed to cover confidential
relationships.
Submissions and consultations
13.192 IP 28 asked whether a confidential communications, sexual assault
communications and medical communication privilege should
be included in the
Evidence Act
13.193 The extension of privilege to relationships other than lawyers and
clients is a controversial issue. The Law Council remains
sceptical about
creating privileges beyond client legal privilege, the privilege against
self-incrimination (both of which further
the administration of justice) and
public interest immunity (which only prevents access to evidence where the
interests of the state
so demand).
The effect of a privilege or immunity is that relevant information is withheld
from a court and the interests of justice suffer accordingly.
Whilst the Council
appreciates arguments in privileging confidential communications within
particular relationships, the Council
believes there should a clear onus upon
any person claiming the ‘privilege’ to show that the interests of
justice are
not, in the circumstances of the particular case, unfairly affected.
Where information may point to there being a reasonable doubt
accused’s guilt the Council remains unconvinced that further privileges
should stand in the way of access to this
13.194 The Law Council emphasises that courts already have powers to maintain
the confidentiality of information disclosed to them
for the specific purpose of
ensuring justice in the individual
13.195 ASIC agrees that great care should be taken before a principle akin to
client legal privilege is applied in the context of
other professional
relationships such as the relationship between accountant and client. This is
because many of the underlying policy
reasons for client legal privilege do not
apply in the case of other professional relationships.
In ASIC’s experience, there are circumstances in which the close
involvement of legal advisers in the structuring of transactions
tantamount to an abuse of client legal privilege. ASIC is concerned that these
abuses may flourish if a similar privilege
was applied to professionals who may
be subject to less rigorous
supervision.
13.196 Another commentator argues that where the evidence is relevant to
facts in issue, then the privilege should not apply. Relevant
evidence might
include matters communicated to a rape crisis counsellor by a complainant
shortly after the event that contradict
a later version of
13.197 The Bar Association of the Australian Capital Territory expresses the view
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth) should not include a confidential
relationships privilege, as the issue of which relationship should be covered is
a political
one, and something best left to individual
The Law Society of SA
does not believe that a confidential relationships privilege should be
legislated.
13.198 However, most consultations supported the adoption of a qualified
confidential relationships and sexual assault communications
practitioners and judges are unaware of areas in which the operation of either
privilege has caused concern in New South
Wales. For example, some New South
Wales District Court judges indicate that the issue has not been raised in many
(if any) trials
over which they have
13.199 However, the support for new privileges is premised on the view that the
privileges should be qualified ones and should only
apply where the interests of
justice so dictate. One senior practitioner considers that it is important that
the privilege be a balancing
exercise, not absolute. He argues that, from a
defence point of view, it is hard to justify a particular privilege for sexual
communications because a particular category of defendant is being
singled out, rather than a category of
information.
A Victorian
practitioner echoed these comments, stating that a confidential relationships
privilege should only be a qualified one,
as there are many examples where the
communication might include something that could be very important for the
13.200 The Australian Accounting Bodies strongly support the adoption of a similar
provision to the New South Wales confidential relationships
privilege in the
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth) to protect confidences between accountants and
their clients.
13.201 Some Family Court judges (and one Federal Magistrate) favour the introduction
of a confidential relationships privilege in
the Commonwealth Act, provided the
best interests of the child are factored into its operation in family law
proceedings. For example,
any confidentiality between a father and his therapist
dealing with issues of sexual assault should not take precedence over the
interests of the child in
disclosure.
13.202 The Inquiry has also been told that the operation of s 19N of the
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) is an issue in some state criminal courts.
Section 19N relates to the admissibility of certain admissions made to family
counsellors
and mediators. Section 19N(2) provides that evidence of anything
said, or any admission made, at a meeting or conference conducted
by a person to
whom the section applies (listed in s 19N(1)) while the person is acting as
such a person is not admissible in any
court (whether exercising federal
of the Commonwealth
or of a state or territory, or by the consent of the
parties, to hear evidence. State criminal courts have regularly held that
19N does not apply to their proceedings on the basis that the reference
in s 19N to ‘any court (whether exercising federal
not)’, is limited by the definition of ‘court’ under
Family Law Act
as ‘the court exercising jurisdiction by
virtue of this Act’.
The Inquiry has been informed that community organisations, particularly those
providing counselling services to parties involved
in family law proceedings,
are concerned about the limited application of s 19N.
13.203 Concerns are raised that s 19N could also be an issue in relation to the
soon to be established Family Relationship Centres
and to communications made in
that context. The enactment of a confidential communications privilege in the
Evidence Act
(Cth) could therefore clarify the position of
notes covering such admissions in the family law jurisdiction.
13.204 In relation to the medical communications privilege in Tasmania, one Crown
Prosecutor told the Inquiry that he prefers the
more general communications
privilege available in New South Wales because it also applies to criminal
proceedings and operates for
the benefit of the accused and witnesses. In
relation to the sexual assault communications privilege, he argues that the New
Wales qualified privilege means that a judge still needs to view the
material, which may be distressing for the complainant. The
absolute privilege
in Tasmania is preferable in that regard, as the complainant maintains complete
control of the material.
The Commissions’ view
13.205 The Commissions believe that the ALRC’s original reasoning for
proposing a confidential relationships privilege remains
sound. Where there is
an identified need for statutory recognition of some confidential relationships,
a tension exists as to whether
to leave the discretion with judges or to try and
craft a statutory statement of the relationships to which privilege will
The New South Wales
approach of a guided discretion is an attempt to negotiate a middle path through
this dilemma.
13.206 The Commissions do not support the addition of an absolute confidential
relationships privilege to the
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth) for the same
reason it was not supported in the original inquiry.
The provision of a discretionary privilege would allow the competing public
interests to be taken into account when the court is
assessing whether evidence
ought in the circumstances to be compelled from witnesses, thus allowing the
courts to be sensitive to
the individual needs of witnesses and of
relationships.
13.207 The Commissions have considered whether to recommend that the
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth) adopt the original proposal in ALRC 38.
However, given the support expressed for the New South Wales provision, it is in
interests of consistency and uniformity for the Commonwealth Act to adopt
the New South Wales confidential communications
provisions.
A draft provision
is set out in Appendix 1.
13.208 The view of ASIC regarding the potential abuse of such a privilege is
noted. However, the fact that the privilege is discretionary,
and that parties
are able to make an argument as to why the material should be released, will
allow a judge to circumvent illegitimate
attempts to claim the privilege.
13.209 The Commissions agree that, in family law proceedings concerning
children, the interests of the child may outweigh the harm
that may be caused,
whether directly or indirectly, to the person who imparted the confidence. It is
noted that the Family Law Council
has released a discussion paper which asks
whether the law should be amended to allow the paramountcy principle—
which requires
that the court treat the best interests of the child as the
paramount consideration in deciding children’s issues—to
qualify the
application of the
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth) in some
circumstances.
13.210 At this stage of the Inquiry, the Commissions propose the adoption of the
sexual assault communications privilege, as enacted
in Division 1B of the New
South Wales
Evidence Act
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
(NSW). Whilst the confidential communications privilege could be considered
to cover such relationships, the Commissions agree with
the view of the New
South Wales Parliament that records of the relationship between a sexual assault
victim and a counsellor are
of particular importance and require a particular
privilege. The Commissions also agree with the recent finding of the VLRC that
such legislation recognises the public interest in encouraging people who have
been sexually assaulted to seek therapy and may also
encourage people who are
sexually assaulted to report the crime to the
The Commissions
consider that the proposal made by the VLRC which is to some extent a hybrid of
the Tasmanian and New South Wales
approaches warrants further examination. The
Commissions welcome views on the VLRC proposal. A draft provision of a sexual
communications privilege has not been included in Appendix 1.
13.211 The Commissions further propose that the confidential communications
privilege and the sexual assault communications privilege
should apply to
pre-trial processes. This is currently what occurs in New South Wales. It is
noted that the extension of these provisions
will resolve the difficulty in
and allow the sexual assault communications privilege sections
currently located in
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
be re-enacted in the
Evidence Act 1995
13.212 The Commissions do not see a need for the
Evidence Act 2001
be similarly amended to follow the New South Wales provisions. Whilst improved
uniformity is clearly a goal of this Inquiry,
it is acknowledged that states may
choose a different path in the enactment of the uniform legislation for good
reasons, such as
consistency with previous legislation or, as in the case of
, following the recommendations of law reform bodies in that
Proposal 13–7
Evidence Act 1995
should be amended to adopt the equivalent of Division 1A of the
Evidence Act
Proposal 13–7a
Evidence Act 1995
, Division 1B of the
Evidence Act 1995
(NSW) should be
amended to include a sexual assault counselling privilege of a discretionary
kind applicable to both civil and criminal
proceedings.
Proposal 13–7b
If Proposal 13–7a is accepted,
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
(NSW) should be repealed.
Proposal 13–8
Both the confidential communications privilege and
the sexual assault communications privilege should apply to pre-trial discovery
and the production of documents in response to a subpoena and non-curial
contexts such as search warrants and notices to produce
documents, as well as
court proceedings.
Privilege in respect
of self-incrimination in other proceedings
13.213 The common law privilege against self-incrimination entitles a person
to refuse to answer any question, or produce any document,
if the answer or the
production would tend to incriminate that
Although broadly
referred to as the privilege against self-incrimination, the concept encompasses
three distinct privileges: a privilege
against self-incrimination in criminal
matters; a privilege against self-exposure to a civil or administrative penalty
any monetary penalty which might be imposed by a court or an
administrative authority, but excluding private civil proceedings for
and a privilege against self-exposure to the forfeiture of an existing right
(which is less commonly invoked).
Section 128(1)
of the uniform Evidence Acts applies where a witness
objects to giving particular evidence that ‘may tend to prove’ that
the witness has committed an offence under Australian or foreign law, or is
liable to a civil penalty.
Subject to subsection (5), if the court finds that there are reasonable grounds
for the objection, the court is not to require the
witness to give that
particular evidence, and is to inform the witness:
(a) that he or she need not give the evidence; and
(b) that, if he or she gives the evidence, the court will give a certificate
under this section; and
(c) of the effect of such a certificate.
13.215 Under
, a witness claiming the privilege on
‘reasonable grounds’ is not required to give that particular
evidence unless the
court finds that the ‘interests of justice’ so
require. In this regard, the Acts differ from the common law, which grants
absolute right to claim the
If the witness
does give evidence, the court must give the witness a certificate which grants
that person use and derivative use
immunity in relation to the particular
evidence (except in criminal proceedings in respect of the falsity of the
Where the court
has denied a claim for privilege and where, after the giving of evidence, the
court finds that there were indeed
reasonable grounds for the claim, the witness
must also be given a
certificate.
The section does
not apply to defendants in criminal proceedings who give evidence that they did,
or omitted to do, an act which
is a fact in issue, or that they had a state of
mind the existence of which is a fact in issue. Corporations cannot claim the
Section 128
differs from the ALRC’s original proposal, which
provided only for an optional certificate, and did not allow a court to compel
witness to give the
13.217 IP 28 asked whether any general concerns were raised by the issuing of
certificates under
of the uniform Evidence
Submissions and consultations
13.218 Concerns raised with the Inquiry regarding the operation of
focused on the procedure of certification, rather than the aims or scope of the
13.219 Judges, in particular, state that the process under
cumbersome and hard to explain to witnesses. One New South Wales Supreme Court
judge told the Inquiry that there is widespread
misunderstanding about
certificates issued under
He said witnesses tend to assume that they
will be exempted from answering questions, rather than understanding that they
required to give the evidence and then be issued with a
certificate.
13.220 Some New South Wales District Court judges submit that generally
serves a useful purpose. However, their view is that the provision is clumsy to
apply and requires redrafting. In particular the
judges submit that:
• the form of words used by the judge is confusing to witnesses;
• the necessity to invoke the process in relation to each question is
clumsy. It should be the broader ‘subject matter’
of the evidence
(rather than ‘particular evidence’) that is protected, for example,
‘the use of cocaine by the
witness when living in Kings Cross in
• it should be sufficient for a judge to confirm the granting of the
certificate in the record of proceedings, rather than having
to create an actual
document; and
• the Act should require a prosecutor to keep a permanent record of all
certificates granted under s 128 in any
proceedings.
13.221 Some New South Wales magistrates agree that it is not clear whether
you have to go through each question that is to be asked
of the witness or
whether you can issue a blanket certificate. Given the time constraints of the
local court, some magistrates tend
to give a blanket certificate. However, they
consider the correct approach is to offer the certificate on a question by
basis. They submit that the process requires
streamlining.
13.222 This is also identified as a problem in the Family Court where a witness, for
example, wishes to give evidence to the Court
fraud. Some Family Court judges state that the situation where a person must be
asked the question,
then object to it, is a
The Commissions’ view
13.223 The process of certification in s 128 was based on a model
adopted in the (then) Australian Capital Territory Court of Petty
ALRC 26 noted that the procedure was invoked around 25 times a year and
elicited useful additional information from
As noted above,
the ALRC at that time recommended an optional certification procedure. This
would still allow witnesses to invoke
his or her common law right not to be
compelled to say anything which might lead to further inquiries or to the
gathering of evidence
against him or
13.224 One suggestion made to the Inquiry is that s 128 could be clarified by
redrafting the order in which the process of certification
is outlined in the
section. This would involve moving s 128(5), where the court may require
the witness to give evidence, closer
to s 128(2), where the witness makes
the objection.
13.225 Rather than the current practice, where a certificate is required to be
issued for each question, one option would be to define
‘particular
evidence’ under the section to include ‘evidence both in response to
questions and evidence on particular
topics’. Section 128(1) could state
the section applies to witnesses giving ‘any or some evidence which may
tend to prove’
that the witness has committed an offence or is liable to a
civil penalty.
13.226 The Commissions are interested in receiving submissions on how the section
might be redrafted.
Proposal 13–9
Section 128 should be re-drafted to clarify the
procedure by which a witness is able to object to giving evidence, may be
to give evidence and may be granted privilege in respect of
self-incrimination in other proceedings.
Question 13–2.
On what terms should s 128 be redrafted to
clarify its procedure?
Application of s 128
to pre-trial proceedings
13.227 Section 128 provides a mechanism for allowing a witness to object to
answering questions on the grounds that, to do so, may
expose the witness to the
risk of criminal and other proceedings. Its policy aim is premised on the
desirability of encouraging witnesses
to testify. Given that this section is
concerned with witnesses and testimonial evidence, it is not proposed that the
certification
procedure be applied to pre-trial matters, along the lines of this
Discussion Paper’s other proposals. In this case, the common
regarding the privilege against self-incrimination will continue to apply in
pre-trial and non-curial contexts.
Application of s 128
to ancillary proceedings
13.228 Anderson, Hunter and Williams note that there are circumstances in
which s 128 has been held to apply to ancillary proceedings,
in the context
of orders made ancillary to asset preservation orders requiring an affidavit of
court’s power to grant asset preservation orders is the ability to require
a person against whom such an order is
made to attend court for an oral
examination as to his or her assets. This examination usually occurs following
the preparation of
an affidavit of assets. One issue in these cases is whether
s 128 is applicable in the context of affidavit evidence only where a
witness or deponent is in court and can give oral evidence of the contents of
the affidavit.
13.229 It has been held in a number of cases that a ‘witness’ for
the purpose of s 128 includes a person who gives evidence
(Australia) Pty Ltd v Evans
Austin J described the practice of
the Equity Division in relation to deciding whether or not the court will
protect an affidavit
of assets by the granting of a s 128 certificate.
The Court initiates the disclosure procedure by making an order that a
disclosure affidavit be prepared and delivered to the judge’s
associate in
a sealed envelope, together with directions that the affidavit not be filed or
served on any other party, and that the
further hearing be notified to the
Director of Public Prosecutions. At that hearing the judge opens the envelope
and inspects the
affidavit. Any affidavit or oral evidence to support the
witness’ objection is then adduced, and submissions are heard as to
whether for the purposes of s 128(2) there are reasonable grounds for the
objection, even though at that stage the plaintiff’s
counsel has not had
access to the affidavit which is the subject of the objection. The judge then
rules on that question …
Once the affidavit has been read, the s 128
certificate is given and attached to it.
If the witness elects not to give the evidence, then the Court hears any further
submissions as to whether it should require the
witness to give the evidence
under s 128(5), and makes a determination accordingly. If the Court decides
to require the witness to
give the evidence, then it follows the procedure for
the reading of the affidavit as outlined above. If the Court decides not to
require the witness to give the evidence, the judge directs that all copies of
the affidavit be returned to the witness’ legal
representative and
authorises their destruction.
Ross v Internet Wines Pty
the New South Wales
Court of Appeal held, in effect, that a respondent could not be compelled to
disclose assets before any claim
to the privilege against self incrimination was
adjudicated upon. The Supreme Court of New South Wales, in
Employment Services v
practice in some detail. Campbell J questioned whether the
approach taken in
is correct, because in essence it is the court
directing the defendant to become a witness only so that the privilege against
self-incrimination
compromised.
It is only by the active involvement of the Court, in setting a time and place
for a special hearing which otherwise would never
occur, that the first
defendant would become a witness. I am not persuaded that these are
circumstances within the scope of the circumstances
for which Parliament
section 128
Evidence Act
to provide an
exception to the privilege against
self-incrimination.
13.231 Campbell J considered that the interaction between the law
concerning privilege against self-incrimination and the law concerning
compulsory disclosure of information for the purpose of civil proceedings was
not coherent.
noted that ‘a conflict has been long apparent between the policy
underlying the privilege against self-incrimination
and the policy that
underlies the procedures, originally equitable, of discovery and
interrogatories’.
example, there are inherent tensions between the privilege against
self-incrimination and the desire to prevent its use by a
criminal defendant to
avoid discovery and interrogatories in associated civil proceedings for the
recovery or administration of
13.232 Campbell J argued that the Commissions’ present Inquiry may be
the appropriate place to consider and clarify the application
similar powers in other legislation where the privilege is abrogated) to
ancillary proceedings for the compulsory disclosure
of information in civil
Macquarie Bank Ltd v Riley Street Nominees Pty
Campbell J made
orders designed to meet the requirements of the Court of Appeal decision in
Ross v Internet Wines
. One of the orders stated that if the respondents
considered that the order to produce an affidavit of assets may incriminate
they had to file and serve within seven days an affidavit setting out
their claim to the privilege against self-incrimination. If
that claim for
privilege was upheld, then the respondents did not need to disclose that
information.
Submissions and consultations
13.234 A committee of the Council of Chief Justices of Australia and New
Zealand is currently investigating the question of the harmonisation
of rules of
court, practice notes and forms in relation to
Anton Piller
orders. The Committee has made a submission to this
Inquiry suggesting that the uniform Evidence Acts
be amended to abrogate
the privilege so that an order for disclosure of the general kind mentioned must
13.235 The Committee notes that, in the United Kingdom, the privilege has
been abrogated by statute in intellectual property and passing
proceedings.
proceedings of these kinds that
Anton Piller
orders are most
commonly made.
13.236 There are a number of potential ways in which
could be amended to
abrogate the privilege in civil proceedings for
Anton Piller
orders. The section could be amended to abrogate the
privilege in civil proceedings generally, where any order is made against an
individual or a question is put to an individual. Alternatively, the privilege
could be specifically abrogated where an order is
made requiring an individual
to disclose assets or other information (or to attend court to testify regarding
assets or other information)
or to permit premises to be searched. The
information would not, however, be available to be used against that individual
criminal proceeding or in any proceeding that would expose the individual
to a penalty, (except a proceeding for perjury or contempt
13.237 The Commissions consider that a general abrogation of the privilege in civil
proceedings in unwarranted and prefers the limited
abrogation of the privilege
to specific types of orders to rectify the present problem with
draft provision is set out in Appendix 1.
Proposal 13–10
Section 128A
should be inserted in the uniform
Evidence Acts to apply in respect of orders made in a civil proceeding requiring
an individual
to disclose assets or other information (or to attend court to
testify regarding assets or other information) or to permit premises
Definition: use in
any proceeding in an Australian court
Section 128(7)
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth) states:
In any proceeding in an Australian court:
(a) evidence given by a person in respect of which a certificate under this
section has been given; and
(b) evidence of any information, document or thing obtained as a direct or
indirect consequence of the person having given evidence;
cannot be used against the person. However, this does not apply to a criminal
proceeding in respect of the falsity of the evidence.
13.239 The term ‘proceeding’ is not defined, although
‘Australian court’ is given a wide
definition.
Odgers argues
that both concepts should be given a liberal interpretation based on the
underlying protective purpose of granting
Section 128(7)
mirrored in the other uniform Evidence Acts, although, for example, under the
Evidence Act 1995
(NSW), the section applies to ‘any proceeding in
a NSW court’.
13.240 As noted in Chapter 2, the definition of an Australian court in the
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth) is broader than the definition of a NSW court in
the New South Wales
Evidence Act
. A ‘NSW court’ is defined in
the Dictionary as the Supreme Court or another court created by Parliament
including a body,
other than a court, that is required to
of evidence.
The definition
of an Australian court under the Commonwealth Act includes a person or body
authorised under an Australian law to
hear, receive and examine evidence
(regardless of whether the rules of evidence must be applied). This means that
the protection
offered by a s 128 certificate under the
Evidence Act
(NSW) is more limited than under the Commonwealth Act as it does not
extend to tribunals that are not required to apply the rules
of evidence, such
as disciplinary tribunals and other administrative
13.241 One issue raised by the term ‘any proceeding’ is the
status of a retrial. In
accused was granted a certificate under s 128 in his first trial for
evidence given by him that might incriminate him in relation
to other possible
charges. The jury at the trial could not decide on a verdict and a re-trial
commenced before Blackmore DCJ in the
District Court of New South Wales.
Blackmore DCJ determined that the trial before him was a different
proceeding for the purposes
of s 128(7) and, therefore, that the
certificate issued by Howie J in the Supreme Court of New South Wales would
apply to the proceeding
in the District Court, preventing the tendering of the
evidence that was the subject of the certificate. The issue was whether a
retrial could be considered a ‘proceeding’ for the purpose of a
s 128 certificate or whether it is part of the original
proceedings.
13.242 Following Blackmore DCJ’s ruling, the parties appeared
before Howie J regarding the issuing of the certificate from the
trial. The Crown contended that the certificate should not be issued because of
the defence delay in seeking it and the use
to be made of it in the District
Court proceedings.
13.243 Howie J considered whether there was any basis on which the
certificate could be limited or amended to prevent its use in keeping
evidence out of the retrial. He found that there was no ground to refuse the
certificate on the basis of events that ‘occurred
after the accused was
told he must answer the questions asked but that a certificate would be issued
in respect of those
The process
set out by s 128 is mandatory not discretionary once the requirements of
the section are met.
13.244 Howie J expressed concern about the situation in
stating that it was difficult to see ‘any justifiable policy which
would permit an accused to give evidence in a trial on the
basis that some or
all of it could not be used against him in any subsequent proceedings for the
same offence’.
basis, he suggested that either it is incorrect to include a retrial in the
definition of a ‘proceeding’ for
the purpose of s 128(7) or the
section needs to be
It is clear from the reasons for judgement and the transcript of proceedings
that the purpose of issuing the certificate was to protect
the applicant from
prosecution for other offences not charged before the Court … As the Crown
has sought to lead evidence of
uncharged criminal activity as part of its case
in proving the offence charged, it seemed to me that the applicant was entitled
defend himself free of running the risk of his evidence being used against
him in subsequent proceedings for criminal activity for
which he was then not
being tried. It was not my intention, nor was it ever suggested during the
course of argument, that the certificate
could be used by the accused to protect
himself from the use of his evidence in a proceeding for the charge in respect
of which the
evidence was
13.245 IP 28 asked whether there were any concerns about the definition of
‘any proceeding in an Australian court’ under
s 128 of the
uniform Evidence Acts.
Submissions and consultations
13.246 There is general support for the proposition that a
‘proceeding’ for which a certificate may be used under s 128
not include its use in a retrial for the same
The view is put that
where a proceeding is aborted, the parties ‘start from square one’
so that any certificate granted
in the aborted trial would have no effect in the
13.247 The issue of a retrial was not considered in the ALRC’s first inquiry.
However, the Commissions consider that Howie J’s
analysis is persuasive.
Section 128 should be clarified to reflect this position. The proposed
provision is set out in Appendix 1.
13.248 The Commissions also believe that the current definition of a ‘NSW
court’ under the
Evidence Act 1995
(NSW) unduly limits the
application of
certificates. In order to reflect the policy basis of
the section, the ambit of the protection of a certificate under the uniform
Evidence Acts should be the same. As under the
Evidence Act 1995
the protection offered by a
certificate should extend to
administrative tribunals and disciplinary bodies authorised to receive and
examine evidence. The Commissions
recommend amendment of the Dictionary of the
Evidence Act 1995
(NSW) to reflect the position under the
Evidence Act
(Cth) in this
A draft provision is
set out in Appendix 1.
Proposal 13–11
Section 128(7)
of the uniform Evidence Acts should
be amended to clarify that a ‘proceeding’ under that section does
not include a retrial
for the same offence or an offence arising out of the same
circumstances.
Proposal 13–12
The definition of a ‘NSW court’ in the
Dictionary of the
Evidence Act 1995
(NSW) should be amended to include
‘any person or body authorised by a New South Wales law, or by consent of
the parties, to
hear, receive and examine evidence’.
confessions
13.249 A specific privilege in respect of religious confessions was not
recommended by the ALRC in its earlier inquiry because it
was considered that
confessions fell under the confidential communications
Such a privilege
was nevertheless enacted in
of the uniform Evidence Acts. The
religious confessions privilege applies in pre-trial matters, as it relates not
only to the adducing
of evidence but also allows a member of clergy (of any
religious denomination) to refuse to divulge that a religious confession was
made or to divulge the contents of the
confession.
13.250 No submissions were received by the Inquiry on this issue nor was it raised
in consultations. This suggests to the Commissions
that the section is working
well in practice, and therefore no change is proposed.
Evidence excluded in
the public interest
13.251 A claim of public interest immunity may be made under the common law
and is also available under
of the uniform Evidence Acts.
Public interest immunity can be distinguished from privilege in that, in the
case of privileges, only a party who can claim the privilege
is able to invoke
it. By contrast, a claim of public interest immunity can be made by the state, a
non-governmental party to the
proceedings, or by the court on its own motion.
13.252 Claims for public interest immunity are most commonly made by the
government in relation to Cabinet deliberations, high level
governments, communications or negotiations between governments, national
security, police investigation methods, or in
relation to the activities of
Australian Security and Intelligence Organisation (ASIO) officers, police
informers, and other types
of informers or covert
operatives.
13.253 In its earlier evidence inquiry, the ALRC found no serious inadequacies in
the common law approach to public interest immunity,
and recommended as little
interference with the supervisory role of the courts as
However, the ALRC
did recommend a change from the accepted common law formula that required the
judge, when determining whether to
grant public interest immunity, to balance
the competing interests at a general
The ALRC supported a
more specific formula balancing ‘the nature of the injury which the nation
or public service is likely
to suffer, and the evidentiary value and importance
of the documents in the particular
litigation’.
Section 130(1)
substantially reflects the ALRC’s
recommendations. It provides:
(1) If the public interest in admitting into evidence information or a document
that relates to matters of state is outweighed by
the public interest in
preserving secrecy or confidentiality in relation to the information or
document, the court may direct that
the information or document not be adduced
as evidence.
New South Wales v
the Federal Court
held that there was no relevant difference, in relation to a public interest
immunity claim for Cabinet papers,
between the common law, as determined in
Sankey v Whitlam
the provisions of
13.256 The ALRC has recently examined the operation of
in the context of
the protection of classified and security sensitive information in court
proceedings. In the Report
Keeping Secrets
(ALRC 98), it was
estimated that public interest immunity arises as an issue in less than one per
cent of cases across all
The ALRC also found
that the public interest immunity procedure worked effectively, although the
procedures for invoking its use
were thought by some to require
clarification.
13.257 ALRC 26 noted that one issue in relation to public interest immunity was
whether procedural provisions should be included in
the uniform Evidence Acts to
enable a judge’s ruling to be obtained in advance of the trial, and to
allow time for an appeal
At the time, the ALRC
considered that the decision in
Sankey v Whitlam
—where reference is
made to the duty to defer inspection to enable the Attorney-General to
appeal—provided a precedent
for raising challenges in this area, and no
specific proposal was made.
The availability of advance rulings for evidentiary issues is discussed further
in Chapter 14.
13.258 In ALRC 98, the ALRC recommended enhancing the regime for the protection
of classified and security sensitive information through
the enactment of
specific procedures in a National Security Information Procedures Act rather
than by amending
Evidence Act 1995
Need for an appeal process
13.259 IP 28 asked whether any issues were raised by
The AGS submits
that it wishes to have a more clearly defined appeal process for public immunity
claims. This is in line with the
AGS’s submission to the ALRC’s
earlier inquiry on classified and security sensitive information. The AGS notes
appeal process was developed by the ALRC in ALRC 98, however, this
only relates to security sensitive (or national security) information
public interest immunity claims more broadly.
13.260 The AGS argues that a clearly defined appeal process would desirably include
provision for public interest immunity claims
made in interlocutory stages to be
determined in sufficient time for an appeal also to be determined before
hearing—or alternatively,
for the hearing to be deferred in whole or in
part as necessary. Such a process should also overcome a problem that now exists
relation to public interest immunity claims made in the interlocutory stages,
this being that the interlocutory ruling does not bind
the trial judge. The AGS
accepts that a trial judge should have the right to reconsider a public interest
immunity claim if circumstances
relating to the competing aspects of the public
interest change. However, aside from that situation, the AGS believes that
interest immunity rulings in interlocutory stages should be final
(subject to appeal).
13.261 The Commissions note the AGS concerns regarding the need for a more defined
appeal process from a ruling on a claim for public
interest immunity. However,
the Commissions consider that this concern is one of procedure and therefore
should not be something
that falls under the ambit of an
Evidence Act
application. It is noted that appeal procedures in relation to other evidentiary
rulings are not included in the uniform
Evidence Acts.
Section 130
to cover pre-trial
proceedings
13.262 A claim for public interest immunity may be made at trial or in the
course of pre-trial
procedures.
In the case of
tribunals and investigative agencies, public interest immunity is often
preserved by the inclusion of statutory
provisions.
Section 130
is essentially a restatement of the common law, with a
non-exhaustive formula indicating how the competing interests are to be
The Commissions believe it would be desirable to extend the operation
to pre-trial proceedings.
Proposal 13–13
Section 130
of the uniform Evidence Acts should
apply to pre-trial discovery and the production of documents in response to a
subpoena and non-curial
contexts such as search warrants and notices to produce
documents, as well as court proceedings.
Exclusion of
evidence of settlement negotiations
Section 131
of the uniform Evidence Acts provides that evidence is not
to be adduced of a communication that is made in connection with an attempt
negotiate a settlement, including communications made with third parties. The
section applies only to civil matters, and not in
relation to negotiations
concerning criminal charges.
13.265 A number of exceptions apply to this general statement, including:
where the parties consent; where the substance of the evidence
has been partly
or wholly disclosed; the communication included a statement that it was not
intended to be confidential; or where
making the communication or preparing the
document affects a right of a person. The exceptions were developed along
similar lines
to those established under the common law.
13.266 In ALRC 26, the ALRC noted that the primary rationale given for
the protection was the public interest in encouraging settlement
The Acts mirror a
similar ‘without prejudice’ privilege available at common law, where
the judge may exercise his or
her discretion to admit evidence of settlement
negotiations as part of the inherent jurisdiction of the court. As under the
the court must be satisfied that the communication is genuinely intended
to be an attempt at
settlement.
13.267 Examples of matters where the court has admitted evidence of
settlement negotiations under
• An offer of compromise on the matter of costs, as it fell within the
exclusion under
relating to liability for
• A letter headed ‘Without Prejudice’ which suggested a willingness
to settle but did not suggest a specific compromise
for the dispute. It was held
not to be an attempt to negotiate a settlement of a
proceeding.
• An offer of settlement on the question of costs which reserved the right to
be tendered on the question of
Silver Fox Pty Ltd v Lenard’s Pty
it was found that
the wording of
Section 131(1)
, subject to its exceptions, gives effect to the policy of
ensuring the course of negotiations—whether private or by
mediation—are
not adduced into evidence for the purpose of influencing the
outcome on the primary matters in issue. Clearly, it is in the public
that negotiations to explore resolution of proceedings should not be inhibited
by the risk of such negotiations influencing
the outcome on those primary
issues. It is equally in the public interest that negotiations should be
conducted genuinely and realistically.
The effect of
s 131(2)(h)
is to expose
that issue to inspection when costs issues only are to be resolved. There is no
apparent public interest in permitting
a party to avoid such exposure by
imposing terms upon the communication, whether by the use of the expression
‘without prejudice’
or by a mediation
13.269 The Commercial Bar Association of Victoria suggests that these
decisions are consistent with what would be the expected results
at common law
and are evidence of the straightforward application of the provisions under the
Submissions and consultations
13.270 One submission argues that the exceptions to the ‘without
prejudice’ privilege may mean that certain statements
made during
mediation or another situation where the privilege would otherwise apply may not
be privileged. These include:
• Where the statement forms part of a discussion that is alleged to
give rise to an agreement;
• If a party is alleged to have made any mis-statement at a mediation
that may be said to amount to a misrepresentation or an
estoppel. It may be
sufficient that a party simply over-states that strength of their case;
• If the ACCC calls for information of what transpired at a mediation
Trade Practices Act 1974
• If there is an examination undertaken by ASIC or a liquidator under s
Corporations Law 2001
• Possibly, where an administrative decision maker seeks to rely on the
• Where the other party is said to have expressly, or impliedly, waived
the privilege;
• If a party makes a statement that is outside the parameters of the
precise dispute in question;
• If a party acknowledges that they are impecunious;
• If a party says that they will move assets to make themselves
“judgment proof”;
• If a party makes a defamatory statement or threatens to institute
patent, copyright or trade mark proceedings; or
• If a party concedes that he or she may give evidence contrary to what
he or she concedes to be the case during
13.271 The submission states that the law should be changed so that nothing
that is said or done in mediation, or in preparation for
mediation or in
consequence of a mediation, should be admissible in any court unless:
• it amounts to a criminal act;
• such disclosure is necessary in order to protect the safety of a
• it vitiates a written agreement that is alleged to have been
13.272 Another suggestion is to amend
so that agreements reached
as a result of mediation will only be enforceable if, and to the extent that,
they are in writing. This
would largely remove the need for courts to examine
without prejudice discussions to determine if a binding agreement was reached,
as they will be required to look at the terms of the written document alone.
Parties would not be required to enter into a written
agreement, but would be
made aware that, if they fail to do so, then the ‘agreement’ will be
unenforceable.
13.273 A drafting discrepancy in the section is also noted. Under
s 131(1)(a)
the communication is protected where it is made in connection
with an attempt to negotiate the settlement of ‘the’ dispute.
s 131(1)(b)
documents are protected that have been prepared in connection
with an attempt to negotiate ‘a’ dispute. However, the
notes that Odgers and Gans and Palmer have argued that this should not make any
difference in outcome.
However, if the section is amended then any differences in language should be
13.274 It is also suggested that
s 131(2)(h)
requires amendment. This section
provides an exception to the privilege where the communication or document is
relevant to determining
liability for costs. It is argued that there is an
anomaly in the legislation because the privilege is lost when the court is
determining
the question of costs but not when it is determining the question of
other matters not related to liability, such as the question
of interest on
damages awarded. On this basis,
s 131(2)(h)
could be amended to include the
words ‘liability for costs
or interest
13.275 The Commissions’ analysis of case law has not revealed any significant
difficulties in the operation of
to date, including in cases that
have involved communications made during mediation. On this basis, the
Commissions are reluctant
to recommend any change to the section without
reference to a specific difficulty that requires remedy. The Commissions are
in receiving further views on this issue.
Question 13–3.
Are there any difficulties with the operation of
of the uniform Evidence Acts? In particular, are there difficulties
with statements made during mediation, that may not be covered
by the privilege,
but should be?
J Gans and A Palmer,
Principles of Evidence
(2nd ed, 2004),
Pyneboard Pty Ltd v Trade
Practices Commission
[1983] HCA 9
(1983) 152 CLR 328
Sorby v Commonwealth
[1983] HCA 10
152 CLR 281
Comptroller General of Customs v Disciplinary Appeal
[1992] FCA 194
(1992) 35 FCR 466.
Evidence Act 1995
Evidence Act
, Div 1A and Div 1B (applying to civil matters only). The sexual
assault communications privilege available in criminal proceedings
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
(NSW). These provisions are discussed
further below.
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, ALRC 38 (1987),
J Anderson, J Hunter and N
The New Evidence Law: Annotations and Commentary on the Uniform
Evidence Acts
(2002), 416.
[1999] HCA 66
(1999) 201 CLR 1.
Australian Law Reform Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1 (1985),
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004),
Qs 11–1, 11–2.
Telstra Corporation v Australis Media Holdings (No 1)
(1997) 41 NSWLR
Adelaide Steamship Pty Ltd v Spalvins
[1998] FCA 144
(1998) 81 FCR 360
[1998] NSWSC 254
(1998) 43 NSWLR 539
; S Odgers,
Uniform Evidence Law
2004), 451.
Mann v Carnell
[1999] HCA 66
(1999) 201 CLR 1.
Esso Australia
Resources Ltd v Commissioner of Taxation
(1999) 2001 CLR
These rules apply
Evidence Act 1995
(NSW) to discovery, interrogatories, subpoenas, notices
to produce and oral examinations:
Supreme Court Rules
District Court Rules
Pt 22, 22A and 29. See S Odgers,
Evidence Law
(6th ed, 2004), [1.3.10360]; J Anderson, J Hunter and N
The New Evidence Law: Annotations and Commentary on the Uniform
Evidence Acts
(2002), 417.
Supreme Court Rules 1937
(ACT) O 34, r
For example,
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
(NSW). These privileges are discussed further
Baker v Campbell
[1983] HCA 39
153 CLR 52.
Ibid; Australian Law
Reform Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1 (1985), [877] citing
Baker v Campbell
[1983] HCA 39
(1983) 153 CLR 52
Baker v Campbell
[1983] HCA 39
153 CLR 52.
Attorney-General
(NT) v Kearney
(1985) 158 CLR 500;
Evidence Act 1995
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1 (1985),
Baker v Campbell
[1983] HCA 39
; Australian Law Reform Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim)
Vol 1 (1985), [877].
[1983] HCA 39
(1983) 153 CLR 52.
See S McNicol, ‘Client Legal Privilege and
Legal Professional Privilege: Considered, Compared and Contrasted’
Australian Bar Review
Grant v Downs
[1976] HCA 63
(1976) 135 CLR 674.
Esso Australia
Resources Ltd v Commissioner of Taxation
(1999) 2001 CLR
Australian Law Reform Commission,
, ALRC 38 (1987), [881].
Grant v Downs
[1976] HCA 63
(1976) 135 CLR 674
, 678. See S Odgers,
Uniform Evidence
(6th ed, 2004), 457.
[1983] HCA 39
(1983) 153 CLR 52
, 408, cited in Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1 (1985),
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1 (1985),
The Daniels Corporation
International Ltd Pty Ltd v Australian Competition and Consumer Commission
[2002] HCA 49
(2002) 213 CLR 543.
A Ligertwood,
Australian Evidence
(4th ed, 2004),
S McNicol, ‘Client Legal
Privilege and Legal Professional Privilege: Considered, Compared and
Contrasted’
Australian Bar Review
(1992), 52.
‘Client Legal Privilege and Legal Professional Privilege: Considered,
Compared and Contrasted’
Australian Bar Review
J Anderson, J Hunter
and N Williams,
The New Evidence Law: Annotations and Commentary on the
Uniform Evidence Acts
(2002), 416.
Law of Privilege
Mann v Carnell
[1999] HCA 66
Esso Australia Resources Ltd
v Commissioner of Taxation
(1999) 2001 CLR
Supreme Court Rules
Pt 23, 24, 36 and 75;
District Court Rules
Pt 22, 22A and
29. See S Odgers,
Uniform Evidence Law
(6th ed, 2004), [1.3.10360]; J
Anderson, J Hunter and N Williams,
The New Evidence Law: Annotations and
Commentary on the Uniform Evidence Acts
It should be noted that the
Civil Procedure Act 2005
(NSW), which provides for the making of uniform
civil procedure rules consistent with the Act, received assent on 1 June 2005. A
of commencement had not been proclaimed at time of publication. The new
Civil Procedure Act
continues the application of the
Evidence Act 1995
(NSW) to pre-trial proceedings.
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
(2004), Q 11–1.
Law Committee of the Law Society of South Australia,
7 March 2005; A Palmer,
Consultation
, Melbourne, 16 March
2005; T Game,
Consultation
, Sydney, 25 February 2005; Judicial Officers
of the District Court of NSW,
Consultation
, Sydney, 3 March 2005; High
Court of Australia,
Consultation
, Canberra, 9 March
High Court of Australia,
Consultation
, Canberra, 9 March
Law Council of Australia,
4 March 2005,
Australian Government
18 February
Director of Public Prosecutions
15 February
Australian Securities &
Investments Commission,
7 March 2005,
CPA Australia and Institute of
Chartered Accountants in Australia,
23 February
Consultation
Sydney, 31 January 2005.
Officers of the District Court of NSW,
Consultation
, Sydney, 3 March
Section 155
gives the ACCC wide
powers to require the production of documents, written information and/or
evidence to be given by any person
who has documents or information that relate
to a suspected contravention of the
Trade Practices
The Daniels Corporation
International Ltd Pty Ltd v Australian Competition and Consumer Commission
[2002] HCA 49
(2002) 213 CLR 543.
Australian Law
Reform Commission,
Principled Regulation: Federal and Civil Administrative
Penalties in Australia
, ALRC 95 (2002),
[1983] HCA 39
(1983) 153 CLR 52.
McNicol, ‘Client Legal Privilege and Legal Professional Privilege:
Considered, Compared and Contrasted’
Australian Bar Review
; J Anderson, J Hunter and N Williams,
The New Evidence Law:
Annotations and Commentary on the Uniform Evidence Acts
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004),
This issue is also
discussed by S McNicol, ‘Client Legal Privilege and Legal Professional
Privilege: Considered, Compared
and Contrasted’
Consultation
, Melbourne, 17 March
Director of Public Prosecutions
15 February
Waterford v Commonwealth
[1987] HCA 25
(1987) 163 CLR 54.
Ibid, 360 cited in
Law of Privilege
Waterford v Commonwealth
[1987] HCA 25
(1987) 163 CLR 54
, 356 cited in S McNicol,
Law of Privilege
ASIC v Rich
[2004] NSWSC
Southern Equities
Corporation Ltd (in Liq) v Arthur Anderson & Co (No 6)
[2001] SASC 398
The issue of independence and
competence is discussed further below.
Uniform Evidence Acts
Consultation
, Melbourne, 17 March
Australian Securities &
Investments Commission,
S McNicol, ‘Client Legal
Privilege and Legal Professional Privilege: Considered, Compared and
Contrasted’
Australian Bar Review
Vance v McCormack
[2004] ACTSC 78.
This case concerned advice given by legal and military officers
employed by the Department of Defence.
This case concerned an application for an order to produce documents for
inspection pre-trial, so the common law of legal professional
privilege applied
rather than the uniform Evidence Acts.
Vance v McCormack
[2004] ACTSC 78
citing, eg,
Legal Practitioners Act 1970
(ACT) s 22;
Profession Act 1987
Legal Practice Act 1996
At the time of writing, an
appeal has been argued in
McCormack v Vance.
The decision has been
Criminal Law Committee of
the Law Society of South Australia,
McKinnon and Secretary of
Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade
[2004] AATA 1365
, [51]. See also
Australian Securities & Investments Commission,
7 March 2005.
McKinnon and
Secretary of Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade
[2004] AATA 1365
Australian Hospital Care v
Duggan (No 2)
[1999] VSC 131.
Ibid, [35]–[59]. See, eg,
Attorney-General (NT) v Kearney
[1985] HCA 60
158 CLR 500
Waterford v Commonwealth
[1987] HCA 25
(1987) 163 CLR 54.
Australian Hospital Care v Duggan
[1999] VSC 131
, [54]. This view was also espoused in
[2004] NSWSC 1089.
See also Brennan J in
Waterford v
Commonwealth
[1987] HCA 25
(1987) 163 CLR 54
, 71: ‘If the purpose of the privilege
is to be fulfilled, the legal adviser must be competent and independent. ...
Independent,
in order that the personal loyalties, duties or interests of the
adviser should not influence the legal advice which he gives or
the fairness of
his conduct of litigation on behalf of his client. If a legal adviser is
incompetent to advise or to conduct litigation
or if he is unable to be
professionally detached in giving advice or in conducting litigation, there is
an unacceptable risk that
the purpose for which privilege is granted will be
subverted’.
Hospital Care v Duggan (No 2)
[1999] VSC 131
Uniform Evidence
(6th ed, 2004), [1.3.10340].
Kennedy v Wallace
[2004] FCAFC 337
(2004) 213 ALR
This case concerned the common
law as it was in relation to a pre-trial
application.
Kennedy v Wallace
[2004] FCAFC 337
(2004) 213 ALR 108
CPA Australia and Institute of
Chartered Accountants in Australia,
23 February
2005. The New Zealand government has introduced legislation establishing a new
privilege for opinions on tax law by registered
tax practitioners. The statutory
privilege is available to cover communications made for the dominant purpose of
giving or receiving
tax advice on tax laws. The policy basis for the privilege
is to allow candid and open communications between tax advisors and their
clients: M Cullen (Minister of Finance New Zealand Government), ‘Statutory
Privilege for Legal Advice Extended’ (Press
Release, 14 September 2004).
The ATO has indicated that they are looking at the New Zealand approach:
‘Follow NZ Lead Say Accountants’,
Australian Financial Review
(Sydney), 17 September 2004, 3.
Baker v Campbell
[1983] HCA 39
(1983) 153 CLR
The Daniels Corporation
International Ltd Pty Ltd v Australian Competition and Consumer Commission
[2002] HCA 49
(2002) 213 CLR 543.
Securities & Investments Commission,
Environment Protection
Authority v Caltex Refining Co Pty Ltd
[1993] HCA 74
(1993) 178 CLR 477
Australian Competition and
Consumer Commission v Daniels Corporation International Pty Ltd
ALR 114, [57].
Daniels Corporation International Ltd Pty Ltd v Australian Competition and
Consumer Commission
[2002] HCA 49
(2002) 213 CLR 543
, [5] (Gleeson CJ, Gaudron, Gummow and
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Principled Regulation: Federal and Civil Administrative Penalties
in Australia
, ALRC 95 (2002), Ch
Ibid, Rec 19–1.
Recommendation 19–4 also advocated that a review be undertaken of federal
investigative powers and the
operation of legal professional privilege with a
view to providing greater certainty and
consistency.
A Ligertwood,
Australian Evidence
(4th ed, 2004),
Australian Federal Police v
Propend Finance
(1997) 188 CLR
A Ligertwood,
(4th ed, 2004), 96.
Australian Federal Police v
Propend Finance
(1997) 188 CLR 501,
Director of Public
Prosecutions (NSW),
15 February
Australian Government
18 February
See eg Criminal Law Committee
of the Law Society of South Australia,
CPA Australia and Institute
of Chartered Accountants in Australia,
February 2005.
Securities & Investments Commission,
This view was also supported
by S McNicol,
Consultation
, Melbourne, 17 March
Australian Federal Police
v Propend Finance
(1997) 188 CLR 501,
Pratt Holdings Pty Ltd v
Commissioner of Taxation
[2004] FCAFC 122
(2004) 207 ALR
Pratt Holdings Pty Ltd v
Commissioner of Taxation
[2003] FCA 39
, 39. See V Morfuni, ‘Legal
Professional Privilege and the Government’s Right to Access Information
and Documents’
Australian Taxation Review
‘Loosening the Shackles on Advice Privilege’ (2004) 42(8)
Society Journal
Pratt Holdings Pty Ltd v
Commissioner of Taxation
[2004] FCAFC 122
(2004) 207 ALR 217
Ibid, [42], [104]; see V
Morfuni, ‘Legal Professional Privilege and the Government’s Right to
Access Information and
Documents’ (2004) 33
Australian Taxation Review
Pratt Holdings Pty
Ltd v Commissioner of Taxation
[2004] FCAFC 122
(2004) 207 ALR 217
, [87] (Stone
‘Loosening the Shackles on Advice Privilege’ (2004) 42(8)
Society Journal
Consultation
, Melbourne, 17 March
The Daniels Corporation
International Ltd Pty Ltd v Australian Competition and Consumer Commission
[2002] HCA 49
(2002) 213 CLR 543
Holdings Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Taxation
[2004] FCAFC 122
(2004) 207 ALR 217
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1 (1985),
Pratt Holdings Pty Ltd v
Commissioner of Taxation
[2003] FCA 39
T Wilson, ‘The House of
Lords Clarifies Purpose and Scope of Advice Privilege’ (2005) 32(3)
Law Council of
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1 (1985),
Newcastle Wallsend Coal
Co Pty Ltd v Court of Coal Mines Regulation
(1997) 42 NSWLR 351
Director of Public
Prosecutions (Cth) v Kane
(1997) 140 FLR 468
Ampolex v Perpetual Trustee
[1996] NSWSC 7
(1996) 40 NSWLR 12
A Ligertwood,
Australian Evidence
(4th ed, 2004),
Attorney-General (NT) v
[1986] HCA 80
(1986) 161 CLR 475
Mann v Carnell
[1999] HCA 66
(1999) 201 CLR 1
, 13 citing
Goldberg v Ng
[1995] HCA 39
[1995] HCA 39
(1995) 185 CLR 83
Mann v Carnell
[1999] HCA 66
(1999) 201 CLR 1
, 13. See also A Ligertwood,
Australian Evidence
(4th ed, 2004),
DSE (Holdings) Pty Ltd v
Interan Inc
[2003] FCA 384
127 FCR 499
SQMB v Minister for
Immigration and Multicultural and Ethnic Affairs
[2004] FCA 241.
M Edelstein, ‘Legal Professional Privilege’
(2004) 78(11)
Law Institute Journal
SQMB v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Ethnic Affairs
[2004] FCA 241
Steamship Pty Ltd v Spalvins
[1998] FCA 144
(1998) 81 FCR
ACCC v Australian Safeway
(1998) 81 FCR 526
NRMA Limited v Morgan (No 2)
[1999] NSWSC 694
, [15]–[16]. See also
J Anderson, J Hunter and N Williams,
The New Evidence Law: Annotations
and Commentary on the Uniform Evidence Acts
SVI Systems Pty Ltd v Best
& Less Pty Ltd
[2000] FCA 1507
Telstra Corporation v Australis
Media Holdings (No 2)
(1997) 41 NSWLR 346
Perpetual Trustees (WA) v
Equuscorp Pty Limited
Adelaide Steamship Pty Ltd
[1998] FCA 144
(1998) 81 FCR 360.
Telstra Corporation v BT Australasia
[1998] FCA 901
(1998) 85 FCR
Australian Government
18 February 2005, 3. Although in
DSE (Holdings) Pty Ltd v Interan Inc
[2003] FCA 384
(2003) 127 FCR 499
, [5], [95]
Allsop J was of the view that the majority test in
on the traditional common law considerations of fairness, and therefore narrowed
Mann v Carnell.
Tallglen Pty Ltd v Pay TV Holdings Pty Ltd
(Unreported, Supreme Court of
New South Wales, Hunter J, 3 March 1997) cited in S Odgers,
Uniform Evidence
(6th ed, 2004), [1.3.11040].
Uniform Evidence Law
(6th ed, 2004),
[1.3.11040].
[1.3.11040].
Carnell v Mann
[1998] FCA 1566
(1998) 89 FCR 247
‘Client Legal Privilege and Legal Professional Privilege: Considered,
Compared and Contrasted’
Australian Bar Review
Uniform Evidence
(6th ed, 2004), [1.3.11040].
Mann v Carnell
[1999] HCA 66
(1999) 201 CLR 1
Director of Public Prosecutions
15 February 2005,
Australian Government
18 February 2005,
Consultation
Melbourne, 17 March 2005; A Palmer,
Consultation
, Melbourne, 16 March
Consultation
, Melbourne, 17 March
Consultation
, Sydney, 21 February 2005; S Finch,
Consultation
Sydney, 3 March 2005.
CPA Australia
and Institute of Chartered Accountants in Australia,
23 February 2005.
Consultation
, Melbourne, 17 March 2005. For example,
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Ethnic Affairs
[2004] FCA 241
which held that waiver can take place even where there is no subjective
intention on the part of the client to waive the
This approach received
some support in consultations: A Palmer,
Consultation
, Melbourne, 16
March 2005.
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1 (1985),
R v Pearson
(Unreported, New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal, Gleeson CJ, Smart and
Sully JJ, 5 March 1996).
Australian Law Reform Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1
(1985), [885].
[1972] 2 All ER 1192.
Law of Privilege
(1992), 101.
Australian Law Reform Commission,
, ALRC 38 (1987), [195].
Carter v The Managing Partner
Northmore Hale Davy and Leake
(1995) 183 CLR
Director of Public
Prosecutions (NSW),
15 February
Director of Public
Prosecutions (Cth) v Kane
(1997) 140 FLR
Director of Public
Prosecutions (NSW),
15 February
Consultation
Sydney, 25 February 2005; Judicial Officers of the District Court of NSW,
Consultation
, Sydney, 3 March
Consultation
Sydney, 25 February 2005.
Officers of the District Court of NSW,
Consultation
, Sydney, 3 March
For example, P Bayne,
Consultation
, Canberra, 9 March
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1 (1985),
Evidence Law
(6th ed, 2004),
[1.3.11620].
Kang v Kwan
[2001] NSWSC 698
Amalgamated Television Services Pty Ltd
[1999] NSWSC 428
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004),
CPA Australia
and Institute of Chartered Accountants in Australia,
23 February 2005, 5.
Australian Government Solicitor,
18 February
NSW Ombudsman,
Ibid. A number of other
examples were given in the
submission.
Waterford v
Commonwealth
[1987] HCA 25
(1987) 163 CLR 54.
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Principled Regulation: Federal and Civil
Administrative Penalties in Australia
, ALRC 95 (2002),
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, ALRC 38 (1987),
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1 (1985),
Ibid, [955]. See also
Australian Law Reform Commission,
, ALRC 38 (1987),
Evidence Act 1995
, Divs 1A, 1B (applying to civil matters only). The sexual
assault communications privilege available in criminal proceedings is in
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
(NSW). These provisions are
discussed below.
Australian Law
Reform Commission,
The Recognition of Aboriginal Customary Laws
Attorney General's
Department (NSW),
Protecting Confidential Communications from Disclosure in
Court Proceedings
, DP (1996); see S Odgers,
Uniform Evidence Law
ed, 2004), [1.3.11860].
Parliamentary Debates
Legislative Council, 22 October 1997 (J
Shaw—Attorney General), 1120: see S Odgers,
Uniform Evidence Law
(6th ed, 2004), [1.3.11940].
Evidence Act
Wilson v New
South Wales
[2003] NSWSC 805
For example, in
John Fairfax Publications Pty Ltd
[2002] NSWSC 563
it was held that
applies to a journalist and source relationship, however, in that case, the
interests of justice in the plaintiff having an effective
remedy outweighed the
possible harm which could be caused to the reputation of journalists and their
ability to obtain information
if they were forced to reveal sources.
Uniform Evidence
(6th ed, 2004), [1.3.11940].
[1.3.11940].
[2003] NSWSC 109
similar privilege is available under
Evidence Act 2001
J Anderson, J Hunter and N
The New Evidence Law: Annotations and Commentary on the Uniform
Evidence Acts
(2002), 444.
(1999) 46 NSWLR 681.
Evidence Act 1995
New South Wales,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Council, 22 October 1997, 1121 (J
Shaw—Attorney General).
Sexual Assault Communications Privilege
(2005) College of Law,
This broad definition of a
counselling relationship was adopted following the decision of the New South
Wales Court of Criminal
[2000] NSWCCA 444
(2000) 50 NSWLR 289
narrowed the definition of the word ‘counselling’ to a clinical
context: G Bartley,
Sexual Assault Communications Privilege
College of Law, 14.
Taskforce on
Sexual Assault and Rape in Tasmania,
P Underwood,
Consultation
, Hobart, 15 March
Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Sexual Offences: Final Report
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1 (1985),
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004),
Qs 11–9, 11–10,
Law Council of
Australian Securities &
Investments Commission,
Consultation
Canberra, 9 March 2005.
Association,
Consultation
, Canberra, 9 March
Criminal Law Committee of the
Law Society of South Australia,
See, eg, Director of Public
Prosecutions (NSW),
15 February 2005; Judicial
Officers of the District Court of NSW,
Consultation
, Sydney, 3 March
2005; B Donovan,
Consultation
, Sydney, 21 February 2005; A Palmer,
Consultation
, Melbourne, 16 March 2005; Supreme Court of the ACT Judicial
Consultation
, Canberra, 8 March 2005. The Law Society of SA did
not object to the adoption of a sexual assault communications privilege along
the lines of the NSW provisions within the
Evidence Act 1995
although it preferred the absolute protection in criminal matters as under the
Tasmanian Act: Criminal Law Committee of the
Law Society of South Australia,
Judicial Officers of the
District Court of NSW,
Consultation
, Sydney, 3 March
Consultation
Sydney, 25 February 2005.
Consultation
, Melbourne, 16 March 2005.
CPA Australia and Institute of
Chartered Accountants in Australia,
23 February
Judicial Officers of the
Family Court of Australia and Federal Magistrates Court,
Consultation
Parramatta, 28 February 2005.
R v Liddy (No. 2)
(2001) 28 Fam LR 377
[2000] NSWSC
Office of the Director of
Public Prosecutions Tasmania,
Consultation
, Hobart, 15 March
Consultation
Sydney, 31 January 2005.
Law Reform Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1 (1985),
These provisions are
contained in the
Evidence Act 1995
Family Law Council,
‘Child Paramountcy Principle’ in the
Family Law Act
(2004), 31,
Qs 1, 2. See Ch 18.
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Sexual Offences: Final Report
Pyneboard Pty Ltd v
Trade Practices Commission
[1983] HCA 9
(1983) 152 CLR 328
Clause 3 of
Dictionary in the
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth) and the
Evidence Act 1995
(NSW) defines a ‘civil penalty’ as a penalty (other than a
criminal penalty) arising under Australian law or a law of
a foreign country.
The protection of a certificate does not appear to extend to use of the evidence
for administrative purposes,
such as cancellation of a licence or a banning
order under the
Corporations Act 2001
(Cth). Administrative actions have
been traditionally held by the courts to have a protective purpose, rather than
that of a penalty
or punishment: eg,
ASC v Kippe
[1996] FCA 517
(1996) 67 FCR 499.
However, in relation to the common law privilege against self-exposure to a
penalty, the High Court has found that disqualification
orders may have both a
protective and a penal purpose, and therefore the privilege may apply:
Australian Securities and Investments Commission
[2004] HCA 42
(2004) 209 ALR
J Anderson, J Hunter and N
The New Evidence Law: Annotations and Commentary on the Uniform
Evidence Acts
(2002), [128.05].
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth) the protection afforded under the
certificate only extends to any proceeding in a NSW court. However, under
(11) of the
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth), a certificate
given under the NSW Act operates as though it were given under the federal Act,
thereby extending the protection
to any Australian Court. That extended effect
also applies to the direct and derivative use immunities contained in
Uniform Evidence
Acts s 128(4).
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, ALRC 38 (1987),
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004),
Officers of the Supreme Court of New South Wales,
Consultation
18 March 2005.
New South Wales
District Court Judges,
22 February
New South Wales Local Court
Magistrates,
Consultation
, Sydney, 5 April
Judicial Officers of the
Family Court of Australia and Federal Magistrates Court,
Consultation
Parramatta, 28 February 2005.
Australian Law Reform Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1
(1985), [861].
Consultation
, Melbourne, 17 March
J Anderson, J Hunter and N
The New Evidence Law: Annotations and Commentary on the Uniform
Evidence Acts
(2002), [128.10].
Ibid, [128.10], citing, eg,
In the Marriage of Atkinson
(1997) 136 FLR
Bax Global (Australia) Pty Ltd v Evans
[1999] NSWSC 815
(1999) 47 NSWLR 538.
Bax Global (Australia) Pty
Ltd v Evans
[1999] NSWSC 815
(1999) 47 NSWLR 538
Ross v Internet
Wines Pty Ltd
[2004] NSWCA 195
(2004) 60 NSWLR
Pathways Employment
Services v West
[2004] NSWSC
Macquarie Bank Ltd v Riley
Street Nominees Pty Ltd
[2005] NSWSC
Committee of the Council of
Chief Justices of Australian and New Zealand,
April 2005.
Supreme Court
Act 1981 (UK)
Uniform Evidence Law
(6th ed, 2004), [1.3.13100]. See discussion
of what is meant by ‘proceeding’ in
[1.3.13100].
The same definition of
a ‘Tasmanian court’ is given under
Evidence Act 1991
Evidence Law
(6th ed, 2004), [1.3.13100].
R v Cornwell
[2004] NSWSC
Australian Law
Reform Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004),
Criminal Law
Committee of the Law Society of South Australia,
7 March 2005; G Bellamy,
Consultation
, Canberra, 8 March 2005; B
Consultation
, Sydney, 21 February
Consultation
Sydney, 31 January 2005.
Proposal 2–1.
Law Reform Commission,
, ALRC 38 (1987), proposed
Evidence Act 1995
J Hunter, C Cameron and T
Litigation I: Civil Procedure
(7th ed, 2005), [8.102].
Australian Law Reform Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1 (1985),
Sankey v Whitlam
[1978] HCA 43
(1978) 142 CLR 1.
Australian Law
Reform Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1 (1985), [866],
Alister v The Queen
[1984] HCA 85
(1983) 50 ALR 41
New South Wales v
(1998) 101 LGERA 246.
See also J Anderson, J Hunter and N Williams,
The New Evidence Law: Annotations and Commentary on the Uniform Evidence
(2002), [130.40].
Sankey v Whitlam
[1978] HCA 43
(1978) 142 CLR
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Keeping Secrets: The Protection of Classified and Security
Sensitive Information
, Report 98 (2004),
[8.192]–[8.205].
Law Reform Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1 (1985),
Ibid, [8.68].
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Keeping Secrets: The Protection of Classified and Security Sensitive
Information
, Report 98 (2004), [8.208]–[8.211]. The
Security Information (Criminal Proceedings) Act 2004
(Cth) commenced
operation in December 2004.
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
(2004), Q 11–18.
Law of Privilege
Australian Securities and
Investments Commission Act 2001
Administrative
Appeals Tribunal Act 1975
Law of Privilege
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1 (1985),
B Leader, ‘Public
Interest Privilege’ (Paper presented at Australasian Government Solicitors
Conference, 19 November
Bruinsma v Menczer
(1995) 40 NSWLR
GPI Leisure Corporation v
(1997) 42 NSWLR 225.
Bloom v Mini Minors
(Unreported, Supreme Court of New South Wales,
McClelland J, 28 August 1996).
Silver Fox Pty Ltd v Lenard’s Pty Ltd
(2004) 214 ALR
Commercial Bar Association of
the Victorian Bar,
21 March 2005.
14. Discretionary and Mandatory Exclusions
Introduction
General discretion to exclude evidence
Exclusion of prejudicial evidence in criminal proceedings
Exclusion of improperly or illegally obtained evidence
General discretion to limit the use of evidence
Discretion to give leave
Advance rulings
14. Discretionary and Mandatory Exclusions
Introduction
14.1 The uniform Evidence Acts contain a number of provisions that give
courts the discretion to exclude, or mandate the exclusion
of, otherwise
admissible evidence.
14.2 Section 135 provides a discretion in both civil and criminal
proceedings to exclude otherwise admissible evidence where the probative
is substantially outweighed by the danger that the evidence might: be unfairly
prejudicial to a party; be misleading or confusing;
or cause or result in undue
waste of time. Section 137 provides that, in criminal proceedings, the
trial judge must refuse to admit
evidence adduced by the prosecutor if its
probative value is outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice to a defendant.
138 provides a discretion to exclude evidence that has been
illegally or improperly obtained.
14.3 In addition, s 136 provides a discretion to limit the use that can
be made of evidence that is relevant for more than one purpose.
s 192 provides that, where a court may give leave, permission or direction,
it may do so on such terms as it thinks fit,
taking into account the factors
specified in s 192(2).
14.4 This chapter examines how these sections are operating in practice and
how any concerns about their operation should be addressed.
General discretion to
exclude evidence
14.5 Section 135 of the uniform Evidence Acts provides that in civil and
criminal proceedings:
The court may refuse to admit evidence if its probative value is substantially
outweighed by the danger that the evidence might:
(a) be unfairly prejudicial to a party; or
(b) be misleading or confusing; or
(c) cause or result in undue waste of time.
14.6 In practice, the onus is on the party seeking exclusion of the evidence
to demonstrate that the probative value is outweighed
on one of the grounds set
out in s 135.
Relevance and the
discretion to exclude
14.7 The origins of the discretion contained in s 135 reside in the
common law concept of ‘sufficient relevance’.
14.8 Both at common law and under the uniform Evidence Acts, relevance is the
fundamental requirement for admissibility: evidence
that is relevant is
admissible, subject to any exclusionary rules; evidence that is not relevant is
not admissible.
The uniform
Evidence Acts adopt a broad definition of relevance, requiring only that the
evidence in question ‘could rationally
affect (directly or indirectly) the
assessment of the probability of the existence of a fact in issue in the
proceeding’.
14.9 At common law, the distinction is sometimes drawn between ‘logical
relevance’ (the broad test reflected in
of the uniform Evidence
Acts) and ‘legal relevance’ (which requires that a piece of evidence
be ‘sufficiently relevant’
in order to be
admissible).
Hence, the threshold
requirement of legal relevance is used to exclude evidence of minimal probative
value or evidence which might
mislead or prejudice a party or cause an undue
waste of the court’s time.
14.10 In its Interim Report from the original ALRC evidence inquiry
the ALRC criticised
the common law notion of ‘sufficient relevance’ on the grounds that
using it to exclude evidence
of minimal probative value or of unfairly
prejudicial effect conceals the policy considerations underpinning the
exclusion. Hence
the ALRC proposed a broad definition of
‘relevance’, in combination with the mandatory and discretionary
exclusions subsequently
enacted as ss 135, 136 and 137. It stated that the
proposed approach
articulates the mental processes inherent in existing law. This is done by two
provisions—one defining relevance in terms of
being capable of affecting
the assessment of the probabilities and the other spelling out in a judicial
discretion the policy considerations,
presently concealed, which lie behind any
decision on the relevance of
14.11 In contrast to an assessment of probative value (discussed below), a
determination of relevance pursuant to
assumes that the tribunal of
fact will accept the evidence
does not require consideration of factors such as prejudice or
reliability.
14.12 The uniform Evidence Acts Dictionary defines ‘probative
value’ as ‘the extent to which the evidence could
rationally affect
the assessment of the probability of the existence of a fact in issue’.
This is similar to the definition
of relevance in
, which provides that
relevant evidence is ‘evidence that, if it were accepted, could rationally
affect (directly or indirectly)
the assessment of the probability of the
existence of a fact in issue in the proceedings’.
14.13 It has been accepted that probative value will be assessed by reference
to the degree of relevance of a piece of evidence to
a particular fact in
Credibility and reliability of evidence
14.14 A comparison of the definition in the uniform Evidence Acts of
relevance and probative value, with the notable absence of the
it were accepted’ from the latter, indicates that an assessment of
probative value is not necessarily predicated
on the assumption that the
evidence will be accepted.
therefore a matter of contention as to whether an assessment of probative value
is solely a qualitative question relating to
relevance (in other words, the
assessment is made on the basis that the evidence will be taken at its highest)
or whether it includes
for consideration other matters such as the credibility
or reliability of the evidence.
14.15 Authorities have been divided on this issue. The more restrictive view was
articulated by Hunt CJ at CL in
The power of the trial judge to exclude evidence … does not permit the
judge, in assessing what its probative value is, to
determine whether the jury
should or should not accept the evidence of the witness upon which the Crown
case depends. The trial judge
can only exclude the evidence of such a witness
where, taken at its highest, its probative value is outweighed by its
prejudicial
14.16 His Honour felt that this view is supported by the fact that the trial
judge has a duty to issue warnings and directions to
the jury regarding any
factors which may undermine the reliability of the evidence. It is also
supported by the supervisory powers
of the court to set aside a verdict where it
is satisfied that the jury ought to have had a reasonable
14.17 That view was supported by Gaudron J (in obiter dicta) in
, who reasoned that:
The omission from the dictionary definition of ‘probative value’ of
the assumption that the evidence will be accepted
is, in my opinion, of no
significance. As a practical matter, evidence can rationally affect the
assessment of the probability of
a fact in issue only if it is accepted.
Accordingly, the assumption that it will be accepted must be read into the
dictionary definition.
Papakosmas v The Queen
, McHugh J took the opposite view,
stating that ‘an assessment of probative value necessarily involves
considerations of
reliability’.
so concluded on two bases: first, the absence of the words ‘if it were
accepted’; and secondly, the rationale
behind the ALRC proposal to remove
the distinction between legal and logical relevance is to make evident the
policy considerations
involved in the decision to admit or exclude particular
evidence, such as procedural fairness and reliability. His Honour felt that
ss 135–137 are intended to address these policy
considerations.
14.19 In a recent case,
Hulme J supported the view
expressed by McHugh J, stating that it is inconsistent with the general
canons of construction to treat
the omission of the words ‘if it were
accepted’ as
insignificant.
reasoned further that where a witness’ credibility is in doubt, this will
affect the question of whether his or
her evidence could rationally affect the
probability of the existence of any fact in issue. His Honour said:
The need to consider the ‘extent’ in the context of
‘rationally affect’ to my mind argues for an assessment
credibility of the author and the likelihood of the evidence being
14.20 On the other hand, it can be argued that the question of reliability
goes to the assessment of any prejudicial effect the evidence
might have.
14.21 If the reliability of the evidence is in question such that the jury
may tend to attribute more weight to the evidence than
it ought, then this is
the prejudicial effect to be weighed against the relevance of the evidence to a
fact in issue. In
Simpson J held that:
There will be occasions when an assessment of the credibility of the evidence
will be inextricably entwined with the balancing process.
That means that
particular caution must be exercised to ensure that the balancing exercise is
not confused with the assessment of
credibility, a task committed to the jury
… The credibility exercise, in those circumstances, is to determine
whether the evidence
given by (or on behalf of) the accused is capable of belief
by the jury. If it is, then its prejudicial effect must be considered.
not, then the balancing exercise may well result in an answer favourable to the
Crown. That is essentially because any prejudice
arising to an accused from
putting a preposterous explanation to the jury would not be unfair
14.22 The first ground for exclusion in s 135 is that the probative
value of the evidence is substantially outweighed by the danger
prejudice. As noted in Chapter 3, the concept of unfair prejudice appears
in ss 135, 136 and 137 and has been interpreted
consistently in relation to
each of these sections.
following discussion therefore applies to each of the abovementioned sections.
14.23 The uniform Evidence Acts provide no guidance as to the meaning of
‘unfair prejudice’. There is consensus in the
case law that evidence
will not be unfairly prejudicial simply because it damages the defence’s
or because it has low
probative value.
Evidence will
be prejudicial if it tends to prove the opponent’s case, but will not be
prejudicial unless there is some misuse of the evidence by the
tribunal of fact. This is outlined in ALRC 26:
By risk of unfair prejudice is meant the danger that the fact finder may use the
evidence to make a decision on an improper, perhaps
emotional basis, ie on a
basis logically unconnected with the issues in the case. Thus the evidence that
appeals to the fact-finder’s
sympathies, arouses a sense of horror,
provokes an instinct to punish, or triggers other mainsprings of human action
may cause the
fact-finder to base his decisions on something other than the
established proposition of the case. Similarly, on hearing the evidence
fact-finder would be satisfied with a lower degree of probability than would
otherwise be required.
Unfair prejudice arising from procedural
considerations
14.24 The question whether the statutory concept of unfair prejudice
encompasses procedural unfairness is not addressed explicitly
in ALRC 26 or
the final Report of the original ALRC inquiry
and authorities
have been divided on the issue. The more restrictive view, that unfair prejudice
relates solely to the misuse of
evidence by a tribunal of fact, was favoured by
McHugh J in
who stated:
Some recent decisions suggest that the term ‘unfair prejudice’ may
have a broader meaning than that suggested by the
Australian Law Reform
Commission and that it may cover procedural disadvantages which a party may
suffer as the result of admitting
evidence under the provisions of the Act 1995
… I am inclined to think that the learned judges have been too much
by the common law attitude to hearsay evidence, have not given
sufficient weight to the change that the Act has brought about in
making hearsay
evidence admissible to prove facts in issue, and have not given sufficient
weight to the traditional meaning of ‘prejudice’
in a context of
rejecting evidence for discretionary reasons … [ss 135, 136, 137]
confer no authority to emasculate provisions
in the Act to make them conform
with common law notions of relevance or
admissibility.
14.25 Prior to
, courts appeared to proceed upon the
assumption that the concept of unfair prejudice was not limited to misuse of
evidence by a tribunal
of fact and could encompass procedural disadvantages. For
example, in
Gordon (Bankrupt), Official Trustee in Bankruptcy v
evidence of a
transcript otherwise admissible pursuant to s 63 was excluded on the basis
that the opposing party was unable to cross-examine
the declarant on an
important issue in the litigation and was therefore unfairly prejudiced. In
Commonwealth v McLean
the court held that the opposing party had been unfairly prejudiced due to an
inability to challenge properly the reliability of
14.26 Subsequent to the caution issued by McHugh J in
the New South
Wales Court of Appeal considered the issue in
The trial judge had
found that it was not reasonably practicable to call the 92 year old
defendant to give evidence and hence admitted
into evidence a statutory
declaration made by the defendant pursuant to s 64. The plaintiff sought
unsuccessfully to have the evidence
excluded pursuant to s 135(a) and
subsequently appealed on the ground that the trial judge ought to have exercised
the discretion
as the denial of the opportunity to cross-examine the maker of
the statement (which had been admitted as an exception to the hearsay
unfairly prejudicial.
14.27 The majority declined to exercise the discretion to exclude the evidence,
stating that the removal of the hearsay rule as an
obstacle to admitting
particular evidence will necessarily be prejudicial to the opposing party, but
that this will not necessarily
create prejudice which is unfair to the point
that it outweighs the probative value of the
The majority therefore
concluded that the inability to cross-examine the maker of a hearsay statement
does not, without more, call
for the exercise of the discretion to exclude on
the grounds of unfair prejudice, but that the inability to cross-examine is a
to be taken into account in the weight to be given to such
14.28 The approach adopted by the majority in
was cited with
approval in
R v Suteski
, where Wood CJ at CL stated:
I see no reason why the inability … to cross-examine … should not
have been relevant for s 135 and
Evidence Act
However, the bare fact that a defendant cannot cross-examine a witness is not
necessarily decisive of the issue which arises in
relation to these provisions
… The decisions mentioned clearly depend upon their particular facts, that
is, upon the character
of the evidence involved and upon the nature or strength
of the potential prejudice to the defendant. Each case, in my view, needs
examined individually by reference to the well understood balancing
Warnings and directions to the
14.29 It has been generally accepted that warnings and directions to the jury
can reduce the prejudicial effects of evidence in some
circumstances, and that
this should be taken into account when the court undertakes the balancing test
Misleading or
14.30 The second ground for exclusion in
is that the probative
value of the evidence is substantially outweighed by the danger that the
evidence might be ‘misleading
or confusing’. This discretion has
been used to exclude evidence where there is a danger that the jury would focus
evidence and give it more significance than it
Overlap between ‘unfair
prejudice’ and ‘misleading or confusing’
14.31 In ALRC 26, it was said that unfair prejudice would result where a
tribunal of fact attributed more weight than it should to
In the discussion of
, it states that a tribunal of fact would be misled or confused in
a situation where it incorrectly assesses the weight to be attributed
Accordingly,
has been used to exclude evidence where there is a danger that the
jury would focus unduly on particular evidence and accord it more
significance
than it deserved.
The similarity
in the definition of the two subsections in ALRC 26 and the use of
in subsequent case law indicate that these categories need not be
conceived of as mutually exclusive categories, despite being listed
in separate
subsections.
Undue waste of
14.32 The third ground for exclusion is that the probative value of the
evidence is substantially outweighed by the danger that the
evidence may
‘cause or result in undue waste of time’. This may, for example, be
used to exclude needless duplication
of evidence. A factor that may be
significant to the exercise of the discretion is whether admission of other
evidence is required
in order to evaluate the evidence subject to the
discretionary exclusion.
Submissions and
consultations
Operation of
14.33 IP 28 asks how
of the uniform Evidence Acts has
operated in practice, whether it has raised any concerns and how any such
concerns should be
14.34 The main concern expressed in the submissions and consultations is that
judicial officers are reluctant to take a robust approach
to the use of the
discretionary exclusions.
judicial officers express concern that reliance on the discretionary provisions
to exclude or limit the use of otherwise admissible
evidence could result in the
decision being overturned on
However, other
submissions contend that the provision is being used effectively and on a
regular basis.
14.35 One senior practitioner considers that
is too narrow and
recommends that an additional sub-section be included so that evidence can be
excluded on the ground that it has
insufficient probative
14.36 Otherwise, the general tenor of the submissions and consultations is
that the section itself is well drafted and that any problems
in practice (such
as judicial reluctance to use the provisions) are not amenable to legislative
Definition of terms
14.37 IP 28 asks whether the terms ‘unfair prejudice,
‘misleading and confusing’ and ‘undue waste of time’
need to be further defined.
14.38 Some concern is expressed that the term ‘unfair prejudice’
is unclear.
The New South Wales
Director of Public Prosecutions (DPP NSW) submits:
there is no objection to including a definition of ‘unfair
prejudice’ reflecting the more restrictive view of the meaning
of the term
reflected in the judgement of McHugh J in
Papakosmas v The Queen
making it clear that the term excludes procedural
unfairness.
14.39 In contrast, the NSW Young Lawyers Civil Litigation Committee submits
no such definition is required, as these concepts have been long employed at
common law and are well understood. Attempting to define
the circumstances would
be difficult, would probably require a catch-all phrase in any event, and would
unnecessarily clutter the
14.40 The New South Wales Public Defenders Office (NSW PDO) submits that
it will not be productive to define these terms, and that
any attempt to define
them is likely to narrow their
Should s 135 be mandatory?
14.41 IP 28 also asks whether s 135 should be made mandatory, so that
the court ‘must refuse to admit evidence’ if its
probative value is
substantially outweighed by the danger that the evidence might be unfairly
prejudicial, misleading or confusing,
or cause or result in undue waste of
14.42 Some submissions favour retaining the existing
discretion.
In contrast, the NSW
Young Lawyers Civil Litigation Committee submits that:
Section 135 should be made mandatory, as a corollary of a finding of such
danger is the exclusion of the evidence. Particularly as
it is highly unlikely
(and as a matter of policy is very undesirable), that a Court would consider
allowing such evidence after ruling
that it is inherently
14.43 The NSW Health Department Child Protection and Violence Unit submits:
evidence unrelated to the issue of sexual assault continues to be used by the
defence in order to harm the reputation and credibility
of the complainant, such
as mental health issues, disability and drug and alcohol abuse. Introducing
prejudicial evidence against
the victim perpetuates the social myths of victim
blaming. This makes complainants feel that they are responsible for the assault.
It also results in complainants feeling frustrated and angry as to the relevance
of the evidence, and undermines their belief in
a just and fair court
Amendment of the
Evidence Act
should occur to include a provision which
would remove the court’s discretion to refuse to admit evidence where the
value of the evidence is outweighed by the likelihood of significant
harm to the complainant.
14.44 One view expressed is that it is confusing to classify
discretion, as it is difficult to imagine a case where a court, having concluded
that the probative value of particular evidence
is substantially outweighed by
the danger of unfair prejudice, would decide nonetheless to admit the evidence.
It is also said that
the real discretion conferred by
, lies in the balancing exercise specified in the provision, not in
the words ‘may
Commissions’ view
Operation of
14.45 The Commissions are of the view that the principal problems with the
operation of
relate to judicial practice and are not amenable to
legislative solutions. In order to ensure that the section operates as intended
(as a safeguard in addition to more relaxed rules of admissibility), educational
programs should be implemented which focus on the
policy underlying the uniform
Evidence Acts’ approach to admissibility of
14.46 In relation to the submission that an additional ground for exclusion
(insufficient probative value) should be added, the Commissions
consider that
such an amendment is unnecessary, as evidence of insufficient probative value
can be excluded on the basis that it
would lead to an undue waste of the
court’s time pursuant to
Definition of terms
14.47 The Commissions do not consider that it is necessary to define the
terms contained in the subsections of
To do so carries the risk of
narrowing their meaning and thereby fettering the discretion.
14.48 The Commissions acknowledge that there has been uncertainty as to
whether unfair prejudice can arise from procedural considerations.
As noted in
Chapter 2, the basis for the discretion is to prevent the tribunal of fact
from being exposed to evidence that is likely
to produce incorrect verdicts by
misleading it or playing upon its emotions or prejudices. In its original
Interim Report, the ALRC
referred not only to unfair prejudice arising from
evidence which might inflame emotions, but also to unfair prejudice resulting
from mis-estimation by the fact finder of the weight to be given to particular
An inability to test
evidence by cross-examination carries with it the danger of such mis-estimation.
14.49 It is therefore consistent with the policy basis for this discretion that
evidence should be excluded where, due to procedural
considerations, the
tribunal of fact will be unable to assess rationally the weight of the evidence.
At the same time, it is important
to bear in mind the policy changes effected by
the uniform Evidence Acts. If it were the case that the inability to challenge
veracity of hearsay statements by non-witnesses were generally to justify a
decision to exclude the evidence, this would, in effect,
write the hearsay
exceptions out of the Acts.
Hence, in the Commissions’ view, the correct approach, reflected in
, is that the concept of ‘unfair
prejudice’ will take into account procedural unfairness when this will
affect the ability
of the fact-finder to assess rationally the weight of the
evidence. Where a procedure has been sanctioned by the Acts, for example
admission of hearsay evidence, this will not of itself create unfair
14.50 There has also been uncertainty in relation to whether factors affecting the
reliability or credibility of evidence can be taken
into account in balancing
the probative value of evidence against any unfair prejudice that may arise.
Consistent with the adversarial
system and the policy underpinning the uniform
Evidence Acts that parties should be able to ‘produce the probative
that is available to
the Commissions are
of the view that questions of credibility and reliability should generally be
left to be determined by the tribunal
of fact. Factors affecting the reliability
or credibility of evidence are usually elicited in cross-examination. However,
factors may not be apparent to a tribunal of fact, and hence where
there is a real danger that a tribunal of fact will misuse or
overestimate the
value of a particular piece of evidence, it is appropriate for the court to be
empowered to exclude such evidence
pursuant to
appropriate warnings and directions would not be sufficient to cure such
dangers. Obviously, whether factors affecting the
reliability or credibility of
evidence will become apparent during the course of a trial cannot be predicted,
hence the discretion
may apply differently depending on which stage in the trial
an application for exclusion of evidence is made.
be mandatory?
14.51 Whilst there is a persuasive argument in favour of mandatory exclusion
on the ground contained in
, the argument has less force in
relation to the grounds in subsections (b) and (c). With the latter grounds, it
is appropriate for
the Court to have flexible control of the evidence.
14.52 Given that the discretionary nature of the section is not causing a
problem in practice, to fragment the section so that exclusion
on the grounds of
unfair prejudice is mandatory and exclusion on the remaining grounds is
discretionary would cause unnecessary difficulties.
This is particularly so
given that, in practice, a court is unlikely to admit evidence where the
probative value is substantially
outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice.
If a court were to admit evidence despite having concluded that the probative
was outweighed by the unfair prejudice, the court would be required to
explain why it had chosen not to exercise the discretion.
If necessary the
matter could then be dealt with on appeal.
14.53 The Commissions are of the view that such a change is not warranted and
therefore favour retaining the existing discretion.
Exclusion of
prejudicial evidence in criminal proceedings
Relationship between
ss 135 and 137
Section 135
provides that the court may refuse to admit evidence
where the probative value is
substantially outweighed
by the danger of
unfair prejudice, whereas
requires the court to refuse to admit
evidence where its probative value is
by the danger of unfair
prejudice. The wording of
indicates that it is a mandatory exclusion
rule, in contrast with
, which provides the judge with a discretion to
exclude evidence.
14.55 The difference in wording between the sections also indicates that
there is a heavier onus on the party seeking exclusion under
This is in accordance with the policy underpinning the uniform
Evidence Acts that courts should be particularly careful when considering
evidence that might prejudice defendants in criminal trials. It is important to
note, however, that the tests are weighted neither
in favour of nor against
exclusion. As stated in ALRC 26, ‘the trial judge should balance
probative value and the danger of
prejudice without any
preconceptions’.
14.56 Another difference between the two sections is that
‘the evidence’ being ‘unfairly prejudicial’, whereas
talks more generally of ‘danger of unfair prejudice’. It
has been held that this difference in wording means that, where
being considered, an assessment of unfair prejudice can take into account the
likely prejudicial impact of any evidence the opponent
may seek to adduce in
order to challenge or explain the initial piece of
This approach has been
rejected by the New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal in relation to
This is consistent
with the policy framework of the Acts, which is concerned particularly with
protecting accused persons from improper
conviction.
Submissions and
consultations
14.57 IP 28 asks whether the operation of
of the uniform
Evidence Acts has raised any
In particular,
IP 28 asks whether a guided discretion would assist to determine whether
evidence is unfairly
prejudicial.
A guided discretion
14.58 Few submissions were made in relation to this question. The
DPP NSW does not favour a guided
discretion.
The NSW PDO
recommends that no change be made to
Discretion or exclusionary rule?
14.59 Concern is expressed that the fact that
of the uniform Evidence Acts, entitled ‘Discretions to
exclude evidence’, is misleading as
is an exclusionary rule. It
is said that this has caused problems in the lower courts as some judicial
officers have regarded the
provision as a discretionary rather than mandatory
Commissions’ view
A guided discretion
14.60 In the Commissions’ view, it will not be helpful to guide the
discretion further than has already been done by its formulation.
Commissions acknowledge that there have been some difficulties with judicial
interpretation of the term ‘unfair prejudice’,
particularly in
relation to whether it includes considerations of procedural fairness. However,
providing legislative guidance carries
the risk of unduly fettering the
discretion and may simply add to the confusion.
Clarification of the mandatory nature of
14.61 The wording of
makes it clear that the exclusion is
mandatory rather than discretionary. This has been acknowledged in the higher
, Sheller JA observed:
When an application is made by a defendant pursuant to
evidence, the first thing the judge must undertake is the balancing process of
its probative value against the danger
of unfair prejudice to the defendant. It
is probably correct to say that the product of that process is a judgment of the
sort which,
in terms of appellate review, is analogous to the exercise of a
judicial discretion … Even so … there seems to me to
be a risk of
error if a judge proceeds on the basis that he or she is being asked to exercise
a discretion about whether or not otherwise
admissible evidence should be
rejected because of unfair prejudice to the defendant. The correct approach is
to perform the weighing
exercise mandated. If the probative value of the
evidence adduced by the prosecutor is outweighed by the danger of unfair
to the defendant, there is no residual discretion. The evidence must
be rejected.
14.62 In light of the fact that there has been some confusion in the lower
courts as to whether
is a discretionary or mandatory exclusion, the
Commissions are of the view that the heading in
of the uniform
Evidence Acts should be amended to read ‘Discretionary and mandatory
exclusions’.
Proposal 14–1
The heading at
‘Discretions
to exclude evidence’ should be amended to read ‘Discretionary and
mandatory exclusions’.
Exclusion of
improperly or illegally obtained evidence
Section 138(1)
(1) Evidence that was obtained:
(a) improperly or in contravention of an Australian law; or
(b) in consequence of an impropriety or of a contravention of an Australian
is not to be admitted unless the desirability of admitting the evidence
outweighs the undesirability of admitting evidence that
has been obtained in the
way in which the evidence was obtained.
Section 138
does not define ‘improperly’ obtained
Section 138(2)
specifically provides that an admission is taken
to have been improperly obtained if it was obtained through questioning and the
person who conducted the questioning either:
(a) did, or omitted to do, an act in the course of the questioning even though
he or she knew or ought reasonably to have known that
the act or omission was
likely to impair substantially the ability of the person being questioned to
respond rationally to the questioning;
(b) made a false statement in the course of the questioning even though he or
she knew or ought reasonably to have known that the
statement was false and that
making the false statement was likely to cause the person who was being
questioned to make an admission.
14.65 Further,
provides that evidence will be considered to
have been ‘improperly obtained’ where the investigating official
to issue a caution to the person being arrested.
Section 138(3)
lists the factors that a court may take into
account in conducting the balancing exercise specified in
Section 138(3)
Without limiting the matters that the court may take into account under
subsection (1), it is to take into account:
(a) the probative value of the evidence; and
(b) the importance of the evidence in the proceeding; and
(c) the nature of the relevant offence, cause of action or defence and the
nature of the subject-matter of the proceeding; and
(d) the gravity of the impropriety or contravention; and
(e) whether the impropriety or contravention was deliberate or reckless; and
(f) whether the impropriety or contravention was contrary to or inconsistent
with a right of a person recognised by the
International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights
(g) whether any other proceeding (whether or not in a court) has been or is
likely to be taken in relation to the impropriety or
contravention; and
(h) the difficulty (if any) of obtaining the evidence without impropriety or
contravention of an Australian law.
14.67 The statutory discretion contained in
, although based on the
Bunning v Cross
discretion at common law, differs from the latter in the following
• the onus of proof is reversed, so that the party adducing the
evidence must establish that the desirability of admitting the
outweighs the undesirability of admitting the evidence;
• it applies to derivative evidence
(s 138(1)(b))
• it includes confessional evidence
• it lists certain matters which must be taken into account in the
exercise of the discretion
• it applies to both civil and criminal proceedings
(s 138(1)).
The nature of the
relevant offence
14.68 The question of how the ‘nature of the relevant offence’ in
s 138(3)(c)
is to be applied to the balancing exercise undertaken pursuant
was raised in
In this case
Spigelman CJ, with whom Blanch AJ agreed, held that:
The public interest in admitting evidence varies directly with the gravity of
the offence. The more serious the offence, the more
likely it is that the public
interest requires the admission of the
14.69 Spigleman CJ indicated that this view applies to both the common
s 138(3)(c).
This statement accords with the discussion in
ALRC 26, which expresses the view that:
There is, for example, a greater public interest that a murderer be convicted
and dealt with under the law than someone guilty of
a victimless
14.70 In the same case, Simpson J took the opposite view, stating that:
In my opinion it would be wrong to accept as a general proposition that, because
the offence charged is a serious one, breaches of
the law will be more readily
condoned. In my judgment there may be cases in which the fact that the charge is
a serious one will
result in a more rigorous insistence on compliance with
statutory provisions concerning the obtaining of evidence. That a person
under suspicion for a serious offence does not confer a licence to contravene
laws designed to ensure
Submissions and
consultations
14.71 IP 28 asks how
of the uniform Evidence Acts has
operated in practice, whether it has raised any concerns and how any such
concerns should be addressed.
particular, IP 28 asks whether the factors to be taken into account in
, for example
s 138(3)(c)
in relation to the influence of the
nature of the relevant offence, require
clarification.
14.72 The primary concern expressed in relation to
pertains to the
and how they should apply to the balancing test. Whilst
some judicial officers express the view that these factors are facilitative
do not create any difficulties,
other commentators express concern that it is uncertain what weight ought to be
given to each factor
and whether
the factors weigh in favour of or against
One view is that the
section should be amended so as to specify how the factors in
should be applied to the balancing
Another view is that such
difficulties should not be resolved via legislative amendment, and that judicial
education is a preferable
14.73 In relation to the question of how the ‘nature of the offence’
influences a determination as to whether to exclude
evidence, the NSW PDO
The approach taken by the majority [in
] assumes what
the prosecution is required to prove; that is, that the accused is guilty. It is
further submitted that the more serious
the offence, the greater should be the
public and private interest in ensuring that accused persons are not convicted
on the basis
of improperly obtained evidence. It is the Public Defenders
submission that the reference to ‘the nature of the relevant
be omitted from
14.74 Another senior practitioner supports Simpson J’s reasoning
R v Dalley¸
the more serious the offence, the more the public interest weighs in favour of
ensuring that correct procedures for obtaining
evidence are adhered
14.75 One submission considers that although the section works well in practice,
for reasons of principle the wording should be altered
so as to render
presumptively inadmissible any evidence obtained as a result of any illegal
It is stated:
There are cases where the public interest in prosecuting offenders is great, and
therefore there should be a provision for the admissibility
of illegally
obtained evidence in exceptional and highly restricted cases, limited to
offences of the most serious type, but specifically
excluding alleged
‘terrorism’, ‘national security’ and immigration cases.
In those cases the provisions of
the law give such power to law enforcement
authorities that there is no need for them to act illegally … it is
important that
the legislature indicate to law enforcement authorities that any
illegal action done in furtherance of investigation will be
14.76 In addition, one view queries whether
should operate at all
in civil proceedings to exclude evidence that has been illegally or improperly
It is also suggested
that the onus of proof be reversed so as to reflect the discretion at common
Commissions’ view
14.77 The policy basis for the formulation of
is expressed in
ALRC 26 as follows:
An argument against taking the probative value, the importance of the evidence
or the seriousness of the offence into account is
that law enforcement agencies
will modify their behaviour accordingly, eg they may believe that they can get
away with murder in
a murder case. As Justices Stephen and Aickin stated in
Bunning v Cross
‘to treat cogency of evidence as a factor favouring admission, where
the illegality in obtaining it has been either deliberate
or reckless, may serve
to foster the quite erroneous view that if such evidence be but damning enough
that will of itself
suffice to atone for the illegality involved in procuring
The question is whether this danger justifies
excluding from consideration some, or all, of the factors which support
admission of
the improperly obtained evidence. This seems too extreme an
approach. One solution would be to exclude them from consideration only
officers have deliberately acted improperly only then will consideration of
these factors be relevant. But to exclude them
from consideration would seem too
extreme an approach. The question for the judge is whether the balance of public
interest favours
admission—he should consider all the factors on both
sides of the equation. The officers themselves, while they should avoid
conduct, will be faced with situations where the legal requirements are vague.
It would be legitimate for the judge to consider
these factors. Safeguards are
provided by the existence of a discretion, by inclusion as a factor on the other
side whether the impropriety
was part of a wider pattern of misconduct, and by
the existence of other forums of
Bunning v Cross
discretion places the onus on the accused
to prove misconduct and justify the exclusion. In contrast,
the party seeking exclusion to establish that the evidence was improperly or
illegally obtained. Once this is done, the
onus is on the party seeking
admission to satisfy the court that the desirability of admitting the evidence
outweighs the undesirability
of admitting it, given the manner in which it was
The reason for the
shifting of the onus of proof was explained in ALRC 26 as follows:
the policy considerations supporting non-admission of the evidence suggest that,
once misconduct is established, the burden should
rest on the prosecution to
persuade the court that the evidence should be admitted. After all, the evidence
has been procured in
breach of the law or some established standard of conduct.
Those who infringe the law should be required to justify their actions
bear the onus of persuading the judge not to exclude the evidence so obtained.
Practical considerations support this approach.
Evidence is not often excluded
Bunning v Cross
discretion. This suggests that the placing of
the onus on the accused leans too heavily on the side of crime control
considerations.
14.79 The Commissions are of the view that the onus of proof in
control and the rights of accused persons. The Commissions
consider that no
convincing case has been made out for revisiting the policy basis of
and therefore recommend that no changes be made in relation to the onus of proof
or to the balancing test required by the section.
14.80 As regards clarification of the factors contained in
Commissions agree that this is not a matter to be solved via legislative
amendment. Amendment of the section may simply result
in unnecessary uncertainty
and confusion.
14.81 The Commissions note that the primary issue causing concern in relation
is the relevance of the seriousness of the offence to the
balancing process. In accordance with the policy articulated in
the Commissions
are of the view that the correct approach is that the more serious the offence,
the more weight should be given to
the public interest in admitting evidence
which might result in the apprehension of criminal offenders. However, this does
that breaches of the law will necessarily be condoned where the offence
is a serious one. The nature of the offence is only one of
the factors which the
court is to take into account in the exercise of this discretion. Whether
illegally or improperly obtained
evidence is admitted will also depend on
factors such as the nature of the impropriety or illegality. Where the
infringement involves
isolated or accidental non-compliance, the weight to be
given to the nature of the offence may be greater than if the infringement
involves a serious and deliberate breach of procedure. Hence, the fact that the
offence charged is serious is by no means determinative
of how the discretion in
will be exercised. The weight to be given to the nature of the
offence will vary depending on the other factors to be considered
pursuant to
14.82 This approach to the interpretation of
s 138(3)(c)
is also supported by
the fact that
addresses the public interest supporting exclusion
(protection of individual rights, deterrence against future illegality,
and judicial
legitimacy)
by placing the onus
on the prosecution to justify admission in the event that impropriety or
illegality is found.
General discretion
to limit the use of evidence
Section 136
provides the trial judge with a discretion in both
civil and criminal proceedings to limit the use to be made of evidence if there
is a danger that the evidence might be unfairly prejudicial or misleading or
confusing. As noted in Chapter 3 and above in this chapter,
the concepts of
‘unfair prejudice’ and ‘misleading or confusing’ are
used consistently in
, and hence the preceding
discussion of those concepts applies.
Section 136
may be used where
evidence is relevant for more than one purpose, for example, evidence may be
relevant to prove a fact asserted
(hearsay purpose) and may also be relevant to
a witness’ credibility.
14.84 The discretion to limit the use of evidence is not guided. It is
suggested that the primary question to be asked is whether
the probative value
and importance of the evidence, when used for that purpose, outweighs the
particular danger or dangers that may
result from that
The court should consider
the extent to which the dangers associated with a particular use of the evidence
may be reduced by some
other action, such as by directions to the
14.85 The discretion may arise, for example, where
(exceptions to
the hearsay and opinion rules) have been applied. In such cases, the fact that
the evidence would not have been admissible
for its hearsay or opinion use but
for the operation of those sections clearly does not of itself justify the
prohibition of such
14.86 One of the grounds upon which the use of evidence may be limited is that it
may result in unfair prejudice to the opponent.
the High Court
clarified that the fact that evidence would not have been admissible at common
law does not of itself create unfair
prejudice. In this case, evidence of recent
complaint was admitted pursuant to
, and the appellant argued that the
trial judge ought to have exercised the discretion in
would not be used for a hearsay purpose (in other words, the appellant sought to
to limit the use of the evidence to that which would have been
permissible at common law). The Court rejected this argument, holding
amounted to ‘an unacceptable attempt to constrain the legislative policy
underlying the statute by reference to common
law rules, and distinctions, which
the legislature has
discarded’.
added, however, that there may be circumstances in which it would be appropriate
to limit the use of complaint
McHugh J cautioned
should only be used once it has been determined that any dangers
arising from the admission of the evidence cannot be cured by a
warning to the
14.87 The relationship between
was discussed in
Roach v Page
Sperling J held
that the inability to test the truth of a previous representation is a
legitimate ground for rejecting or limiting
the use of evidence which is covered
by an exception to the hearsay
His Honour also held that
where the maker of a previous representation is available and the party
tendering the evidence does not
call the person, that is a legitimate
consideration in favour of a finding of unfair
His Honour noted
gives rise to special considerations because, unlike other
exceptions to the hearsay rule, it is not the objective of
facilitate proof but to avoid a distinction having to be made about evidence
being used for one purpose and not for
Submissions and
consultations
14.88 IP 28 asks whether
of the uniform Evidence Acts has
operated to limit the use of evidence which is relevant for more than one
purpose and whether the
operation of
has raised any concerns which
should be addressed.
also seeks comment about the extent to which
is being utilised in
jury and non-jury trials.
14.89 Judicial officers and legal practitioners provide a range of perspectives on
the operation of
Some practitioners express the view that
has not been used much by judicial officers to limit the use that can be made of
evidence that is relevant for more than one
In relation to
expert evidence, the view is expressed that
is not often used to control
the use made of the factual content of such evidence, but that this does not
create any problems in
practice as the judge can deal with it as a matter of
weight to be given to the
By contrast, some
practitioners consider that the section is being used frequently
Relationship with
14.90 IP 28 also asked whether
is being used to limit the
operation of
and, if so, in what circumstances trial judges are
limiting the use of hearsay evidence admitted for a non-hearsay
14.91 In addition to the comments noted above, some concerns are expressed that
as presently drafted may not provide adequate grounds on which to
exclude evidence admissible pursuant to
Some commentators express
concern that
is an ‘inelegant’ or unnecessarily
complicated method of controlling problems created by the breadth of
The NSW PDO
submits that:
most judges appear to have taken the judgment of the High Court in
v The Queen
[1999] HCA 37
(1999) 196 CLR 297
to mean that in no case should evidence of
what used to be called ‘complaint’ evidence admitted under
be limited to evidence of the fact … this problem is best addressed not by
the amendment of
, but by the repeal of
14.92 On the other hand, the DPP NSW submits that the discretion in
is capable of addressing any concerns raised by the operation of
in relation to prior inconsistent statements and the factual basis of
expert opinion evidence.
14.93 One concern expressed in relation to
is the uncertainty of the
scope of the grounds for exclusion. In particular, there is uncertainty as to
whether the inability to
cross-examine on evidence admissible for a hearsay
purpose creates unfair
Commissions’ view
14.94 Overall, the primary concern expressed (and as noted above, this
concern is not expressed unanimously) pertains to the extent
to which judges
make use of the discretion.
14.95 In the Commissions’ view, this is not a problem amenable to
legislative solution. As noted above, this is a question of
judicial practice,
to be remedied by judicial and practitioner education.
Relationship with
14.96 In ALRC 38, the rationale for
is explained as follows:
The proposal enables evidence … to be used for a hearsay purpose, if
admitted for other reasons. It enables simpler rules and
simpler operation of
the law … The proposal avoids the need to create a multiplicity of complex
exceptions dealing with, for
example, the factual material normally relied upon
by experts. Controls remain, however, and in appropriate cases, the evidence can
be excluded.
14.97 The Commissions are of the view that
is operating as such a
control in relation to evidence admissible under
The primary concerns
raised, aside from the suggestion of reluctance on the part of the judiciary to
utilise the discretion, relate
to the scope of the exclusionary grounds. As
noted above, the Commissions do not consider that legislative amendment would
in this regard. The Commissions see no basis for revisiting the policy
underpinning
and hence recommend that no changes be
Discretion to give
14.98 A further discretion operates by virtue of
, which provides
that a court, where it may give leave, permission or direction, may do so on
such terms as it thinks fit. This may
arise in the following contexts: in
granting leave to a witness to revive their memory pursuant to
permitting cross-examination of an unfavourable witness pursuant to
admitting evidence relevant to an accused’s character pursuant to
; or admitting evidence pursuant to
s 108(3)(b).
Section 192(2)
Without limiting the matters that the court may take into account in deciding
whether to give the leave, permission or direction,
it is to take into account:
(a) the extent to which to do so would be likely to add unduly to, or to
shorten, the length of the hearing; and
(b) the extent to which to do so would be unfair to a party or to a witness; and
(c) the importance of the evidence in relation to which the leave, permission or
direction is sought; and
(d) the nature of the proceeding; and
(e) the power (if any) of the court to adjourn the hearing or to make another
order or to give a direction in relation to the evidence.
14.100 The High Court held in
Stanoevski v The Queen
that when a court
is considering granting leave, permission or making a direction under the
uniform Evidence Acts, ‘in all
cases the court must take into account the
matters prescribed by
’, as well as ‘matters which may
be relevant in a particular
R v Reardon
, the New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal
held that unless the contrary can be inferred, it should be assumed that the
will continually be having regard to the matters referred to in
during the course of a
R v Stevens
, Simpson J explained that:
does not in my opinion require a ritual incantation of each of
the five considerations listed in subs 2. What it requires is that
such of those
matters, as well as other matters, be raised for consideration as relevant to
the particular application, be considered
and taken into account. What
distinguishes
from many other cases is that the majority in
the High Court took the view that if certain of the matters listed in
(2) had been taken into account and given due consideration a different result
may well have eventuated. In other words, what the
High Court held was that
there was real substance in the particular application of
does not hold is that failure to mention the
section, or any of the matters listed in sub s (2) necessarily constitute
error. Failure
to mention either the subsection globally or the individual
considerations, provides the foundation for a finding of error. But the
may only be made if it is also shown that one or more of those conditions was
actually material to the
Submissions and
consultations
14.103 IP 28 asks whether there are any concerns in relation to the
operation of
and how any such concerns might be
14.104 Few comments have been made in relation to the operation of
judicial officer comments that, despite the ruling in
judges are not really giving consideration to the factors in
Another view
expressed is that judges are considering the factors in
, but are not
making explicit reference to
Commissions’ view
14.105 A review of the submissions and consultations and the case law
indicates no need for change. The Commissions are of the
has not raised any significant concerns and requires no
14.106 It is a matter of contention whether and in what circumstances the
uniform Evidence Acts permit the giving of advance rulings.
The High Court
addressed this issue in
In this case,
counsel for the defence informed the Crown prosecutor that he intended to raise
evidence of the accused’s good
character. The Crown prosecutor indicated
that if the defence took this course of action, the Crown would seek to rebut
the evidence
of good character with evidence of matters that were the subject of
a related charge. On this basis, defence counsel decided not
to adduce evidence
of good character. The accused appealed his subsequent conviction on the grounds
that there had been a miscarriage
of justice as he had been unfairly denied the
benefit of adducing evidence of good character. He argued that his counsel at
ought to have sought an advance ruling on whether the Crown’s
character evidence would have been excluded pursuant to
14.107 The High Court held that there is nothing in
of the uniform
Evidence Acts conferring the power to give an advance ruling as to how the
discretion in
will be exercised, and that ‘a discretion
can only be exercised if and when it is
held, however, that it may be appropriate to give an advance ruling where leave
is sought pursuant to
(with whom Gummow and Hayne JJ agreed) stated:
The provisions of the
Evidence Act
requiring the giving of leave,
permission or direction require a ruling to be made and, unless the particular
provision in question
directs otherwise, there is no reason why they should be
read as precluding an ‘advance ruling’ if that course is
appropriate.
It may, for example, be appropriate to give an ‘advance
ruling’ if all matters relevant to the issue have been or can
ascertained and if it is clear that a ruling will inevitably be
14.108 The Court held that the power to give advance rulings was limited
because of the concern that
‘advance rulings’ … may give rise to a risk that the trial
judge will be seen as other than impartial. Particularly
is that so in the case
of advance rulings that serve only to enable prosecuting or defence counsel to
make tactical decisions. If
there is a risk that an ‘advance ruling’
will give rise to the appearance that the trial judge is other than impartial,
it should not be given.
14.109 Prior to
, the New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal
held that the court has the power to give advance
and in some cases
has an obligation to do
Submissions and
consultations
14.110 IP 28 seeks comments regarding whether
amended to provide the court expressly with the power to give advance
14.111 Few submissions have been made in relation to this question. One senior
practitioner considers that advance rulings may be
beneficial to avoid the need
to ‘chase evidentiary
Commissions’ view
14.112 The Commissions are of the view that there is nothing in the uniform
Evidence Acts to preclude the giving of advance rulings.
This is consistent with
the adversarial context in which the Acts operate.
14.113 The power to give advance rulings, a power that has been available at
common law,
is important to
ensure that issues of admissibility of evidence can be determined prior to
evidence being led and that decisions
can be made by both parties about the way
in which their case will be conducted. It is particularly important in relation
to evidence
of a prejudicial nature. The outcome of cases should not depend on
tactical manoeuvring and bluff and counter-bluff. As long as the
exercised in a manner that is impartial, the appearance of impartiality should
not be lost.
14.114 The Commissions are therefore of the view that the uniform Evidence Acts
should be amended so as to provide expressly for the
power to give advance
rulings. Further, the power should be available to be exercised where
appropriate whenever there is an issue
as to the admissibility of evidence in
civil and criminal trials. A draft provision providing for advance rulings is
set out in Appendix
Proposal 14–2
The uniform Evidence Acts should be amended to
provide the Court with the power to give advance rulings.
Uniform Evidence Acts
[1976] VicRp 34
[1976] VR 376.
Law Reform Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1 (1985), [639].
Adam v The Queen
CLR 96, [22].
Papakosmas v The
[1999] HCA 37
(1999) 196 CLR 297
(1996) 89 A Crim R 457
Adam v The Queen
CLR 96, [59].
(1997) 92 A Crim R 52
Adam v The Queen
CLR 96, [60].
Papakosmas v The
[1999] HCA 37
(1999) 196 CLR 297
Ibid, [81].
Ibid, [222].
[2004] NSWCCA 52
(1997) 94 A Crim R
Papakosmas v The
[1999] HCA 37
(1999) 196 CLR 297
(1997) 94 A Crim R 131
R v Lockyer
(1996) 89 A
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1 (1985), [644].
Australian Law Reform Commission,
, ALRC 38 (1987).
Papakosmas v The Queen
[1999] HCA 37
(1999) 196 CLR 297
Gordon (Bankrupt), Official
Trustee in Bankruptcy v Pike
(Unreported, Federal Court of Australia,
Beaumont J, 1 September 1995).
Commonwealth v McLean
[1996] NSWSC 657
(1996) 41 NSWLR
Papakosmas v The Queen
[1999] HCA 37
(1999) 196 CLR 297.
[2000] NSWCA 180.
Ibid, [41].
R v Suteski
[2002] NSWCCA 509
(2002) 56 NSWLR
, [126]–[127]. See also
Roach v Page (No 11)
[2003] NSWSC 907
[2002] NSWCCA 20.
(1997) 91 A Crim R 356
Symss v The Queen
[2003] NSWCCA
(1997) 94 A Crim R 131
[2004] NSWCCA 52.
Reading v ABC
[2003] NSWSC
, [32]–[33].
Australian Law
Reform Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1 (1985),
Ibid, [644].
For recent examples see:
[2003] NSWSC 716
[2003] NSWCCA 82
(2003) 57 NSWLR
Uniform Evidence
(6th ed, 2004), [1.3.14600].
See Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
IP 28 (2004), Q 12–1.
Consultation
, Sydney, 21 February 2005; Judicial Officers of the
Family Court of Australia and Federal Magistrates Court,
Consultation
Parramatta, 28 February 2005; T Game,
Consultation
, Sydney, 25 February
2005; Judicial Officers of the Family Court of Australia and Federal Magistrates
Consultation
, Parramatta, 28 February 2005.
Judicial Officers of the District
Court of NSW,
Consultation
, Sydney, 3 March
Consultation
Sydney, 3 March 2005; Supreme Court of the ACT Judicial Officers,
Consultation
, Canberra, 8 March 2005; Judicial Officers of the Family
Court of Australia and Federal Magistrates Court,
Consultation
Parramatta, 28 February 2005.
Consultation
, Sydney, 11 March
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004),
New South Wales
District Court Judges,
Consultation
, Sydney, 3 March
Director of Public Prosecutions
15 February 2005,
NSW Young Lawyers Civil Litigation
7 March 2005,
New South Wales Public Defenders,
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004),
Director of Public
Prosecutions (NSW),
15 February 2005, 32; P
Consultation
, Sydney, 11 March
NSW Young Lawyers Civil
Litigation Committee,
NSW Health Department Child
Protection and Violence Prevention Unit,
February 2005.
Evidence Law
(6th ed, 2004), [1.3.14540]; Evidence Acts Review Workshop for
the Judiciary,
Consultation
, Sydney, 30 April
See also the discussion in Ch 3.
Australian Law Reform Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1 (1985), [644].
Uniform Evidence Law
(6th ed, 2004), [1.3.14560].
Australian Law Reform Commission,
, ALRC 38 (1987), [46].
Australian Law Reform Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1 (1985),
[2004] NSWCCA
R v Richards
[2001] NSWCCA 160
(2001) 123 A
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, ALRC 38 (1987), [35].
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004),
Director of Public
Prosecutions (NSW),
15 February 2005,
New South Wales Public Defenders,
New South Wales Local Court
Magistrates,
Consultation
, Sydney, 5 April
[2000] NSWCCA 61
(2000) 111 A
, [19]–[20]. In
[2001] NSWCCA 413
(2001) 53 NSWLR 317
went further and stated that the application of this provision ‘does not
depend upon any discretionary judgment, still
less any merely intuitive
[1978] HCA 22
(1978) 141 CLR 54.
Nicholas v The Queen
[1998] HCA 9
(1998) 193 CLR 173
[2002] NSWCCA 284
(2002) 132 A
Crim R 169.
Australian Law Reform Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1 (1985),
[2002] NSWCCA 284
(2002) 132 A
Australian Law
Reform Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004),
Qs 12–8, 12–9.
South Wales Local Court Magistrates,
Consultation
, Sydney, 5 April
J Garbett, Sydney, 28 February
Consultation
Canberra, 8 March 2005.
J Garbett, Sydney, 28 February
New South Wales Public
[2002] NSWCCA
S Tilmouth,
Consultation
Adelaide, 11 May 2005.
Confidential,
22 February
Consultation
Canberra, 8 March 2005.
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1 (1985), [964].
(Unreported, New
South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal, Hunt CJ at CL, Smart and McInerney JJ, 24
April 1997).
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1 (1985), [964].
Uniform Evidence
(6th ed, 2004), [1.3.14640].
(1997) 91 A Crim R 356
Symss v The Queen
[2003] NSWCCA
(1997) 94 A Crim R 131
[2004] NSWCCA
Papakosmas v The Queen
[1999] HCA 37
(1999) 196 CLR 297.
Ibid, [40].
Ibid, [94]. McHugh J adopted
comments made by Hunt CJ at CL and Bruce J in
A Crim R 131
, 140, 151.
Page (No 11)
[2003] NSWSC 907.
Ibid, [74].
Ibid, [74].
Ibid, [74]. See the discussion of
unfair prejudice above and the discussion of hearsay evidence in Ch 7.
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004),
Consultation
, Sydney, 3 March 2005; Crown Prosecutors,
Consultation
, Sydney, 11 February
Supreme Court of the ACT
Judicial Officers,
Consultation
, Canberra, 8 March 2005; ACT Bar
Association,
Consultation
, Canberra, 9 March 2005.
New South Wales District Court
Consultation
, Sydney, 3 March 2005; B Donovan,
Consultation
, Sydney, 21 February 2005; T Game,
Consultation
Sydney, 25 February 2005; Supreme Court of the ACT Judicial Officers,
Consultation
, Canberra, 8 March
See Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004),
Consultation
, Canberra, 9 March
New South Wales Public
Director of Public
Prosecutions (NSW),
15 February
Consultation
Canberra, 9 March 2005.
Law Reform Commission,
, ALRC 38 (1987), [144].
See also the discussion in Ch 7.
Stanoevski v The Queen
(2001) 202 CLR 115
Reardon, Michaels and Taylor
[2002] NSWCCA 203
R v Stevens
Australian Law
Reform Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004),
Wales Local Court Magistrates,
Consultation
, Sydney, 5 April
P Greenwood,
Consultation
, Sydney, 11 March
TKWJ v The Queen
[2002] HCA 46
(2002) 212 CLR 124.
Ibid, [43].
(Unreported, New
South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal, Wood CJ, Sully and Ireland JJ,
1 October 1998).
[2000] NSWCCA 59
(2000) 111 A Crim R 388
, [41]-[42]. In this case, the Court held
that the trial judge would have had an obligation to make an advance ruling in
to character evidence sought to be adduced by the prosecution.
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004), [12.47].
P Greenwood,
11 March 2005.
Uniform Evidence Law
(6th ed, 2004), [1.3.9040].
15. Judicial Notice
Introduction
Judicial notice of matters of law
Judicial notice of matters of common knowledge
Judicial notice of matters of state
The Commissions' view
15. Judicial Notice
Introduction
15.1 ‘Judicial notice’ is a common law doctrine that permits
departure from the general rules of leading evidence of a
particular matter of
fact or law in court proceedings. In broad terms, a court ‘takes judicial
notice’ when it acts upon
its own knowledge obtained independently from
evidence adduced by the parties. However, a court can only do so in prescribed
circumstances.
At common law, a court ‘notices’ a fact whenever the
fact is so commonly known that all ordinary people would be reasonably
to know about it.
15.2 The process of taking judicial notice involves a departure from the general
rules of leading evidence that:
• the material upon which a court decides a case will be placed before
it in the form of evidence formally proved through witnesses;
• the judge and jury are not permitted in finding any facts, to use
their own personal knowledge of relevant facts.
15.3 Two main reasons have been advanced for allowing this departure from the
formal rules of leading evidence:
• to maintain consistent findings in court proceedings in areas of
common knowledge and experience, and in areas of science
and history which have
been the subject of earlier community investigation and are not reasonably open
to dispute. This maintains
the credibility of the trial
• to save parties time and costs by eliminating the need for formal proof of
evidence and cross-examination where dispute between
the parties is unlikely on
a particular issue.
of the uniform Evidence Acts, being
, generally restates the common law doctrine of judicial notice in a
simplified and clarified form.
sets out the following principal categories of fact that do not require proof:
Section 143:
legislative instruments, such as an Act, regulation
or rule of court.
• Section 144: reasonably established facts forming part of common
knowledge or which can be verified by an authoritative document.
• Section 145: certain types of Crown certificates.
Judicial notice of
matters of law
15.5 IP 28 sets out an overview of the judicial notice provisions in
Part 4.2 of the uniform Evidence
It calls for submissions on
any concerns with the operation of this
15.6 Section 143 provides that the provisions of legislation and the process
by which legislation comes into operation in any Australian
require proof. It was intended to reflect, but simplify, existing
Australian legislation covers:
• statutes;
• subordinate legislation;
• executive government proclamations and orders; and
• instruments of a legislative character, such as rules of court, which
by law must be published or notified in a government
or other official gazette.
15.7 Section 143(2) allows a judge to inform himself or herself about
such matters in any way that the judge thinks fit.
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth) states that
applies to all proceedings in any Australian
‘Australian
court’ is defined to include courts in jurisdictions that have not adopted
the uniform evidence legislation,
and also persons or bodies that take evidence
or that are required to apply the laws of
Interaction of
s 143 and s 5 of the
Evidence Act 1995
15.9 The interaction of
has been the subject of some
academic comment. Professor Jeremy Gans and Andrew Palmer have observed that,
is constitutionally valid,
would appear to have
entirely replaced the common law in relation to judicial notice of Australian
Stephen Odgers SC has
questioned the constitutional validity of
being able to apply to
proceedings in a state court exercising state jurisdiction with respect to state
legislation.
15.10 The Criminal Law Committee of the Law Society of South Australia (Law Society
SA) and the Legal Services Commission of South
Australia (Legal Services
Commission SA) commented in their submissions to IP 28 on what would
potentially happen if
were read down in the
circumstances of totally state-based legislation, jurisdiction and court
proceedings. The two submissions similarly
observed that the states and the
Northern Territory which have not enacted the uniform
Evidence Act
have similar
provisions in their Evidence Acts. Any constitutional invalidity would simply
mean these local provisions would operate.
They consequently considered that no
15.11 The Commissions do not consider that the constitutionality of s 5 of the
Commonwealth Act is an issue in this context, and have
found no problems in
Judicial notice of
matters of common knowledge
15.12 Section 144 restates the common law doctrine of judicial
It provides that
‘knowledge that is not reasonably open to question’ does not require
proof. Two types of such knowledge
are mentioned:
• local or general common
• knowledge capable of verification by reference to an authoritative
15.13 The main difference between the two types of knowledge is that the
latter category may require reference to an authoritative
document to discover
or confirm a fact of which judicial notice has been taken, while no such inquiry
is needed for facts that form
part of general
15.14 Section 144(2) allows a judge to acquire this knowledge in any way that
the judge thinks fit. A court (including a jury, if
there is one) must take such
knowledge into account (s 144(3)). In the process of taking judicial notice
of common knowledge or knowledge
contained in an authoritative document, a judge
must give parties to the proceedings the opportunity to make submissions as to
this knowledge is acquired or taken into account by the judge or court to
ensure that the party is not unfairly prejudiced (s 144(4)).
Operation of
15.15 IP 28 suggests that the scope and application of the procedural
protection for the parties under s 144(4) might be
and called for
submissions on the operation of this
sub-section.
In particular,
IP 28 indicated a number of points relating to the lack of clarity in the
operation of s 144(4).
15.16 IP 28 asks if s 144(4) means that judicial notice cannot be taken
of matters of common knowledge (or knowledge contained in
an authoritative
document), if it is impossible to do so without unfairly prejudicing one of the
In their submissions,
the Law Society SA and the Legal Services Commission SA consider this to be an
incorrect interpretation of
Rather, they
believe that ‘the purpose of s 144(4) is to ensure that the parties
are given an opportunity to address whatever
facts judicial notice is to be
taken of, not to prevent them from being taken notice of at
15.17 IP 28 went on to ask if a judge alone can decide that a party may be
unfairly prejudiced, or if the party needs to make a prior
submission of unfair
prejudice to the judge.
Society SA and the Legal Services Commission SA consider that s 144(4) only
requires the parties to be given an opportunity
to make submissions about facts
which are judicially noticed as is necessary to ensure
15.18 Another question raised in IP 28 was whether matters of ‘general
experience’ (as distinct from ‘common knowledge’)
covered by the procedural protections in s 144(4). Justice Dyson Heydon has
suggested in an academic paper that if it were
intended that s 144 covered
both matters then ‘great cumbrousness’ would
Judicial notice would
‘have to be given constantly about what matters the judge (or jury) was
considering in a manner which
was not necessary at common law’. Heydon
believes this consequence cannot have been contemplated under s 144. The
Law Society
SA and the Legal Services Commission SA agree with the view
expressed in the paper by Heydon that matters of ‘general
experience’
do not fall within the meaning of
15.19 IP 28 noted generally that despite the availability of judicial notice
under the provisions of s 144, parties to a proceeding
could still lead
formal evidence of matters of common
15.20 The submission to IP 28 by Kylie Burns of Griffith University Law School
raises the interesting argument that judicial notice
legislation should make a
distinction between ‘adjudicative’ facts and ‘legislative
and/or social facts’.
particular, the submission argues that, similar to judicial notice legislation
in the United States federal sphere, the ambit
of s 144 should be expressly
restricted to apply only to facts directly in issue between the parties
(‘adjudicative’
Burns defines a
‘social fact’ as statements about human behaviour, nature of society
and its institutions, and social
The submission
The use of social fact material whether sourced or unsourced, provided by the
parties or sourced by the judge … is not specifically
provided for in the
Australian law of evidence or practice. The reference to such material has
apparently developed without any specific
guiding principles as to authenticity,
notice or necessary evidential
15.21 Burns’s submission, however, also observes that refusing
‘to allow admission of facts on the basis that they are
not adjudicative
facts, or that the reception of such material does not come within the
traditional ambit of the doctrine of judicial
notice is unnecessarily
restrictive’.
proposes, therefore, that consideration be given to ‘any further new
provisions to specifically govern the admission
of legislative and social
facts’, potentially through judicial discretion, with the parties being
given the opportunity to
The submission also
observes that ‘given the very widespread use of social facts in judicial
decision making very explicit
evidential rules could prove administratively
difficult and costly to implement’. Burns further suggests that methods of
the reception and accuracy of social fact evidence could include
greater encouragement of amicus curiae, and the introduction of
directions in the relevant appellate courts that encourages parties to include
submissions on social fact material, including
supporting social scientific
material, in written appellate
submissions.
15.22 One senior practitioner considers that s 144(4) is awkward and could be
dealt with in a much simpler
That is, if a matter were
really one of ‘common knowledge’ and ‘not reasonably open to
question’ under s
144, then there would be no prejudice under
s 144(4). However, the practitioner also noted that s 144(4) was not a
major problem,
since it was not utilised a lot.
15.23 Other submissions consider that s 144(4) as it presently operates gives
parties the opportunity to respond if judicial notice
is taken of a fact where
it has the potential to be
In summary, the Law
Society SA and the Legal Services Commission SA have no concerns about the
operation of s 144(4) and do not believe
that any change is
They conclude:
Given these provisions [s 144(1), (2), (3)], the obligation on judges
contained in s 144(4) is appropriate, in order that the parties
procedural fairness. If the provision was not in the Evidence Acts, it is likely
something similar to it would have been
inferred as implicit in the other
sub-sections.
Judicial notice of
matters of state
15.24 Section 145 of the uniform Evidence Acts retains the common law
principles that apply to judicial notice of matters of State
as follows:
This Part does not exclude the application of the principles and rules of the
common law and of equity relating to the effect of
a certificate given by or on
behalf of the Crown with respect to a matter of international affairs.
15.25 This section principally deals with executive government recognition of
foreign states and governments, where a certificate
issued by the executive
government on the recognition issue is decisive evidence. The ALRC has commented
in the past that such matters
of state should be reviewed in the context of a
reference on international or constitutional law, rather than under a reference
to the rules of
Submissions on
s 145 note it had not changed the common law and that there are no concerns
with its operation.
Commissions’ view
15.26 Only a few submissions and consultations referred to the two issues
raised in IP 28 with regard to the operation of the judicial
provisions under the uniform Evidence
The submissions generally
have no concerns with the practical operation of Part 4.2 of the uniform
Evidence Acts, including s 144(4),
and do not indicate any change is
required—with the exception of the issue of possible new provisions to
specifically govern
the admission of legislative and social
15.27 The Commissions note the lack of examples of practical difficulties presently
occurring with the operation of Part 4.2, including
the procedural
requirements in s 144(4). It therefore appears that Part 4.2 is
operating effectively in practice.
15.28 The Commissions are, however, interested in further comment on whether there
is a need for a legislative provision allowing
judges to take account of social
Question 15–1
Should the provisions relating to judicial notice
allow judges to take account of social facts? Are there more effective ways of
with this issue?
Holland v Jones
[1917] HCA 26
(1917) 23 CLR 149
Australian Law Reform Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1 (1985),
J Gans and A Palmer,
Principles of Evidence
(2nd ed, 2004),
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004),
Ibid, Qs 13–1,
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1 (1985), [973] on the draft
bill proposal.
Note that the
(NSW) has no equivalent provision to
Evidence Act 1995
Dictionary.
J Gans and A Palmer,
Australian Principles of Evidence
(2nd ed, 2004),
Uniform Evidence
(6th ed, 2004), [1.4.540].
Criminal Law Committee of the Law Society of South Australia,
7 March 2005, 15; Legal Services Commission of South Australia,
22 February 2005,
J Gans and A Palmer,
Principles of Evidence
(2nd ed, 2004), 37. In
Gattellaro v Westpac
Banking Corporation
(2004) 204 ALR 258
, 262 the High Court commented on the
‘In New South Wales there would appear to be no room
for the operation of the common law doctrine of judicial notice, strictly
called, since the enactment of the
Evidence Act 1995
Uniform Evidence
s 144(1)(a).
s 144(1)(b).
J Gans and A Palmer,
Australian Principles of Evidence
(2nd ed, 2004), 40.
See Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004),
[13.12]–[13.13].
This is the
conclusion of Sackville J in
Prentice v Cummins (No 5)
[2002] FCA 1503
Criminal Law Committee of
the Law Society of South Australia,
7 March 2005,
16; Legal Services Commission of South Australia,
22 February 2005, 8.
Criminal Law
Committee of the Law Society of South Australia,
7 March 2005, 16; Legal Services Commission of South Australia,
22 February 2005,
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004),
Criminal Law
Committee of the Law Society of South Australia,
7 March 2005, 16; Legal Services Commission of South Australia,
22 February 2005,
Expert Evidence and
Economic Reasoning in Litigation under
Trade Practices Act
Theoretical Issues
(2003) unpublished manuscript, 44.
Criminal Law Committee of the Law
Society of South Australia,
7 March 2005, 16;
Legal Services Commission of South Australia,
February 2005, 8.
Australian Law
Reform Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004),
18 February 2005, 1.
Federal Rules of Evidence
(US) r 201: K Burns,
18 February 2005, 2,
18 February 2005, 4.
P Greenwood,
Consultation
Sydney, 11 March 2005.
Criminal Law
Committee of the Law Society of South Australia,
7 March 2005, 16; Legal Services Commission of South Australia,
22 February 2005,
Criminal Law Committee of the Law
Society of South Australia,
7 March 2005, 16;
Legal Services Commission of South Australia,
February 2005, 8.
Criminal Law
Committee of the Law Society of South Australia,
7 March 2005, 16; Legal Services Commission of South Australia,
22 February 2005,
Australian Law Reform Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1 (1985),
Criminal Law Committee of the
Law Society of South Australia,
7 March 2005, 15;
Legal Services Commission of South Australia,
February 2005, 7.
Criminal Law
Committee of the Law Society of South Australia,
7 March 2005; Legal Services Commission of South Australia,
22 February 2005; K Burns,
February 2005; P Greenwood,
Consultation
, Sydney, 11 March
See K Burns,
18 February 2005.
16. Comments, Warnings and Directions to the Jury
Introduction
Failure of the accused to give evidence or to call a witness
Warnings about unreliable evidence
Warnings in respect of children's evidence
Other common law warnings
16. Comments, Warnings and Directions to the Jury
Introduction
16.1 In jury trials, generally the role of the judge is to decide questions
of law and the role of the jury is to decide questions
of fact. The judge is
required to direct the jury about the legal rules that it must apply to the
facts in determining the verdict
and can also direct the jury about the manner
in which those legal rules should be applied to the facts. A direction warns a
against following an impermissible path of reasoning and cannot be
In certain circumstances,
the trial judge may also express opinions about the evidence in the form of a
judicial comment. The latter
is distinct from a direction in that the jury is
not obliged to follow it.
16.2 Although it is not possible to predict all of the ways in which a judge may
be required to direct or instruct the jury during
the course of a trial, the
common law has developed certain warnings in respect of particular types of
evidence and inferences that
can be drawn from the absence of evidence.
16.3 The uniform Evidence Acts do not contain a specific Part dealing exclusively
with comments and directions to the jury. However,
the following are expressly
provided for:
• in criminal proceedings for an indictable offence, the judge or any
party (other than the prosecutor) may comment on the failure
of a defendant (or
a defendant’s spouse, de facto spouse, parent or child) to give evidence
• the court has a discretion to limit the use to be made of evidence if
there is a danger that a particular use of the evidence
might be unfairly
prejudicial to a party or misleading or confusing (s 136);
• the judge may give a warning about ‘evidence of a kind that may
be unreliable’ (s 165); and
• where identification evidence has been admitted, the judge is to
inform the jury of the need for caution (and of the reasons
for the need for
caution) before accepting that evidence (s 116).
16.4 The uniform Evidence Acts have abolished the requirement for
corroboration warnings
but preserve
a trial judge’s powers at common law to give warnings in respect of
certain types of evidence.
uniform Evidence Acts do not cover the common law doctrine in relation to the
inferences that can be drawn from absent evidence,
nor do they cover the
directions for circumstantial evidence in a criminal trial.
Failure of the
accused to give evidence or to call a witness
by the trial judge on failure to give evidence
16.5 It is a well-established principle at common law that an accused has a
right to silence. This right means that a defendant cannot
be compelled to give
evidence or to answer questions put to him or her in the dock. However, a trial
judge may be permitted to comment
on the fact that the defendant has not given
The rules differ across
the various jurisdictions as to whether a comment can be made and what form that
comment might take.
16.6 In the Interim Report of the original ALRC evidence inquiry (ALRC
the ALRC considered that there
were strong arguments in favour of permitting a tribunal of fact to draw adverse
inferences from the
failure of an accused to give evidence:
If accused persons can avoid giving evidence, and being subject to
cross-examination, without any adverse consequences, then there
is a risk that
guilty persons would escape
conviction.
16.7 The ALRC acknowledged, however, that there may be reasons other than
guilt that would lead an accused to choose not to give evidence.
For example,
giving evidence may result in the disclosure of non-criminal conduct that is
embarrassing or shaming. An accused may
wish to remain silent to prevent
revealing prior convictions or to protect other people. Alternatively, an
accused may choose not
to give evidence because he or she may present as a poor
witness due to particular mannerisms or communication
difficulties.
16.8 The ALRC further argued that prohibitions on judicial comment were
unsatisfactory given the reality that ‘adverse inferences
will be drawn by
the tribunal of fact’:
Rather than making no comment and leaving the jury to draw what inferences they
will, it seems preferable to permit a trial judge
to instruct the jury as to
inferences they may, and may not, draw from the accused person’s
16.9 The ALRC therefore recommended that, as a compromise between the
considerations outlined above, the tribunal of fact should be
entitled to take
the accused’s failure to testify into account when assessing the other
evidence in the case, but not to use
it as direct evidence of
Accordingly, it
recommended that any comment by counsel or the trial judge on the failure of an
accused to give evidence must be
in terms consistent with legally permissible
inferences.
16.10 Section 20 of the uniform Evidence Acts provides that in criminal
proceedings for an indictable offence:
(2) The judge or any party (other than the prosecutor) may comment on a failure
of the defendant to give evidence. However, unless
the comment is made by
another defendant in the proceeding, the comment must not suggest that the
defendant failed to give evidence
because the defendant was, or believed that he
or she was, guilty of the offence concerned.
(3) The judge or any party (other than the prosecutor) may comment on a failure
to give evidence by a person who, at the time of
the failure, was:
(a) the defendant’s spouse or de facto spouse; or
(b) a parent or child of the
16.11 The extent to which a judge may make an adverse comment pursuant to
s 20 was considered by the High Court in
In this case, the
trial judge made a comment to the jury that it was entitled to conclude that the
accused’s election not to
deny or contradict certain prosecution evidence
was evidence that his evidence would not have assisted him at trial. The
held that this comment breached the prohibition in s 20(2),
Section 20(2) should be given no narrow construction inviting the drawing
of fine distinctions. In particular, the prohibition contained
in the second
sentence (forbidding the judge making a comment that suggests the accused failed
to give evidence because he or she
was … guilty) must be given full
operation … It has been said that the line between what is permissible and
what is not
… may be a fine one. Whether or not that is so, s 20(2)
requires a line to be drawn and it should be drawn in a way that gives
prohibition against suggesting particular reasons for not giving evidence its
full operation.
16.12 The Court emphasised that, apart from the prohibition contained in
s 20(2), the ability of the judge to make an adverse comment
on the failure
to give evidence was limited by the fundamental accusatorial principle in
criminal trials that the prosecution bears
the onus of proving the
accused’s guilt beyond reasonable doubt. In this regard, it stated:
It will seldom, if ever, be reasonable to conclude that an accused in a criminal
trial would be expected to give evidence. The most
that can be said in criminal
matters is that there are some cases in which evidence (or an explanation)
contradicting an apparently
damning inference to be drawn from proven facts
could come only from the accused. In the absence of such evidence or
explanation,
the jury may more readily draw the conclusion which the prosecution
16.13 The Court also discussed an earlier common law decision,
Weissensteiner v The
in which the High
Court held as permissible the trial judge’s comment that ‘an
inference of guilt may be more safely
drawn from the proven facts when an
accused person elects not to give evidence of relevant facts which it can easily
be perceived
must be within his knowledge’. In this case, the defendant
was charged with the murder of two persons who had disappeared whilst
the Pacific. The accused was later found in possession of their boat and
possessions. He made a number of inconsistent
pre-trial statements as to the
whereabouts of the couple, but did not give evidence at trial. The Court
approved the judicial comment
on the basis that only the accused knew what had
happened while he was on the boat with the couple and hence that he was the only
person capable of explaining their disappearance. It stated:
In a criminal trial, hypotheses consistent with the innocence of the accused may
cease to be rational or reasonable in the absence
of evidence to support them
when that evidence, if it exists at all, must be within the knowledge of the
16.14 Section 20 does not operate to prohibit a
Weissensteiner
comment. However, in
the High Court
confined the decision in
Weissensteiner
to its unusual facts. It held
that such a comment was only appropriate (both at common law and in uniform
Evidence Act
explanation) contradicting an apparently damning inference to be drawn
proven facts could only come from the
Azzopardi v The Queen
the High Court emphasised that a
Weissensteiner
comment will only be appropriate in ‘rare and
exceptional’ cases.
this case, the accused was charged with soliciting P to murder G. P gave
evidence in support of the prosecution’s case and
the accused did not give
evidence. The trial judge commented to the jury that it was entitled to take
into account the fact that
the accused did not deny or contradict evidence about
matters which were within his personal knowledge. The High Court held that
and confirmed that:
It is … clear beyond doubt that the fact that an accused does not give
evidence at trial is not of itself evidence against
the accused. It is not an
admission of guilt by conduct; it cannot fill any gaps in the prosecution case;
it cannot be used as a
make-weight in considering whether the prosecution has
proved the accusation beyond reasonable
16.16 The Court further held that there is no basis for giving a
Weissensteiner
comment where another witness has given evidence on an
aspect of the prosecution case. It stated:
All that could be said in this case is that the accused did not give evidence
contradicting
evidence which had been led. This was not a case where the
accused did not take the opportunity to provide some
material for consideration by the jury which would explain or contradict the
case sought to be made by the prosecution. This
was not a case in which the jury
might properly use the absence of evidence of additional, exculpatory, material
in considering inferences
sought by the
prosecution.
16.17 The Court concluded that a
Weissensteiner
comment will only be
appropriate where there is a basis for concluding that there are additional
facts, peculiarly in the knowledge
of the accused, which would explain or
contradict the inference the prosecution seeks to draw. The fact that an accused
contradicted evidence already given will not
16.18 In a dissenting judgment, McHugh J stated that it is a misreading
of the common law and legislative history to hold that
removes the
right of comment that trial judges have exercised for more than two
His Honour noted that
courts had regularly directed juries that they could, in appropriate
circumstances, take into account that the accused
had failed to rebut or explain
evidence as a reason for accepting that
His Honour considered
that such judicial comments did not suggest that accused persons had failed to
give evidence because they were
guilty of the offence charged (and hence did not
, nor were they inconsistent with the accused’s right
to silence.
Submissions and consultations
16.19 IP 28 asked whether the operation of
raised any concerns and
whether any such concerns should be addressed through amendment of the uniform
Evidence Acts. In particular,
it asked whether the term ‘comment’ or
the content of permissible judicial comment should be
16.20 The New South Wales Public Defenders Office (NSW PDO) considers
that the comments to be given in a case where the accused does
not give evidence
are now reasonably well settled (in this regard the NSW PDO refers to
) and submits that the current law is working satisfactorily and
requires no further clarification or
16.21 In contrast, the Office of the NSW Director of Public Prosecutions
(DPP NSW) submits that the case law has narrowed the circumstances
judicial comment is permitted beyond that suggested by the terms of
itself, and that clarifying the content of comments permissible under
would help to achieve consistency and decrease the number of appeals on this
16.22 IP 28 also asked whether any concerns were raised by the provision
for judicial comment on the failure of a spouse, de facto,
parent or child of a defendant to give
16.23 The NSW PDO submits that the current provisions are working well
and do not require amendment.
16.24 The DPP NSW again submits that
should be amended to clarify
the content of any permissible comment. The DPP NSW further submits that
there is some doubt about the
and refers to the
dissenting judgement of McHugh J in
Dyers v The
In this case,
McHugh J suggested that
is open to the construction that the
judge may make a comment when the accused fails to call any of the persons
nominated in the
sub-section to answer a relevant part of the prosecution case,
and is not confined to cases where the accused sets up an affirmative
Honour also suggested that
must be seen as a supplement to the
common law right to comment, as it is unlikely that the legislature intended the
limit the power
to comment to the categories of persons mentioned in that
subsection.
The Commissions’ view
16.25 In relation to the question regarding whether ‘comment’ or
the content of permissible judicial comment should be
defined, the Commissions
are of the view that the law has been settled by the High Court in cases such as
Whilst that
decision has perhaps narrowed the scope of
from that envisaged in the
original ALRC recommendation, the Commissions consider that the policy
underpinning this decision is sound
and that no need has been demonstrated to
revisit it. It is noted that the NSWLRC examined the operation of
2000 and recommended that, in general, the present law concerning the right to
silence at trial should not
Prosecutor’s
16.26 In accordance with
, only the trial judge and defence counsel
are permitted to make a comment regarding an accused’s failure to give
In its report on the right to
the NSWLRC considered
whether it would be desirable to permit prosecutors to make such comments. In
favour of such a change, it was
argued that a jury might interpret a judicial
comment as an indication the judge has an opinion adverse to the defendant and
therefore lead it to give the issue undue significance. It was also
considered unfair that the prosecution not be permitted to comment
that the defence may itself raise with the jury, in anticipation of comments
from the trial judge.
16.27 The NSWLRC therefore recommended that prosecutors be permitted to make
appropriate comments to the jury. This could be done
by the prosecution making
an application, in the absence of the jury, for leave to comment. Leave could
then be granted subject to
conditions on the content of the proposed comment,
which would not be permitted to go beyond that allowed for under
16.28 IP 28 asked whether the prohibition on prosecution comment in
the uniform Evidence Acts should be removed and, if so, whether a
prosecutor’s ability to comment should be subject to a
requirement that it
apply for leave to do so.
Submissions and consultations
16.29 The NSW PDO submits that prohibition on prosecution comment in
should be retained:
It is too easy for prosecutors in the heat of a trial to over-emphasise the
importance of the failure of the accused to give evidence.
In such cases juries
can easily be diverted from the issue of whether the Crown has proved its case,
to the issue of why the accused
has not given evidence. It is much safer to
leave any comments on the failure of the accused to give evidence to the trial
The current provisions do not require
16.30 Similarly, the Law Council of Australia (Law Council) favours retaining
the prohibition on the basis that the judge is the appropriate
person to direct
the jury that no inferences can be drawn from an accused’s
16.31 In contrast, the DPP NSW agrees with the reasoning in the NSWLRC report
and supports the proposal that the prosecutor be able,
subject to the leave
requirement, to comment on the inferences to be drawn from the failure of an
accused to give evidence.
16.32 Some New South Wales Crown Prosecutors consider that it would be desirable
for a prosecutor to be able to make a comment, not
in relation to an inference
of guilt, but in relation to the credibility of the
The Commissions’ view
16.33 The ALRC considered in its original report the question of whether
prosecutors should be able to comment on the failure of an
accused to give
evidence, and concluded that:
To allow the prosecution to do so would carry grave dangers. There is a fine
line between what is and is not permissible comment.
The inexperienced or
overzealous prosecutor could overstep that line and cause the trial to be
aborted. Further, by subtle use of
the right to comment, the prosecutor could
focus attention on the choice and shift attention from the burden of proof
the Crown to the question of the significance of the choice made by
the accused.
16.34 The Commissions are inclined to agree with the policy outlined in
ALRC 38 in relation to this question. No amendment to the
uniform Evidence
Acts should be made in this regard.
from the absence of evidence
16.35 At common law, a judge is permitted to direct the jury that it may
infer from a party’s failure to call evidence that
the evidence in
question would not have assisted that party’s case (known as the rule in
uniform Evidence Acts are silent as to whether and what inferences can be drawn
from a party’s failure to call evidence
and hence the common law continues
to operate.
16.36 The operation of the rule in
Jones v Dunkel
in criminal proceedings
has been restricted by recent authority. In
Dyers v The Queen
Court held that:
As a general rule a trial judge should not direct the jury in a criminal trial
that the accused would be expected to give evidence
or call others to give
evidence. Exceptions to that general rule will be rare. They are referred to in
. As a general rule … a trial judge should not direct the
jury that they are entitled to infer that evidence which the accused
given, or which others, called by the accused, could have given, would not
assist the accused. If it is possible that
the jury might think that evidence
could have been, but was not, given or called by the accused, they should be
instructed not to
speculate about what might have been said in that
16.37 The Court reasoned that to allow the rule to operate generally in
criminal proceedings would contradict the fundamental requirement
prosecution prove its case beyond reasonable
The Court drew further
support for its conclusion from the fact that is the duty of the prosecution to
call all available material
witnesses unless there is a good reason for not
16.38 In a dissenting judgment, McHugh J considered that the majority decision was
an ‘anathema’ given the history of
the failure to call a witness
direction and stated that a trial judge should be able to give a
direction where an accused establishes an ‘affirmative
evidentiary case’ (in other words, has given an alternative version
Submissions and consultations
16.39 IP 28 asks whether the uniform Evidence Acts should be amended to
provide for comment on the adverse inferences that may be
drawn from the failure
to call evidence and whether such comment should be limited to civil
proceedings.
IP 28 sought comment on whether there is a need for the
uniform Evidence Acts to provide specifically for the rule in
16.40 The Law Council does not favour statutory embodiment of the rule in
In civil cases inferences are permitted from a party’s failure to testify
or call other evidence or cross-examine an opponent’s
witness. However,
courts remain wary about such inferences. The Council is wary of legislative
formulation of appropriate inferences
in civil cases and, in light of its view
to reduce evidential rules in civil cases, does not favour statutory embodiment
of the ‘rule’
Jones v Dunkel
. Whilst there may be stronger
arguments for enacting an equivalent rule in criminal cases the Council is not
at present convinced
this is necessary in light of the High Court’s strong
stand against drawing adverse inferences from such
16.41 Similarly, the NSW PDO supports the majority position in
that the judge
should comment on the failure of the defence to call a witness
the most unusual of
circumstances.
16.42 One submission expresses the view that the rule in
works well in practice in civil cases and that there is no need for a
similar rule in criminal cases.
16.43 In contrast, the DPP NSW supports the view expressed by McHugh J in his
dissenting judgment in
and submits that the uniform Evidence Acts
should be amended to permit judicial comment in both criminal and civil
proceedings where
the accused has set up an affirmative evidentiary case and
fails to call evidence.
Commissions’ view
16.44 The Commissions are of the view that a case has not been made out for
the uniform Evidence Acts to be amended to provide for
the inferences that can
be drawn from the absence of evidence. The operation of the rule in
in civil trials appears to be working well in practice. In relation
to criminal trials, the Commissions consider that it would be
inappropriate to
legislate for the rule in light of the majority stance taken in
that adverse
inferences should not be drawn from the failure to give evidence or call
witnesses except in the most unusual of circumstances.
Warnings about
unreliable evidence
16.45 At common law, certain categories of evidence require a warning from
the trial judge where the evidence is uncorroborated. These
categories include:
evidence of complainants in sexual assault
accomplices;
children giving
sworn evidence;
informers’ evidence.
Section 164
of the uniform Evidence Acts abolishes the common law
mandatory corroboration regime, replacing it with the warning requirements
However, it should be noted that
does not prohibit
the trial judge from warning that it would be dangerous to convict on
uncorroborated evidence.
R v Stewart,
Spigelman CJ observed that
‘constitute reform of the law of a fundamental
‘significant change in the law was
These remarks
emphasise that great caution must be exercised in taking into account the
comparable common law on the interpretation
16.48 ALRC 26 criticised the common law on the following basis:
The present law is too rigid and technical. There is a strong case for saying
that it does not adequately serve the rationale of
minimising the risk of
wrongful convictions. Warnings can be required when not necessary and avoided
when they should be given in
the circumstances of the particular case. In
addition, warnings in their present form distract attention from the issue of
the reliability
of the evidence in question. Finally, the directions to be given
are so complex that they are likely to be ignored … What is
required is a
simpler regime, under which the trial judge must consider whether a direction
appropriate to the circumstances should
16.49 The ALRC therefore proposed that there be an obligation to give a
warning in respect of certain categories of evidence (including
some of the
previous common law categories) where the evidence may be unreliable or its
probative value may be over-estimated, unless
there is a good reason not to do
so. The ALRC recommended that the judge’s common law powers and
obligations to give appropriate
warnings and directions remain intact,
suggesting that these general powers would be available to cover any new
category of unreliable
evidence that may
The ALRC also observed
that a judge would not be prevented from suggesting that the jury look for
independent evidence to confirm
the evidence in question, nor from directing a
jury in appropriate cases that it is dangerous to convict an accused on the
of a particular witness’
16.50 The draft legislation in ALRC 38 provided an exhaustive list of the
categories of evidence that may require a
By contrast,
provides a non-exhaustive list, stating that
‘unreliable’ evidence includes the following:
(a) evidence in relation to which
evidence) or 3.4 (admissions) applies;
(b) identification evidence;
(c) evidence the reliability of which may be affected by age, ill health
(whether physical or mental), injury or the like;
(d) evidence given in a criminal proceeding by a witness, being a witness who
might reasonably be supposed to have been criminally
concerned in the events
giving rise to the proceeding;
(e) evidence given in a criminal proceeding by a witness who is a prison
(f) oral evidence of official questioning of a defendant that is questioning
recorded in writing that has not been signed, or otherwise
acknowledged in
writing, by the defendant;
(g) in a proceeding against the estate of a deceased person—evidence
adduced by or on behalf of a person seeking relief in
the proceeding that is
evidence about a matter about which the deceased person could have given
evidence if he or she were alive.
16.51 Hence
applies not only to the specific categories listed in
but also to evidence of a ‘kind that may be
unreliable’. One issue upon which the case law has diverged is whether the
section applies to any evidence which falls within one of the categories listed
or whether it must also be established that the evidence
is of a kind that is
unreliable.
Further, no
indication is given in the uniform Evidence Acts as to the breadth of the test
of unreliability. It has been held, however,
that the section only applies to
evidence where there is a risk of a miscarriage of justice that may be apparent
to the judge but
16.52 The required contents of the warning are set out in
(2) If there is a jury and a party so requests, the judge is to:
(a) warn the jury that the evidence may be unreliable; and
(b) inform the jury of matters that may cause it to be unreliable; and
(c) warn the jury of the need for caution in determining whether to accept
the evidence and the weight to be given to it.
Section 165(4)
provides that it is not necessary that a particular
form of words be used in giving the warning or information.
16.54 In relation to
s 165(2)(b)
, the information provided to the jury
will depend on the particular matters that lead to the conclusion that the
evidence is ‘of
a kind that may be
unreliable’.
Odgers states
that where a warning is required, information need not be confined only to those
matters which would bear on the reliability
of evidence of the
‘kind’. Any matter that may cause it to be unreliable should be
noted as an assessment of whether
a witness’ evidence should be accepted
will often depend on the totality of matters bearing on its
reliability.
16.55 As recommended by the ALRC,
provides that the judge need not
give a warning if ‘there are good reasons for not doing so’. The
uniform Evidence Acts
are silent on what may constitute ‘good
reasons’ for refusing to give a warning.
Section 165
provides no indication as to when a warning should be given.
The New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal has observed that it is
‘highly preferable’ that a trial judge give any required warnings
immediately before or immediately after the giving
of the subject evidence, as
opposed to waiting to do so in the course of
summing-up.
Section 165(5)
provides that the section ‘does not affect any
other power of the judge to give a warning to, or to inform, the jury’.
Hence it preserves the trial judge’s general powers and obligations to
give appropriate warnings (except in New South Wales
where the common law has
been limited in relation to
In contrast to the
warnings provided for in
, at common law a trial judge may be required
to give a warning where it is not requested by either
and potentially even where
the parties indicate that they do not wish a warning to be
Section 165(5)
discussed further below.
Submissions and
consultations
16.58 IP 28 asks how
of the uniform Evidence Acts has
operated in practice, whether it has raised any concerns and how any such
concerns should be
16.59 One practitioner considers that
generally works
The Law Council also
endorses the flexible and non-technical approach of
16.60 In contrast, the NSW PDO submits that
‘has proved to
be a blunt and ineffective instrument when compared to the common law rules
relating to
corroboration’.
16.61 The DPP NSW submits that guidance as to the timing of a warning under
is desirable:
Section 165
should be amended to indicate that, unless the court is satisfied
that it is in the interests of justice to give the warning at some
other time,
the warning given by the trial judge pursuant to the section, must be given
immediately before or immediately after the
giving of the evidence that is the
subject of the warning.
16.62 The New South Wales Department of Health Child Protection and Violence
Unit submits that the Acts should be amended to provide
that the judge must not
warn, or suggest to the jury in any way, that the law regards complainants in
sexual assault cases as an
unreliable class of witness.
16.63 IP 28 also asks whether further categories of evidence should be
included in
16.64 The NSW PDO supports the inclusion of additional categories in
In particular, it proposes the addition of evidence from
witnesses who have ‘bad character’, noting that currently there
authority for the proposition that a
direction for witnesses of bad
character is not required.
NSW PDO also proposes that evidence from a person affected by drugs and
alcohol be added to the list in
on the basis that there are
presently conflicting authorities about such witnesses. It is suggested that it
is anomalous that a
direction must be given in relation to a witness
affected by a physical or mental ill-health, injury, or the like, but not be a
affected by drugs or
16.65 In contrast, the DPP NSW does not consider that further categories of
evidence should be included in
16.66 IP 28 further asks whether the required content of warnings to the jury under
should be amended.
16.67 The DPP NSW does not support any amendment to
In contrast, the
NSW PDO submits that the statutory formulation in
considerably weaker than the common law regarding the uncorroborated evidence of
accomplices, and does not indicate which approach
is to be taken when there is
more than one accomplice giving evidence. It therefore proposes that
be amended to include the following:
(d) that it would be dangerous to act on the evidence of an unreliable witness
which is not supported by other independent evidence;
(e) the evidence of a number of witnesses all criminally concerned in the events
giving rise to the proceedings do not provide independent
support for each
16.68 The Law Council submits that it might be appropriate to develop uniform
model directions (and particularly warnings required
criminal cases in uniform
Evidence Act
directions be developed, care must be taken to ensure that they do not achieve a
(and hence technical)
16.69 One senior judicial officer considers that it would be difficult to legislate
to include different types of
directions.
Commissions’ view
16.70 The Commissions note that relatively few submissions were received in
relation to warnings given pursuant to
(excluding common law warnings
permitted under
16.71 One issue raised in relation to the general operation of the section
concerns the timing of
warnings. The Commissions agree with the
proposition that a warning should be given immediately before or immediately
after the giving
of the evidence in question (as noted in
). However, the
Commissions do not consider that a case has been made out in favour of
legislative amendment in relation to timing.
16.72 In relation to whether further categories of evidence should be included in
, the Commissions note that
does not provide an
exhaustive list and parties may therefore request warnings in relation to
evidence ‘of a kind that may
be unreliable’. Given that this is the
case, the categories of evidence referred to by the NSW PDO (persons
affected by drugs
or alcohol and persons of bad character) may fall within the
general ambit of ‘evidence of a kind that may be unreliable’.
the Commissions are not inclined to propose that further categories be added to
16.73 In relation to whether
requires amendment, the only issues
raised in the submissions concerned whether a direction in relation to evidence
given by accomplices
should be given and whether model directions should be
formulated.
16.74 In relation to the first question, the Commissions note that a trial judge is
not prevented from suggesting that the jury look
for independent evidence which
may confirm the evidence in question or, in appropriate cases, from directing a
jury that it is dangerous
to convict an accused on the basis of a particular
witness’ evidence.
Commissions consider that no convincing case has been made out for including
additional directions.
16.75 In relation to the question of model directions, the Commissions consider
that this carries too great a risk of being treated
as mandatory by judicial
officers, thereby removing the flexibility the section was intended to provide.
Accordingly, the Commissions
do not propose an amendment to the required content
of warnings to the jury under
A targeted inquiry
16.76 The Commissions are of the view that a more targeted inquiry into
comments, directions and warnings to the jury is warranted.
In part, this is due
to the complexity of the issues involved. The focus of the current Inquiry is
the uniform Evidence Acts. The
Commissions consider that the solutions to
problems raised in the context of comments, warnings and directions to the jury
a broader analysis than this Inquiry allows. There is a need to examine
not only the uniform Evidence Acts, but also the common law
and other pieces of
state legislation regarding particular types of
16.77 Any future inquiry should address the need to increase the quality and
consistency of trial practice across the various jurisdictions
Australia. A joint inquiry involving law reform bodies from a number of
Inquiry, would facilitate such an
16.78 However, as part of this Inquiry, the Commissions are still considering
whether specific changes are required to the uniform
Evidence Acts. For example,
the Commissions make a proposal and seek further comments in relation to
later in this chapter.
in respect of children’s evidence
16.79 At common law, children are traditionally seen as unreliable witnesses,
and there are requirements in all Australian jurisdictions
that judges warn
juries that it is dangerous to convict on the uncorroborated evidence of a
As a result of
research and a better understanding of children’s cognitive and recall
skills, all Australian jurisdictions
have removed the common law requirement
that corroboration warnings be
However, there are
differences in the scope of the provisions that allow judges to give warnings
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth) contains no specific provision regarding
warnings about the evidence of child
Section 165
of the uniform Evidence Acts allows, at the request of a party, the judge to
give a warning to the jury that certain evidence may
be unreliable.
Section 165(1)(c)
specifically includes ‘age’ as one of the
reasons why the reliability of evidence might be affected.
16.81 In the report of an inquiry into children and the legal process
(ALRC 84), the ALRC and the Human Rights and Equal Opportunity
(HREOC) found that, despite changes to the law removing corroboration
requirements, it remains standard practice in many
give warnings to juries concerning the evidence of
The concerns raised
in submissions to that inquiry were that these judicial warnings are often based
on individual judges’
assumptions and prejudices rather than modern
research findings, effectively discriminating against child
The ALRC and HREOC
made a recommendation that judges should be prohibited from warning or
suggesting to the jury that children are
an unreliable class of witness or that
their evidence is suspect; and that judicial warnings about the evidence of a
particular child
witness should only be given on request of a party where that
party can show that there are exceptional circumstances warranting
16.82 In 2001, the
Evidence Act 1995
(NSW) was amended to insert a number of
specific provisions relating to warnings to be given by judges in jury trials
involving the
evidence of child
Sections 165(6)
prohibit the giving of general warnings:
• about the reliability of a child’s evidence due to age;
• that children as a class are unreliable witnesses; or
• that there is a danger of convicting on the uncorroborated evidence
of any child witness.
Section 165B
provides that a judge may give warnings in relation
to a particular child’s evidence where this has been requested by a party,
and the party has satisfied the court that there are circumstances particular to
the child affecting the reliability of the child’s
16.84 The New South Wales provisions were inserted in the
Evidence Act
(NSW) upon the recommendation of the Wood Royal Commission into the New
South Wales Police Service (Wood Royal
Commission).
In the Wood
Royal Commission’s final report, Justice Wood opposed compulsory
corroboration warnings being given in relation
to child witnesses because,
first, even carefully given warnings can ‘easily be mistaken by a jury as
an instruction to acquit’;
and secondly, research suggests that child
witnesses as a class are not inherently more unreliable than adult
expressed support for the recommendations of the ALRC and HREOC in their inquiry
into children and the legal
The New South Wales
Evidence Act
recommended the
implementation of the Wood Royal Commission’s recommendations on child
Section 164(4)
Evidence Act 2001
(Tas) contains a
similar provision to s 165A(1) of the New South Wales Act prohibiting
warnings or suggestions to a jury that children
as a class are unreliable
witnesses, but does not contain any of the other restrictions on warnings
relating to the reliability of
the evidence of child witnesses.
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth) contains, in relation to sexual
offences (including child sex tourism and sexual servitude offences), a
prohibition on warnings
to the jury regarding children as an unreliable class of
While child sexual
assault cases—where the evidence of the child is often the crucial piece
of evidence in a trial—are
the type of cases where the mischief of
unwarranted judicial warnings is most likely to arise, there is a question as to
the approach to warnings to juries on the evidence of children should be
applied uniformly across all of the uniform Evidence Acts.
Submissions and
consultations
16.87 IP 28 asked how
(NSW) have operated in practice and whether the
Evidence Act
(Cth) should be amended to include more specific provisions on warnings
to juries regarding the evidence of children,
similar to those that
appear in the
Evidence Act 1995
16.88 NSW PDO submits that
Evidence Act
(NSW) appear to be working
satisfactorily.
submissions agree that the New South Wales provisions appear to have worked
well, and could usefully be included in the uniform
Similarly, the Law
Council submits:
should be clarified to at least discourage judges from warning that
evidence of a certain class is generally unreliable. In the case
categories of witnesses, children and victims of sexual assault, legislation
exists in many jurisdictions to prohibit such
general comments and the Council
supports similar provisions being contained in the uniform Evidence
Commissions’ view
16.89 The general tenor of the submissions is that the New South Wales
provisions relating to children’s evidence have worked
well and there is
general support for including similar provisions in the uniform Evidence
16.90 The Commissions agree with the views expressed by Justice Wood in his
report into the New South Wales Police
and those in
should be made to the
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth) to clarify the law in
respect of warnings about children’s evidence, to ensure that warnings
are not given and trial judges focus on the particular
circumstances of the child giving evidence when considering whether to warn
jury about the reliability of that child’s evidence.
16.91 The policy of the Commissions, underpinning the current Inquiry, is that
uniformity in evidence laws should be pursued unless
there is good reason to the
contrary. In view of the desirability of clarity, effectiveness and uniformity
in evidence law between
Australian jurisdictions, the Commissions have concluded
that provisions on warnings to juries regarding the evidence of children,
Evidence Act 1995
should be included in the uniform Evidence Acts.
Proposal 16–1
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth) should be
amended to include similar provisions to
Evidence Act 1995
(NSW) dealing with warnings in respect of
children’s evidence.
common law warnings
16.92 As noted above,
retains the power of the trial judge to
give common law directions and warnings. The common law requires a warning to be
the jury ‘whenever a warning is necessary to avoid a perceptible
risk of miscarriage of justice arising from the circumstances
Such a direction
is required even when statute has abolished the requirement of
corroboration.
Some examples
of situations where the common law requires warnings are where there has been a
long delay in the reporting of an
and in respect of the
evidence of prison informers who give evidence of a disputed
confession.
16.93 Since the 1980s, substantial law reform has been undertaken across all
Australian jurisdictions to remove those aspects of the
common law which
required judges to warn juries that it would be unwise or dangerous to convict
an accused of a sexual offence charge
on the basis of the uncorroborated
evidence of the complainant. Significant research has also been undertaken into
the issue of delayed
complaint in sexual assault
The assumption that
a victim of a sexual assault will make an early complaint has been widely
discredited, and legislation has been
enacted in many jurisdictions (for
example, Tasmania and Victoria) requiring a judge to warn the jury that a delay
in complaint does
not necessarily indicate that the allegation is
16.94 The Tasmania Law Reform Institute (TLRI) has recently released an issues
paper examining warnings in sexual offence cases relating
to delays in
The paper argues
that, despite legislative reform of the common law corroboration doctrines and
of the law relating to early complaint,
the High Court has effectively imposed
new mandatory directions upon trial judges relating to delay in complaint. By
virtue of the
operation of
, these directions apply in the uniform
Evidence Act
reinstate, albeit in a muted form, traditional suspicions and beliefs about
sexual assault
complainants.
16.95 One common law warning of particular significance is the
Longman v The
concerned a warning
to the jury about a victim’
year delay in complaining about an
incestuous assault. The High Court found that a substantial delay in complaint
disadvantaged the
accused in mounting a defence and that the jury should
therefore be warned about convicting on the uncorroborated evidence of the
complainant. Brennan, Dawson and Toohey JJ explained the problems with delayed
complaint as follows:
Had the allegations been made soon after the alleged event, it would have been
possible to explore in detail the alleged circumstances
attended upon its
occurrence and perhaps to adduce evidence throwing doubt upon the
complainant’s story or confirming the applicant’s
requires a direction to the jury that the delay may have
prevented the evidence of the witness being adequately tested and therefore
it would be dangerous to convict the accused on the basis of that evidence alone
unless the jury, having scrutinised the evidence
with great care, is satisfied
of the truth and accuracy of the witness’ evidence.
directions are frequently given in sexual offence cases, where it is common for
complainants (and particularly children) to delay
in reporting alleged
has been re-affirmed by the High Court in the more recent
Crampton v The
These cases
effectively require trial judges to give strong corroboration warnings to juries
the length of delay, the absence of
corroboration or the potential forensic disadvantage suffered by an accused mean
the interests
of justice in the particular case would be seriously
compromised.
A specific form
of words for the direction is not required, although the direction must be given
as a warning, not merely as a comment
The warning must,
however, cover the matters prescribed by the High Court in
Sully J stated
The approach of the majority Justices in both
seems to me to entail that a trial Judge who is framing a
direction must ensure that the final form of the direction to the jury covers in
terms the following propositions:
, that because of the passage of
time the evidence of the complainant cannot be adequately tested;
, that it would be, therefore, dangerous to convict on that
evidence alone;
, that the jury is entitled, nevertheless, to act
upon that evidence alone if satisfied of its truth and accuracy;
, that the jury cannot be so satisfied without having first
scrutinised the evidence with great care;
, that the carrying out
of that scrutiny must take into careful account any circumstances which are
peculiar to the particular case
and which have a logical bearing upon the truth
and accuracy of the complainant’s evidence; and
, that every
stage of the carrying out of that scrutiny of the complainant’s evidence
must take serious account of the warning
as to the dangers of
conviction.
16.98 The TLRI has noted that the complexity of the
coupled with the necessity to give an adequate warning, poses difficulties for
trial judges in giving directions that
are ‘insulated from successful
appeal and that also meet the co-existing requirement of intelligibility,
simplicity and
For example,
R v Glennon
, Callaway J stated that a
direction need
not contain specific words.
In contrast, Levine J held in
that the words ‘dangerous to
convict’ must be used.
However, the TLRI argues that despite this, it is probably undesirable that a
standardised
warning be developed, on the basis that every
warning should be tailored to the circumstances of each
16.99 The TLRI states that the effect of the
decision is to create
an irrebuttable presumption that the accused has been prejudiced by the
complainant’s delay in making
a complaint. In
, Wood CJ at
CL criticised this feature of the decision in
(and subsequent
cases) on the basis that it elevates the presumption of innocence to an
assumption that the accused was, in fact,
innocent, and that he or she might
have called relevant evidence, or cross-examined the complainant in a way that
would have rebutted
the prosecution case had there been a contemporaneity
between the alleged offence and the
at CL emphasised that the facts may suggest that a warning is warranted,
however, he questioned the unequivocal nature of
warning—and the assumption that the accused was unable to test the
prosecution case.
16.100 There has been much criticism surrounding the role of jury warnings on delay
in complaint and their potential to confuse the
jury or unnecessarily question
the complainant’s
credibility.
The report of
the New South Wales Parliament Standing Committee on Law and Justice on child
sexual assault prosecutions found that
there was no logic in distinguishing
between evidence of recent complaint and delayed complaint because delay bears
no relation to
the credibility of the complainant and is typical of sexual
assault complainants.
2003 paper, Justice Wood argued that without a firm basis for the suggestion
that the delay might have affected the complainant’s
credibility or
created actual prejudice to the accused, these kinds of warnings unfairly
disadvantage
complainants.
16.101 The TLRI has expressed the view that it is preferable that the circumstances
warning can be given be limited to situations where an
accused can show specific disadvantage caused by delay ‘rather than
hypothetical, presumptive disadvantage’. Where no such disadvantage can be
indicated, application of the
irrational.
The specific
proposal of the TLRI is discussed further below.
16.102 Another common law warning of significance is the ‘
warning’. In
High Court considered the situation where there was a delay in making a
complaint of sexual assault in a jurisdiction where the
legislation required the
judge to warn the jury that absence of complaint or delay did not necessarily
indicate that the allegation
of sexual assault was
The judge was also
required to inform the jury that there may be good reasons why such a person may
hesitate in making or refrain
from making a complaint. The Court held that the
trial judge was also required to invite the jury to use lack of recent complaint
to impugn the credit of the complainant where this was necessary to ensure that
the accused secured a fair
16.103 The TLRI argues that this has given rise to two apparently contradictory
warnings to the jury.
example, if a case involving delayed complaint was tried in Tasmania,
s 371A of the
Criminal Code
(Tas) would require a warning that
delayed complaint does not indicate that the complainant had fabricated the
allegations, and
would require a further direction that such delay
may be indicative of fabrication. Further, it argues that, like the
warning, it is unclear when it is required,
and that another source of
uncertainty for both warnings is the common law obligation to give such warnings
even when not requested.
Submissions
and consultations
16.104 IP 28 asks whether the uniform Evidence Acts should be amended to
provide for other common law warnings such as the Longman
16.105 The DPP NSW submits that it would be useful if the Acts included
provision for a
direction which identified some of the
circumstances in which the warning may be
16.106 The NSW PDO agrees that the
direction should be
incorporated into the Acts. It further argues that the Acts should contain the
direction given in
that where the
Crown case depends upon a single witness, the jury should scrutinise the
evidence with great care.
16.107 Victoria Legal Aid submits that the
warning should be included
in the uniform Evidence Acts as it provides a measure of flexibility to ensure
judges can tailor their
directions to the particular circumstances of the case
in order to ensure a fair trial. In that regard it refers to
Doggett v The
, where Kirby J stated that there are strong reasons of legal
principle and policy to restrain the court from diminishing the ambit
16.108 In contrast, the Law Council submits that whilst ss 164 and 165 seek to
avoid general ritualistic warnings in order to permit
judges and counsel to
focus on the particular circumstances of the case, judges continue to attempt to
formulate directions appropriate
to more generalised situations.
This can be seen in the development of the so-called
which appears to demand ritualistic warning about the danger of acting upon the
uncorroborated testimony of a victim of a
sexual assault where there is long
delay between the assault and the subsequent complaint. Whilst the Council
supports careful warnings
in such cases, it does not believe there needs to be
any ritualistic incantation and that whether a jury has been adequately directed
in such cases should be determined upon a case by case basis. The effect of this
is to place the onus of the accused to establish
that as a result of the
direction in question the accused has lost a chance of
16.109 One senior judicial officer considers that the large number of appeals
concerning the
warning would not be alleviated by including it in
the uniform Evidence Acts.
16.110 Two submissions favour the introduction of legislation to abolish the use of
all warnings to the jury on delay in complaint
to simplify the complexity of the
law for juries and reduce the potential for appeal based on judicial
Commissions’ view
Wood CJ at CL noted the complexity of the required
warnings in sexual assault matters. He concluded that:
The jury is … faced with a potentially bewildering array of
considerations, some of which may appear highly technical, if not
inconsistent,
to the lay mind and which, in any event, are likely to vex an experienced trial
lawyer, even though they related to
a simple factual dispute arising very often
within a domestic setting. Added to that is the circumstance that any direction,
in terms of it being “
dangerous or unsafe
” to convict,
risks being perceived as a not too subtle encouragement by the trial judge to
acquit, whereas what in truth the
jury is being asked to do is to scrutinize the
evidence with great care.
16.112 Both the VLRC and the TLRI have recently suggested amendments to the
operation of the
warnings to limit and clarify
their application.
16.113 The VLRC examined the use of
directions in its 2004
Sexual Offences
and made recommendations based on the views of
Justice Wood, which are mentioned above. The Report recommends that a
direction should not be given unless there is evidence that the
accused has in fact suffered some specific forensic disadvantage
due to a delay
in reporting a sexual offence or unless there is other evidence that the accused
has in fact been prejudiced in the
circumstances of the particular case. The
VLRC also recommends that in giving a warning it should not be necessary for the
to use the words ‘dangerous to
16.114 In relation to the
warning, the VLRC proposed adding to
s 61 of the
Crimes Act 1958
(Vic)—which forbids any warning or
suggestion that the law regards complainants in sexual offence cases as
unreliable witnesses—the
requirement that where an issue arises as to
delayed complaints, the judge must inform the jury that there may be good
reasons why
a victim of a sexual assault may delay or hesitate in making a
complaint and further require that the judge ‘must not state,
in any way to the jury’ that the credibility of a complainant is affected
by the delay unless satisfied that there
is sufficient evidence to justify such
a warning. It also provides that the judge must not make any comment on the
reliability of
evidence given by the complainant if there is no reason to do so
in the particular proceeding to ensure a fair trial.
16.115 The TLRI has questioned whether these proposals are sufficient. In relation
warning, it argues that the VLRC proposal may still permit
its continued operation because it does not proscribe the use of the
to convict’ formula, but only provides that its use is
not necessary. It also expresses concern that notwithstanding that the
provisions require that there be evidence that the accused has been prejudiced,
the accepted reasoning in a number of cases has been
that delay has necessarily
caused a forensic disadvantage. It is therefore concerned that those
requirements will not bring about
any change. The TLRI issues paper argues that
what may be necessary is a provision which requires that before a warning in the
terms is to be given, it must be established on the balance of
probabilities that a specific forensic disadvantage has occurred,
and that the
mere fact of delay is not sufficient. Alternatively, it suggests that
exceptional circumstances should be required and
that delay alone should not be
sufficient to establish such
circumstances.
16.116 The TLRI also questions whether the VLRC proposal in relation to the
warning will be sufficient. It argues that given the evidence that
delay in or failure to make complaint is normal in sexual assault
should only be in exceptional circumstances that delay or failure to complain
can have any legitimate bearing on the truthfulness
of the account of the
complainant. Therefore it should be required to be shown on the balance of
probabilities, in light of exceptional
circumstances, that the delay can be
attributed to fabrication, or have some bearing on the credibility of the
complainant, before
a warning is
16.117 As the
warnings apply in uniform Evidence
Acts jurisdictions by virtue of s 165(5), one option for reform suggested
by the TLRI is to repeal
s 165(5). This would encourage judges to give
warnings of the kind allowed pursuant to the other subsections in s 165
rather than
the common law. The benefits of this approach are identified as
• it would make a warning conditional upon the request of a party;
• subsection (2) states what needs to be said in a warning and does not
use the ‘dangerous to convict’ formula;
• subsection (3) enables the judge to decline to give a warning where
there are good reasons for not doing
16.118 The major difficulty with this approach, however, is that the repeal
of s 165(5) will not prevent other sections of the Act
(such as s 9)
operating to permit the common law obligations of the trial judge to continue.
For this reason, the TLRI expresses
the view that specific and express reform is
16.119 Another option identified is that further categories be added to
s 165(1) to deal with the
situations. In
relation to the
warning, the following category could be added:
‘evidence given where delay in making or failure to make, a complaint may
doubts as to the reliability of the evidence’. In relation to
, the following category could be added: ‘evidence that may
be unreliable but not demonstrably so because of the inability to
adequately for any reason including the passage of time’.
16.120 However, this option may not be sufficient to address all issues. It might
also be necessary to amend s 165(3) to provide that
‘the judge is not
obliged to comply with a request unless the party making the request shows that
there are good reasons for
doing so’. Arguably, this will considerably
reduce the uncertainty referred to by the TLRI because it will place the onus on
the parties seeking a warning to demonstrate the need for it and will go some
way to ensuring that there has to be a demonstrable
basis for seeking the
warnings. Alternatively, a subsection could be added:
(4A) Without limiting the operation of subsection (4), expressions such as
‘dangerous to convict’ should only be used
in exceptional
circumstances.
16.121 Having regard to the fact that the VLRC and TLRI inquiries were
carried out recently, the Commissions consider that it would
be premature to put
forward any proposals. These issues require further consultation within the
current Inquiry, with a view to the
possible development of uniform proposals.
Further, as noted above, the Commissions are of view that a more targeted
inquiry into
comments, directions and warnings to the jury is warranted.
Question 16–1
Should the recommendations proposed by the
Victorian Law Reform Commission or the Tasmania Law Reform Institute in relation
warnings (or any other models) be adopted
under the uniform Evidence Acts?
Limitations on s 165(5)
16.122 The TLRI notes the problem of an escalating number of successful
appeals on the ground of failure to give an adequate
One significant
concern regarding the operation of s 165 is that judges are giving
unnecessary warnings in order to avoid decisions
being overturned on the ground
that a warning should have been given. This may, in part, stem from the fact
that s 165(5) preserves
the common law powers (and obligations) of the
trial judge to give warnings. As the law currently stands, a situation may arise
all the parties agree that a warning is not required, but the decision may
be overturned on appeal due to a finding that there has
been a miscarriage of
justice resulting from the failure to warn. As noted above, the TLRI does not
believe that repeal of s 165(5)
will overcome the difficulties of
warnings because other sections of the uniform
Evidence Acts allow the common law to be applied.
16.123 One solution to this problem might be to subject s 165(5) to the same
limitation as applies to warnings under s 165(2), namely
that the parties
must request that the warning be given. Such an approach will not exclude
appellate intervention where counsel fails
to request a particular warning. The
question on appeal will be whether the failure of counsel to request a warning
has resulted
in a miscarriage of
Such an amendment
will clarify the trial judge’s obligation to give warnings and potentially
reduce the volume of appeals and
retrials in this area.
16.124 Another solution might be to amend the uniform Evidence Acts to provide that
the judge’s common law obligations to give
warnings continue to operate
unless all the parties agree that a warning should not be given.
16.125 A further matter for consideration in relation to both solutions is whether a
provision should be included in the uniform Evidence
Acts to require the judge
to raise the issues regarding warnings with the parties and satisfy him or
herself that the parties are
aware of their rights in this
16.126 A benefit of either approach is that it should become a matter of routine for
the trial judge to ask counsel to consider what
warnings they will seek and to
identify any such warnings prior to charging the jury. If the judge is concerned
that counsel has
erroneously failed to seek a particular warning, the judge can
question counsel to ensure that the question has been considered and
the record counsel’s reason for not seeking the warning.
Question 16–2
Should the uniform
Evidence Acts be amended to require that, where the parties are represented,
warnings, including warnings given
under s 165(5), are only required to be
given on request of one of the parties? In the alternative, should the uniform
Evidence Acts
be amended to provide that a trial judge’s obligation to
give warnings at common law continues to operate unless all the parties
that such a warning should not be given?
Question 16–3
In either case referred to in Question 16–2,
should the uniform Evidence Acts be amended to provide that the court is
to inform the parties of their rights in relation to common law
Azzopardi v The Queen
[2001] HCA 25
Uniform Evidence Acts
[1893] NSWLawRp 67
LR (NSW) 150.
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1
However, unless the comment is
made by another defendant in the proceeding, a comment made by a judge or party
must not suggest that
the spouse, de facto spouse, parent or child failed to
give evidence because the defendant was guilty of the offence or because the
spouse, de facto spouse, parent or child believed that the defendant was guilty:
Uniform Evidence Acts s 20(4).
RPS v The Queen
[2000] HCA 3
(2000) 199 CLR
Ibid, [20].
Ibid, [27].
Weissensteiner v The Queen
[1993] HCA 65
(1993) 178 CLR 217.
RPS v The Queen
[2000] HCA 3
199 CLR 620.
Azzopardi v The Queen
[2001] HCA 25
(2001) 205 CLR 50.
RPS v The Queen
[2000] HCA 3
199 CLR 620.
Ibid, [86].
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004),
New South Wales
Public Defenders,
Director of Public Prosecutions
15 February 2005,
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004),
New South Wales
Public Defenders,
Director of Public Prosecutions
15 February
Dyers v The Queen
[2002] HCA 45
210 CLR 285.
Azzopardi v The Queen
[2001] HCA 25
(2001) 205 CLR 50.
New South Wales Law
Reform Commission,
The Right to Silence
, Report 95 (2000), Rec 14. This
was apart from changes to the prosecutor’s right to comment discussed
Ibid, 181, Rec
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004),
New South Wales
Public Defenders,
21 April 2005. A similar view
was expressed by one judicial officer and one senior practitioner: Confidential,
22 February 2005; T Game,
Consultation
Sydney, 25 February 2005.
Law Council
of Australia,
Director of Public Prosecutions
15 February
Crown Prosecutors,
Consultation
, Sydney, 11 February
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, ALRC 38 (1987),
Jones v Dunkel
[1959] HCA 8
Australian Securities
Commission v AS Nominees Ltd
(1995) 133 ALR 1.
South Wales, Tasmanian and Norfolk Island Evidence Acts provide that the
legislation does not affect the operation of
an evidentiary principle or rule of
the common law or equity in proceedings to which the legislation applies (except
in so far as
the legislation provides otherwise expressly or by necessary
intendment). The Commonwealth Act contains a modified version of this
See discussion in Ch 2.
v The Queen
[2002] HCA 45
(2002) 210 CLR 285
, [5]. See discussion above in relation to
Azzopardi v The Queen
and the content of permissible judicial comment on
the failure of the accused to give evidence.
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004),
Ibid, [14.18].
Law Council of Australia,
Dyers v The Queen
[2002] HCA 45
210 CLR 285.
New South Wales Public
Confidential,
22 February 2005.
Director of Public Prosecutions (NSW),
February 2005.
Dyers v The
[2002] HCA 45
(2002) 210 CLR 285.
Azzopardi v The Queen
[2001] HCA 25
(2001) 205 CLR
Kelleher v The Queen
[1974] HCA 48
131 CLR 534.
Davies v Director of
Public Prosecutions
[1954] AC 378.
Hargan v The King
[1919] HCA 45
(1919) 27 CLR 13.
Pollitt v The Queen
[1992] HCA 35
Conway v The Queen
(2002) 209 CLR 203
[2001] NSWCCA 260
(2001) 52 NSWLR 301
Ibid, [2]–[15],
Papakosmas v The Queen
[1999] HCA 37
(1999) 196 CLR 297
; see S Odgers,
Uniform Evidence Law
(6th ed, 2004),
[1.4.2860].
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1 (1985),
The draft legislation in
ALRC 38 also provided a residual discretion, as appears in
Australian Law Reform Commission,
, ALRC 38 (1987),
R v Stewart
[2001] NSWCCA 260
[2001] NSWCCA 494
(2001) 123 A Crim R 506
NSWCCA 321.
R v Baartman
[2001] NSWCCA 260
124 A Crim R 371
[2002] NSWCCA 217
(2002) 131 A Crim R
Uniform Evidence
(6th ed, 2004), [1.4.2880].
Ibid, [1.4.2880].
[2002] NSWCCA 328
(2002) 133 A Crim R 227
Evidence Act 1995
R v Stackelroth
(Unreported, NSW Court of Criminal Appeal, Gleeson CJ, Powell and Smart JJ, 9
April 1997).
[2001] VSCA
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004),
Consultation
, Sydney, 25 February
Law Council of Australia,
New South Wales Public
Director of Public Prosecutions
15 February
NSW Health Department Child
Protection and Violence Prevention Unit,
February 2005.
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004),
New South Wales
Public Defenders,
21 April 2005. The case cited
for this proposition is
R v Stewart
[2001] NSWCCA 260
(2001) 52 NSWLR
New South Wales Public Defenders,
Director of Public Prosecutions
15 February
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004),
Director of Public
Prosecutions (NSW),
15 February
New South Wales Public
21 April 2005.
Law Council of Australia,
High Court of Australia,
Consultation
, Canberra, 9 March
[2002] NSWCCA 328
(2002) 133 A Crim
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1 (1985),
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 371A;
Evidence Act 1929
Evidence Act 1939
Sexual Offences (Evidence and
Procedure) Act 1983
D Byrne and JD Heydon,
Evidence: Australian Edition
Section 164 of the
uniform Evidence Acts, s 632(2) of the
Criminal Code Act 1899
Evidence Act 1906
(WA) abolish corroboration
requirements for all types of evidence. In addition, in New South Wales, there
are specific provisions
prohibiting corroboration warnings relating to children
except in certain circumstances:
Evidence Act 1995
(discussed below). Queensland, Western Australia and the Northern
Territory have express provisions which prohibit corroboration
warnings in
relation to child witnesses on the basis that children are regarded as an
unreliable class of witnesses:
Evidence Act 1958
(Vic) s 23(2A);
Criminal Code Act 1899
(Qld) s 632(3) (not restricted to children as
a class of witnesses, but applies in relation to ‘any class of
Evidence Act 1906
(for indictable
Evidence Act 1939
(NT) s 9C. In the Commonwealth and the
Australian Capital Territory, the same prohibition only applies in certain
sexual offence
proceedings:
Crimes Act 1914
Evidence (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1991
Australia, judges are not obliged to give corroboration warnings in relation to
the sworn evidence of children, but they
are not prohibited from doing so:
Evidence Act 1929
Evidence Act 1995
(NSW), as originally enacted, similarly had no specific provision regarding
warnings on the evidence of child
Australian Law Reform
Commission and Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission,
Seen and Heard:
Priority for Children in the Legal Process
, ALRC 84 (1997),
Legislation Amendment Act 2001
Royal Commission into the
New South Wales Police Service,
Final Report
, vol 5 (1997), Rec 90.
The Wood Royal Commission
considered a draft recommendation made by the ALRC and HREOC: Australian Law
Reform Commission and Human
Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission,
of Priority: Children and the Legal Process
, DRP 3 (1997), Draft
Rec 5.8. The ALRC and HREOC inquiry was completed after the Wood Royal
Commission report was released. Recommendation
100 of ALRC 84 was in
similar terms to the draft
recommendation.
committee established within the NSW courts to monitor operation of the
Evidence Act 1995
Parliament of New South Wales,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative
Assembly, 28 November 2001, 19037 (B Debus—Attorney
Crimes Act 1914
The types of offences to which this section applies are
was inserted by the
Measures to Combat
Serious and Organised Crime Act 2001
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004),
New South Wales
Public Defenders,
21 April 2005,
Confidential,
22 February 2005; Director of Public Prosecutions (NSW),
15 February 2005,
Law Council of Australia,
4 March 2005,
Royal Commission into the New
South Wales Police Service,
Final Report
, vol 5 (1997),
[15.140–15.142].
Law Reform Commission and Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission,
and Heard: Priority for Children in the Legal Process
, ALRC 84 (1997),
Longman v The
[1989] HCA 60
(1989) 168 CLR 79
Robinson v The Queen
[1999] HCA 42
(1997) 197 CLR
Jones v The Queen
(1997) 191 CLR 439;
Fleming v The Queen
(1998) 197 CLR
Pollitt v The Queen
[1992] HCA 35
(1992) 174 CLR 558.
For details of
this research see Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Sexual Offences: Interim
(2003), [2.43].
Crimes Act 1958
(Vic) s 61;
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 371A.
This legislation circumvented the decision of the High Court in
Kilby v The
[1973] HCA 30
(1973) 129 CLR 460
, which said that the jury should be instructed that
failure to report a sexual assault promptly could be an important factor in
determining
a complainant’s
credibility.
Tasmania Law Reform
Warnings In Sexual Offence Cases Relating To Delays In
, Issues Paper No 8
Longman v The Queen
[1989] HCA 60
(1989) 168 CLR 79.
For further discussion of the
warnings in these cases see Tasmania Law Reform Institute,
Warnings In Sexual Offence Cases Relating To Delays In Complaint
Paper No 8 (2005),
[7.64]–[7.133].
[2000] HCA 60
(2000) 176 ALR 369.
Doggett v The Queen
(2001) 182 ALR
‘Longman Warnings under
Scrutiny’ (2003) 77(4)
Law Institute Journal
[2002] NSWCCA 60
(2002) 54 NSWLR 241
Law Reform Institute,
Warnings In Sexual Offence Cases Relating To Delays In
, Issues Paper No 8 (2005),
R v Glennon (No 2)
[2001] VSCA 17
(2001) 7 VR 631.
(2002) 129 A Crim R 54.
Law Reform Institute,
Warnings In Sexual Offence Cases Relating To Delays In
, Issues Paper No 8 (2005),
[2002] NSWCCA 60
NSW Health Department Child
Protection and Violence Prevention Unit,
February 2005.
New South Wales
Legislative Council Standing Committee on Law and Justice,
Report on Child
Sexual Assault Prosecutions
, Report 22 (2002). See also NSW Health
Department Child Protection and Violence Prevention Unit,
21 February 2005; Women’s Legal Services (NSW),
24 March 2005.
‘Sexual Assault and the Admission of Evidence’ (Paper presented at
Practice and Prevention: Contemporary Issues
in Adult Sexual Assault in New
South Wales, Sydney, 12 February
Tasmania Law Reform
Warnings In Sexual Offence Cases Relating To Delays In
, Issues Paper No 8 (2005), [2.2.2]. See also
Crofts v The Queen
[1996] HCA 22
(1996) 186 CLR 427.
In that case
the legislation was
Crimes Act 1958
s 61(1)(b).
In Queensland, the
decision in
has been overridden by
Law (Sexual Offences) Act 1978
(Qld). This section provides that a judge
must not warn or suggest to the jury that the complainant’s evidence is
more or less
reliable because of the length of time before a complaint was
Tasmania Law Reform
Warnings In Sexual Offence Cases Relating To Delays In
, Issues Paper No 8 (2005),
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004),
Director of
Public Prosecutions (NSW),
15 February
New South Wales Public
21 April 2005. This view was also
supported by one New South Wales District Court judge: Confidential,
22 February
Victoria Legal Aid,
18 February 2005.
Law Council of Australia,
High Court of Australia,
Consultation
, Canberra, 9 March
NSW Health Department Child
Protection and Violence Prevention Unit,
February 2005; Women’s Legal Services (NSW),
24 March 2005.
[2002] NSWCCA 60
(2002) 54 NSWLR 241
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Sexual Offences: Final Report
Rec 170. The recommendation also limited the use of warnings that the
credibility of the complainant may be affected by a
delay in reporting:
v The Queen
[1973] HCA 30
(1973) 129 CLR 460
Tasmania Law Reform Institute,
Warnings In Sexual Offence Cases Relating To Delays In Complaint
Paper No 8 (2005), [3.1.5].
Ibid, [2.1.1]. In the
issues paper, the TLRI presents a (non-exhaustive) list of 63 appeals between
1997 and 2004 on the ground
of failure to give an adequate
TKWJ v The Queen
[2002] HCA 46
(2002) 212 CLR 124.
Section 132
the uniform Evidence Acts provides a possible model for such a provision.
17. Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Traditional Laws and Customs
Introduction
Evidence of traditional laws and customs
Privilege and traditional laws and customs
17. Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Traditional Laws and Customs
Introduction
chapter discusses two issues concerning the evidence of Aboriginal or Torres
Strait Islander (ATSI) witnesses. The discussion
focuses on whether the uniform
Evidence Acts should be amended to include a provision dealing specifically with
the admissibility
of evidence of traditional laws and customs.
17.2 The chapter also considers whether there should be a privilege with
respect to evidence that, if disclosed, would render an ATSI
witness liable to
punishment under traditional laws and customs. Other aspects of evidence law and
practice applicable to ATSI witnesses
are discussed elsewhere, including in
Chapter 5 (in relation to the giving of evidence in narrative form).
Evidence of
traditional laws and customs
The Recognition of
Aboriginal Customary Laws Report
17.3 In 1986, the ALRC released a report
The Recognition of Aboriginal
Customary Laws
(ALRC 31). The report presented a wide ranging set of
recommendations on the recognition of Aboriginal customary laws in relation
among other things: marriage, children and family property; criminal law and
sentencing; local justice mechanisms for Aboriginal
communities; and traditional
hunting, fishing and gathering rights.
17.4 Importantly, ALRC 31 gave detailed consideration to problems of
evidence and procedure affecting the proof of Aboriginal ‘customary
ALRC 31 did not
define the term ‘customary law’, noting instead that narrow
legislative definitions ‘misrepresent
the reality’:
Exactly how Aboriginal customary laws are to be defined will depend on the form
of recognition adopted … But it is clear that
definitional questions
should not be allowed to obscure the basic issues of remedies and recognition.
It will usually be sufficient
to identify Aboriginal customary laws in general
terms, where these are recognised for particular
17.5 In this Discussion Paper, the Commissions have adopted the term
‘traditional laws and customs’. This term is consistent
Native Title Act 1993
(Cth), and native title proceedings are an
important context in which this sort of evidence is relevant.
Section 223
Native Title Act
refers to ‘traditional laws acknowledged,
and the traditional customs
The rules that
constitute traditional laws and customs are rules having ‘normative
17.6 ALRC 31 observed that the central difficulty for proof of traditional
laws and customs presented by the rules of evidence arises
from the distinction
between matters of fact and matters of opinion, and from the insistence on
first-hand evidence based on personal
knowledge of matters of
That is, the opinion rule and
the hearsay rule were both seen as problematic in proving traditional laws and
customs, which have
been developed and maintained over time as part of an oral
17.7 After detailed consideration of the application of these rules of evidence,
the ALRC concluded:
It is not satisfactory that the evidence of traditionally oriented Aborigines
inadmissible in law unless
it can be forced into one of the limited exceptions to the hearsay and opinion
evidence rules, or that
it should be admitted in practice only by concession of
the court or counsel … Both overseas and Australian experience (in
courts and in land claims) demonstrates the importance of Aboriginal testimony
its difficulties, but so does
anthropological evidence. The best evidence seems to be a combination of both,
with expert evidence
providing a framework within which the Aboriginal evidence
can be understood and assessed.
17.8 Despite the problems highlighted in the report, the ALRC did not favour
excluding the laws of evidence, which would have the
disadvantage of:
leaving arguments about admissibility unstructured, and depriving the courts of
the assistance which satisfactory rules might give.
Only if the existing rules,
however modified to assist with proof of Aboriginal customary laws, can be shown
to be wholly unsuitable
for present purposes, would their wholesale exclusion be
appropriate.
17.9 The ALRC concluded that deficiencies and uncertainties in the law of
evidence as it applied to traditional laws and customs should
be remedied,
recommending that legislation should be enacted so that:
evidence given by a person as to the existence or content of Aboriginal
customary laws or traditions is not inadmissible merely because
it is hearsay or
opinion evidence, if the person giving the evidence:
• has special knowledge or experience of the customary laws of the
community in relation to that matter; or
• would be likely to have such knowledge or experience if such laws
17.10 This recommendation is referred to in this chapter as ‘the
ALRC 31 recommendation on evidence of traditional laws and
17.11 The ALRC stated that such a provision would not make undesirable inroads into
the laws of evidence and that, in particular,
other discretions to exclude
evidence would be retained. Any more extensive provision, excluding the laws of
evidence entirely in
relation to the proof of Aboriginal customary laws or
traditions, was considered
unnecessary.
Hearsay and the ATSI
oral tradition
17.12 The hearsay rule has significant implications for an ATSI culture
founded on an oral tradition of knowledge. Peter Gray has
Perhaps the greatest clash between Aboriginal and Anglo-Australian systems of
knowledge is in relation to the form knowledge takes.
Oral traditions and
history are usually the basis of Aboriginal connection with land and,
accordingly, are of major importance to
land claims and native title
applications. As well as the dreamings, genealogies, general historical stories
and land use information
will be transmitted orally in most Aboriginal
communities. Yet the Anglo-Australian legal system is the ‘most
prohibitively
literate of
institutions’.
De Rose v South
provides an example of the problems involved in dealing with oral history. In
, O’Loughlin J considered the admissibility of a witness
statement indicating that the witness was told by a deceased Aboriginal
when speaking of the land subject to native claim, that ‘this is your
grandmother’s country’. O’Loughlin
J held that it would
not be appropriate to receive the witness statement into evidence, under
of the uniform Evidence
as evidence of the fact
that it was the grandmother’s
17.14 O’Loughlin J referred generally to evidentiary problems relating
to the receipt into evidence of statements made by other
ATSI people to a
witness. For example, he noted that under the ordinary rules of evidence, it
would not be possible, in the majority
of cases, to prove the place of birth of
older generations by means only of oral evidence. Many ATSI people, particularly
those living
in remote areas, have no such written records of their
Evidence in native
title proceedings
17.15 While evidence of traditional laws and customs is relevant in many
different legal contexts (see below), much commentary about
the interplay
between the law of evidence and the ATSI oral tradition has been centred on
native title proceedings.
17.16 When the
case was heard by the Supreme Court of Queensland,
the Meriam people faced difficulty in presenting evidence of their traditional
customs. In the vicinity of 300 objections were made to the evidence given by
Eddie Mabo of what his grandfather had told him about
the laws and customs of
the Meriam people, and the rights and interests he had, on the grounds that it
was hearsay.
17.17 Subsequently, much case law and other commentary has concerned the admission
and use of such evidence in native title proceedings
Native Title
. Determinations under the
Native Title Act
require applicants to
establish rights and interests in relation to land or waters possessed under
traditional laws and customs,
by which they have a continuing connection with
the land or waters.
The primary
issue in establishing traditional laws and customs is whether the law or custom
has, in substance, been handed down from
generation to generation: that is,
whether it can be shown to have its root in the tradition of the relevant
17.18 Some of the most important issues in native title proceedings ‘can only
be resolved upon evidence which in other circumstances
may be regarded as
The need to make
findings about traditional laws and customs practiced more than 150 years ago
must necessarily rely upon evidence
other than that of the direct personal
observations of witnesses. Similarly, genealogical connections to ancestors
living at or prior
to European settlement cannot be proved by reference to
official records.
Yarmirr v Northern Territory (No.2)
, Olney J confirmed that
ss 73(1)(d) and 74(1) of the uniform Evidence Acts relating to evidence of
reputation concerning history
and family relationships and of reputation
concerning the existence, nature or extent of a public or general right:
enable the Court to have regard both to the evidence of witnesses who have
recounted details concerning relationships and traditional
practices which have
been passed down to them by way of oral history and to matters recorded by
ethnographers and other
17.20 However, these provisions may not always be sufficient to prevent the
exclusion of oral histories and accounts. Such evidence
continues to be
challenged as hearsay and may not readily fit within the categories of
admissible hearsay provided by the uniform
Evidence Acts. For example, there may
be disputes about whether particular evidence is of ‘reputation
concerning’ a ‘general
right’ in terms of s 74(1), if it
is only a building block in showing the rights of a group of ATSI people in
respect to land.
17.21 A Federal Court judge provided another example in a submission to the
Inquiry. He suggested that an Aboriginal witness may say:
When I was a child my late father [X] told me that his father [Y] was an
initiated man who came from somewhere in the area of [A]
and had two wives, one
of whom was [Z], the mother of my father. He told me that his father [Y] roamed
around the following places:
B, C and D.
17.22 The judge noted that, while some parts of this witness’ statement
may be seen to concern matters covered by s 73 (whether
a person was
married and family history or family relationship), it is questionable whether
any part of the statement is evidence
of ‘reputation concerning’
those matters. Further, the parts relating to initiation and, perhaps less
clearly, where
Y came from, lie outside the ambit of the
Ward v Western
Lee J said:
In a proceeding in which native title is in issue any rules of evidence applied
to the proceeding must be cognisant of the evidentiary
difficulties faced by
Aboriginal people in presenting such claims for adjudication and the evidence
adduced must be interpreted in
the same spirit, consistent with the due exercise
of the judicial power vested in the court under the
Constitution
Of particular importance in that regard is the disadvantage faced by Aboriginal
people as participants in a trial system structured
for, and by, a literate
society when they have no written records and depend upon oral histories and
accounts, often localised in
nature. In such circumstances application of a rule
of evidence to exclude such material unless it is evidence of general reputation
may work substantial injustice
Native Title
17.24 Prior to the 1998 amendments to the
Native Title Act
of the Act ‘explicitly acknowledged the need for different processes to
cater for special needs, such as oral
tradition’.
provided that the Federal Court, in conducting native title
proceedings, was ‘not bound by technicalities, legal forms or rules
17.25 However, in 1998, this provision was amended to provide:
Rules of evidence
(1) The Federal Court is bound by the rules of evidence, except to the extent
that the Court otherwise orders.
Concerns of Aboriginal peoples and Torres Strait Islanders
(2) In conducting its proceedings, the Court may take account of the cultural
and customary concerns of Aboriginal peoples and Torres
Strait Islanders, but
not so as to prejudice unduly any other party to the proceedings.
operates in conjunction with the Federal Court Rules,
which provide that the Court may ‘make any order it considers appropriate
relating to evidentiary matters’ including an order ‘relating to the
presentation of evidence about a cultural or customary
17.27 However, the
Native Title Act
provides no guidance on the
factors which may justify an order setting aside the rules of evidence. In
Daniel v Western
Nicholson J
held that, by abandoning the prior provision, Parliament ‘evinced an
intention that the rules of evidence should
apply to native title applications
except where the court orders otherwise’ and that it ‘requires some
factor for the
court to otherwise
Kaiadilt, Yangkaal, Gangalidda Peoples v State of Queensland &
the Federal Court
interpreted
to mean that the rules of evidence would apply
‘unless there are circumstances which persuade the Court that the rules
not, or to a limited extent, apply to all of the evidence sought to be
tendered or particular categories of that
Native Title Act
does not allow the court to dispense generally
with the rules of evidence in native title proceedings. In
Harrington-Smith v
Western Australia (No.8)
, Lindgren J noted that, for
invoked, it is ‘not a sufficient reason that the rules of evidence render
certain evidence inadmissible: the terms of
reflect an acceptance by
the Parliament that this will be so, and that the position, should not, as a
matter of course, be relieved
De Rose v South Australia
, O’Loughlin J used
to allow hearsay evidence to be admitted. In doing so, O’Loughlin J
highlighted the practical evidentiary issues facing native
title applicants. He
stated that, given much of the evidence in native title cases is dependent upon
past events and the actions
of earlier generations, ‘there is a compelling
justification, in appropriate cases, to allow Aboriginal witnesses to give
of their beliefs that are based on what they have been told by members
of the older generations who are now dead or are otherwise
unable to give direct
17.30 In particular, it was held that, in relation to the admission of historical
and anthropological evidence,
Native Title Act
used to ‘ensure that applicants are not required to meet an evidentiary
burden that is, in the circumstances that are
unique to every native title
application, impossible to
As a Federal Court
judge stated, it should be accepted that, by amending
Parliament did not intend to make it impossible for applicants for a
determination of native title to establish the existence of
native title. To
think otherwise would be to attribute to the Parliament a cynical attempt to
have an Act which purported to provide
a regime under which determination
whether native title does or does not exist might be made, yet to frustrate the
achievement of
that purpose.
17.31 The Yamatji Marlpa Barna Baba Maaja Aboriginal Corporation (Yamatji
Aboriginal Corporation) observed that the additional factor
required to allow
the rules of evidence to be dispensed with in native title proceedings
‘remains an enigma with no judicial
determination of what this
The Yamatji
Aboriginal Corporation submitted that s 82 and its subsequent
interpretation:
is ambiguous and adverse to the flexible development of the courts’ own
rules of evidence. For Aboriginal claimants there is
uncertainty as to whether
their oral tradition evidence is
admissible.
Evidence in other
17.32 While the evidentiary difficulties faced by ATSI parties are
highlighted in proceedings under the
Native Title Act
, similar issues
arise in many other contexts, including in relation to criminal law defences,
sentencing, coronial matters, succession,
family law and placement of
17.33 Other important legal contexts in which the admissibility of evidence of ATSI
traditional laws and customs may become important
include proceedings arising
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Heritage Protection Act
(Cth), and similar state and territory legislation, such as the
Aboriginal Heritage Act 1988
17.34 Evidence of traditional laws and customs has been used as an element of
various defences under criminal law, including in relation
to consent, duress,
provocation and honest claim of
For example, in
the defence in an
assault case relied on evidence showing the conduct of the accused was
consistent with the relevant traditional
law, in order to prove that the victim
had consented or that the defendants held an honest belief that she had
consented. In
Lofty v The
the Northern
Territory Supreme Court held that it was proper to inform a jury that the
conduct of the victim constituted a grave
breach of ATSI customary law when
assessing the gravity of a provocation.
17.35 Evidence of traditional laws and customs may be taken into account when
sentencing offenders. This most often occurs when an
Aboriginal person has been
(or will be) subjected to traditional punishment by his or her own community, in
addition to any punishment
provided by the criminal justice
Aboriginal defendants
may face traditional spearings, physical beatings, or banishment. Evidence on
the nature and likelihood of
the traditional punishment (for instance, the
degree of harm likely to be caused) may be used as a mitigating factor in
sentencing.
Evidence about
traditional laws and customs also can be adduced to explain or mitigate a
person’s state of mind at the time
of the offending
Family law and placement of
17.36 When determining the best interests of the child, the
Family Law Act
Family Law Act
) requires the court to take into account
the background of a child, ‘including any need to maintain a connection
with the lifestyle,
culture and traditions of Aboriginal
peoples or Torres
Strait Islanders’.
17.37 The Family Law Council suggests that it would be desirable to consider
whether courts should be provided with an express power
to receive information
relevant to the exercise of their family law jurisdiction in parenting cases
involving ATSI people, in light
of the outcomes of the Family Court of
Australia’s Children’s Cases Program
17.38 The Family Law Council recommended that the federal Attorney-General bring
‘the issue of admissibility of evidence relating
to cultural
practices’ to the attention of the ALRC in its review of the
Submissions and
consultations
17.39 IP 28 asks a range of questions concerning the admissibility of
evidence of traditional laws and customs, with a focus on native
proceedings and the operation of
Native Title
17.40 It soon became clear, as confirmed by submissions and consultations, that
concerns about evidence of traditional laws and customs
are not limited to those
in the context of native title
proceedings.
Consultations
highlighted the many contexts in which evidence of traditional laws and customs
is adduced.
17.41 The Yamatji Aboriginal Corporation submits that, because the written word
dominates the Anglo-Australian legal culture, this
results in an undervaluing of
the spoken word and that the current statutory mechanisms used to reconcile
differences between the
two cultures can operate in a manner that is
disadvantageous to native title
17.42 However, it is also clear that practices in some jurisdictions operate in
ways which are more flexible than the strict legal
position might indicate. For
example, in the Northern Territory, there appears to be an operating assumption
in some cases that evidence
of traditional laws and customs, taken from ATSI
elders or ‘lawmen’, is not inadmissible as hearsay. Rather, it is
(to the extent that the basis of admissibility is considered) as expert
opinion evidence or as ‘real’ evidence.
17.43 There is some support for the implementation of the ALRC 31
recommendation on evidence of traditional laws and
and suggestions that
such a recommendation would be well received by the Northern Territory legal
which is experienced
in the reception of such evidence.
17.44 The Human Rights Commissioner referred to the Hindmarsh Island Bridge
in which arguments about
‘women’s business’ arose. It was observed that, in the context
of arguments about the
existence and scope of this evidence, the second clause
of the ALRC 31 recommendation would apply—that is, the words
would be likely to have such knowledge or experience
if such laws
’—to allow the evidence to be admitted. Otherwise, the
evidence would not be admissible, except by consent, despite being
the facts in issue.
17.45 In relation to evidence used as the factual basis of expert opinion evidence,
an Aboriginal Land Council observes that:
The circumstances in which Aboriginal people divulge information on which an
expert’s opinion is often based should be borne
in mind: the divulgence of
information to known and trusted experts in an informal setting is quite
different to the artificiality
and pressure of a court situation. The fact that
a statement made by an Aboriginal informant to an expert in the former situation
is not repeated directly in direct evidence should not automatically disqualify
that statement from going before the
fact-finder.
17.46 The Aboriginal Land Council submits that the court’s concern
should be the reliability of the information sought to be
admitted through an
expert’s report, rather than the mere fact that a statement has been made
out of court.
In relation to the
operation of the hearsay provisions of the
Evidence Act 1995
native title proceedings, the Council observes that:
Aboriginal societies do not relegate information passed on via oral tradition to
a second class form of knowledge (as do the current
provisions of the
); what is significant is the fact of the transmission, its source and to
whom it has been passed.
17.47 The Council considers that sufficient protection is provided by the
discretionary provisions in
of the uniform Evidence Acts to
address the concerns of parties as to the appropriate weight to be given to
hearsay evidence dealing
with matters of Aboriginal traditional laws and
17.48 The Yamatji Aboriginal Corporation is critical of the current operation
Native Title Act
and proposes reform to address
admissibility and to ensure proper weight is accorded to oral tradition
evidence. Specifically, the
Corporation proposes that the
Evidence Act
(Cth) be amended to provide that:
Native Title Act
is subject to the provisions of the
Evidence Act 1995
• the rules of evidence in native title proceedings should be
approached in light of the evidentiary difficulties inherent in
adjudicating
Aboriginal claims, and courts should interpret that evidence in the same
• Aboriginal oral knowledge (tradition) evidence is admissible as real
evidence in all native title proceedings;
• in conducting proceedings, the court is not bound by technicalities,
legal forms or rules of evidence in relation to Aboriginal
witness oral
knowledge/tradition evidence; and
• in conducting proceedings, the court must do so in a manner that
consistently integrates the culture and custom of Aboriginal
and Torres Strait
Islander people.
17.49 Similarly, another Aboriginal body submits that the change to
Native Title Act
has removed recognition of the
sui generis
nature of native title claim proceedings and places greater emphasis on an
adversarial claims process, to the disadvantage of Aboriginal
native title
claimants. This Aboriginal Land Council submits that the
Native Title Act
should be amended to reinsert the original
or a provision
reflecting the Federal Court Rules, which permit the court to ‘make any
order it considers appropriate relating
to evidentiary
17.50 By contrast, the State of South Australia submits that
Native Title Act
is satisfactory in its present form and that no
amendment is required.
submits that
enables judges to approach the admission of hearsay
evidence based on an evaluation of all the circumstances of the case and that,
in cases such as
, judges have been prepared to use
admit evidence that might conventionally be considered
17.51 A Federal Court judge suggests that the experience of judges in native title
proceedings is that while the hearsay evidence
of ATSI witnesses is often
objected to, ruled inadmissible or limited as to use:
After a time, the parties resisting the making of a determination that native
title exists seem to cease objecting, and a vast body
of first-, second- and
third-hand hearsay comes to be
17.52 The need to make rulings on such evidence can greatly prolong native
title proceedings, and in the judge’s view, the effective
native title proceedings is dependent on the commonsense of the lawyers who
practise in this area—‘the simple
fact is that a practical course
must be, and is found, and in one way or another, the indigenous witnesses
manage to tell their
17.53 The judge submits that
Native Title Act
should be amended so
as to be consistent with both:
(a) the possibility of proof of native title in a reasonable and practicable
(b) protection of the rights of interests opposed to recognition of native
17.54 The law in Australia may be moving towards greater acceptance of oral
evidence of ATSI traditional laws and customs. Peter Gray
observes that the
decision of the Supreme Court of Canada in
Delgamuukw v British
and that in
v Western Australia
may have opened a new chapter in the attitude of common law courts to the use of
indigenous oral accounts and the operation of the
hearsay rule. The recognition
of the intrinsic value of oral traditions, and of oral evidence of them, might
even mark the beginning
of the creation of a special exception to the hearsay
rule, relating to evidence of land tenure systems, and entitlements under them,
in oral cultures.
17.55 Gray notes that, while the provisions of the
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth) are more liberal than the common law rules, they are ‘potentially
restrictive of any attempt to create new exceptions’.
Perhaps, he says,
the solution lies in a recognition of oral traditions as a category of real
evidence, not hearsay at
17.56 A recent decision in the Federal Court is consistent with a move in this
direction. In
Gumana v Northern Territory of
considered the uniform Evidence Acts’ hearsay restrictions. He noted that
the hearsay rule in
of the uniform Evidence Acts is subject to a
number of exceptions:
First, where the evidence is of a fact, rather than what is said about the fact,
then it is not hearsay. This is reflected in
which provides that evidence can be given in relation to ‘evidence
of reputation concerning the existence, nature or extent
of a public or general
right’. In my view evidence of a ‘custom’ or tradition
including evidence of what is believed
of a fact and is not hearsay. It can be treated as evidence of
‘reputation’ for
this purpose. In my view there is no prohibition
of the admissibility of that evidence. Evidence can be given pursuant to
of the ‘reputation’ of the existence, nature and extent of
Aboriginal custom by those subject to Aboriginal custom and
by those who have
studied it over a long period.
17.57 Selway J stated that it did not seem necessary for evidence of
ATSI custom and tradition to be considered as a special exception
to the usual
rules of evidence, even assuming that it were possible to do so in the context
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth). Rather, it is ‘direct evidence of a
fact in issue—the existence of tradition or custom and of rights pursuant
17.58 However, it is doubtful whether evidence of ‘reputation’ can be
given by an outside expert who only carries out
an investigation for the purpose
of giving evidence in particular litigation. In such a case the evidence may not
properly be characterised
as evidence of ‘reputation’, but only as
evidence of what that person has been told (that is,
Commissions’ view
17.59 ALRC 31 stated that a provision dealing with proof of traditional
laws and customs would have advantages, apart from the basic
one of rendering
relevant Aboriginal evidence admissible, in that it would:
• deal with the problem of ‘experiential’ evidence given
without formal
academic qualifications but with long contact and experience with Aboriginal
communities; and
• avoid any objection to evidence based on the ‘ultimate
issue’ rule, the ‘common knowledge’ rule and
the problem of
opinions based in part on
17.60 These problems in relation to the opinion rule were addressed to a
large extent by provisions of the uniform Evidence Acts.
As discussed in Chapter
allows specialised knowledge to be based on a person’s
‘training, study
experience’;
abolished the
ultimate issue and common knowledge rules; and
lifts the hearsay rule
for evidence relevant for a non-hearsay purpose. Further, the hearsay exceptions
provided by
, operate to allow some evidence of
traditional laws and customs to be admitted, despite the hearsay rule in
17.61 The question is whether sufficient reason still exists—in view of
the provisions of the uniform Evidence Acts and case
law since the ALRC 31
recommendation was made—to recommend a legislative amendment providing
that evidence of ATSI traditional
laws and customs is not inadmissible on the
grounds that it is hearsay or opinion evidence.
17.62 It seems likely that short of such an amendment, the laws of evidence
will continue to present difficult barriers in relation
to the admission and use
of evidence of traditional laws and customs. Submissions and consultations
indicate that the admission of
such evidence is often contested.
17.63 As Federal Court Chief Justice Michael Black stated in 2002, despite
the more flexible hearsay provisions of the uniform Evidence
Acts, there
a serious question as to whether it is appropriate for the legal system to treat
evidence of this nature as prima facie inadmissible
and to only admit it by way
of an exception to an exclusionary rule when such evidence is in precisely the
form by which law and
custom are maintained under indigenous
traditions.
17.64 In the Commissions’ view, this problem should be addressed
through an amendment to the uniform Evidence Acts. This is
consistent with the
conclusions of a background paper for the Law Reform Commission of Western
Australia, which suggested the need
for a ‘general statutory relaxation of
the complex common law requirements for proof of Aboriginal customary
Evidence of
traditional laws and customs, given by those with such knowledge, should be
admissible. Any problems arising with regard
to the opinion or hearsay character
of such evidence should be dealt with as going to weight.
17.65 However, the Commissions now consider that the recommendation made by the
ALRC in 1986 may not be broad enough. The ALRC 31
recommendation on
evidence of traditional laws and customs requires that the person giving the
evidence has or would be likely to
have ‘special knowledge or experience
of the traditional laws or customs of an Aboriginal community’.
17.66 Such a reform would not, for example, cover evidence of the kind referred to
in paragraph 17.21 above. To focus on the status
of the witness, for example as
an elder or ‘lawman’, may work against ATSI communities that have
lost, through the passage
of time or intergenerational breaks in transmission of
knowledge, people with the required special knowledge. Therefore, the
Commissions
propose broader amendments to provide exceptions to the hearsay and
opinion evidence rules for evidence relevant to ATSI traditional
customs (see Proposal 17–1 below). This proposal is reflected in Appendix
1 (new ss 73A, 79A and definition of traditional
laws and customs).
17.67 The proposal may still not be
broad enough to cover some kinds of evidence based on ATSI oral knowledge. For
example, the kind
of evidence referred to in paragraph 17.21 may not be
sufficiently direct evidence of traditional law or customs to fit within the
wording of the proposal. Further, in native title proceedings,
‘traditional’ has been interpreted to mean the normative
ATSI societies existing before the assertion of sovereignty by the British
For these reasons, the
term ‘traditional laws and customs’ may be overly restrictive for
the purposes of this reform.
Therefore, the Commissions are seeking
further comment on whether the proposed amendment to the uniform Evidence Acts
should apply
to ATSI ‘oral knowledge’ (or some similar term) and, if
so, how such a term should be defined.
17.68 Questions may also be raised about whether such an amendment should apply to
other cultures represented in the Australian community
that have primarily an
oral tradition
example, Polynesian, Melanesian and Micronesian cultures. However, ATSI people
are in a special category as they are explicitly
obliged under Australian laws
to prove certain interests by reference to traditional laws and customs.
Further, questions about the
admissibility of evidence of the traditional laws
and customs of other cultures are unlikely to arise very often in Australian
proceedings. The Commissions are interested in further comment on this
17.69 The proposal to include provisions specific to evidence of ATSI traditional
laws and customs in the uniform Evidence Acts is
consistent with the
Commissions’ policy that the Acts should be of general application to all
criminal and civil proceedings.
As discussed above, issues concerning the admission of evidence of traditional
laws and customs arise in many different proceedings
from native title, family
and other civil proceedings, through to criminal prosecutions.
17.70 Particular problems exist in relation to native title proceedings which may
not be addressed by the Commissions’ proposal.
The proposal lifts the
hearsay rule only in relation to evidence of traditional laws and customs and
not, for example, evidence about
family relationships that is relevant to
showing a continuing connection with land.
17.71 In this context, the Commissions consider that there are strong arguments
Native Title Act
should be amended. Submissions and
consultations dealing with
and its relationship with the
(Cth), and the Commissions’ own research, lead to the
conclusion that
is not operating effectively and should be reviewed.
The provision does not provide sufficient guidance or certainty on the
admissibility
of evidence in native title proceedings. However, the Commissions
consider that recommendations to amend the
Native Title Act
, albeit only
with respect to its evidentiary provisions, fall outside their terms of
reference and make no proposal in this regard.
Proposal 17–1
The uniform Evidence Acts
should be amended to provide an exception to the hearsay and opinion evidence
rules for evidence relevant
to Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander traditional
laws and customs.
Question 17–1.
Should the proposed amendment in Proposal
17–1 apply to a broader category of evidence such as evidence based on
knowledge’ or ‘oral tradition’ and, if so, how
should such a term be defined?
Privilege and
traditional laws and customs
17.72 ALRC 31 also considered whether the law should compel a witness to
answer questions in court where the answer would disclose
a past violation of
Aboriginal customary laws which might bring ‘shame’ to the witness,
or render the witness liable
retaliation.
17.73 The ALRC stated that:
There have been instances of Aboriginal people seeking to avoid disclosing
evidence on the grounds that it might ‘incriminate’
them under their
customary laws. To refuse to extend the privilege to cover incrimination under
customary laws would appear to deny
the significance of customary laws in the
lives of many Aborigines. To allow the privilege to be raised in matters of
foreign law
but not in matters of Aboriginal customary laws also seems
unjustified.
17.74 The ALRC considered that a court should not compel a witness to answer
questions tending to incriminate the witness under Aboriginal
customary laws
unless there are good reasons for doing so. However, it concluded that an
absolute privilege, applicable in all cases,
is not desirable because there are
other ways of protecting confidential or secret information (including the
proposal made in ALRC
26 for a confidential communications
privilege).
17.75 The ALRC recommended that:
The courts should be given power to excuse a witness from answering a question
which tends to incriminate the witness under his or
her customary laws. This
power should be exercised unless the court finds that the desirability of
admitting the evidence outweighs
the likelihood of harm to the witness, to some
other person concerned, or to the Aboriginal community
17.76 The factors recommended to be taken into account in making a
determination under the privilege provision were to include:
• the importance of the evidence to the proceeding;
• other ways of obtaining the information in question;
• the nature of the proceeding;
• whether the witness is a party to the proceeding; and
• the power of the court to prevent disclosure of the evidence in other
17.77 In Chapter 13, the Commissions propose that the uniform Evidence
Acts should include a confidential communications privilege.
This privilege is
unlikely to apply to evidence tending to incriminate a witness under his or her
ATSI traditional laws and customs
as it requires, among other things, that there
be a communication made in the course of a professional relationship.
17.78 The Commissions are interested in receiving comments about whether the
uniform Evidence Acts should be amended to include a
specific privilege applying
to ATSI witnesses who risk incriminating themselves under traditional laws and
Question 17–2.
Should the uniform Evidence Acts be amended to
allow courts to excuse a witness from answering a question which tends to
incriminate
the witness under his or her Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander
traditional laws and customs and, if so, on what basis and subject
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Recognition of Aboriginal Customary Laws
, ALRC 31 (1986), Ch 24,
[614]–[642].
Native Title Act 1993
Members of the Yorta Yorta
Aboriginal Community v Victoria
[2002] HCA 58
(2002) 214 CLR 422
Australian Law Reform Commission,
The Recognition of Aboriginal Customary Laws
, ALRC 31 (1986),
Ibid, [642]. The ALRC also
recommended that legislation provide that such evidence is admissible,
notwithstanding that the question
of Aboriginal customary laws is a fact in
issue in the case.
P Gray, ‘Do the Walls
Have Ears?: Indigenous Title and Courts in Australia’
[2000] AUIndigLawRpr 1
(2000) 5(1)
Australian Indigenous Law Reporter
De Rose v South
[2002] FCA 1342.
Sections 62
provide for an exception to the hearsay rule for
first-hand hearsay in civil proceedings if the maker is not
De Rose v South
[2002] FCA 1342
Ibid, [265]. The judge noted that s 73 of the uniform Evidence Acts
addresses some, but not all, of these problems by providing
that the hearsay
rule does not apply to evidence of reputation concerning marriage; cohabitation;
a person’s age; or family
history or a family relationship. See also
Yarmirr v Northern Territory (No 2)
[1998] FCA 771
(1998) 82 FCR 533
G McIntyre,
Paper: Aboriginal Customary Law—Can it be Recognised?
Reform Commission of Western Australia,
Native Title Act 1993
Members of the Yorta
Yorta Aboriginal Community v Victoria
[2001] FCA 45
(2001) 180 ALR 655
Yarmirr v Northern
Territory (No 2)
[1998] FCA 771
(1998) 82 FCR 533
Ibid, 544. See also Australian
Law Reform Commission and Australian Health Ethics Committee,
Essentially
Yours: The Protection of Human Genetic Information in Australia
(2003), Ch 36 on the problems of using genetic testing and genetic
information to prove
‘Aboriginality’.
Yarmirr v Northern Territory (No 2)
[1998] FCA 771
(1998) 82 FCR 533
Confidential,
22 April 2005.
Western Australia
[1998] FCA 1478
(1998) 159 ALR
Ibid, 504, referring to the
decision of the Supreme Court of Canada in
Delgamuukw v British Columbia
(1997) 153 DLR (4th) 193.
Marlpa Barna Baba Maaja Aboriginal Corporation,
February 2005.
Federal Court Rules
O 78 r 31(3)(f).
Western Australia
[2000] FCA 858
(2000) 178 ALR
Lardil, Kaiadilt, Yangkaal,
Gangalidda Peoples v State of Queensland
Harrington-Smith v Western
Australia (No 8)
[2004] FCA 338
(2004) 207 ALR 483
, 499. Similarly, in
Jango v Northern
Territory of Australia (No 2)
, Sackville J concluded that the 1998
amendments were intended to ensure that the law of evidence should apply in all
but exceptional
circumstances. If there was a certain looseness of approach in
the past, ‘it should have ceased with the enactment of the new
Jango v Northern Territory of Australia (No 2)
, [18]–[20]; Yamatji Marlpa Barna Baba Maaja Aboriginal
Corporation,
De Rose v South Australia
[2002] FCA 1342
Confidential,
22 April 2005.
Marlpa Barna Baba Maaja Aboriginal Corporation,
February 2005.
The following examples are
cited and discussed in V Williams,
Background Paper: The Approach of
Australian Courts to Aboriginal Customary Law in the Areas of Criminal, Civil
and Family Law
(2003) Law Reform Commission of Western Australia.
As in the Hindmarsh Island Bridge
cases: Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission,
Consultation
Sydney, 4 March 2005.
V Williams,
Background Paper: The Approach of Australian Courts to Aboriginal Customary
Law in the Areas of Criminal, Civil and Family Law
(2003) Law Reform
Commission of Western Australia, 61–62.
(Unreported,
District Court of Western Australia, 26 April
Lofty v The Queen
See V Williams,
Paper: The Approach of Australian Courts to Aboriginal Customary Law in the
Areas of Criminal, Civil and Family Law
(2003) Law Reform Commission of
Western Australia, 16–24.
[1992] NTCCA 1
(1992) 59 A Crim R 227
R v Wilson Jagamara Walker
(Unreported, Northern Territory Supreme Court, 10 February 1996). See V
Background Paper: The Approach of Australian Courts to Aboriginal
Customary Law in the Areas of Criminal, Civil and Family Law
Reform Commission of Western Australia, 25–60 (for a comprehensive case
For example,
[2003] NTCA 9.
Law Act 1975
s 68F(2)(f).
Family Law Council,
Recognition of Traditional Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
Child-Rearing Practices: Response to Recommendation 22: Pathways
Report, Out of
(2004), 29. The CCP is discussed in
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004), Qs 5–14,
15–6 to 15–8.
Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission,
Consultation
, Sydney, 4 March
2005; C McDonald,
Consultation
, Darwin, 31 March
Department of Justice (NT),
Consultation
, Darwin, 31 March 2005; C McDonald,
Consultation
Darwin, 31 March 2005; S Cox,
Consultation
, Darwin, 31 March 2005;
Justice Southwood,
Consultation
, Darwin, 30 March 2005; M Johnson,
Consultation
, Darwin, 30 March
Yamatji Marlpa Barna Baba Maaja
Aboriginal Corporation,
Human Rights and Equal
Opportunity Commission,
Consultation
, Sydney, 4 March 2005; C McDonald,
Consultation
, Darwin, 31 March
Justice Southwood,
Consultation
, Darwin, 30 March
This dispute involved several
inquiries and numerous court cases including the High Court cases:
Minister for Aboriginal & Torres Strait Islander Affairs
[1996] HCA 18
(1996) 189 CLR
Kartinyeri v Commonwealth
[1998] HCA 22
(1998) 195 CLR
Human Rights and Equal
Opportunity Commission,
Consultation
, Sydney, 4 March
Confidential,
27 April 2005.
Yamatji Marlpa Barna Baba Maaja
Aboriginal Corporation,
Confidential,
27 April 2005;
Federal Court Rules
State of South Australia,
16 February
Confidential,
22 April 2005.
Delgamuukw v British
(1997) 153 DLR (4th)
Ward v Western
[1998] FCA 1478
(1998) 159 ALR 483.
Gray, ‘Do the Walls Have Ears?: Indigenous Title and Courts in
[2000] AUIndigLawRpr 1
(2000) 5(1)
Australian Indigenous Law Reporter
Gumana v Northern Territory of
[2005] FCA 50.
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
The Recognition of Aboriginal Customary Laws
, ALRC 31 (1986),
M Black, ‘Developments in
Practice and Procedure in Native Title Cases’
(2002) 13(1)
G McIntyre,
Background Paper: Aboriginal Customary Law—Can it be Recognised?
(2005) Law Reform Commission of Western Australia, 55. The Law Reform Commission
of Western Australia’s inquiry into recognition
of Aboriginal customary
laws is continuing.
Members of the
Yorta Yorta Aboriginal Community v Victoria
[2002] HCA 58
(2002) 214 CLR 422
Evidence Acts Review Workshop
for the Judiciary,
Consultation
, Sydney, 30 April
Australian Law Reform Commission,
The Recognition of Aboriginal Customary Laws
, ALRC 31 (1986),
[662]–[665].
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
The Recognition of Aboriginal Customary Laws
, ALRC 31 (1986),
Ibid, [665].
18. Matters Outside the Uniform Evidence Acts
Introduction
Evidence Act and other legislation
Rape shield laws
Evidence and children witnesses
Family law proceedings
Other evidentiary provisions
18. Matters Outside the Uniform Evidence Acts
Introduction
18.1 In the uniform
Evidence Act
with evidentiary provisions contained in a range of other Commonwealth, state
and territory
legislation. These evidentiary provisions include those dealing
with, for example, the privilege against self-incrimination in the
regulatory proceedings;
warnings to
be given to juries in relation to lack of complaint in sexual offence
proceedings;
protection of
complainants in sexual offence proceedings (‘rape shield’
provisions); protection of child witnesses; and
evidence in family law
proceedings.
18.2 The Inquiry is directed to consider whether, in view of the desirability of
clarity, effectiveness and uniformity in evidence
law, some of these evidentiary
provisions should be incorporated into the uniform Evidence Acts and, if so, in
18.3 IP 28 noted that it is beyond the practical scope of the Inquiry to
examine in detail all evidentiary provisions and their relationship
uniform Evidence Acts.
Rather, this
chapter focuses on areas that were highlighted as being of particular
significance. These are:
• the ‘rape shield’ provisions contained in state and
territory criminal procedure legislation;
• provisions dealing with child witnesses; and
• evidence in family law proceedings.
18.4 The discussion and conclusions in this chapter are informed by the
Commissions’ common policy position with regard to matters
that should be
incorporated in the uniform Evidence Acts and matters that should be enacted
elsewhere. This policy is discussed in
detail in Chapter 2.
18.5 The policy position is based on the propositions that: (i) uniformity in
evidence laws should be pursued unless there is good
reason to the contrary;
(ii) the uniform Evidence Acts should be a comprehensive statement of the laws
of evidence (the evidence
law ‘pocket bible’); and (iii) the uniform
Evidence Acts should be of general application to all criminal and civil
proceedings.
Act and other legislation
Evidence Act
(Cth) deals with the operation of other Acts.
Section 8(1)
(1) This Act does not affect the operation of the provisions of any other Act,
sections 68
Judiciary Act 1903
18.7 It has been held that the legislative intention of
is that, where a court
is not required to observe the rules of evidence, the
Evidence Act 1995
will not operate so as to impose that
obligation.
18.8 The effect of the reference to the
Judiciary Act 1903
(Cth) is said to
be that those provisions which had allowed courts exercising federal
are significantly modified in
their operation by the
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth). The practical result is
• federal courts and Australian Capital Territory (ACT) courts apply
only the rules of admissibility and rules relating to the
competence and
compellability of witnesses contained in the
Evidence Act 1995
the exclusion of state and territory law that is inconsistent with the Act;
• state and other territory courts apply only those parts of the
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth) which are specifically provided to apply to all
Australian courts.
Evidence Act 1995
(NSW) provides simply: ‘This Act does
not affect the operation of the provisions of any other
This means, for
example, that evidentiary provisions contained in the
Criminal Procedure Act
(NSW) are not affected by the New South Wales Act.
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth) applies in the courts of the ACT. While
the ACT Legislative Assembly may enact evidence legislation, any such
legislation will
not apply if it is inconsistent with the Commonwealth
Therefore, the ACT effectively
may not enact new laws which would make inadmissible evidence that is admissible
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth), as this would be inconsistent with
s 56 of the Act. In consultations, concern was expressed that a range of
ACT evidentiary
provisions may be challengeable on this
These include evidentiary
provisions in relation to sexual offences and child witnesses.
shield laws
18.11 All states, the ACT and Northern Territory have passed legislation that
deals specifically with the admission of evidence in
criminal proceedings where
someone is charged with a sexual
These ‘rape
shield laws’ are said to have three principal aims. These are to:
• prohibit the admission of evidence of a complainant’s sexual
reputation;
• prevent the use of sexual history evidence to establish the
complainant as a ‘type’ of person who is more likely
to consent to
sexual activity; and
• exclude the use of a complainant’s sexual history as an
indicator of the complainant’s
truthfulness.
18.12 All Australian rape shield laws take the form of an exclusionary rule
and share a similar procedural
However, there are a
number of differences between Commonwealth, state and territory rape shield
All the laws protect the
complainant in relation to the offence charged but do not extend to other
witnesses, except in the case
of the Commonwealth provisions, which protect
every child witness in sexual offence
proceedings.
18.13 All existing rape shield laws are associated with other provisions regulating
the cross-examination of witnesses and the adducing
and admission of evidence of
witnesses’ sexual history by any party, except in Western Australia where
the law only applies
These provisions may
also deal with specific warnings or directions to be given by judges in sexual
offence cases.
Aspects of the
examination of witness and the giving of directions, including in sexual offence
proceedings, are dealt with in Chapters
18.14 All states and the ACT have provisions which make evidence relating to the
sexual reputation of a complainant
inadmissible.
These provide no
exceptions to their exclusionary rule. The justification for making evidence of
sexual reputation completely inadmissible
is said to be that ‘evidence of
reputation, even if relevant and therefore admissible, is too far removed from
evidence of
actual events or circumstances for its admission to be justified in
any circumstances’.
18.15 However, Northern Territory legislation allows evidence of the sexual
reputation of the complainant to be admitted with the
leave of the court, if the
court is satisfied that the evidence has substantial relevance to the facts in
Similarly, the
Commonwealth law allows evidence of a child witness’ or child
complainant’s sexual reputation to be admitted
with the leave of the
court, if the court is satisfied that the evidence is substantially relevant to
facts in issue in the
proceeding.
18.16 Australian jurisdictions have adopted different approaches in relation to
evidence of the ‘sexual
activities’,
experience’
‘sexual experiences’
of the complainant.
18.17 The most important distinction is between New South Wales, where the
admissibility of such evidence depends on whether it falls
within specific
statutory exceptions,
other jurisdictions, where the evidence is inadmissible unless the leave of the
judge is obtained. Admissibility in the latter
judge’s discretion, although the exercise of the discretion is subject to
various conditions
laid down by the
legislation.
18.18 A further distinction may be drawn within the ‘discretionary
models’. In Victoria, Western Australia, the Northern
Territory and
Tasmania, the sexual experience provisions apply (expressly or by implication)
to prior sexual experience between the
complainant and the accused. In the
remaining jurisdictions, the sexual experience or conduct provisions do not
apply to ‘recent’
sexual activity between the complainant and the
18.19 There are concerns about the operation of the rape shield laws, many
of which have been canvassed in reports by the Model Criminal
Code Officers
Committee of the Standing Committee of Attorneys-General (MCCOC), the New South
Wales Law Reform Commission and the
Victorian Law Reform
Commission.
18.20 These reports have canvassed concerns about whether a mandatory or
discretionary model is preferable for dealing with the admission
of evidence of
a complainant’s sexual
experience;
and whether the New
South Wales legislation
restrictive, so that it excludes not only irrelevant but also relevant material
concerning the complainant’s sexual
experience.
18.21 The MCCOC report considered the relative merits of
the mandatory and discretionary approaches in some
The report referred to
the ‘undoubted difficulties encountered with the New South Wales
model’ and the fact that the
rest of Australia and other common law
to a strictly circumscribed discretionary
MCCOC therefore
recommended that the Model Criminal Code should contain a provision that
prohibits questioning of a complainant in
the trial of a sexual offence as to
prior sexual experience unless leave of the judge is
Relationship
with the uniform Evidence Acts
18.22 The uniform
Evidence Acts do not affect the operation of Commonwealth, state or territory
rape shield laws.
shield laws operate alongside provisions of the uniform Evidence Acts that
regulate the admission of evidence generally,
including evidence of sexual
reputation or sexual experience. Evidence of sexual reputation or sexual
experience may be inadmissible
under the rape shield laws, the uniform Evidence
Acts, or both.
18.23 For example, leaving aside the operation of rape shield laws, where evidence
of a complainant’s sexual reputation or experience
is sought to be adduced
as relevant to the complainant’s credibility, it may be excluded under
s 102 of the uniform Evidence
Acts unless it is relevant to another purpose
or falls within one of the exceptions to the credibility rule. The operation of
credibility rule, including in relation to evidence of sexual reputation or
experience, is discussed in Chapter 11.
18.24 Evidence of a complainant’s sexual reputation or sexual experience may
be admissible under the exception to the credibility
rule provided by s 103
of the uniform Evidence Acts. This section provides that the credibility rule
does not apply to evidence adduced
in cross-examination of a witness (including
the complainant in a sexual offence case) if the evidence has substantial
value. However, the evidence may still be ruled inadmissible under
rape shield laws, depending on the applicable law and the exercise
of judicial
discretion (where available).
18.25 In some circumstances, evidence of a complainant’s sexual reputation or
experience may be subject to the tendency rule.
As discussed in Chapter 10,
s 97 of the uniform Evidence Acts provides that evidence of character,
reputation, conduct or a tendency
is not admissible to prove a person’s
tendency to act in a particular way or have a particular state of mind, unless
thinks that the evidence would have significant probative value.
18.26 Again, even where such evidence is admissible under the uniform Evidence
Acts, the evidence may be ruled inadmissible under
rape shield laws. Conversely,
evidence about prior consensual sexual activity involving the complainant and
the accused may be admissible
under exceptions in the rape shield laws, but
still constitutes tendency evidence for the purposes of s 97 of the uniform
Acts. If so, in order to be admissible, notice has to be given to the
other party and the evidence must have significant probative
rape shield laws
18.27 In some states and territories, rape shield provisions are contained in
legislation dealing with criminal
or with evidence and
procedure in sexual offence cases
specifically.
Some non-uniform
Evidence Act
legislation.
18.28 Tasmania is the only uniform
Evidence Act
provisions in evidence legislation. In 1996, the Tasmanian Law Reform
Commissioner’s Special
Committee on Evidence recommended that, if Tasmania
were to adopt the uniform
Evidence Act
, then s 102A of the
Evidence Act
(Tas) containing Tasmania’s rape shield provisions should be
transferred to Chapter XIV of the
Criminal Code Act 1924
However, the
provisions were instead re-enacted in Tasmania’s uniform evidence
legislation.
18.29 IP 28 notes that, in the interest of uniformity between Australian
provisions and
those of the uniform Evidence Acts, there may be good reasons to recommend
including provisions dealing specifically
with the admission of evidence of
sexual reputation or experience in the uniform Evidence Acts. However, as each
is part of the uniform Evidence Acts scheme has enacted
different rape shield provisions, uniform rape shield provisions would need
be developed.
Submissions
and consultations
18.30 IP 28 asks whether there are concerns about the relationship
between the uniform Evidence Acts and the rape shield provisions
in state and
territory legislation and whether the uniform Evidence Acts should be amended
specifically to include provisions dealing
with the admission of evidence of
sexual reputation or
experience.
18.31 Women’s Legal Services (NSW) and the New South Wales Health Department
Child Protection and Violence Prevention Unit submit
that the uniform Evidence
Acts should be amended to include new provisions specific to sexual assault
cases. Among other things,
the amendments recommended would require courts to
refuse to admit evidence where the probative value of the evidence is outweighed
by the likelihood of significant harm to the complainant in sexual assault
cases; and make prosecution tendency and coincidence evidence
prima facie
admissible if relevant in a sexual assault
These submissions are
based on the 2004 recommendations of the New South Wales Adult Sexual Assault
Interagency Committee.
18.32 The New South Wales Public Defenders Office (NSW PDO) submits that, if
rape shield provisions are to be included in the uniform
Evidence Acts, the
provisions should be based on the discretionary model, rather than on current
New South Wales legislation.
18.33 The New South Wales Director of Public Prosecutions (DPP NSW) states
that while it might be desirable to include rape shield
provisions in the
uniform Evidence Acts:
given the differences in the approach taken to the rape shield provisions
between NSW and other States (and the unlikelihood of achieving
provisions) inclusion of these provisions in the Evidence Act is not
practicable.
18.34 Others oppose introducing rape shield and similar provisions into the
uniform Evidence Acts because it is considered that the
Acts should not contain
provisions applicable only to specific
Commissions’ view
18.35 IP 28 noted that a review of the effectiveness of the rape shield
provisions is outside the ALRC’s terms of reference
and would constitute
an unnecessary duplication of effort, given recent reports by other
18.36 The Commissions’ common policy position is that uniformity in evidence
laws should be pursued unless there is good reason
to the contrary. Uniformity
in rape shield laws could be advanced by an agreed recommendation for enactment
in Commonwealth, state
and territory evidence laws.
18.37 However, significant differences between existing Commonwealth, state and
territory rape shield laws, and outstanding reform
mean that it is
inappropriate for this Inquiry to develop recommendations on uniform rape shield
laws. Developing such recommendations
would require review of the effectiveness
of the provisions in each jurisdiction and review by the Commissions of previous
recommendations
for reform of rape shield laws. Such a project is beyond the
resources and timetable of the current Inquiry.
18.38 The Commissions would support, in principle, the conduct of a separate
inquiry into the content and operation of Commonwealth,
state and territory rape
shield laws, with a view to achieving uniformity. Once agreement is reached on
the content of uniform rape
shield laws, the desirable location for these
provisions could be determined.
18.39 In the meantime, leaving rape shield provisions outside the uniform Evidence
Acts is consistent with, and does not detract significantly
from, the advantages
of the Acts. While it may be perceived as convenient, and consistent with the
aim of a ‘pocket
to include all
evidentiary provisions in the uniform Evidence Acts, the Acts are of general
application and do not generally include
provisions directed at evidentiary
issues arising in the trial of specific offences. Such provisions are saved by
s 8 of the uniform
Evidence Acts.
18.40 The application of rape shield provisions is confined expressly to specified
sexual offences, which inevitably vary from jurisdiction
to jurisdiction, and to
specific types of evidence, such as evidence of sexual reputation or sexual
history. It is consistent with
the structure of the uniform Evidence Acts and
their intended application for specific evidentiary provisions relating to
offence cases to remain outside the
18.41 Another option would be to recommend the enactment of the different rape
shield laws in the uniform Evidence Acts of each jurisdiction.
If this were
done, it would be on the basis that the relevant provisions are evidentiary in
nature and should be included in the
uniform Evidence Acts, despite their lack
of uniformity. As discussed in Chapter 2, the same reasoning applies to
many other evidentiary
provisions relevant to specific offences or categories of
witness in each jurisdiction. The approach carries dangers for the objective
the uniform Evidence Acts. Arguably, the more non-uniform provisions included,
the less the incentive to maintain uniformity in
the existing provisions.
and child witnesses
18.42 Concerns about the effects of evidentiary and procedural rules on child
witnesses have led to the enactment of new evidentiary
provisions since the
introduction of the uniform Evidence Acts.
18.43 Increased recognition of the difficulties faced by children in the
legal system can be attributed to a number of factors, including
appreciation of the rights of the child (and, in particular, the adoption by
Australia of the
Convention of the Rights of the Child
in 1990); expanded
research into the psychological development of children; and greater experience
of child witness testimony primarily
derived from the increased numbers of
prosecutions of child sex
18.44 Elsewhere, this Discussion Paper raises a number of concerns relating to the
evidence of child witnesses and asks whether there
is a need for new rules of
evidence to facilitate the giving of evidence by child
18.45 Most Australian jurisdictions have enacted procedural provisions intended to
assist children to give evidence in a manner that
reduces stress and trauma and
thereby assists the court to have access to relevant evidence. For example,
Part IAD of the
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth) provides, in relation to
sexual offences, for the giving of evidence by child witnesses (under the age of
18) by closed-circuit
television (CCTV), video recording or other alternative
means, and that a child witness may be accompanied by an adult when giving
evidence. The
Evidence (Children) Act 1997
(NSW) includes similar
provisions for alternative means of giving evidence and provision for adult
accompaniment. These apply in
relation to a broader range of court and tribunal
proceedings, but only for child witnesses under the age of
18.46 If there is a need for specific rules of evidence applying to child
witnesses, it can be argued that it would not be appropriate
to provide for
these rules within the uniform Evidence Acts. The uniform Evidence Acts attempt
to provide broad, general rules of
evidence that can be applied regardless of
the type of case involved. IP 28 noted that many of the existing specific
rules for child
witnesses apply to particular types of proceedings, rather than
having general application, and may be better placed in the legislation
to those offences, or in a more general
Evidence (Children)
(as is the case in New South Wales and
18.47 Another issue is whether evidentiary provisions relating specifically to
child witnesses should be separated from procedural
While it seems
appropriate that procedural rules relating to child witnesses should be
contained in legislation outside the uniform
Evidence Acts, there are questions
rules or included
in the uniform Evidence Acts, for example, as exceptions to
general rules of evidence.
Evidence (Children) Act 1997
(NSW) was established as a
comprehensive regime for children giving evidence in criminal proceedings. Its
provisions combined a number
of existing measures that had been set out in the
Crimes Act 1901
(NSW) with new measures recommended by the New South
Wales Children’s Evidence Task Force and supported by the Wood Royal
Commission.
18.49 While it would have been possible to include evidentiary provisions relating
to child witnesses in the
Evidence (Children)
, provisions
relating to warnings to be given by judges in jury trials involving the evidence
of child witnesses were inserted into
Evidence Act 1995
Evidence (Children) Act
clearly states that the Act is intended to work
alongside and in addition to the
Evidence Act 1995
(NSW). The majority of
the provisions are procedural in nature.
18.50 Similarly, at the Commonwealth level, one option would be to enact a
Commonwealth
Evidence (Children) Act
to incorporate existing provisions
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth) and any other provisions
that should apply to children giving evidence in federal proceedings.
18.51 IP 28 asked whether there is a need for a Commonwealth
(Children) Act
that incorporates relevant evidentiary and procedural laws
that should apply to child witnesses, or whether there are particular
evidentiary rules relating to child witnesses that should instead be
incorporated into the
Evidence Act 1995
Submissions
and consultations
18.52 The Commissions received a range of views in submissions and
consultations. Some people consider that the uniform Evidence Acts
include evidentiary provisions relating specifically to child
18.53 By contrast, some Family Court judges consider that children’s
evidence provisions should be located in the uniform Evidence
It is also suggested that
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) should cross-reference these provisions so
that, for example, unrepresented parties wishing to examine a child witness are
more easily made aware of the protections
18.54 The DPP NSW submits that provisions concerning the warnings to be given
by judges about children’s evidence should be
enacted in the uniform
Evidence Acts, as they have in New South
rather than in any
Commonwealth
Evidence (Children)
Commissions’ view
18.55 At this stage, the Commissions do not propose that evidentiary
provisions relating specifically to child witnesses be included
in the uniform
Evidence Acts. This view is based on a number of reasons.
18.56 Existing evidentiary provisions relating specifically to child
witnesses are closely linked with complex procedural issues and
technology—for example, video recording, CCTV and
This may make the
provisions more suitable for inclusion in an
Evidence (Children) Act
rather than in the uniform Evidence Acts.
18.57 Some evidentiary provisions concerning children’s evidence are directed
to proceedings in relation to specific offences
(such as sexual offences). The
inclusion of such provisions would be inconsistent with the Commissions’
policy position that
the uniform Acts should be of general application. This was
one reason for rejecting the introduction in the uniform Evidence Acts
hearsay exception directed to children’s evidence (see Chapter 7).
18.58 More pragmatically, any recommendation for the enactment of evidentiary
provisions relating specifically to child witnesses
would require the
development of uniform provisions. While there may be more consistency in
Commonwealth, state and territory laws
concerning children’s evidence than
in rape shield laws, this is still a major project and may be beyond the
resources and
timetable of the current Inquiry. Nevertheless, the Commissions
intend to conduct further research on existing laws to identify areas
there is already sufficient uniformity to allow recommendations to be made for
the enactment of new provisions in the uniform
Evidence Acts.
law proceedings
18.59 Family law proceedings raise a particular set of evidentiary concerns,
notably in connection with evidence in children’s
cases. Evidence in
family law proceedings before the Family Court of Australia is governed by both
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth) and the
Family Law Act 1975
Family Law Act
contains a number of important evidentiary
provisions. Most significantly, s 100A provides that evidence of a
representation made
by a child about a matter that is relevant to the welfare of
the child or another child is not inadmissible solely because of the
law against
hearsay. The
Family Law Act
also contains evidentiary provisions dealing
with, among other things:
• the admissibility in evidence of admissions made at a meeting or
conference conducted by a family and child counsellor or
• the admissibility in evidence of admissions made by a person attending a
post-separation parenting
• the court’s power requiring any person to give evidence material to the
parentage of a child;
• the competence and compellability of husbands and wives in proceedings under
• children swearing affidavits, being called as witnesses or being present in
• protecting witnesses from offensive or oppressive
questioning;
• means of proving birth, parentage, death or
• restrictions on the examination of
18.61 As discussed above,
Evidence Act 1995
ensures that these provisions are unaffected by the Act. In addition,
Family Law Act
states that regulations may provide for
rules of evidence with effect, despite any inconsistency with the
(Cth), in proceedings dealing with property, spousal maintenance
and maintenance agreements.
and the paramountcy principle
18.62 One issue of contention concerning the relationship between the
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth) and the
Family Law Act
has been the extent
to which the Family Court is bound by the rules of evidence in children’s
matters—especially in light
of the ‘paramountcy principle’,
which requires that the court treat the best interests of the child as the
consideration in deciding children’s
18.63 A number of decisions prior to 1995 held that rules of evidence may be put
aside if the welfare of the child was likely to be
advanced by the admission of
the evidence.
Some decisions
limited this principle, noting that statutory provisions relating to evidence
could not be overridden by concerns
for the welfare of the
18.64 Since these decisions, the enactment of comprehensive rules of evidence in
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth) and amendments to the paramountcy provisions
made by the
Family Law Reform Act 1995
(Cth) have changed the law and,
arguably, left little room for the paramountcy principle to
Reform Act 1995
has been said to have restricted the scope of the
paramountcy principle. Rather than applying in general to children’s
it now applies only to the decision about whether or not to make a
particular parenting order.
18.65 The High Court, in
Northern Territory v
interpreted this
restriction to mean that the paramountcy principle has no overriding effect on
the rules of procedure and evidence,
as these are not part of the
‘ultimate issue’ of deciding whether to make a particular parenting
order. McHugh and Callinan
JJ stated that the paramountcy principle is to
be applied when the evidence is complete and is ‘not an injunction to
the rules concerning the production or admissibility of
in dissent, queried how confining the operation of the principle to the
‘ultimate issue’ could accord with the
need for a court to have all
necessary and relevant evidence before it in order to make a decision based on
the best interests of
Court again considered the application of the paramountcy principle—this
time to the admission of further evidence
on appeal before the Full Court of the
Family Court. The judgments of the High Court in
are said to
support the view that, even if the paramountcy principle does not apply
expressly in statute, the child’s best
interests will remain a significant
or ‘powerful’ consideration in judicial
18.67 In December 2004, the Family Law Council released a discussion paper on the
paramountcy principle. The Family Law Council discussion
paper asks whether,
taking account of the observations of the High Court in
differences of view in
Northern Territory v GPAO
there are any decisions
where the paramountcy principle (a) does not currently apply to which it should
be made applicable; or (b)
currently applies to which it should be made
inapplicable.
18.68 The Family Law Council discussion paper also asks whether the law should be
amended to allow the paramountcy principle to qualify
the application of the
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth) in any circumstances, and whether there are
specific applications of the paramountcy principle where it would be appropriate
to list other factors which should be considered while treating the best
interests of the child as
The closing date for
submissions on the Family Law Council discussion paper was 6 May 2005.
Children’s Cases Program
18.69 In March 2004, the Family Court commenced a pilot for a new
Children’s Cases Program (CCP), involving cases in the Sydney
Parramatta registries, which has moved towards a more permissive application of
the rules of evidence.
18.70 Practice Directions state that all evidence is to be conditionally
admitted and that the judge will determine the weight to
be given to the
However, parties to
cases in the CCP do not waive their right to appeal an order on the ground of
inappropriate weight having been
No objections are to
be taken to the evidence of a party or a witness, or the admission of documents,
photographs, videos, tape recordings
and so on, other than on the grounds of
privilege, illegality or other such serious
18.71 The Family Court’s brochure on the CCP explains that, for
example, the judge can take ‘hearsay’ evidence into
coming to a decision but that, if the hearsay relates to an important matter,
the judge will usually require direct
18.72 At present, participation in the CCP requires the informed consent of all
parties. The parties’ agreement is formalised
in a consent order, and
parties who are not represented by lawyers have access to legal advice about
giving consent.
matters that is the subject of the parties’ consent is the waiver of some
of the rules of evidence in accordance
Evidence Act
18.73 In March 2005, Paul Boers wrote that the private profession’s response
to the CCP has been ‘mixed’ and that
waiver of the rules of evidence
is the main source of concern:
There is a view that the Court’s task is now more difficult. Instead of
relying upon lawyers to draft affidavit material which
complies with the rules
of evidence, and then deal with objections, the judge now has to consider
everything that is admitted and
then decide whether: it is relevant; it is
otherwise admissible under the remaining rules of evidence; it is reliable; and
what weight
should it be given?
18.74 The Federal Magistrates Court has not adopted the CCP process. It is
said that the Court shares many of the objects of the CCP
in terms of its case
management, but has expressed the view that the rules of evidence serve the
fact-finding process and lead to
18.75 There is a distinct possibility that the CCP will become the manner in which
all children’s cases will be determined
in the Family
The CCP pilot program
will be evaluated externally to determine if the approach should be adopted more
widely. The evaluation, which
will assess if the CCP is achieving its objectives
and determine the best practice model for national
implementation,
is expected to
be completed by April 2006.
18.76 The Commissions understand that the federal Government is considering reforms
to mandate the application of the CCP, including
in some cases where the parties
do not consent or have withdrawn consent. This is likely to involve amendments
Family Law Act 1975
18.77 IP 28 asks whether the
Family Law Act
Evidence Act
(Cth) should be amended to ensure that, in proceedings under
Family Law Act
, rules of evidence may be dispensed
with where this is in the best interests of the
Commissions’ view
18.78 The Commissions received differing views on where evidentiary
provisions to facilitate the extension of the CCP should be
However, the dominant
view is that the
Family Law Act
is the better location as this already
contains a range of evidentiary
provisions,
and is where family
law practitioners turn first to find relevant statute
18.79 Further, were the
Family Law Act
to be amended to mandate the
application of CCP processes, then it would be logical for evidentiary
provisions relating to the CCP
to be located
especially given the
prevalence of unrepresented parties in family law proceedings.
18.80 For these reasons, the Commissions agree that the
Family Law Act
should remain the primary location for evidentiary provisions applicable to
family law proceedings. This is bolstered by the Commissions’
position that the uniform Evidence Acts should remain Acts of general
application.
evidentiary provisions
18.81 There are other evidentiary provisions contained in state and territory
criminal procedures or evidence legislation which might
be included in the
uniform Evidence Acts.
18.82 For example, the
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
(NSW) contains
provisions dealing with the admissibility of admissions by suspects in criminal
proceedings.
Section 281
Criminal Procedure Act
provides that
evidence of certain admissions made in the course of official questioning are
not admissible unless a tape recording
is available to the court, and that the
hearsay rule and the opinion rule of the uniform Evidence Acts do not prevent
the admission
and use of such recordings. Other jurisdictions have similar
provisions.
Criminal Procedure Act
contains detailed provisions dealing with
the compellability of spouses to give evidence in certain
proceedings,
evidentiary
aspects of certain depositions and written
statements,
sexual assault
communications privilege,
warnings to be given to juries in relation to lack of complaint in sexual
offence proceedings.
Evidence Act 2001
(Tas) also contains a range of provisions that
are not present in either the Commonwealth or New South Wales
legislation—although,
in some instances, equivalent provisions may be
found elsewhere in those jurisdictions’ statute books. The additional
provisions include those dealing with:
• procedures for proving certain matters, which are not provided for in
the other uniform Evidence
• the admissibility of depositions on one charge in the trial of
• the production and use in evidence of certain
depositions;
• the powers of a court or judge to order examination of witnesses on
interrogatories or
18.85 The evidence legislation of other states or territories also contain
other kinds of evidentiary provisions that might be incorporated
in the uniform
Evidence Acts. For example, Queensland, Western Australia and the Northern
Territory evidence legislation provides,
in similar terms, for evidentiary
certificates with respect to DNA evidence used in criminal
proceedings.
18.86 IP 28 asked whether there are categories of evidentiary provisions, for
example, those contained in state or territory criminal
procedures or evidence
legislation or in the
Evidence Act 2001
(Tas), which should be
incorporated in the uniform Evidence
Submissions
and consultations
18.87 The DPP NSW submits that evidentiary provisions, based on those in the
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
(NSW), and dealing with the following
matters, should be incorporated in the uniform Evidence
• admissions by suspects in criminal
proceedings;
• the compellability of spouses to give evidence in certain
proceedings;
• evidentiary aspects of certain depositions and written
statements;
• sexual assault communications
• warnings to be given to juries in relation to lack of complaint in sexual
offence proceedings.
18.88 The NSW PDO notes that, in New South
Wales, while admissions generally are dealt with under the
Evidence Act 1995
(NSW), verbal admissions are dealt with under
Procedure Act 1986
(NSW). The NSW PDO submits that ‘it would be
more logical and convenient’ if the provisions dealing with verbal
were incorporated into the
Evidence Act 1995
Commissions’ view
18.89 Other than those mentioned
the Commissions
received few other comments supporting the enactment in the uniform Evidence
Acts of provisions already contained
in state or territory criminal procedures
or other legislation. Accordingly, the Commissions make no proposal.
18.90 In Chapter 13, the
Commissions propose that privileges under the uniform Evidence Acts
(confidential communications privilege
and the sexual assault communications
privilege) should apply to pre-trial processes. If this proposal were
implemented, some provisions
currently outside the uniform Evidence Acts could
be brought within it. For example, the sexual assault communications privilege
sections in
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
(NSW), could
be re-enacted in the
Evidence Act 1995
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004),
When considered together with
which provides: ‘For the avoidance of doubt, this Act does not
affect an Australian law so far as the law relates to a court’s
dispense with the operation of a rule of evidence or procedure in an
interlocutory proceeding’.
Epeabaka v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs
Evidence Law
(6th ed, 2004),
Evidence Act 1995
Evidence Act 1995
Supreme Court of the ACT
Judicial Officers,
Consultation
, Canberra, 8 March 2005; ACT Bar
Association,
Consultation
, Canberra, 9 March
Evidence Act
Crimes Act 1914
Procedure Act 1986
Evidence Act 2001
Evidence (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1991
. Non-uniform
Evidence Act
(SA) s 34I;
Evidence Act 1958
(Vic) s 37A;
Criminal Law (Sexual Offences) Act 1978
Evidence Act 1906
Offences (Evidence and Procedure) Act 1983
T Henning and S
Bronitt, ‘Rape Victims on Trial: Regulating the Use and Abuse of Sexual
History Evidence’ in P Easteal
Balancing the Scales: Rape, Law
Reform and Australian Culture
J Gans and A Palmer,
Principles of Evidence
(2nd ed, 2004),
These differences were
highlighted by the High Court in
Bull v The Queen
(2000) 201 CLR
Crimes Act 1914
. See J Gans and A Palmer,
Principles of Evidence
(2nd ed, 2004),
For example,
Procedure Act 1986
Evidence Act 2001
s 194M(1)(a)
Evidence (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1991
(Vic) s 37A(1)(1);
Criminal Law (Sexual Offences) Act
Evidence Act 1929
(SA) s 34I(1)(a);
Evidence Act 1906
Model Criminal Code
Officers Committee of the Standing Committee of Attorneys-General,
Criminal Code—Chapter 5 Sexual Offences Against the Person
(1999), 219.
Sexual Offences
(Evidence and Procedure) Act 1983
Crimes Act 1914
Procedure Act 1986
Criminal Law (Sexual Offences)
Evidence Act 1929
(SA) s 34I(1)(b);
Evidence Act 1958
(Vic) s 37A(1)(2);
Evidence (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1991
Sexual Offences (Evidence and Procedure) Act 1983
Criminal Procedure
Evidence Act 2001
s 194M(1)(b).
Evidence Act
Procedure Act 1986
(Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1991
Offences (Evidence and Procedure) Act 1983
Criminal Law (Sexual Offences) Act 1978
Evidence Act 1929
(SA) s 34I(2)–(3);
Evidence Act 2001
Evidence Act 1958
Evidence Act 1906
See Model Criminal
Code Officers Committee of the Standing Committee of Attorneys-General,
Criminal Code—Chapter 5 Sexual Offences Against the Person
(1999), 223–224;
Criminal Law (Sexual Offences) Act 1978
(acts which are ‘substantially contemporaneous’);
Evidence Act 1929
(SA) s 34I(1)(b) (‘recent sexual
activities with the accused’).
Model Criminal Code Officers Committee of the Standing Committee of
Attorneys-General,
Model Criminal Code—Chapter 5 Sexual Offences
Against the Person
, Report (1999); New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Review of Section 409B of the
Crimes Act 1900
, Report 87 (1998);
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Sexual Offences: Final Report
Model Criminal Code Officers
Committee of the Standing Committee of Attorneys-General,
Model Criminal
Code—Chapter 5 Sexual Offences Against the Person
, Report (1999),
Crimes Act 1900
(NSW) s 409B. These provisions were re-enacted without significant change
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
New South Wales Law Reform
Commission,
Review of Section 409B of the
Crimes Act 1900
87 (1998), [1.8].
Model Criminal Code
Officers Committee of the Standing Committee of Attorneys-General,
Criminal Code—Chapter 5 Sexual Offences Against the Person
(1999), 237–243.
MCCOC also stated that it favours ‘the variant that extends the
discretionary regime to all incidents of sexual
and the accused’.
Uniform Evidence Acts
Criminal Procedure Act
Criminal Law
(Sexual Offences) Act 1978
Sexual Offences (Evidence and
Procedure) Act 1983
Evidence (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act
(ACT). The ACT legislation deals with a range of other matters,
including evidence of children and the use of audio-visual links
proceedings.
Evidence Act 1929
Evidence Act 1958
Evidence Act 1906
Law Reform Commissioner of
Report on the Uniform
Evidence Act
and its Introduction to
, Report 74 (1996) rec 5,
Evidence Act 2001
Australian Law
Reform Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004),
Ibid, Qs 15–1,
Women’s Legal
Services (NSW),
24 March 2005; NSW Health
Department Child Protection and Violence Prevention Unit,
21 February 2005.
Sexual Assault Interagency Committee,
A Fair Chance: Proposals for Sexual
Assault Law Reform in NSW
New South Wales Public Defenders,
21 April 2005.
The NSW PDO expressed particular concern about the operation of the
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
, which prevents
cross-examination about previous false accusations of sexual assault by a
complainant.
Director of Public
Prosecutions (NSW),
15 February
For example, G Bellamy,
Consultation
, Canberra, 8 March
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004),
For example, a discretionary
model was recommended by the New South Wales Law Reform Commission in 1998, but
has not been enacted:
New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Section 409B of the
Crimes Act 1900
, Report 87
As noted above, in 1996,
the Tasmanian Law Reform Commissioner’s Special Committee on Evidence
recommended that, if a uniform
Evidence Act
were adopted in Tasmania,
Tasmania’s rape shield provisions should be transferred to crimes
legislation: Law Reform Commissioner
of Tasmania,
Report on the Uniform
Evidence Act
and its Introduction to Tasmania
, Report 74 (1996) rec 5,
See Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Sexual Offences: Final Report
See discussion in relation to:
constraints on cross-examination of child witnesses (Ch 5); an exception to
the hearsay rule for
evidence of child witnesses (Ch 7); admission of
expert evidence on the development and behaviour of children (Ch 8); and
prohibitions on warnings to the jury about the reliability of the
evidence of children (Ch 16).
Evidence (Children and Special Witnesses) Act 2001
(Tas) which
applies to children under the age of
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004),
In developing the draft
Evidence Bill, the ALRC narrowly defined what was to be considered as a law of
evidence and covered by the
Bill. Rules relating to the gathering of evidence
before a trial, and the manner in which the evidence would be given, were
as procedural rules and excluded from the ALRC’s consideration:
Australian Law Reform Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim) Vol 1
(1985), Ch 2.
Parliament of New
South Wales,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Assembly, 25 November
1997, 2450 (B Langton—Minister for Transport and Minister for Tourism).
See also Royal Commission
into the New South Wales Police Service,
, vol 5 (1997), Ch 15.
Evidence Act 1995
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004), Qs 15–3,
Consultation
, Sydney, 21 February 2005; G Bellamy,
Consultation
Canberra, 8 March 2005.
Officers of the Family Court of Australia and Federal Magistrates Court,
Consultation
, Parramatta, 28 February 2005. Also Legal Aid Office (ACT),
Consultation
, Canberra, 8 March
Judicial Officers of the Family
Court of Australia and Federal Magistrates Court,
Consultation
Parramatta, 28 February 2005.
Evidence Act 1995
Director of
Public Prosecutions (NSW),
15 February 2005. At
the same time, the DPP NSW supports the enactment of a Commonwealth
Evidence (Children) Act
Consultation
, Canberra, 8 March
Family Law Act 1975
See G Watts, ‘Is
the Family Court Bound by the Rules of Evidence in Children Matters?’
(1999) 13(4)
Australian Family Lawyer
Hutchings v
[1993] FamCA 22
(1993) 16 Fam LR 452.
Wakely v Hanns
[1993] FamCA 157
(1993) 17 Fam LR
R Chisholm, ‘“The
Paramount Consideration”: Children’s Interests in Family Law’
Australian Journal of Family Law
Northern Territory v
(1999) 196 CLR 553.
CDJ v VAJ (No 1)
197 CLR 172.
Family Law Council,
The ‘Child Paramountcy Principle’ in the
Family Law Act
(2004), 18.
Ibid, 31, Qs 1,
Practice Direction No 2 of 2004:
The Children's Cases Program
Family Court of Australia,
The Children’s Cases Program: A New Way of Working with Parents and
Others in Children’s Cases
Practice Direction No 2 of 2004:
The Children's Cases Program
Adversarial Approach to Determining Children’s Cases
(2005) FindLaw
http://www.findlaw.com.au/articles
at 19 April
Judicial Officers of the Family
Court of Australia and Federal Magistrates Court,
Consultation
Parramatta, 28 February 2005; Legal Aid Office (ACT),
Consultation
Canberra, 8 March 2005.
Family Court
of Australia,
Children’s Cases Program: A New Way of Working with
Parents and Others in Children’s Cases
<www.familycourt.gov.au/presence/connect/www/home/about/childrens_cases_program/>
at 19 April 2005.
Australian Law
Reform Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004),
Legal Aid Office
Consultation
, Canberra, 8 March 2005; Judicial Officers of the
Family Court of Australia and Federal Magistrates Court,
Consultation
Parramatta, 28 February 2005.
Officers of the Family Court of Australia and Federal Magistrates Court,
Consultation
, Parramatta, 28 February
Legal Aid Office (ACT),
Consultation
, Canberra, 8 March
Judicial Officers of the Family
Court of Australia and Federal Magistrates Court,
Consultation
Parramatta, 28 February 2005.
Crimes Act 1914
Crimes Act 1958
Criminal Procedure
Evidence Act
Evidence Act 1977
Evidence Act 1906
Evidence Act 1939
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
, IP 28 (2004),
Director of
Public Prosecutions (NSW),
15 February
For example,
Procedure Act 1986
For example, Ibid
For example, Ibid
For example,
example, Ibid
Wales Public Defenders,
For example, in relation to
confidential communications privilege (see Ch 13); warnings in jury trials
involving the evidence of
child witnesses (see Ch 16); expert evidence in
relation to the development and behaviour of children (see Ch 8).
Appendix 1. Draft
The following provisions are preliminary drafts only, to demonstrate the way
in which the Proposals and some of the options, if adopted,
could be implemented
in the Commonwealth and New South Wales Evidence Acts.
Draft provisions have not been included for all Proposals or options
discussed in the Chapters.
In particular, draft provisions are not included for Proposals to repeal
certain provisions and to apply certain privileges in pre-trial
investigation contexts.
Part 1.2—Application of this
4 Courts and proceedings to which Act
(1) This Act applies to
proceedings in a federal court or an ACT court, including proceedings that:
(a) relate to bail; or
(5) Subject to subsection (5A), the provisions of this Act (other than
sections 185, 186 and 187) do not apply
(a) an appeal from a court of a State, including an appeal from a court of
a State exercising federal jurisdiction; or
(5A) Despite subsection (5), this Act applies
an appeal to the Family Court of
Australia from a court of summary jurisdiction of a State or Territory
exercising jurisdiction
Family Law Act 1975
5 Extended application
of certain provisions
The provisions of this Act referred to in the Table apply
all proceedings in an Australian
court, including proceedings that:
(a) relate to bail; or
2.1—Witnesses
Division 1—Competence and compellability of
13 Competence: lack
of capacity
(1) A person who is incapable of understanding that, in giving evidence, he
or she is under an obligation to give truthful evidence
is not competent to give
sworn evidence.
(2) (a) Subject to subsection (4) a person who because of subsection (1)
is not competent to give sworn evidence is competent
to give unsworn
(b) Before a person may give unsworn evidence the court must inform the
person of the need to tell the truth.
(4) A person is not competent to give evidence (sworn or unsworn) about a
fact if for any reason, including physical disability:
(a) the person lacks the capacity:
(i) to understand; or
(ii) to give an answer which can be understood to
a question about the fact; and
(b) that incapacity cannot be overcome,
but the person may be competent to give evidence about another fact.
(7) For the purpose of determining a question arising under this section,
the court may inform itself as it thinks fit, including
by information from a
person who has relevant specialised knowledge based on the person’s
training, study or experience.
14 Compellability:
reduced capacity
A person is not compellable to give evidence on a particular matter if the
court is satisfied that:
(a) substantial cost or delay would be incurred in ensuring that the
person would be capable of understanding, or of giving
an answer which can be
understood to, questions on that matter; and
(b) adequate evidence on that matter has been given, or will be able to be
given, from one or more other persons or sources.
Division 2—Oaths
and affirmations
21 Sworn evidence of witnesses to be on oath or
affirmation
(1) A witness in a proceeding must either take an oath, or make an
affirmation, before giving evidence.
(2) Subsection (1) does not apply to a person who gives unsworn
3—General rules about giving evidence
29 Questioning witnesses and ways of giving
(1) A party may question a witness in any way the party thinks fit, except
as provided by this Chapter or as directed by the
(2) A witness may give evidence in narrative form.
5—Cross-examination
41 Improper
(1) The court may disallow an improper question put to a witness in
cross-examination, or inform the witness that it need not
be answered.
(1A) The court must disallow an improper question put to a vulnerable
witness in cross-examination, or inform the witness that
it need not be
(2) Without limiting the matters that the court may take into account for
the purposes of this section, it is to take into account
any relevant condition
or characteristic of the witness, such as the following:
(a) the age, personality and education of the witness;
(b) any mental, intellectual or physical disability to which the witness
is or appears to be subject;
(c) the ethnic and cultural background of the
(3) In this section:
improper question
means a question that:
(a) is misleading or confusing; or
(b) is annoying, harassing, intimidating, offensive, humiliating,
oppressive or repetitive; or
(c) is put to the witness in a manner or tone that is inappropriate
(including because it is humiliating, belittling or otherwise
insulting); or
(d) has no basis other than a sexual, racial, cultural or ethnic
stereotype.
vulnerable witness
means a witness who, because of age or
mental or intellectual disability, should be protected from improper
3.2—Hearsay
Division 1— The hearsay rule
59 The hearsay rule—exclusion of hearsay
(1) Evidence of a previous representation made by a person is not
admissible to prove the existence of an asserted fact.
(2) In this Part,
asserted fact
means a fact that the person
who made the representation can reasonably be supposed to have intended to
assert by the representation.
(2A) For the purposes of, but without limiting, subsection (2), the court
may take into account the circumstances in which the
representation was
Note: Specific exceptions to the hearsay rule are as follows:
▪ tags and labels (section 70);
▪ electronic communications (section
60 Exception:
evidence relevant for a non-hearsay purpose
(1) The hearsay rule does not apply to evidence of a previous
representation that is admitted because it is relevant for a purpose
proof of the asserted fact.
(2) Subsection (1) applies whether or not the evidence is of a previous
representation that was made by a person who had personal
knowledge of an
asserted fact.
Note: Subsection (2) overcomes the effect of the decision in
(1998) 157 CLR 394.
2—First-hand hearsay
64 Exception: civil proceedings if maker
(3) If the person who made the representation has been or is to be called
to give evidence, the hearsay rule does not apply
to evidence of the
representation that is given by:
(a) that person; or
(b) a person who saw, heard or otherwise perceived the representation
being made.
65 Exception:
criminal proceedings if maker not available
(2) The hearsay rule does not apply to evidence of a previous
representation that is given by a person who saw, heard or otherwise
the representation being made, if the representation was:
(a) made under a duty to make that representation or to make
representations of that kind; or
(b) made when or shortly after the asserted fact occurred and in
circumstances that make it unlikely that the representation
is a fabrication;
(c) made in circumstances that make it highly probable that the
representation is reliable; or
(d) against the interests of the person who made it at the time it was
made and in circumstances that make it likely that the
representation is
66 Exception:
criminal proceedings if maker
(1) This section applies in a criminal proceeding if a person who made a
previous representation is available to give evidence
(2) If that person has been or is to be called to give evidence, the
hearsay rule does not apply to evidence of the representation
that is given
(a) that person; or
(b) a person who saw, heard or otherwise perceived the representation
being made;
if, when the representation was made, the occurrence of the asserted fact was
fresh in the memory of the person who made the representation.
(2A) In determining whether the occurrence of an asserted fact was fresh in
the memory of a person, the matters that the court
must take into account, in
addition to the period of time between the occurrence of the asserted fact and
the making of the
representation, include:
(a) the nature of the event concerned; and
(b) the age and health of the person.
66A Exception:
contemporaneous statements about a person’s health
The hearsay rule does not apply to evidence of a representation made by a
person that was a contemporaneous representation about
the person’s
health, feelings, sensations, intention, knowledge or state of mind.
3—Other exceptions to the hearsay rule
71 Exception: electronic
communications
The hearsay rule does not apply to a representation contained in an
electronic communication so far as the representation is a
representation as
(a) the identity of the person from whom or on whose behalf the
communication was sent; or
(b) the date on which or the time at which the communication was sent;
(c) the communication’s destination or the identity of the person to
whom it was addressed.
Note 1: Division 3 of Part 4.3 contains presumptions about some electronic
communications.
Note 2: Section 182 gives this section a wider application in relation to
Commonwealth records.
72 Exception:
contemporaneous statements about a person’s health
73A Exception: Aboriginal or Torres Strait
Islander customary laws
The hearsay rule does not apply to a previous representation relevant to the
existence or non-existence, or the content, of the
customary laws of an
Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander community.
3.3—Opinion
79 Exception: opinions based on specialised
(1) If a person has specialised knowledge based on the person’s
training, study or experience, the opinion rule does not
apply to evidence of an
opinion of that person that is wholly or substantially based on that
(2) To avoid doubt, subsection (1) applies to
evidence of a person who has specialised knowledge of child development and
child behaviour (including specialised knowledge of the effect of sexual abuse
on children and of their behaviour during and
following the abuse), being
evidence in relation to either or both of the following:
(a) the development and behaviour of children generally;
(b) the development or behaviour of children who have been the victims of
sexual offences, or offences similar to sexual
79A Exception: Aboriginal or Torres Strait
Islander customary laws
If a person has specialised knowledge of the existence or non-existence, or
the content, of the customary laws of an Aboriginal
or Torres Strait Islander
community, the opinion rule does not apply to evidence of an opinion of that
person relevant to
those matters that is wholly or substantially based on that
3.4—Admissions
85 Criminal proceedings: reliability of
admissions by defendants
(1) This section applies only in a criminal proceeding and only to evidence
of an admission made by a defendant:
(a) to or in the presence of an investigating official who was at the time
performing functions in connection with the investigation
of the commission or
possible commission of an
(b) as a result of an act of another person who is capable of influencing
the decision whether a prosecution of the defendant
should be brought or should
be continued.
(2) Evidence of the admission is not admissible unless the circumstances in
which the admission was made were such as to make
it unlikely that the truth of
the admission was adversely affected.
89 Evidence of
(1) In a criminal proceeding, an inference unfavourable to a party must not
be drawn from evidence that the party or another
person failed or refused:
(a) to answer one or more questions; or
(b) to respond to a representation;
put or made to the party or other person by or in the presence of an
investigating official who was at the time performing functions
in connection
with the investigation of the commission or possible commission of an
(2) Evidence of that kind is not admissible if it can only be used to draw
such an inference.
3.6—Tendency and coincidence
97 The tendency
(1) Evidence of the character, reputation or conduct of a person, or a
tendency that a person has or had, is not admissible
to prove that a person has
or had a tendency (whether because of the person’s character or otherwise)
to act in a particular
way, or to have a particular state of mind, unless:
(a) the party adducing the evidence gave reasonable notice in writing to
each other party of the party’s intention to
adduce the evidence; and
(b) the court thinks that the evidence will, either by itself or having
regard to other evidence adduced or to be adduced by
the party seeking to adduce
the evidence, have significant probative value.
98 The coincidence
(1) Evidence that 2 or more events occurred is not admissible to prove that
a person did a particular act or had a particular
state of mind on the basis
that, having regard to the similarities in the events and the similarities in
the circumstances
surrounding them, it is improbable that the events occurred
coincidentally unless:
(a) the party adducing the evidence gave reasonable notice in writing to
each other party of the party’s intention to
adduce the evidence; and
(b) the court thinks that the evidence would, either by itself or having
regard to other evidence adduced or to be adduced
by the party seeking to adduce
the evidence, have significant probative value.
3.7—Credibility
101A Credibility
(1) A reference in this Part to evidence that is relevant to a
witness’s credibility, or to the credibility of a person
referred to in
section 108A, is a reference to evidence that:
(a) is relevant only because it affects the assessment of the credibility
of the witness or person; or
(b) is otherwise relevant but is not admissible.
(2) For the purposes of paragraph (1)(b), ignore sections 60, 77, 135, 136
102 The credibility
Evidence that is relevant to a witness’s credibility is not
admissible.
Note 1: Specific exceptions to the credibility rule are as follows:
▪ evidence to re-establish credibility (section 108);
▪ evidence of opinions of persons with specialised knowledge etc
(section 108AA);
103 Exception:
cross-examination as to credibility
(1) The credibility rule does not apply to evidence adduced in
cross-examination of a witness if the evidence could substantially
assessment of the credibility of the
(2) Without limiting the matters to which the court may have regard for the
purposes of subsection (1),
is to have regard to:
(a) whether the evidence tends to prove that the witness knowingly or
recklessly made a false representation when the witness
was under an obligation
to tell the truth; and
(b) the period that has elapsed since the acts or events to which the
evidence relates were done or occurred.
104 Further
protections: cross-examination of accused
(1) This section applies only in a criminal proceeding and so applies in
addition to section 103.
(2) A defendant must not be cross-examined about a matter that is relevant
only because it is relevant to the defendant’s
credibility unless the
court gives leave.
(3) Despite subsection (2), leave is not required for cross-examination by
the prosecutor about whether the defendant:
(a) is biased or has a motive to be untruthful; or
(b) is, or was, unable to be aware of or recall matters to which his or
her evidence relates; or
(c) has made a prior inconsistent statement.
(4) Leave must not be given for cross-examination by the prosecutor about
any matter that is relevant only because it is relevant
to the defendant’s
credibility unless:
(b) evidence adduced by the defendant has been admitted that tends to
prove that a witness called by the prosecutor has
a tendency to be untruthful,
and that is relevant solely or mainly to the witness’s credibility.
(5) A reference in paragraph (4)(b) to evidence does not include a
reference to evidence of conduct in relation to:
(a) the events in relation to which the defendant is being prosecuted;
(b) the investigation of the offence for which the defendant is being
prosecuted.
105 Further
protections: defendants making unsworn statements
106 Exception:
rebutting denials by other evidence
(1) The credibility rule does not apply to evidence relevant to a
witness’s credibility adduced with the court’s
leave otherwise than
from the witness if, in cross-examination:
(a) the substance of the evidence was put to the witness; and
(b) the witness denied the substance of the evidence or did not admit or
agree to it.
(2) Leave under subsection (1) is not required in relation to evidence that
tends to prove that a witness:
(a) is biased or has a motive for being untruthful; or
(b) has been convicted of an offence, including an offence against the law
of a foreign country; or
(c) has made a prior inconsistent statement; or
(d) is, or was, unable to be aware of matters to which his or her evidence
relates; or
(e) has knowingly or recklessly made a false representation while under an
obligation, imposed by or under an Australian
law or a law of a foreign country,
to tell the truth.
108A Evidence of
credibility of person who has made a previous representation
(a) because of a provision of Part 3.2, the hearsay rule does not apply to
evidence of a previous representation; and
(b) evidence of the representation has been admitted; and
(c) the person who made the representation has not been called, and will
not be called, to give evidence in the proceeding;
evidence that is relevant to the credibility of the person who made the
representation is not admissible unless the evidence could
substantially affect
the assessment of the credibility of the
(2) Without limiting the matters to which the court may have regard for the
purposes of subsection (1), it is to have regard
(a) whether the evidence tends to prove that the person who made the
representation knowingly or recklessly made a false
representation when the
person was under an obligation to tell the truth; and
(b) the period that elapsed between the doing of the acts or the
occurrence of the events to which the representation related
and the making of
the representation.
108AA Exception: evidence of persons with
specialised knowledge etc
(1) If a person has specialised knowledge based on the person’s
training, study or experience, the credibility rule does
not apply to evidence
given by the person, being evidence of an opinion of that person that:
(a) is wholly or substantially based on that knowledge; and
(b) could substantially affect the credibility of a witness; and
(c) is adduced with the court’s
(2) To avoid doubt, subsection (1) applies to evidence of a person who has
specialised knowledge of child development and child
behaviour (including
specialised knowledge of the effect of sexual abuse on children and of their
behaviour during and following
the abuse), being evidence in relation to either
or both of the following:
(a) the development and behaviour of children generally;
(b) the development or behaviour of children who have been the victims of
sexual offences, or offences similar to sexual
3.8—Character
110 Evidence about character of accused
(1) The hearsay rule, the opinion rule, the tendency rule and the
credibility rule do not apply to evidence adduced by a defendant
(directly or by implication) that the defendant is, either generally or in a
particular respect, a person of good
(2) If evidence adduced to prove (directly or by implication) that a
defendant is generally a person of good character has been
admitted, the hearsay
rule, the opinion rule, the tendency rule and the credibility rule do not apply
to evidence adduced
to prove (directly or by implication) that the defendant is
not generally a person of good character.
(3) If evidence adduced to prove (directly or by implication) that a
defendant is a person of good character in a particular
respect has been
admitted, the hearsay rule, the opinion rule, the tendency rule and the
credibility rule do not apply to
evidence adduced to prove (directly or by
implication) that the defendant is not a person of good character in that
112 Leave required to
cross-examine about character of accused or co-accused
A defendant must not be
cross-examined
arising out of evidence of a kind referred to in this Part unless the court
gives leave.
3.10—Privileges
1—Client legal privilege
117 Definitions
(1) In this Division:
includes the following:
(a) a person who engages a lawyer, or who employs a lawyer (including
under a contract of service), to provide professional
(b) an employee or agent of a client;
Evidence is not to be adduced if, on objection by a client, the court finds
that adducing the evidence would result in disclosure
(a) a confidential communication made between the client and a lawyer;
(b) a confidential communication made between 2 or more lawyers acting for
the client; or
(c) the contents of a confidential document (whether delivered or not)
prepared by the client, a lawyer or another
for the dominant purpose of the lawyer, or one or more of the lawyers,
providing legal advice to the client.
122 Loss of client
legal privilege: consent and acting inconsistently with the
(1) This Division does not prevent the adducing of evidence given with the
consent of the client or party concerned.
(2) Subject to subsection (4A), this Division does not prevent the adducing
of evidence if the client or party has acted in
a way that is inconsistent with
its relying on section 118, 119 or 120 in relation to the evidence.
(2A) Without limiting subsection (2), a client or party is taken to have so
(a) the client or party knowingly and voluntarily disclosed the substance
of the evidence to another person; or
(b) the substance of the evidence has been disclosed with the express or
implied consent of the client or party.
(3) The reference in paragraph (2A)(a) to a knowing and voluntary
disclosure does not include a reference a disclosure by a
person who was, at the
time, an employee or agent of a client or party or of a lawyer unless the
employee or agent was authorised
to make the disclosure.
(4A) A client or party is not taken to have acted in a manner inconsistent
with its relying on section 118, 119 or 120 in relation
to particular evidence
merely because:
(a) the substance of the evidence has been disclosed with the express or
implied consent of the client or party to a lawyer
acting for the client or
(b) the substance of the evidence has been disclosed:
(i) in the course of making a confidential communication or preparing a
confidential document; or
(ii) as a result of duress or deception; or
(iii) under compulsion of law; or
(iv) if the client or party is a body established by, or a person holding
an office under, an Australian law—to
the Minister, or the Minister of the
State or Territory, administering the law, or the part of the law, under which
the body is established or the office is held; or
(c) of a disclosure by a client to another person if the disclosure
concerns a matter in relation to which the same lawyer
is providing, or is to
provide, professional legal services to both the client and the other person;
(d) of a disclosure to a person with whom the client or party had, at the
time of the disclosure, a common interest relating
to a proceeding or an
anticipated or pending proceeding in an Australian court or a foreign court.
(6) This Division does not prevent the adducing of evidence of a document
that a witness has used to try to revive the witness’s
memory about a fact
or opinion or has used as mentioned in section 32 (attempts to revive memory in
court) or 33 (evidence
given by police officers).
123 Loss of client
legal privilege: defendants
(1) In a criminal proceeding, this Division does not prevent a defendant
from adducing evidence unless it is evidence of:
(a) a confidential communication made between an associated defendant and
a lawyer acting for that person in connection with
the prosecution of that
(b) the contents of a confidential document prepared by an associated
defendant or by a lawyer acting for that person in
connection with the
prosecution of that person.
(c) any of the
(i) a confidential communication made between the prosecutor and a
(ii) a confidential communication made between 2 or more lawyers acting
for the prosecutor;
(iii) the contents of a confidential document (whether delivered or not)
prepared by any person;
for the dominant purpose of either:
(iv) the lawyer, or one or more of the lawyers, providing legal advice to
the prosecutor; or
(v) the prosecutor being provided with professional legal services
relating to a criminal proceeding, or an anticipated
or pending criminal
proceeding, under a law of the [
Commonwealth
name of Territory
(2) In paragraph (1)(c),
the Director of Public
Prosecutions.
2—Other privileges
126A Professional confidential relationship
(1) In this section:
confidential communication
mean what it means in Division
includes actual physical bodily harm, financial loss,
stress or shock, damage to reputation or emotional and psychological
as shame, humiliation or fear).
protected confidence
means a confidential communication made by
a person to another person (
the confidant
(a) in the course of a relationship in which the confidant was acting in a
professional capacity; and
(b) when the confidant was under an express or implied obligation not to
disclose the contents of the communication, whether
or not the obligation arises
under law or can be inferred from the nature of the relationship between the
the confidant.
protected confider
means a person who has made a protected
confidence.
protected identity information
means information or an opinion
(including information or opinions forming part of a database), whether true or
and whether recorded in a material form or not, about an individual whose
identity is apparent, or can reasonably be ascertained,
from the information or
(2) For the purposes of this Division, a
communication is not taken not to be a confidential communication merely because
it is made in the presence of a third party if the third party’s presence
is necessary to facilitate communication.
Evidence not to be
(3) The court may direct that evidence not be adduced in a proceeding if
the court finds that adducing it would disclose:
(a) a protected confidence; or
(b) the contents of a document recording a protected confidence; or
(c) protected identity information.
(4) The court may give the direction:
(a) on its own initiative; or
(b) on the application of the protected confider or confidant concerned
(whether or not either is a party).
(5) The court must give the direction if satisfied that:
(a) it is likely that harm would or might be caused (whether directly or
indirectly) to a protected confider if the evidence
were adduced; and
(b) the nature and extent of the harm outweighs the desirability of the
evidence being given.
(6) Without limiting the matters that the court may take into account for
the purposes of this section, it is to take into account
the following matters:
(a) the probative value of the evidence;
(b) the importance of the evidence in the proceeding;
(c) the nature and gravity of the relevant offence, cause of action or
defence and the nature of the subject matter of the
proceeding;
(d) the availability of any other evidence concerning the matters to which
the protected confidence or protected identity
information relates;
(e) the likely effect of adducing the evidence, including the likelihood
of harm, and the nature and extent of harm that
would be caused to the protected
(f) the means (including ancillary orders that may be made under
subsection (8) or otherwise) available to the court to limit
the harm or extent
of the harm that is likely to be caused if evidence of the protected confidence
or the protected identity
information is given;
(g) if the proceeding is a criminal proceeding—whether the party
seeking to adduce evidence of the protected confidence
or protected identity
information is a defendant or the prosecutor;
(h) whether the substance of the protected confidence or the protected
identify information has already been disclosed by
the protected confider or any
other person.
(7) The court must state its reasons for giving or refusing to give a
direction under this section.
(8) Without limiting any action the court may take to limit the possible
harm, or extent of the harm, likely to be caused by
the disclosure of evidence
of a protected confidence or protected identity information, the court may:
(a) order that all or part of the evidence be heard in camera; and
(b) make orders relating to the suppression of publication of all or part
of the evidence given before the court that, in
its opinion, are necessary to
protect the safety or welfare of the protected confider.
Loss of privilege: consent
(9) This section does not prevent the adducing of evidence with the consent
of the protected confider concerned.
Loss of privilege:
(10) This section does not prevent the adducing of evidence of a
communication made or the contents of a document prepared in
the furtherance of
the commission of a fraud or an offence or the commission of an act that renders
a person liable to a
civil penalty.
(11) For the purposes of this section, if the commission of the fraud,
offence or act is a fact in issue and there are reasonable
grounds for finding
(a) the fraud, offence or act was committed; and
(b) a communication was made or document prepared in furtherance of the
commission of the fraud, offence or act;
the court may find that the communication was so made or document so
128 Privilege in
respect of self-incrimination in other proceedings
(7A) If a defendant in a criminal proceeding for an offence is given a
certificate under this section, subsection (7) does not
apply in a proceeding
that is a retrial of the defendant for the offence or a prosecution of the
defendant for an offence
arising out of the same, or substantially the same,
circumstances as the first-mentioned
128A Privilege in respect of self-incrimination
in relation to certain orders
(1) In this section:
means property of any kind, including a chattel and a
financial asset.
court order
means an order made by [
a federal court or an
a [name of State] court
] in a civil proceeding requiring
a person (including a party to the proceeding) to do 1 or more of the
(a) to disclose information about assets or documents;
(b) to permit premises to be searched;
(c) to permit inspection, copying or recording of assets or documents
(whether of the person or another person);
(d) to secure, or to deliver up or permit removal of, assets or
It does not matter who owns the assets or documents.
relevant person
means a person to whom a court order is
(2) A relevant person is not excused from complying with a court order on
the ground that compliance with it may tend to prove
that the person:
(a) has committed an offence against or arising under an Australian law or
a law of a foreign country; or
(b) is liable to a civil penalty.
(3) In any proceeding in [
an Australian court
a [name of State]
] to which the relevant person is a party:
(a) evidence of information disclosed by the relevant person in compliance
with a court order; and
(b) evidence or any document or thing found in the course of a search of
premises under a court order; and
(c) evidence of any information, document or thing obtained as a direct or
indirect consequence of the person having given
that information or as a
consequence of such a search;
cannot be used against the relevant person if the court finds that the
evidence tends to prove that the relevant person:
(d) has committed an offence against or arising under an Australian law or
a law of a foreign country; or
(e) is liable to a civil penalty.
Note: Subsection 128A(3) differs from subsection 128A(3) of the NSW
Act. The NSW provision refers to a
instead of an
Australian court.
(4) Subsection (3) does not apply to a criminal proceeding in respect of
the falsity of information disclosed by the relevant
person in compliance with
the court order.
(5) If a person has complied with an order referred to in a prescribed
State or Territory provision made in a civil proceeding
in a State or Territory
court, this section applies in the same way, in a proceeding to which this
subsection applies, as
if the court order was one to which this section
(6) The following are prescribed State or Territory provisions for the
purposes of subsection (5):
section 128A
Evidence Act 1995
the Commonwealth
(b) a provision of a law of a State or Territory declared by the
regulations to be a prescribed State or Territory provision
for the purposes of
subsection (5).
(7) Subsection (5) applies to:
(a) a proceeding in relation to which this Act applies because of
section 4; and
(b) a proceeding for an offence against a law of [
the Commonwealth
name of State
] or for the recovery of a civil penalty under a law of the
Commonwealth, other than a proceeding referred to in paragraph (a).
3.11—Discretionary and mandatory
4.3—Facilitation of proof
Division 3—Matters relating to post and
communications
161 Electronic
communications
(1A) If a document purports to contain a record of a message transmitted by
means of a lettergram or telegram, it is presumed
(unless evidence sufficient to
raise doubt about the presumption is adduced) that the message was received by
to whom it was addressed 24 hours after the message was delivered to
a post office for transmission as a lettergram or telegram.
(1) If a document purports to contain a record of an electronic
communication other than one referred to in subsection (1A),
it is presumed
(unless evidence sufficient to raise doubt about the presumption is adduced)
that the communication:
(a) was made as appears from the document; and
(b) was made by the person from whom or on whose behalf it appears from
the document to have been sent; and
(c) was made on the day on which, at the time at which and at the place at
which it appears from the document to have been
(d) was received at the destination to which it appears from the document
to have been sent; and
(e) was so received at the time at which it appears from the document that
its transmission to that destination was concluded.
(2) Subsections (1A) and (1) do not apply if:
(a) the proceeding relates to a contract; and
(b) all the parties to the proceeding are parties to the contract; and
(c) the relevant subsection is inconsistent with a term of the
Note: Section 182 gives this section a wider application in relation to
Commonwealth records.
162 Lettergrams and
4.5—Warnings
165 Unreliable evidence
(1) This section applies to evidence of a kind that may be unreliable,
including the following kinds of evidence:
(a) evidence in relation to which Part 3.2 (hearsay evidence) or 3.4
(admissions) applies;
(b) identification evidence;
(c) evidence the reliability of which may be affected by age, ill health
(whether physical or mental), injury or the like;
(d) evidence given in a criminal proceeding by a witness, being a witness
who might reasonably be supposed to have been criminally
concerned in the events
giving rise to the proceeding;
(e) evidence given in a criminal proceeding by a witness who is a prison
(f) oral evidence of official questioning of a defendant that is
questioning recorded in writing that has not been signed,
or otherwise
acknowledged in writing, by the defendant;
(g) in a proceeding against the estate of a deceased person—evidence
adduced by or on behalf of a person seeking relief
in the proceeding that is
evidence about a matter about which the deceased person could have given
evidence if he
or she were alive.
(2) Subject to this section, if there is a jury and a party so requests,
the judge is to:
(a) warn the jury that the evidence may be unreliable; and
(b) inform the jury of matters that may cause it to be unreliable; and
(c) warn the jury of the need for caution in determining whether to accept
the evidence and the weight to be given to it.
(3) The judge need not comply with subsection (2) if there are good reasons
for not doing so.
(3A) The judge must not:
(a) warn or inform a jury that the reliability of evidence given by a
child may be affected by the age of the child, or suggest
to the jury that
children as a class are unreliable
(b) warn the jury that, or suggest to the jury that, it is dangerous to
convict on the uncorroborated evidence of a child
(3B) Subsection (3A) does not prevent the judge from:
(a) warning or informing the jury that the evidence of the particular
child may be unreliable because of the child’s
(b) warning the jury of the need for caution in determining whether to
accept the evidence of the particular child and the
weight to be given to
but only if the judge is satisfied that there are circumstances particular to
that child that affect the reliability of
the child’s evidence and that
warrant the giving of a warning or the
information.
(4) It is not necessary that a particular form of words be used in giving
the warning or information.
(5) This section (other than subsections
and (4)) does not affect
any other power of the judge to give a warning to, or to inform, the jury.
4.6—Additional provisions
Division 2—Proof of certain matters by
affidavit or written statements
170 Evidence relating to certain
(1) Evidence of a fact that is, because of a provision of this Act referred
to in the Table, to be proved in relation to a document
or thing may be given by
a person permitted under section 171 to give such evidence.
Provisions of this Act
Subject matter
Hearsay exception for electronic communication
5—Miscellaneous
182 Application of certain sections in relation
to Commonwealth records, postal articles sent by Commonwealth agencies and
Commonwealth documents
(1) Subject to this section, the provisions of this Act referred to in the
following Table apply in relation to documents that:
(a) are, or form part of, Commonwealth records; or
(b) at the time they were produced were, or formed part of, Commonwealth
as if those sections applied to the extent provided for in section 5.
Provisions of this Act
Subject matter
Hearsay exception for electronic communications
Section 161
Electronic communications
192A Advance rulings and
Where a question arises in a proceeding, being a question about:
(a) the admissibility of evidence proposed to be adduced; or
(b) the operation of a provision of this Act in relation to evidence
proposed to be adduced;
the court may, if it thinks appropriate, give a ruling or make a finding in
relation to the question before the evidence is adduced.
1—Definitions
customary laws
, in relation to an Aboriginal or Torres Strait
Islander community, means the customary laws, traditions, customs, observances,
practices and beliefs of a community or group (including a kinship group) of
Aborigines or Torres Strait
de facto relationship
means a relationship as a couple between
2 persons who:
(a) are not married to each other; and
(b) are not otherwise members of the same
de facto spouse
of a person means a person with whom he or she
is in a de facto
relationship.
electronic communication
(a) a communication of information in the form of data, text or images by
means of guided and/or unguided electromagnetic
(b) a communication of information in the form of speech by means of
guided and/or unguided electromagnetic energy, where
the speech is processed at
its destination by an automated voice recognition
means a person who is admitted to practice as a legal
practitioner, barrister or solicitor (whether in Australia or in a country
(whether or not an independent sovereign state) outside Australia and the
external Territories).
NSW Act only
(a) the Supreme Court, or
(b) any other court created by Parliament, or
(c) any person or body (other than a court) that, in exercising a function
under the law of the State, is required to apply
the laws of
(d) any person or body authorised by a law of the State, or by consent of
the parties, to hear, receive and examine
2—Other Expressions
4 Unavailability of persons
(1) For the purposes of this Act, a person is taken not to be available to
give evidence about a fact if:
(a) the person is dead; or
(b) the person is, for any reason other than the application of section 16
(Competence and compellability: judges and jurors),
not competent to give the
evidence about the fact; or
(ba) the person is mentally or physically unable to give evidence about the
(c) it would be unlawful for the person to give evidence about the fact;
(d) a provision of this Act prohibits the evidence being given; or
(e) all reasonable steps have been taken, by the party seeking to prove
the person is not available, to find the person or
to secure his or her
attendance, but without success; or
(f) all reasonable steps have been taken, by the party seeking to prove
the person is not available, to compel the person
to give the evidence, but
without success.
(2) In all other cases the person is taken to be available to give evidence
Consequential on Proposal
Consequential on Proposal
2–2. Note that there is no consequential amendment to s 4(6), as it
is a spent provision.
Consequential on
Proposal 2–2.
Consequential on Proposal
Consequential on Proposal
Proposals 5–2, 5–3,
Consequential on Proposal
Consequential on Proposal
Consequential on Proposal
Consequential on Proposal
Consequential on Proposal
Consequential on Proposal
Consequential on Proposals
11–1, 11–-2.
Consequential
on Proposal 11–2.
Consequential on Proposal
Consequential on Proposal
Proposal 16–1: see
Evidence Act 1995
Proposal 16–1; see
Evidence Act 1995
Proposal 16–1;
Evidence Act 1995
Consequential on Proposal
Consequential on Proposal
Consequential on Proposal
Consequential on Proposal
Consequential on Proposal
Proposal 7–4.
Appendix 2. Application of s 398A of the
Crimes Act 1958
Introduction
Propensity evidence
Relevant to facts in issue
Just in all the circumstances
Drafting issues
Appendix 2. Application of s 398A of the
Crimes Act 1958
Introduction
Section 398A of the
Crimes Act 1958
(Vic), provides as follows:
(1) This section applies to proceedings for an indictable or summary
(2) Propensity evidence relevant to facts in issue in a proceeding for an
offence is admissible if the court considers that in all
circumstances it is
just to admit it despite any prejudicial effect it may have on the person
charged with the offence.
(3) The possibility of a reasonable explanation consistent with the innocence of
the person charged with an offence is not relevant
to the admissibility of
evidence referred to in sub-section (2).
(4) Nothing in this section prevents a court taking into account the possibility
of a reasonable explanation consistent with the
innocence of the person charged
with an offence when considering the weight of the evidence or the credibility
of a witness.
(5) This section has effect despite any rule of law to the contrary.
The provisions have been the subject of extensive judicial analysis. It is
convenient to consider that analysis by reference to key
terms and phrases.
Interpreted literally, the section applies to evidence about the particular
offence charged—for example, a sexual offence charge.
It was presumably
assumed that in practice such an interpretation would not be sought or, if it
was, it would be just in all the
circumstances to receive the
An issue yet to be authoritatively resolved is whether and to what extent
this section will apply to evidence disclosing discreditable
conduct which forms
part of the
the sense of discreditable conduct which is part of the transaction that
embraces the crime charged
points to a propensity on the part of the
The issue arises because
the common law has drawn a distinction in its approach to the admissibility of
evidence forming part of
and circumstantial evidence
consisting of similar fact
the latter attracting the
special rules of admissibility which s 398A seeks to address.
Relevant to facts in
The first element specified is that the evidence be ‘relevant to facts
Identifying the
basis or bases on which the evidence is relevant is particularly important in
this area. Typically, the evidence
will be relevant for a variety of reasons,
but will generally reveal a tendency to behave in a manner which is relevant and
badly on the accused. The trial judge must be satisfied that the
evidence is relevant before admitting it (where it is just in all
circumstances to do so). Identifying the relevance of the evidence is also
important for other reasons—if the evidence
is admitted and the judge has
to decide what directions should be given to the jury about the way the evidence
may and may not be
In a number of cases, the question of relevance has been a critical question
in determining whether the evidence is admissible. For
example, in
Tektonopoulos
accused was charged with one count of trespass with intent to commit sexual
assault and two counts of indecent assault. The person
who had been assaulted
had identified the accused in an identification parade. In support of that
identification, the Crown relied
upon surveillance evidence of the accused
entering premises near the premises at which it was alleged he had committed the
assaults. It relied upon alleged similarities between the
accused’s conduct when under surveillance and the evidence of the
of the person who committed the indecent assaults. In addressing the issue of
relevance, Winneke P said:
Within the meaning of s 398A(2), the ‘facts in issue’ to the
proof of which the propensity evidence was relevant was
the identity of the
offender in Kennedy Street and not the adequacy of the evidence of the
complainant.
After referring to the learned trial judge’s conclusion that the
evidence was relevant to a fact in issue, whether that be ‘the
accuracy of
the identification made by the complainant or the identity of the
assailant’, his Honour said:
On any view it seems to me that his Honour misdirected himself. He appears to
have been influenced by the fact that the Crown was
seeking to use the evidence
as ‘corroboration’ of the complainant's identification and that a
fact in issue was the accuracy
of that identification … this seems to me
to mistake the fact in issue towards which the propensity evidence was
In considering the relevance of the surveillance evidence, the Victorian
Court of Appeal took the view that there was nothing in those
events which
rendered it objectively probable that the accused was the person who committed
the offences charged and accordingly,
the evidence should not have been
Consideration of the issue of relevance tends to be less clear in those cases
where people are charged with multiple sex offences,
particularly against
children. Different approaches appear to have been taken which cannot be
entirely explained by reference to
the issues in dispute in the cases and the
evidence in question.
• In some instances, the issue of fact identified is the relationship
between the accused and the alleged
• In a number of cases, reference has been made to the evidence of the
complainants pointing to a pattern of conduct involving
‘systematic
exploitation’
‘sexual appetite’
‘the preying nature’
of the behaviour, suggesting reliance upon a specific propensity to prove the
commission of the crimes in question—as, for
example, was the reasoning in
situations, it is also often possible to support the relevance of the evidence
on the basis that it is improbable that the
witnesses would give similar
accounts if the events described had not occurred.
• At the same time, the admission of the propensity evidence has been justified
because of the probative value given to it from
the improbability of the
complainants giving connected accounts if they were not
and the resulting support
that each complainant’s evidence gives to the evidence of each
The latter analysis was used in
where the accused
was charged with 21 counts of sexual offences against a child, KD, under the age
of 16 years. The Crown was permitted
to adduce evidence from another child, JG,
that the accused had shown her his scrotum to demonstrate that he had been
and bragged about his sexual experience with LZ. It appears that,
according to KD, he had made similar statements to her. In the
Victorian Court
of Appeal, Nettle JA commented that the evidence
did not go directly to a fact in issue. But it was evidence of the
applicant’s propensity to show his scrotum in order to demonstrate
had been sterilised and to brag of his sexual experiences with LZ; and
propensity evidence like that, which establishes a
remarkable modus operandi, is
capable of corroborating or confirming other evidence about a matter in issue
and it may be admitted
His Honour went on to cite Brennan CJ in
in commenting on the
admissibility of evidence of things said and done by the accused to one victim,
tendered to corroborate or confirm
the evidence of
According to
Brennan CJ, in determining the admissibility of such evidence, what is
critical is that there be striking similarity
between the evidence of what was
said and done and that it confirms evidence that is material to facts in issue.
Nettle JA emphasised
that for the evidence to be used to corroborate,
‘it is sufficient that it confirmed evidence that is material to facts in
is another recent example of multiple counts of sexual
offences involving more than one child. Some of the evidence was relevant as
relationship evidence and admitted as such. The evidence relating to the various
counts themselves was treated as relevant because:
It was the kind of similar fact evidence where the probative value derived from
the improbability of three complainants independently
giving such similar counts
of sexual abuse by the
The difference between propensity reasoning and probability reasoning was
described as involving
a different train of thought. It is one thing to say that the account of a
witness is more likely to be true because of the similarities
it bears to the
independent account of other witnesses and the improbability that, by sheer
coincidence, their accounts would be
similar … it is a different thing
altogether to reason that, because the evidence of one witness is accepted in
relation to
offences committed against her, the accused is the kind of person
who is likely to have committed similar offences against other
complainants, ie,
in the present context, to conclude that he is a paedophile. As I have said, the
former chain of reasoning is permitted
but the latter is
In light of these authorities, it can be argued that, on occasions, the
courts treat the disputed evidence as relevant to the credibility
of evidence on
which the Crown relies in respect of each count. If that is the correct
analysis, it may be a qualification to the
traditional common law embargo on
leading evidence relevant only to the credibility of evidence. Taking that
approach to the question
of relevance, however, and other approaches relying
upon coincidence reasoning, is a less emotive reasoning approach than a
reasoning approach. Nonetheless, the serious dangers of unfair
prejudice remain and have to be dealt with by adequate directions
Whatever is the correct analysis of the reasoning processes, the practice
appears to be to direct juries that reliance should not
be placed on the
evidence in such cases to establish any propensity, specific or general. The
standard charge that is recommended
to address the issue of the forbidden
reasoning is that the jury is told that, if it is satisfied that the accused
person engaged
in one or more of the other offences (or uncharged acts), it is
not to reason that the accused is the kind of person who is likely
committed the offence charged—or words to that
Just in all the
circumstances
What does the term ‘just’ require? What is its content and what
are its limits? In the context of s 398A, it has been
suggested that the
term directs attention to the fair trial of the accused but may be given a more
expanded meaning, such as taking
into account ‘the legitimate interests of
the Crown and the
community’.
As to that,
however, it has been argued that ‘the public interest in an offender being
convicted only extends to that person
being convicted after a fair
It is not surprising, given the lack of guidance to be obtained from the
overarching concept of ‘just’, that the Victorian
Court of Appeal
sought to give it content by stating that:
The decision on admissibility under s 398A requires attention to be focused
on probative value and prejudicial effect, for otherwise
the rule will be too
In applying the section, the Victorian courts have followed the common law
authorities of England and Australia, other than
in articulating what may be ‘just in all the circumstances’ in each
case. In light of those authorities, the Victorian
Court of Appeal has stated
propensity evidence is admissible only if its probative value is such that it is
just to admit the evidence despite any prejudicial
effect it may have on the
accused. In considering the issues, the focus is on what the evidence discloses,
not the purpose for which
The approach to be taken in balancing probative force against prejudicial
effect has been the subject of discussion in the judgments
of the Victorian
Court of Appeal. In
R v Tektonopoulos
, Winneke P—after
referring with approval to the comments of Callaway JA in
who noted that,
properly applied, the section would not greatly alter the conduct of criminal
trials—stated that what the test
is not far removed from the test which was customarily applied in Australia
before Hoch. In
[1984] HCA 5
(1984) 152 CLR 528
, Brennan J described the
test of admissibility as follows (547–8):
Before the trial judge is at liberty to admit similar fact evidence he must
be satisfied that the probative force of the evidence
clearly transcends its
merely prejudicial effect … It is the probative force (or cogency) of the
evidence in comparison
with the impermissible prejudice that it may produce
which determines admissibility …
After asserting that the section was not intended to ‘set at nought the
body of common law principles’ which had been
formulated ‘over a
period of more than 100 years’, Winneke P stated:
The effect of these principles is that [such] evidence … is prima facie
inadmissible because the antipathy which it is apt
to engender may unjustly
erode the presumption of innocence … Before such evidence may be admitted
it must have such a probative
force in relation to the offence charged as to
justify its admission notwithstanding its inherent prejudicial effect
Later he said:
The courts, as I have indicated, have always admitted propensity evidence with
great caution and, because it is inevitably attended
by prejudice, have required
it to go beyond mere disposition to commit crimes or particular kinds of crime
and to have a ‘strong
probative force’ in respect of the offence
charged … or a probative force which clearly transcends its prejudicial
In a later case, the Winneke P commented that similar fact evidence
has generally been treated by courts as a special class of circumstantial
evidence which, because of its discrete prejudicial nature,
will be excluded
unless—in the opinion of the judge—it has a high probative value in
proof of the offence charged beyond
that of merely demonstrating that the
accused is a person of criminal disposition … the ultimate question for
the Court to
determine is whether the evidence sought to be led has a high
degree of probative value in proof of an element of the offence …
proof that the crime charged has been committed and that the accused was the
person committing it.
The probative value of a piece of evidence is to be considered in combination
with the other evidence in the case to determine its
probative value and its
prejudicial effect.
As a general
rule, the judge in determining admissibility under s 398A should proceed on
the basis that the evidence is
This issue was first
discussed by Callaway JA in
His Honour rejected
the argument advanced for the applicant, based on the second reading speech,
• subsections (3) and (4) did not operate to prevent consideration of
whether there was a substantial risk of concoction or
unconscious influence; or
• while a possibility of a reasonable explanation consistent with
innocence could not be considered on the question of admissibility,
‘reasonable explanation’ supported by ‘cogent evidence’
could be taken into account.
His Honour stated:
subss (3) and (4) should be understood to refer only to explanations, like
collusion and unconscious influence, that affect the truth
of the propensity
evidence sought to be adduced and not to extend to explanations like
coincidence, because so to construe them would
make the judge's task impossible
in the case of similar fact evidence … subsection (2) must be read in
harmony with subsections
(3) and (4), so that ‘all the
circumstances’ bearing on probative value and prejudicial effect are
relevant to admissibility
but not facts impugning the reliability of the
However, in assessing probative value, while the truth of the evidence is to
be accepted, issues such as the probability or improbability
of coincidence
remain relevant to the assessment of probative
His Honour concluded by stating that the question could be expressed in terms
of probabilities.
Assuming that the jury will accept the evidence as true, is the improbability of
coincidence so great that it is just to admit it
despite its prejudicial
There may, however, be qualifications.
R v Alexander
it was said that where evidence
‘is disputed “similar facts” evidence, its probative value
will be less than would
be the case where the similar facts are not in
• In view of the fact that it is generally accepted that s 398A
adopts the English approach to admissibility for propensity
it should be borne in
mind that the House of Lords in
while stating that the
judge should approach questions of admissibility on the basis that the alleged
similar facts were true, also
commented that ‘generally’ collusion
is not relevant at that stage.
It also stated that, where similar fact evidence has been admitted and later in
the trial the judge forms the view that no reasonable
jury could accept the
evidence as free from collusion, the judge should direct the jury that it cannot
be relied upon for any purpose
adverse to the
It should be noted that
this analysis was made in the context of English law which gives greater power
to the trial judge to take
cases away from the
As a result the apparent
qualification should be approached with caution. However, the direction is to be
given in cases where the
case is not taken away from the jury. If such a
direction is correct, should the trial judge, in determining admissibility, rule
that the evidence should not be admitted if the judge forms the view that no
reasonable jury could accept the evidence as free from
collusion? Ultimately,
the question for the trial judge is what is ‘just in all the
circumstances’.
• Further, the possibility remains that, in some cases, the prejudicial effect
of evidence may be so great that it will only
be just to admit that evidence if
there is no reasonable explanation for its existence consistent with
Ultimately, the trial judge can only proceed on the basis of assuming that
the evidence is true as long as it would be ‘just
circumstances’ to do so. To do otherwise would be to ignore the
section’s words.
the weight of any evidence is an aspect of its probative value. As was stated by
the Law Commission of England and Wales
(Law Commission):
The heart of the problem is the fact that the question of admissibility turns on
the weight to be given to the evidence. In this
context credibility is a crucial
factor in deciding the probative force (and hence one limb of admissibility) of
the evidence. In
many cases where this problem arises, for example cases of
alleged sexual misconduct, the evidence in question is likely to be very
prejudicial. In these cases, if the judge does not pre-test the quality of the
evidence, highly prejudicial evidence of dubious quality
is likely to be
The Law Commission considered the issues in some
and advanced the
following conclusions:
• in assessing the probative value of tendency and coincidence evidence
(referred to by the Law Commission as evidence of bad
character), the court
should be required to proceed on the assumption that the evidence is true
‘except where it appears, on
the basis for any material before the court,
that no court or jury could reasonably find it to be
• that a trial judge, in a matter before a jury, should be required to
discharge the jury or direct the jury to acquit where
the judge came to the
conclusion that the evidence was contaminated such that, ‘considering the
importance of the evidence
to the case against the defendant, a conviction would
be unsafe’.
If the correct view of the law in Victoria is that, in all cases, the trial
judge must accept the disputed evidence to be true in
deciding its
admissibility, consideration should be given to the above proposals advanced by
the Law Commission.
It should be noted that some of the consequences of the Victorian analysis
have been considered in the context of warnings to juries.
, Callaway JA referred to the situation where the probative
force derived from the improbability of independent, but cohering allegations,
but it is reduced because of
a reasonable possibility that the explanation for the seeming coincidence is
collusion, unconscious influence or media publicity
of which the complainants
were aware.
In that situation, his Honour stated that the trial judge should direct the
jury that it could not use the disputed similar fact evidence
unless satisfied
beyond reasonable doubt that no such factor was
The other matters
raised by the Law Commission have not yet arisen for decision in Victoria and
need to be addressed.
Issues arise in part from the way the section is drafted. It states that,
provided the two conditions—that the evidence ‘is
relevant to facts
in issues’ and that ‘it is just to admit it’—are
satisfied, the evidence is ‘admissible’.
Interpreted literally, the section has the result that, provided the evidence
is relevant to facts in issue and it is just to admit
it, it must be admitted.
On the face of it, the section does not leave any room for the operation of any
other common law exclusionary
rules, such as the hearsay rule, the opinion rule,
the best evidence rule or the exclusionary discretions. Any issues relevant to
those rules or discretions might be considered when determining whether it would
be ‘just to admit’ the evidence, but
that issue does not appear to
have been authoritatively considered. The Victorian Court of Appeal has referred
to but left open the
question whether the
(that is, the
discretion to exclude evidence where its probative value is outweighed by its
prejudicial effect) has any room to operate
where s 398A
It was probably intended that such evidence be admissible subject to any
other rules of admissibility. The uniform Evidence Acts avoid
this problem by
stating exclusionary rules and then prescribing exceptions which lifted those
exclusionary rules. The uniform Evidence
Acts do not state that if an exception
applies the evidence is admissible.
It will apply where several charges are
joined in the one presentment to resolve issues about the admissibility of
evidence relevant
to one charge when considering the other
[1998] 4 VR 603
Harriman v The Queen
[1989] HCA 50
167 CLR 590
, 594, 663. For example, evidence that a man, charged with murdering
a fellow employee by violence, had, during the day and night
preceding the
killing engaged in a connected course of conduct characterised by heavy drinking
and repeated acts of violence against
O’Leary v The King
[1946] HCA 44
(1946) 73 CLR 566.
[1999] VSCA 90
[1999] 2 VR 425
, [14]–[15]. See also
discussion in J Clough, ‘Section 398A of the
Crimes Act 1958
Pfennig Resurrected?’
(2000) 24(1)
Criminal Law Journal
Harriman v The Queen
[1989] HCA 50
167 CLR 590
, 628–34; cf 594.
example of the similar operation of the requirement of relevance at common law,
(1994) 75 A Crim R
[1998] 4 VR
R v Tektonopoulos
[1999] VSCA 93
R v Alexander
[2002] VSCA 183
(2002) 6 VR 53
[2004] VSCA 114
[2004] VSC 253
(2004) 148 A Crim R
R v Tektonopoulos
[1999] VSCA 93
[1999] 2 VR
, [28], Charles and Batt JJA
concurring.
For example,
[2002] VSCA 210
R v Loguancio
[2000] VSCA 33
, [18]–[20] (together
with lack of complaint for 18 months).
R v Glennon
[2001] VSCA 17
[2001] VSCA 213
R v Papamitrou
[2004] VSCA 12
[2000] VSCA 18
[2000] 1 VR
[2002] VSCA 210
Pfennig v The Queen
[1995] HCA 7
(1995) 182 CLR 461
, 487, 522–528,
R v Glennon
[2001] VSCA 17
[2004] VSCA 12
, [31]; see also the reasoning in
[1975] AC 421
, 441, 444, 453, 454, 462 and
Pfennig v The
[1995] HCA 7
(1995) 182 CLR 461
, 477. See also
[1998] 4 VR 603
R v Buckley
[2004] VSCA
, Winneke P and Charles JA concurred with
BRS v The Queen
[1997] HCA 47
191 CLR 275
R v Buckley
[2004] VSCA 185
, [46]–[47].
[2004] VSCA 185
[2004] VSCA 230
Callaway JA.
Ibid, [6], [30];
(1996) 86 A Crim R 293.
‘Section 398A of the
Crimes Act 1958
(Vic): Pfennig Resurrected?’
(2000) 24(1)
Criminal Law Journal
Ibid, after citing
Pfennig v The Queen
[1995] HCA 7
(1995) 182 CLR 461
, 507 per Toohey J , and 529
per McHugh J who referred to the ‘public interest in adducing all
relevant evidence of guilt’.
Note also Deane J in
Bannon v The
[1995] HCA 27
(1995) 185 CLR 1
, [7]: ‘The central prescript of our criminal
law is that no person should be convicted of a crime unless his or her guilt is
established beyond reasonable doubt after a fair trial according to
[1998] 4 VR
, 631–632, referring in comparison to
Director of Public
Prosecutions v P
[1991] 2 AC 447
, 460E, 462B,
Hoch v The Queen
[1988] HCA 50
165 CLR 292.
(Phillips CJ and Buchanan JA
concurring).
R v Tektonopoulos
[1999] VSCA 93
[1999] 2 VR 412
, [19], per Winneke P (Charles JA and Batt JA
concurring). See also
[2004] VSC 253
(2004) 148 A Crim R 185
Tektonopoulos
[1999] VSCA 93
[1999] 2 VR 412
Ibid, [23]. See also
[2002] VSCA 183
(2002) 6 VR 53
, [41] and fn 16;
R v Rajakaruna
[2002] VSCA 183
(2002) 6 VR 53
R v Tektonopoulos
[1999] VSCA 93
[1999] 2 VR 412
[1998] 4 VR 603
R v Rajakaruna
[2004] VSCA 114
[1998] 4 VR 603
The Attorney-General of
Victoria had stated the following in Victoria,
Parliamentary Debates
Legislative Assembly, 9 October 1997, 431 (J
Wade—Attorney-General):
Accordingly, the mere possibility of
concoction, collusion, infection or coincidence will not be a ground for
inadmissibility of
propensity evidence leading to the separation of trials.
However, implicit in the provision is the notion that where the Court is
satisfied that there is a substantial risk of concoction having occurred it
would not be just to admit the evidence in a single trial.
Where a joint
trial proceeds and there are allegations that victims have concocted or colluded
in allegations, or that their allegations
are tainted by infection or
coincidence, that will be a matter the jury can consider in assessing the credit
of the witness, and
the judge can direct the jury to that effect. Overall, the
provision will ensure a more consistent and fair approach to the prosecution
multiple victims sexual assault cases.
[1998] 4 VR 603
, 610; see also
It has been argued that,
accepting this analysis of the operation of subsections (3) and (4), the
‘no reasonable explanation
consistent with the innocence’
requirement may still apply in those circumstances where the probative value
argument is concerned
with explanations affecting the probative force of the
evidence and not its reliability: J Clough, ‘Section 398A of the
(Vic): Pfennig Resurrected?’
(2000) 24(1)
Criminal Law Journal
[1998] 4 VR 603
, 610. The general approach that a question as to the possibility
of collusion, concoction or innocent infection is for the jury rather
factor to be taken into account in determining admissibility was confirmed in
R v Glennon
[2001] VSCA 17
, [73] per Winneke P and Ormiston JA,
[117]–[118].
[2002] VSCA 183
(2002) 6 VR 53
, [41] fn 16, citing
Pfennig v The Queen
[1995] HCA 7
(1995) 182 CLR 461
, 482–483 per Mason CJ, Deane and Dawson JJ.
Note Palmer has argued that this proposition is confined to the situation where
the evidence is disputed on the basis of joint concoction and does not apply
where the issue is the possibility of independent lying—that
matter for the jury: A Palmer, ‘Propensity, Coincidence and Context: The
Use and Admissibility of Extraneous Misconduct
Evidence in Child Sexual Abuse
[1999] NewcLawRw 4
(1999) 4(1)
Newcastle Law Review
, 80 fn 139, 82
[1998] 4 VR 603
[1995] 2 AC 596
, 612, 622. See also Lord Russell in
[1994] 1 WLR
(1988) 37 A Crim R 288.
See, eg, in
[2002] VSCA 210
, [51] where the trial judge thought it necessary
to investigate whether collusion was deliberate or otherwise had been
established.
Law Commission of England
Evidence of Bad Character in Criminal Proceedings
, Report 273
(2001), [15.15].
[15.1]–[15.38].
R v Glennon
, [117]–[118].
example of a case where it was held that the improbability reasoning was weak
with the result that the probative force of
the evidence was not strong: see
R v Tragear
[2003] VSCA 222.
R v Christie
[1914] AC 545.
[1998] 4 VR 621
Appendix 3. List of
Submissions
Submission Number
Australian Institute of Mining and Metallurgy
21 December 2004
Australian Customs Service
21 February 2005
Australian Government Solicitor
18 February 2005
Australian Securities & Investments Commission
7 March 2005
18 February 2005
Clayton Utz
17 February 2005
Commercial Bar Association of the Victorian Bar
Committee of the Council of Chief Justices of Australia and New
22 April 2005
Confidential
3 September 2004
Confidential
6 September 2004
Confidential
22 February 2005
Confidential
22 April 2005
Confidential
27 April 2005
CPA Australia and Institute of Chartered Accountants in Australia
23 February 2005
Criminal Law Committee of the Law Society of South Australia
7 March 2005
20 December 2004
Director of Public Prosecutions (NSW)
15 February 2005
8 October 2004
17 February 2005
P Greenwood
11 March 2005
K Hanscombe
29 March 2005
16 August 2004
21 March 2005
10 March 2005
E Kerkyasharian
4 February 2005
H Kharbanda
23 February 2005
16 March 2005
3 March 2005
Law Council of Australia
4 March 2005
Legal Services Commission of South Australia
22 February 2005
B Marchione
17 January 2005
7 January 2005
10 May 2005
New South Wales District Court Judges
22 February 2005
New South Wales Public Defenders Office
21 April 2005
NSW Deputy Ombudsman
16 February 2005
NSW Health Department Child Protection and Violence Prevention Unit
21 February 2005
NSW Ombudsman
27 January 2005
NSW Young Lawyers Civil Litigation Committee
7 March 2005
C O’Donnell
C O’Donnell
26 December 2004 2 September 2004
Optometrists Association Australia (Vic)
9 December 2004
J Orchiston
12 April 2005
22 December 2004
Rights Australia Inc
24 March 2005
20 January 2005
16 September 2004
State of South Australia
16 February 2005
23 March 2005
Victoria Legal Aid
18 February 2005
3 February 2005
Women’s Legal Services (NSW)
24 March 2005
Yamatji Marlpa Barna Baba Maaja Aboriginal Corporation
9 February 2005
Appendix 4. List of
Consultations
Magistrate Bob Abood, Local Court of New South Wales
Aboriginal Interpreter Service (Northern Territory)
ACT Bar Association
ACT Law Society
ACT Supreme Court Judges
Mr Peter Bayne, Australian National University
Mr Geoff Bellamy
Mr Darryl Coates SC, Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions
Justice David Collier, Family Court of Australia
Ms Susan Cox QC, Northern Territory Legal Aid Commission
Mr Brian Donovan QC, NSW Bar
Justice Clifford Einstein, Supreme Court of New South Wales
Mr Stephen Finch SC, NSW Bar Association
Dr Ian Freckelton SC, Victorian Bar
Mr Tim Game SC, NSW Bar
Magistrate James Garbett, Parramatta Local Courts
Mr Phil Greenwood SC, NSW Bar
Justice Thomas Grey, Supreme Court of South Australia
Mr Charles Heunemann, Managing Director, SurfControl
Mr Paul Holdenson QC, Victorian Bar
Justice Roderick Howie, Supreme Court of New South Wales
Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission
Associate Professor Jill Hunter, University of New South Wales
Mr Mark Johnson, Northern Territory Bar
Judges of the High Court of Australia
The Hon Michael Lavarch, University of Queensland
Law Institute of Victoria
Law Reform Commission of Western Australia
Law Society of the Northern Territory
Law Society of South Australia
Law Society of Western Australia
Mr Andrew Ligertwood, University of Adelaide
Justice Kevin Lindgren, Federal Court of Australia
Professor Kathy Mack, Flinders University
Mr Wayne Martin QC, Law Society of Western Australia
Mr Colin McDonald QC, Northern Territory Bar
Justice John McKechnie, Supreme Court of Western Australia
Associate Professor Sue McNicol, Monash University
Mr Stephen Mason, Blake Dawson Waldron
New South Wales Bar Association
New South Wales Supreme Court Judges
New South Wales Crown Prosecutors
Northern Territory Department of Justice
Mr Stephen Odgers SC, NSW Bar
Office of the Attorney-General of Western Australia
Magistrate Jillian Orchiston, Local Court of New South Wales
Mr Andrew Palmer, Melbourne University
Queensland Bar Association
Queensland Law Reform Commission
Ms Judy Ryan, Federal Magistrate
Mr Wayne Roser, NSW Crown Prosecutor
Justice Hal Sperling, Supreme Court of NSW
South Australian Department of Justice
Justice Steven Southwood, Northern Territory Supreme Court
Dr Cameron Spenceley
Justice Janine Stevenson, Family Court of Australia
Supreme Court of Victoria Litigation Committee
Tasmanian Law Reform Commission
Mr Sydney Tilmouth QC, South Australian Bar
Chief Justice Peter Underwood, Supreme Court of Tasmania
Victorian Supreme Court and County Court Judges
The Hon Rod Welford, Attorney-General of Queensland
Western Australian Department of Justice
Western Australian Director of Public Prosecutions
Mr Neil Williams SC, NSW Bar
Mr Peter Zahra SC, Public Defenders Office New South Wales
Appendix 5. Abbreviations
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission
Australian Capital Territory
Australian Government Solicitor
Australian Law Reform Commission
Australian Law Reform Commission,
, ALRC 26 (Interim)
Australian Law Reform Commission,
, ALRC 38 (1987)
Australian Securities and Investments Commission
Australian Taxation Office
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
Australian Accounting Bodies
CPA Australia and the Institute of Chartered Accountants in Australia
New South Wales Director of Public Prosecutions
Tasmanian Director of Public Prosecutions
Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
IP 28 (2004)
Law Council
Law Council of Australia
Law Society SA
Criminal Law Committee of the Law Society of South Australia
Legal Services Commission SA
Legal Services Commission of South Australia
Law Reform Commission of Western Australia
Model Criminal Code Officers� Committee
New South Wales Law Reform Commission
New South Wales Public Defenders Office
Northern Territory Law Reform Committee
Queensland Law Reform Commission
Tasmania Law Reform Institute
uniform Evidence Acts
Evidence Act 1995
Evidence Act 1995
Evidence Act 2001
Evidence Act 2004
Victorian Law Reform Commission
Yamtji Aboriginal Corporation
Yamatji Marlpa Barna Baba Maaja Aboriginal Corporation
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (6.59 MB)
PDF format (3.49 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter