URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/lawreform/TASLRIIP/2019/28.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:50:34
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Notional Estates [2019] TASLRIIP 28
Should Tasmania Introduce
‘Notional Estate’ Laws?
Issues Paper No. 28
Information
The Tasmania Law Reform Institute was established on 23 July 2001 by
agreement between the Government of the State of Tasmania, the
University of
Tasmania and the Law Society of Tasmania. The creation of the Institute was part
of a Partnership Agreement between
the University and the State government
signed in 2000. The Institute is based at the Sandy Bay campus of the University
of Tasmania
within the Faculty of Law. The Institute undertakes law reform work
and research on topics proposed by the government, the community,
the University
and the Institute itself.
The work of the Institute involves the review of laws with a view to:
• the modernisation of the law
• the elimination of defects in the law
• the simplification of the law
• the consolidation of any laws
• the repeal of laws that are obsolete or unnecessary
• uniformity between laws of other States and the Commonwealth.
The Institute’s Director is Associate Professor Terese Henning. The
members of the Board of the Institute are Associate Professor
Terese Henning
(Chair), Professor Tim McCormack (Dean of the Faculty of Law at the University
of Tasmania), the Honourable Justice
Helen Wood (appointed by the Honourable
Chief Justice of Tasmania), Ms Kristy Bourne (appointed by the
Attorney-General), Associate
Professor Jeremy Prichard (appointed by the Council
of the University), Mr Craig Mackie (nominated by the Tasmanian Bar
Association),
Ms Ann Hughes (appointed at the invitation of the Institute
Board), Mr Rohan Foon (appointed by the Law Society of Tasmania), Ms
Baumeler (appointed at the invitation of the Institute Board) and Ms Rosie Smith
(appointed at the invitation of the Institute
Board as a member of the Tasmanian
Aboriginal community).
The Board oversees the Institute’s research, considering each reference
before it is accepted, and approving publications before
their release.
The Tasmania Law Reform Institute invites responses to the various issues
discussed in this Issues Paper. There are a number of questions
posed by this
Issues Paper to guide your response.
Respondents can choose to address any or
all of those questions in their submissions.
Respondents can also suggest
alternative options for reform or raise other relevant matters in their
There are a number of ways to respond:
• By filling in the Submission Template
The Template can be filled in electronically and sent by email or printed
out and filled in manually and posted to the Institute.
The Submission Template
can be accessed at the Institute’s webpage:
http://www.utas.edu.au/law-reform/
• By providing a more detailed response to the Issues Paper
The Issues Paper poses a series of questions to guide your response —
you may choose to answer all, some, or none of them.
Please explain the reasons
for your views as fully as possible.
The Institute uses all submissions received to inform its research.
Submissions may be referred to or quoted from in a TLRI final
report which will
be printed, provided to the Tasmanian Government and also published on the
Institute’s website. Extracts
may also be used in published scholarly
articles and/or public media releases. However, if you do not wish your response
to be referred
to or identified, the Institute will respect that wish.
Therefore, when making a submission to the Institute, please identify how you
would like it to be treated based on the following categories:
1. Public submission – the Institute may refer to or quote directly
from the submission and name you as the source of the submission
in relevant
publications.
2. Anonymous submission – the Institute may refer to or quote directly
from the submission in relevant publications but will
not identify you as the
source of the submission.
3. Confidential submission – the Institute will not refer to or quote
directly from the submission but may aggregate information
in your submission
with other submissions for inclusion in any report or publication. Confidential
submissions will only be used
to inform the Institute generally in their
deliberations of the particular issue under investigation, and/or provide
publishable
aggregated statistical data.
After considering all responses and stakeholder feedback it is intended that
a final report, containing recommendations, will be published.
Providing a submission is completely voluntary. You are free to withdraw your
participation at any time up to the time it is sent
for publication, by
withdraw without providing an
explanation. However, once the report has been
sent for publication, it will not be possible to remove your comments.
All responses will be held by the Tasmania Law Reform Institute for a period
of five (5) years from the date of the first publication
and then destroyed.
Electronic submissions will be stored on a secure, regularly backed-up
University network drive. Hard copy submissions
will be stored in a locked
filing cabinet. At the expiry of five years, submissions will be deleted from
the server, in the case
of electronic submissions, or shredded and securely
disposed of in the case of paper submissions.
Electronic submissions should be emailed to:
Law.Reform@utas.edu.au
Submissions in paper form should be posted to:
Tasmania Law Reform Institute
Private Bag 89
Hobart, TAS 7001
Inquiries about the study should be directed to Mrs Kate Hanslow at the above
address, or by telephoning (03) 6226 2069, or by email
Law.Reform@utas.edu.au
CLOSING DATE FOR RESPONSES:
<24 May 2019>
This study has been approved by the Tasmanian Social Sciences Human Research
Ethics Committee. If you have concerns or complaints
study, please contact the Executive Officer of the HREC (Tasmania) Network on
+61 3 6226 6254 or email
human.ethics@utas.edu.au. The Executive Officer is the
person nominated to receive complaints from research participants. Please
ethics reference number [H0016752].
Report to the Attorney-General
After considering all responses and stakeholder feedback it is intended that
a final report, containing recommendations for reform,
will be published.
of Reference
Whether notional estate legislation should be introduced in Tasmania.
Acknowledgments
This reference was given to the Institute in December 2016 by the then
Attorney-General, the Honourable Dr Vanessa Goodwin MLC, and
later funded by the
Tasmanian Government from the Solicitors’ Guarantee Fund, with a grant of
$65,022. This Issues Paper was
prepared for the Board of the Tasmania Law Reform
Institute by Mr Ken Mackie, Dr Elise Histed, Mr Dylan Richards and Mrs Kate
It addresses the question of whether Tasmania should introduce notional
estate legislation.
and Abbreviations
Administrator
Someone who obtains a Grant of Letters of Administration
from the Supreme Court of Tasmania
Assets held by the deceased at their death or that are paid to
the person’s legal personal representative
Someone appointed under a will to administer the
person’s estate
Family provision claim
See ‘TFM claim’
Grant of Administration
‘A legal document issued under the Seal
of the Court which enables the person(s) named as Executor(s) or
Administrator(s)
to deal with the assets held by the deceased in
Grant of Probate
‘Probate is the process of officially proving
the validity of a Will as being the last Will of the deceased. A Grant of
is issued when the deceased’s last Will and testament is proved by
one or more Executors named in the
Grant of Letters of Administration
A Grant made if a person dies
without a will
Where a person dies without a will that gifts the whole of
their estate
Legal personal representative
An executor or administrator who obtains
a Grant of Administration
New South Wales Law Reform Commission
Queensland Law Reform Commission
South Australian Law Reform Institute
A person who makes a will
A claim by an eligible applicant for provision, or
additional provision, from a deceased’s estate under the
Testator’s Family Maintenance Act 1912
(Tas) (or equivalent
provisions in other jurisdictions)
Testator’s Family Maintenance Act 1912
Succession Act
Succession Act 2006
Victorian Law Reform Commission
In Australia, all capable adults are able to make a document (called a will)
that outlines what is to happen to their assets (called
‘estate’) after their death. There are no fixed amounts that must be
left to family members and the person is free
to choose how they want their
estate dealt with. A person could, for example, leave all of their estate to
charity or friends and
not gift anything to their spouse or child.
There are, however, laws in each state and territory of Australia that enable
limited classes of people to claim a share (or a larger
share) of a
person’s estate after their death. These are often referred to as
‘TFM claims’ or ‘family provision’
claims. In Tasmania,
these laws are contained in the
Testator’s Family Maintenance Act
’). Those able to make a TFM claim
are limited to the spouse and children of the deceased, or the deceased’s
parents where
they did not have a spouse or child. A person may wish to make a
claim because they were not left anything under a will, or they
may consider
that what they were provided is not adequate or proper in the circumstances. It
is equally possible for someone to challenge
the amount they are entitled to
receive under the law of intestacy, where legislation sets out who is to receive
estate and in what shares when a person dies without a valid
will dealing with the distribution of their estate.
A person (an ‘applicant’) commences a TFM claim by filing an
application with the Supreme Court of Tasmania, which determines
a claim if the
matter cannot be resolved by agreement amongst the parties. The applicant must
satisfy the Court that they have been
left without adequate provision for their
proper maintenance and support. The Court will consider a range of factors in
its discretion,
but this usually includes consideration of the size of the
estate available, the nature and quality of the relationship between the
applicant and the deceased, the competing claims of the beneficiaries, the
financial need of the applicant and any reasons ascertained
for why the deceased
wished to gift their estate as they did. The Court can decline to make provision
for an applicant where it determines
that the person has disentitled themselves
due to their conduct. This might arise, for example, where there has been
violence or
abuse inflicted upon the deceased by the applicant or other relevant
family history.
If the Court is satisfied that an applicant meets the test outlined in the
legislation, it may order that the applicant receive an
amount (or additional
amount) from the deceased’s estate.
In all Australian jurisdictions other than New South Wales, a court may only
make provision for a successful TFM applicant from the
deceased’s estate.
It is possible for a person who might be considered wealthy to die with very
little (if anything) in their
estate. This might occur where the person owns
property with another person as a joint tenant, or where assets are held in
superannuation
funds or trusts. A person may make gifts before their death, with
any assets gifted then ceasing to be part of their estate. Assets
may also pass
to beneficiaries outside of a person’s estate, for example, where
superannuation or life insurance proceeds are
paid directly to beneficiaries
rather than to the person’s legal personal representative.
These arrangements may not be made to intentionally defeat potential TFM
claims and might exist for other reasons — for example,
protection or taxation purposes, or to reward or compensate an individual who
has provided someone with assistance (in
the case of gifts). These arrangements
might, on the other hand, be intentional in order to reduce what is available to
if someone were to make a TFM claim after a person’s death. In
either case, the effect is the same: the result is to significantly
reduce, and
sometimes eliminate, the possibility of the Court awarding an applicant further
provision from an estate, because there
is simply no estate to claim.
In Tasmania, an applicant must file a TFM claim within three months of a
Grant of Administration having been made in the estate, although
the Court has
discretion to extend this time period. If the three month claim period passes
and a legal personal representative has
not had notice of any claims, the legal
personal representative may commence distributing the estate amongst
beneficiaries. The
confirms that assets distributed in these
circumstances cease to be part of an estate. Because they are then not part of
the estate,
these assets are also unable to be used to fund provision for a
successful TFM applicant where the Court permits them to make a claim
Legislation in New South Wales is intended to address these issues. It
enables the court to deem assets that are not within a person’s
part of their estate — called their ‘notional estate’. The
court is then able to utilise assets deemed
notional estate when awarding
provision for a successful TFM applicant. These provisions are not dissimilar to
laws that apply to
bankruptcy, where assets may be ‘clawed-back’
where they are disposed of within certain timeframes prior to the commencement
of a person’s bankruptcy. Similarly, in the family law context,
superannuation is considered an asset for the purpose of ascertaining
parties’ ‘asset pool’, with the Family Court able to make
property orders splitting superannuation between
partners. In some
circumstances, trust assets may also be considered a financial resource of a
party to a relationship for the purposes
of family law property orders despite
those assets being held in a trust and not owned personally.
In broad terms, the New South Wales Supreme Court may only make a notional
estate order if an applicant is successful in their claim,
and only if there are
insufficient assets to pay the award ordered. Only transfers or other dealings
occurring within three years
of the deceased’s death (or that occur upon
or after the person’s death) may be treated as notional estate. Before
designating
property as notional estate, the Court must consider the importance
of not interfering with reasonable expectations in relation to
property, the
substantial justice and the merits involved, and any other matter it considers
The New South Wales notional estate provisions apply equally to acts and
omissions. So, if a person fails to do an act — like
sever a joint
tenancy, or make or change a binding death benefit nomination, or make a
distribution from a trust — then those
‘transactions’ may also
be captured.
These provisions enable the New South Wales Supreme Court to award provision
for successful TFM claimants from a much broader pool
of assets than are
presently available to the Court in Tasmania. On one hand, extending the reach
of TFM laws to assets not currently
impacted imposes a further restriction on a
person’s ability to choose how they want their estate distributed after
their death.
On the other hand, the law presently gives scope for people to
structure their affairs in ways that limit the utility of family provision
which are intended to ensure that a person makes adequate provision for their
spouse and children.
The Institute has been asked to provide advice to the State Government about
whether Tasmania should introduce notional estate legislation.
If introduced,
notional estate laws would extend the reach of the Supreme Court to enable it to
make orders affecting property that
is presently unable to be dealt with in a
TFM claim. This Issues Paper asks a range of questions intended to elicit
the Tasmanian community which will then be used to evaluate the
degree of support or opposition that exists to the introduction of
estate laws.
It is outside of the scope of this review to consider the need for, or
desirability of, other changes to the
, other than to consider any
changes that may become necessary or desirable if notional estate legislation
were introduced in Tasmania.
List of Questions
The Institute welcomes your response to any individual question or to all
questions contained within this Issues Paper. A full list
of the consultation
questions is provided below.
In your experience, do people deal with or structure their assets in order to
reduce the property that is available to make provision
for a successful
applicant under the
Testator’s Family Maintenance Act 1912
Please provide examples. (Page 31)
Should people be entitled to deal with their assets during their lifetime to
reduce the property that is in their estate and available
to claim under the
Testator’s Family Maintenance Act 1912
(Tas)? Please provide
reasons explaining your view. (Page 32)
Please indicate your level of support (if any) for the following proposition:
‘notional estate legislation should be introduced
in Tasmania’:
1. strongly agree;
3. somewhat agree;
4. neutral/no view;
5. somewhat disagree;
6. disagree;
7. strongly disagree.
Please provide reasons explaining your view. (Page 32)
Do you consider that introduction of notional estate provisions in Tasmania
would create difficulties or issues? For example, in your
experience or opinion
how might notional estate legislation interfere with:
(a) tax planning;
(b) asset protection arrangements;
(c) provisions made for individuals during a person’s life;
(d) farming or business succession arrangements; or
(e) other aspects of estate planning? (Page 33)
If notional estate provisions were introduced in Tasmania, should the New
South Wales legislation be used as a precedent? If so, are
there any parts of
these provisions that you think should be changed? For example, do you consider
that there is a need to make any
(a) the types of property that may be affected;
(b) the acts (or failures to act) captured;
(c) the relevance of a person’s intentions;
(d) the period of time in which a relevant property transaction occurs that
is covered;
(e) the circumstances in which a notional estate order may be made; or
(f) any other provisions? (Page 34)
Are there any other matters in relation to introducing notional estate
legislation in Tasmania that you would like to comment on?
Introduction
1.1.1 All Australian states and territories adopt a ‘freedom of
testation’ model, where a person with the necessary capacity
will (a testator) is free to make a will that leaves their estate to whomever
they wish upon their death. Subject to family
provision legislation (explained
below), there is no legal obligation upon a testator to make any particular
provision for their
spouse, children or other dependants in their will. Where a
person dies without a valid will, legislation sets out how that person’s
estate is to be divided and distributed amongst their family
1.1.2 All states and territories have legislation, however, that allows a
court to make provision (or additional provision) for an
eligible applicant
where the court determines that a testator’s will (or the effect of
intestacy laws) does not make adequate
provision for that
In Tasmania, these matters fall under the
Testator’s Family Maintenance
(Tas) (the ‘
’) and are commonly known as
family provision or ‘TFM’ claims.
1.1.3 In all Australian jurisdictions apart from New South Wales, only those
assets that are part of the deceased’s ‘estate’
can be used to
fund a successful claim for
Broadly speaking, this
includes assets owned by the person solely, or owned with another person as a
tenant in common.
There are many
instances where assets that might be considered the testator’s are not, in
fact, included within their estate.
This includes assets owned with others as
joint tenants, trust assets and, in some instances, superannuation. A person may
the way assets are owned prior to death, including by making gifts
which reduce their estate. What is included within a person’s
explained in more detail in Part 2.
1.1.4 Legislation has been enacted in New South Wales that enables the court
to deem assets that are not part of a person’s
estate as being part of
their ‘notional
This enables the
court to fund provision for a successful family provision applicant from assets
that are not available in other
1.1.5 The purpose of this review is to evaluate whether Tasmania should
introduce similar notional estate legislation to ‘claw-back’
and make them available to fund an award of provision for a successful TFM
Background to this Reference
1.2.1 In December 2016, the then Attorney-General, the Honourable Dr Vanessa
Goodwin MLC, wrote to the Tasmania Law Reform Institute
following an approach by
the Treasurer, the Honourable Peter Gutwein MP, about the issue of whether
Tasmania should implement the
concept of ‘notional estate’ within
existing family provision legislation. This arose because of concerns raised by
constituent about gifts and transfers made prior to a testator’s death
which resulted in their estate, for TFM purposes, being
significantly smaller
than what might be considered their net worth. The effect was to substantially
reduce the pool of assets from
which to award provision to an applicant under
1.2.2 The Institute subsequently received funding to make recommendations to
the Tasmanian Government on whether Tasmania should introduce
notional estate
legislation.
Report structure
1.3.1 The purpose of this Issues Paper is to examine whether Tasmania should
to incorporate notional estate provisions similar to
those that exist in New South Wales.
1.3.2 The Issues Paper comprises five parts: Part 1 discusses the legal
concept of family provision. Part 2 outlines some of the potential
issues with
the current law. Part 3 introduces the concept of a ‘notional
estate’ for the purposes of family provision
law. It examines the
recommendations of the National Committee for Uniform Succession Laws, the
Victorian Law Reform Commission (‘VLRC’)
and the South Australian
Law Reform Institute (‘SALRI’) on the matter. Part 4 reviews the New
South Wales notional estate
provisions contained in the
Succession Act
(NSW), along with case examples from New South Wales.
considers options for reform and invites responses to a series of questions
Family provision laws
1.4.1 This Part serves as an introduction to family provision legislation
generally. It deals with the following issues:
• succession and property;
• the restriction on absolute testamentary freedom via family provision
legislation; and
• an explanation of the
History of succession and property laws
1.4.2 The predominant view of the current law of succession is that it is
based on the rights of ownership and possession of private
property. Many of the
advantages of gaining private property would be lost if those private rights
were not to extend to a right
to transmit that property on
This view was, and is, heavily based on the liberal views of John Stuart Mill
(1806–1873).
1.4.3 The basic argument, although simplistic, was that testamentary freedom
was a consequence of an individual’s creation of
property rights. It
followed that there should be no automatic right for any individuals (most
likely members of the deceased’s
family) to inherit. Under this view,
testamentary freedom was seen to be absolute. The ability of the testator to
leave his or her
property to whomever pleased him or her was the dominant
doctrine in the common law world for about 200 years before the twentieth
1.4.4 This is in stark contrast to most civil law countries, which feature
partial forced succession laws, where there is a compromise
between total
freedom of testation on the one hand and the interests of the deceased’s
family on the other. The compromise
has taken a number of forms, the essence of
which is that the immediate relatives of the deceased have certain shares of
may not be deprived. Freedom of testation rests only with that part
of the estate not subject to the shares. Mackie comments that
the advantages of
such schemes include the obvious certainty created, the equality of treatment of
relatives and the lack of need
to resort to judicial proceedings to enforce the
Conversely, Atkinson
One obtains property in his lifetime and may do with it as he pleases —
why should he not be permitted to appoint his successors?
Akin to this is the
argument that a plan of forced inheritance might discourage individual
initiative and thrift. Such a scheme would
also tend to destroy parental
control, and thus render family relations unwholesome. The testator would have
no protection which
would enable him to reward kindness or punish
Restrictions on absolute testamentary freedom: Family provision
legislation
1.4.5 A difficulty with complete testamentary freedom is, of course, that
testators have an absolute right to leave property as they
wish and may ignore
the claims of family and other dependants. The need for legislative intervention
to protect those dependants
was recognised in the early twentieth century. The
original suggestions for reform were for the adoption of a mixed system of
and universal succession, with fixed shares devolving on the wife and
children, as with the European Civil Law system discussed
Eventually, however, that
system was considered to be too inflexible and rigid and the solution adopted by
all Australian jurisdictions
was to vest the courts with a discretionary power
to award provision where the circumstances were appropriate.
1.4.6 The first legislation of this type was enacted in New Zealand with the
passing of the
Testator’s Family Maintenance Act
in 1900. All state
and territory jurisdictions in Australia followed suit: Victoria in 1906,
Tasmania in 1912, Queensland in 1914,
New South Wales in 1916, South Australia
in 1918, Western Australia in 1920 and both the Australian Capital Territory and
the Northern
Territory in 1929.
Similar legislation was passed in England in
The focus of the earlier law was upon the protection of widows, as exemplified
by the parliamentary remarks of the Attorney-General
of New South Wales
preceding the introduction of the original New South Wales Act of 1916:
It is remarkable that in Australia, where the rights of women have developed
as rapidly as the matter of property, we have wiped out
whatever right a woman
has in the estate of her husband. The dower which existed here for many years
exists no longer. It was abolished
in the year 1890 and today a man may leave
the whole of his property both real and personal, to any stranger to whom he
leave it. The wife may have been with him a partner for forty or
fifty years. She may have assisted him in acquiring whatever wealth
possesses, yet he, dying, may will the property away and leave her dependent on
the kindness of friends or the charity of the
state. During his lifetime he
cannot do that, for it is incumbent on him to maintain his wife. The object of
the Bill is to secure
that after her husband’s death the right of the wife
to get sufficient from his estate to maintain her shall continue, and
of his children shall be equally
1.4.7 As is evident in this statement, the original legislation was directed
at the protection of women, who were likely to be financially
dependent on their
husbands, along with the children of a marriage. Over time, however, it was
recognised that similar problems existed
in relation to other classes of
individuals and so the categories of eligible applicants have been expanded.
Testator’s Family Maintenance
1.5.1 This next section outlines key provisions of the
It is the Supreme Court
of Tasmania that has jurisdiction to hear and determine claims under the
The test applied
1.5.2 Section 3 of the
outlines the test that the Court must
apply when determining the merits of a claim. The section provides a threshold
question requiring the Court to be satisfied that a
deceased’s will (or intestacy provisions) have left an applicant
adequate provision for his proper maintenance and
If, and only if,
that condition is satisfied may the Court embark on the discretionary question
as to whether provision should be
made, and if so, to what
1.5.3 Courts have made it clear that the words ‘adequate’ and
‘proper’ establish independent tests as to eligibility.
‘Adequate’ relates to the actual needs of the applicant, but
‘proper’ is a matter that can only be determined
having regard to
all the circumstances of the
In other words, there is
no fixed concept, with the Court using a ‘multi-faceted evaluation
to evaluate the
current and future needs of an applicant. In undertaking this consideration, the
Court places itself in the position
of the deceased and considers what he or she
ought to have done in the circumstances, treating them as wise and just, rather
fond or foolish. This is often regarded as a moral duty test, which was
most forcibly stated by Edmonds J in the New Zealand decision
Allardice v
In that case, his
Honour stated that the duty of the court was to place itself in the position of
the testator and to consider:
whether or not, having regard to all the existing facts and surrounding
circumstances, the testator has been guilty of a manifest
breach of that moral
duty which a just, but not a loving husband or father owes towards his wife or
towards his children.
1.5.4 This so called ‘moral test’ has been reiterated in most
modern decisions
and upheld by a
majority of the High Court of Australia in
However, there is
also judicial authority that the ‘moral duty’ approach is not a
static concept and involves consideration
of contemporary community standards in
assessment of the claim.
provides that, when assessing the merits of a claim,
a judge may have regard to:
• the net value of the
• the financial resources of the
• the deceased’s reasons, so far as they are ascertainable, for
making the dispositions in their will, or for not making
any provision or
further provision.
provides that the Court may to refuse to make an
order (even if a ‘moral’ claim has been established) where the
or conduct of the applicant disentitles him or her to the benefits of
1.5.7 Whilst the Act does not set out other factors, the following matters
are often considered when assessing the merits of an applicant’s
• the financial responsibilities of the applicant;
• the age and health of the applicant;
• the nature and quality of the relationship between the applicant and
the deceased;
• services rendered to the applicant by the deceased;
• promises made by the deceased about the provisions of the will, acted
upon by the applicant;
• lifetime benefits received by the applicant from the deceased;
• the competing moral and financial claims of the beneficiaries,
including the duty of the deceased to provide for other members
Eligible applicants
1.5.8 The following classes of people are eligible to make a claim in
Tasmania seeking provision, or further provision, from an estate:
• a spouse (defined to include a person in a significant relationship
with the deceased at the date of their death within the
meaning of the
Relationships Act 2003
• children, including an adopted child,
and surrogate
• parents, where the deceased dies without any spouse or children;
• a former spouse of the deceased if they were receiving, or entitled
to receive, maintenance from the deceased at their
1.5.9 In some jurisdictions, the classes of those eligible to apply for
provision is more expansive and may include a person partly
or wholly dependent
on the deceased,
a person living
in a close personal relationship
with the deceased at their
grandchildren
circumstances.
Other provisions of the TFM Act
1.5.10 Other parts of the
are summarised briefly as not being
germane to the main inquiry about the possible inclusion of notional estate
provisions in the
• section 11 deals with time limit for making an application. It
provides that an application must be filed within three months
of the date of a
grant of administration being made in the estate. This section allows the Court
to grant an extension of time, in
its discretion;
• section 8A relates to the admissibility of evidence of the
deceased’s reasons for making a will, particularly for not
benefitting the
applicant in that will; and
• section 3(2) gives a wide discretion to the Court as to the method in
which provision may be made for a successful applicant.
Potential Issues with the
Introduction
2.1.1 Claims under the
can only deal with the estate of a
deceased. Some assets might be considered to be an asset of a deceased, but at
law fall outside
of their estate. A common example is joint tenancy property. A
number of other examples are outlined in this Part.
2.1.2 Depending upon how assets are held and structured, there is potential
for a person who might otherwise be considered wealthy
to die with very little,
if anything, in their estate. This reduces (or eliminates) the pool of available
assets from which to satisfy
a successful claim under the
This occurrence may frustrate the intention of the Act which is to make
provision, or additional provision, for a worthy applicant.
2.1.3 This Part is concerned with two issues:
• what property is available to satisfy an order under s 3 of the
• when is an estate ‘distributed’ for the purposes of the
Property available to satisfy a
2.2.1 Section 3(1) of the
provides that any order of the
Court is restricted to the estate of the deceased. As Dal Pont and Mackie state:
can therefore be made only out of the property that the
deceased beneficially owned at the time of death and that passes to the
personal representative, less the liabilities of the
2.2.2 A person’s estate comprises assets or interests held
the person solely, jointly
with others as tenants in common (not as joint tenants) and other assets paid to
the person’s legal
personal representative upon their death.
2.2.3 This section explains what is included in a person’s estate which
can be claimed as part of a TFM claim.
Transfers subject to unconscionability or undue influence
2.2.4 Assets transferred or gifted before a person’s death typically
fall outside of their estate for the purpose of a TFM claim.
2.2.5 If, however, a transaction is made in circumstances of
unconscionability or undue influence, it may be set aside in equity.
case, the asset would become available to satisfy a TFM claim. For example, in
Bridgewater v Leahy
testator had sold a portion of his property to his nephew for its true value,
but by deed had forgiven a substantial portion of
the debt. The nephew also
benefitted under the testator’s will by being gifted an option to purchase
the testator’s rural
property substantially under value. An application to
set aside by the widow and daughters of the testator, who were otherwise barely
provided for in the will, was successful. The court held that the testator was
in a disadvantaged position when the deed was executed,
having an emotional
attachment and dependency on the nephew. The nephew had taken advantage of this
to secure the benefit.
2.2.6 Transactions that a deceased entered into before his or her death where
there has been unconscionability or undue influence
are therefore already able
to be addressed and the property restored to a person’s estate without the
use of notional estate
legislation.
Property subject to contract: testamentary promises
2.2.7 It is possible for testators to make contracts with third parties to
leave them some property under their will. A common example
is where spouses
make an agreement with each other to make their wills in certain ways.
2.2.8 Prior to the decision of the High Court of Australia in
the Privy Council had
held that these types of contracts had to be performed before any claim for
family provision could be
entertained.
That is, the court
had no power to throw any of the burden of a family provision order on property
gifted by the testator in fulfilment
of a promise to do the
Barns v Barns
the High Court refused to follow this
authority, preferring to follow an earlier Privy Council
which held that
property the subject of a contract between parties for one to make their will in
a certain way was indeed available
to satisfy an order under family provision
legislation. In the Tasmanian case of
Porter J noted the
comments of Gleeson CJ in
Barns v Barns
Because the [family provision legislation] imposed a restriction on freedom
of testamentary disposition, a promise to make a testamentary
disposition was
subject to the potential operation of that legislative restriction. The effect
of the legislation could have been
avoided by a disposition inter vivos so that
the deceased died with no estate; that is inherent in the scheme of the
legislation.
But the effect of the legislative restriction on freedom of
testamentary disposition cannot be avoided by a promise to make a certain
disposition.
Property unavailable to satisfy a
2.3.1 This next section outlines property that may not be available to
satisfy a TFM claim, depending on the circumstances.
Pre-death gifts and transfers
2.3.2 The present law provides scope for potential TFM claims to be defeated
through a person removing property from their estate,
for example by making
gifts prior to death. If a gift is
the Court has no
‘estate’ of the deceased). It is
irrelevant whether the gift was
made with the purpose of defeating a potential
Mr Smith has three adult children. His only substantial asset is a dairy farm
at Deloraine. His daughter helps with the farming operations
as well as living
with Mr Smith and assisting him with domestic tasks. Mr Smith does not have a
close relationship with his two sons
who live interstate.
Mr Smith wants his daughter to take over the farm on his death. He is adamant
that he does not want the farm to be sold and is worried
that this might happen
if his sons were to claim a share of his estate after his death.
Mr Smith therefore decides to transfer (gift) the farm to his daughter during
his life. The effect is that, on Mr Smith’s death,
the farm does not form
part of his estate. It is unable to be claimed by his sons via a TFM claim.
Joint tenancy property
2.3.3 Property held jointly with another person may be held in a ‘joint
tenancy’ form of ownership or a ‘tenancy
in common’ form of
ownership. Each are treated differently. Co-owned assets held as joint tenants
do not form part of a person’s
estate, whilst interests held jointly as
tenants in common do form part of an estate.
2.3.4 The legal effect of joint tenancy ownership is to automatically vest a
co-owner’s interest in the property in the surviving
co-owner. This is
called a right of survivorship. A co-owner’s interest in property held as
a joint tenant is therefore not
an asset that can be gifted via their will or
dealt with under intestacy. The effect is that a deceased’s interest in a
tenancy asset falls outside of the pool of assets from which provision can
be made for a successful applicant under the
2.3.5 This situation is in contrast to a tenancy in common form of ownership
where one co-owner’s share does not automatically
vest in a surviving
co-owner upon death. Each co-owner holds a distinct share that then forms part
of their estate upon their death.
Lucinda and Gary commence a relationship in their sixties. Both have children
from previous relationships. Lucinda owns a house at
Smithton in her sole name
which she received from her late husband’s estate.
Lucinda wants to make a will that leaves the property to Gary.
Lucinda learns that her children will be able to challenge a gift of the
house to Gary in her will. She also learns that, if the property
was held by
them as joint tenants, Gary will automatically receive it and it will not form
part of Lucinda’s estate and able
to be challenged. She therefore decides
to transfer the house so that she and Gary own it as joint tenants.
On her death, Lucinda’s children are unable to claim any share of the
house as Gary automatically receives the property as the
surviving joint
2.3.6 The case of
Calvert v Badenach
(which proceeded to the High
) demonstrates this issue.
In that case, the Court considered whether a lawyer preparing a will was
negligent for failing to advise
his client about options to structure his estate
in order to reduce the risk or impact of a TFM claim. At first instance, Blow CJ
The testator could have arranged his affairs during his lifetime so that the
assets of the estate available to satisfy a claim under
were worth far less than
His principal assets
were his interests in two properties on the Tasman Peninsula. He and the
plaintiff owned each property as tenants
in common in equal shares. If he had
made arrangements for the plaintiff and himself to hold both properties as joint
tenants then,
when he predeceased the plaintiff, those properties would have
ceased to form part of his estate. There are no ‘notional estate’
provisions in the TFM Act. Similarly, he could have given or transferred other
assets to the plaintiff before he died, placing them
out of reach for the
purposes of the TFM Act. He was terminally ill when he gave the solicitor
instructions for his last will, and
the solicitor knew that.
The plaintiff contends that the solicitor and his firm were negligent in that
they (a) failed to advise the testator of the risk of
the daughter making a
claim under the TFM Act, and (b) failed to advise him of the options available
for him to arrange his affairs
so as to reduce or extinguish his estate, so as
to avoid or partly avoid any claim which could disturb his testamentary
2.3.7 This case demonstrates the applicability of potential notional estates
legislation in the context of joint tenancies. Had the
testator entered into
arrangements to transfer ownership of properties to a joint tenancy ownership,
they would have been unavailable
to satisfy the ultimately successful claim for
Joint Bank Accounts
2.3.8 Joint bank accounts have the same effect as joint tenancy property.
That is, a deceased’s interest in a joint bank account
vests upon the
surviving account holder. This was confirmed in the New Zealand case of
where a testator
died leaving her entire estate to her daughter, excluding her other three
children. The estate, after administration,
was valued at just under $4,000. At
the time of her death, however, there was approximately $87,000 in a joint bank
account in the
name of the testator and her daughter. The High Court of New
Zealand held that the funds in the joint bank account vested in the
daughter on
her mother’s death and did not form part of her estate. Their decision was
consistent with previous Australian
Superannuation
2.3.9 Superannuation can be a substantial asset of an individual. The
Australian Prudential Regulation Authority (‘APRA’)
reports that
there were $2.7 trillion in superannuation assets in Australia at 30 June
The average account
balance was $69,807.
individual may also hold life insurance within superannuation, with it being
estimated that 13.5 million Australians have a life
insurance policy within
comprising more than 70
per cent of the life insurance policies in
2.3.10 The treatment of a person’s superannuation upon their death
depends on several factors including the rules of the fund
in which it is held,
and any binding nominations made by the member effective upon their death.
Depending on these factors, a person’s
superannuation death benefits may
or may not form part of their estate. It may not form part of a person’s
estate if, for example,
they have made a valid and
binding death benefit
nomination that directs all of their death benefits to a beneficiary, for
example to a spouse or other dependant.
2.3.11 Death benefits that a fund pay directly to a beneficiary fall outside
of the purview of a claim under the
. It is only death benefits
that are paid to a deceased’s legal personal representative that become
available for challenge
under the Act.
Barry has superannuation with the ABC Superannuation Fund with $450,000 in
his member account. He wants his five children to receive
his superannuation
when he dies and does not want any of it to be claimed by his partner.
Barry completes a binding death benefit nomination that directs all of his
superannuation to his five children equally. The nomination
means that, on his
death, Barry’s super must be paid to his children, which is what the fund
ultimately does. His partner is
unable to claim provision from any of the
superannuation when making a TFM claim under the
Proceeds of a life insurance policy
2.3.12 Treatment of the proceeds of a life insurance policy is similar to the
position in relation to superannuation. In summary,
the proceeds of a life
insurance policy are paid according to the details of the policy — who the
account holder is, and any
beneficiaries nominated.
2.3.13 Proceeds of a life insurance policy paid to a person’s legal
personal representative form part of their estate and are
available for
challenge under the
. Proceeds of a life insurance policy that are
paid directly to a nominated beneficiary fall outside of the person’s
and are not available to satisfy successful TFM claims.
Jenny takes out a life insurance policy to ensure that there will be enough
money for her daughter, Tamika, to complete her education
if Jenny were to die
young. Jenny does not want there to be any possibility that the proceeds of the
policy could be paid to anyone
else and wants them used solely for
Tamika’s benefit.
Jenny therefore nominates Tamika as the beneficiary of her life insurance
policy. The effect is that the life insurance company must
pay the proceeds to
Tamika and they are unable to be affected by any claim that might be made under
Trust assets and property the subject of a power of
appointment
2.3.14 Assets held within a trust, for example a family trust, do not form
part of a person’s estate with the exception of any
beneficiary loan
account within the trust.
2.3.15 A testator may have a controlling role in relation to a trust, for
example as a trustee, appointor, protector or guardian.
Often the terms of a
trust deed give the trustee broad discretion about the treatment of income and
capital. A trustee may, for example,
have power to distribute income and/or
capital to themselves as a beneficiary, and if they were to make such a
distribution, then
the amount distributed would become part of their
Despite a person having
had effective control of a trust during their life, including the ability to
appoint income and capital to
themselves, the assets of that trust are not part
of their estate. The trust’s assets may not, therefore, be used to fund
for a successful TFM applicant.
2.3.16 The terms of a trust deed also often provide the ability for that
individual to appoint a successor controller of the trust
by deed or by will.
When a testator exercises a power of appointment by will, the property appointed
is not part of the testator’s
The exercise of such a power therefore falls outside of a possible TFM
Mr Nguyen is the sole appointor and trustee of the Nguyen Family Trust. The
trust has in excess of $1 million net assets. Despite
having terminal cancer and
knowing of his imminent death, Mr Nguyen does not appoint any capital of the
trust to himself as a beneficiary.
The $1 million of net assets therefore remain
within the trust following his death.
The Trust Deed sets out how Mr Nguyen can pass control of the trust to
successors in the event of his death. Before his death, Mr
Nguyen exercised this
power by including a clause in his will which nominated Mrs Nguyen.
Mr Nguyen’s children are worried because they have no guarantee that
they will receive any distributions from the trust. The
terms of the trust give
the trustee a broad discretion in relation to decisions about distributions of
income and capital. Mr Nguyen’s
children are unable to claim any of the
assets held in the Nguyen Family Trust if they decide to bring a TFM claim
against Mr Nguyen’s
2.4.1 These examples demonstrate the ability for individuals to defeat
potential TFM claims, or at least reduce the assets at risk.
In response to this
circumstance, New South Wales has enacted notional estate provisions within
family provision legislation. These
enable assets to be treated as though they
comprised part of a person’s estate for the purpose of making an award of
to a successful TFM applicant. These provisions are explained in more
detail in Part 4.
Effect of an estate having been
distributed
2.5.1 The Act requires a TFM claim to be filed with the Court within three
months of the grant of
administration.
Section 11(4)
provides that any application seeking an extension of this time limit must be
made before the estate has been fully
distributed.
An application ... shall be made before the final distribution of the estate
of the deceased person, and no distribution of any part
of the estate made
before the making of an application ... shall be disturbed by reason of that
application or of any order made
thereon or in consequence thereof.
2.5.2 This was the situation that arose in the Tasmanian decision of
Williams v Williams
case involved an application by a surviving spouse which was made after the
expiry of the three month claim period. In the meantime,
the executors had
distributed the main asset in the estate, property at St Helens worth about
$650,000, in accordance with the terms
of Mr Williams’ will.
2.5.3 Whilst the Court approved the applicant’s claim being made out of
it was confirmed that, as
a consequence of s 11(4) the
, the distribution of St Helens
property could not be disturbed for the purpose of making provision to the
This significantly
reduced the pool from which additional provision could be made for the
2.5.4 Notional estate provisions in New South Wales provide for this
circumstance. They enable the court to designate assets distributed
estate as notional estate. Using the example of
Williams v Williams
ability to make a notional estate order could have enabled the Court to treat
the St Helens property as part of Mr Williams’
notional estate for the
purpose of making provision for the spouse (assuming the requirements of the
legislation were met). Details
of the tests applying in New South Wales are
outlined in Part 4.
Development of the Idea of the
‘Notional Estate’
Introduction
3.1.1 Preceding parts of this Issues Paper have considered the development of
family provision law, the position in Tasmania arising
and those assets that can be claimed as part of a TFM claim in Tasmania.
3.1.2 This Part is concerned with:
• what is meant by a ‘notional estate’; and
• the historical backdrop leading to the passing of notional estate
provisions in New South Wales.
3.1.3 In broad terms, development of notional estate laws are intended as
‘anti-avoidance’
to eliminate (or at
least substantially reduce) the ability to defeat family provision claims by
removing assets from challenge within
that jurisdiction.
What is meant by a ‘notional
Succession Act 2006
(NSW) (‘NSW
Succession Act
’) allows the court to make orders designating
property not strictly within a person’s estate as comprising the
estate’ of the deceased. Any property designated as
‘notional estate’ becomes available to make provision for a
successful TFM applicant as though it were part of the
The effect is to enable
the New South Wales Supreme Court to make provision for a successful applicant
from a broader pool of assets
than are available to the Supreme Court in
3.2.2 As explained by the New South Wales Law Reform Commission
(‘NSWLRC’):
Notional Estate orders are orders issued by the Court which are intended to
make available for family provision orders assets that
are no longer part of the
estate of a deceased person because they have been distributed either before or
after the deceased’s
death (either with or without the intention of
defeating application for family provision). Without legislative provisions
for notional estate orders, the Courts are unable to make family
provision orders with respect to property that is no longer part
of the deceased
3.2.3 The New South Wales legislation explains the effect of the provisions
as follows:
This Part applies where, as a result of certain property transactions,
property is not included in the estate of a deceased person
or where property
has been distributed from the estate of a deceased person. This Part enables the
Court in limited circumstances
to make an order designating property that is not
included in the estate, or has been distributed from the estate, as
estate’ of the deceased person for the purpose of making a
family provision order under
in respect of the estate of the deceased
person (or for the purpose of ordering that costs in the proceedings be paid
from the notional
3.2.4 New South Wales is the only jurisdiction in Australia to have
provisions of this type. Similar laws, however, exist in the United
and the United
Historical backdrop
Introduction of notional estate orders in New South Wales
3.3.1 In 1977, the NSWLRC was the first Australian law reform commission to
examine and recommend adoption of notional estate
‘Notional estate’ was considered to be:
• property gifted by the deceased within three years of death, if made
with the intention of defeating an application for provision;
• gifts made within one year of death, regardless of intention;
• property subject to a power of disposal by the deceased;
• property comprised in certain settlements;
• property held on a joint tenancy;
• property held in certain life assurance schemes; and
• property in certain superannuation schemes.
3.3.2 These recommendations, not all in their original form, were put into
effect by the
Family Provision Act 1982
(NSW). This Act was subsequently
repealed, and family provision laws incorporated into the NSW
with the provisions relating to ‘notional estate’ contained
Recommendations of the National Committee for Uniform Succession
3.3.3 The National Committee for Uniform Succession
(the ‘National
Committee’) examined the merits of notional estate provisions as part of
an overall consideration of uniform
succession laws in Australian jurisdictions
The report presented to
the National Committee closely examined the New South Wales approach and
recommended that similar provisions
be included in the model
legislation.
recommendations were consistent with recommendations of the New Zealand Law
Commission (‘NZLC’) made in the same
Subsequent recommendations of the National Committee
3.3.4 The National Committee revisited the matter in a Supplementary Report
to the Standing Committee of Attorneys General in
The report outlined draft
model succession law legislation for
which included
replicating, in broad terms, the notional estate provisions from New South
Wales. This report also considered specific
aspects of the New South Wales
legislation particularly in relation to joint
3.3.5 The NSWLRC subsequently published a report containing commentary in
relation to the draft model
legislation.
legislation has not been implemented in any other Australian jurisdiction.
Victorian Law Reform Commission Review
3.3.6 The VLRC released a Consultation Paper in 2012 as part of its review of
succession law in
Amongst other matters, it dealt with the possibility of introducing notional
estate provisions in Victoria as contained in the New
South Wales legislation
and as recommended by the National
3.3.7 In its Final Report, the VLRC observed that several respondents’
submissions were not in favour of introducing notional
estate laws in Victoria
on the basis that the law ought not detract from the general proposition that
persons are able to deal with
their property as they wish during their
3.3.8 Some respondents expressed the view that, if notional estate provisions
were introduced, they should only apply to transactions
entered into with the
specific intention of defeating a claim for family
In relation to the
relevance of intention, however, the VLRC concluded:
The Commission considers that a notional estate scheme that only applied to
transactions entered into with the intention of avoiding
family provision
obligations could be easily circumvented. Further, intention is difficult to
prove, as evidenced by the clear preference
for the notional estate provisions
in New South Wales which do not require proof of intention to defeat a possible
family provision
claim. The Commission also agrees that any notional estate
scheme that does not require some intention on the part of the deceased
risks being too far-reaching and unduly limiting of a person’s right to
dispose of their property during their
3.3.9 Further, it commented:
The Commission also considers that any transaction entered into before death
may have the effect of benefitting the same people who
could later be family
provision claimants. The gift during life may give effect to the person’s
responsibility to provide,
but does this before death rather than
3.3.10 The Report discussed the New South Wales provisions and noted that
the National Committee, in 1996, had been advised that:
Whether it would be possible to persuade the other States and Territories to
follow this approach may perhaps depend on how successful
it has been in New
South Wales in practice ... An evaluation of the legislation, from a New South
Wales perspective, must be undertaken
as part of the
3.3.11 It commented that the need for notional estate laws and the
effectiveness of the New South Wales provisions in meeting that
need (if any)
had not been demonstrated. It noted
The National Committee’s recommendation to adopt the New South Wales
provisions was not based on empirical research demonstrating
the need for such
provisions, but rather because the provisions existed and had been in operation
for some time, and there was ‘nothing
hugely wrong with
3.3.12 The VLRC did not recommend introduction of notional estate provisions
in Victoria due to ‘the absence of clear evidence
demonstrating the need
for such provisions in Victoria, or the effectiveness of such provisions in New
South Wales.’
South Australian Law Reform Institute
3.3.13 SALRI released a report in 2017 that considered a range of issues
related to family provision, including the possibility of
introducing notional
estate legislation in South
3.3.14 The majority of respondents to SALRI’s preceding Background
expressed opposition to
the introduction of notional estate legislation. Reasons given included that
notional estate laws intrude
upon testamentary freedom and that there may be a
host of valid reasons for a testator entering into arrangements during his or
lifetime other than seeking to defeat a future family provision claim.
3.3.15 SALRI sought feedback about the operation of superannuation and
trusts, but there was little support for notional estate provisions
areas. There was some support, however, for using notional estate provisions to
equalise benefits given where beneficiaries
received pre-death
In other words, if assets
have been given to beneficiaries prior to death, that benefit should be
available for clawback for the
purposes of family provision claims.
3.3.16 SALRI’s conclusion was as follows:
SALRI is not persuaded of the case for introducing NSW style notional estate
and clawback laws in South Australia. The relevant laws
are complicated. SALRI
finds the reasoning of the VLRC convincing. It also accepts the views presented
in consultation that NSW style
notional estate or clawback laws are very
problematic in terms of both policy and practice and would especially undermine
the concept
of testamentary freedom. SALRI notes that when a strong theme of
both its consultation and wider research is the importance of enhancing
testamentary freedom and reducing a court’s ability to intervene, it would
be inconsistent to introduce NSW style notional
estate or clawback laws in South
3.3.17 SALRI recommended that notional estate laws not be introduced in South
Western Australia: the Gregson Paper
3.3.18 In 2017, Craig Gregson
released a comprehensive paper entitled,
Notional Estate Provisions: A case
for Implementation in Western
The paper does
not confine itself to the Western Australian jurisdiction, but considers the
matter generally across all jurisdictions.
It argues strongly for the
implementation of notional estate provisions.
3.3.19 Gregson observes that ‘there are a large number of examples of
capricious and unreasonable distributions that have come
before the courts over
time’ and that there needs to be some restraint on complete, unfettered
testamentary freedom.
report identifies areas where the intent of family provision legislation has
been circumvented, either wilfully or inadvertently,
including joint tenancies,
superannuation, pre-death
transactions, trusts and business succession
planning. Gregson observes how other jurisdictions deal with avoidance,
including the
Family Court, bankruptcy law and under social security
3.3.20 The review includes the results of qualitative research conducted on
the views of the legal profession in relation to notional
estate laws.
Participants were asked whether they supported or opposed notional estate
provisions and 17.02% responded that they
were neutral, 12.77% declared
themselves in support with another 8.51% in strong support of the provisions. On
the other hand, 37.23%
opposed the provisions with another 24.47% in strong
opposition.
Arguments put
forward against implementation of notional estate provisions included the
encroachment on testamentary freedom, the
increase of possible
‘illegitimate claims’, the interference with property rights,
increased costs and increased complexity
and time in administering estates as
‘the costs of litigation and time taken to get to mediation will increase
as a result
of the work in tracing pre-death
transactions.’
addition, respondents suggested that lawyers would simply give advice on how to
get around any family provision anti-avoidance
legislation (although Gregson
points out that the mere existence of the provisions would make defeating the
purposes of the legislation
difficult).
3.3.21 Gregson concludes with the following comments:
In the author’s opinion, without NEP [notional estate provisions], TFM
legislation in today’s society is as effective
as the succession law that
existed in England circa 1724. It is difficult to see why NEP should not be
implemented when other areas
of law, such as family law, bankruptcy law, and
many others, have effectively implemented anti-avoidance provisions... This
research suggests that the opposition stems from a historical
deep-rooted objection to any reform that limits the extent of testamentary
freedom. On reading the historical overview it can be seen that testators have
only ever had limited rights to testation. Freedom
of testation has always been
somewhat restricted as a form of Kantian safety net and wealth distribution
vehicle. The objection seems
to be against the existence of the TFM legislation
itself rather than an objection to its enforcement. Further research needs to
undertaken into the effectiveness of the NSW provisions in order to lend support
to a political mandate.
New South Wales Notional Estate
Introduction
4.1.1 This Part explains the notional estate laws applying in New South
Property that may be deemed ‘notional
4.2.1 Certain classes of transactions may be caught by the New South Wales
notional estate provisions:
• property that has been distributed from an
• property that has been the subject of a ‘relevant property
transaction’;
• property falling within the preceding two scenarios and which has
been the subject of a subsequent ‘relevant property
transaction’.
These are explained below.
A ‘relevant property transaction’
4.2.2 The court must be satisfied that there has been a ‘relevant
property transaction’. A ‘relevant property transaction’
explained as follows:
A person enters into a relevant property transaction if the person does,
directly or indirectly, or does not do, any act that (immediately
time later) results in property being:
(a) held by another person (whether or not as trustee); or
(b) subject to a trust,
and full valuable consideration is not given to the person for doing or not
doing the act.
Examples of ‘relevant property transactions’
4.2.3 The legislation specifies a number of examples of ‘relevant
property transactions’.
These include:
• failure to exercise a power of appointment;
• failure to prevent property passing by survivorship by not severing a
joint tenancy;
• failure to exercise a power to extinguish a trust or a property
interest held by another person over property;
• failure to nominate a beneficiary under a life assurance policy;
• failure to nominate a beneficiary under a superannuation fund; or
• entering into a contract for the disposition of property out of the
deceased’s estate;
in situations where valuable consideration was not given.
4.2.4 It is explicitly stated that this list is not
exhaustive.
4.2.5 The key case on the meaning of ‘prescribed transaction’
(applying the former
Family Provision Act
Kavalee v Burbidge
In deciding
whether a prescribed transaction had occurred, Mason P observed that:
It is obvious that the legislature has cast the net very wide, in pursuit of
its goal of providing adequate provision in favour of
eligible persons. As
beneficial legislation, a liberal approach to construction is called for,
notwithstanding the obvious impact
of a designating order upon existing property
His Honour went on to conclude that:
I do not see
as confined to acts or omissions that are the
operative cause of property becoming held by the deceased’s intended
To do so would ignore the thrust of this liberal enactment which
emphasises its scope with the words ‘directly or indirectly’,
result of which’ (emphasis added) and ‘whether or
not the property becomes ... so held immediately’ ... The legislation
clearly intended to operate in a context of human agents where several may have
to act in concert and where there is the possibility
that one may not
co-operate. To paraphrase Mason J in
Fagan v Crimes Compensation Tribunal
(at 673) – ‘the fact that other unconnected events may also have had
some relationship to the occurrence is not material
if the ... act was a cause,
even if not the sole
4.2.6 In other words, despite any complicated legal relationships that may
obscure the transactions made, the court should look at
the practical reality of
whether the deceased had taken actions (or failed to take actions) that
indirectly resulted in claimants
being prevented from accessing the estate.
Where valuable consideration given
4.2.7 Providing full valuable consideration for a particular act or omission
excludes that transaction from being a ‘relevant
transaction’. ‘Full valuable consideration’, broadly speaking,
means that the person receiving an item
has paid full value for the item. For
example, if a property is worth $300,000 and the person receiving the property
pays $300,000
for it, this is full valuable consideration.
it was noted
that owners of assets should still be able to deal with assets while alive and
that the consideration received will
form part of the estate. This decision
followed a long line of common law authority on the nature of valuable
consideration and agreed
that the notion of ‘fair equivalent’ should
be applied. This was later approved in the case of
Vaughan v Duncan; Vogt v
where the deceased
agreed with her son to give him half her shares in the family company in order
to entice him into the company.
In that discussion she said that her intention
was to allow her remaining shares to acquire no value after her death, which
cause the remaining shares in the company to rise in value. This part of
the offer, apparently, convinced the son to join the business.
4.2.9 The view of the court was that the agreement that the deceased allow
her shares to become valueless amounted to a transaction
for valuable
consideration, one that created an equitable interest. This particular
transaction is significant because it was not
completed before the deceased
died, indicating that the New South Wales courts will take a liberal view of
what constitutes valuable
consideration even in respect of incomplete
transactions.
When notional estate orders may be
4.3.1 The NSW
Succession Act
provides that the court may make an order
designating property as notional estate if it is satisfied that a person entered
relevant property transaction before his or her death and that the
transaction:
• if taking effect
within three years
deceased’s death — was entered into with the intention of wholly or
partly defeating or limiting a claim for
family provision;
• if taking effect
within one year
before the deceased’s
death — was entered into at a time when the deceased had a moral
obligation to make adequate provision
that was substantially greater than any
moral obligation to enter into the transaction. In these circumstances the
intention is irrelevant; or
• took effect or is to take effect on or after the deceased’s
explains when a relevant property transaction takes effect.
It provides that ‘a relevant property transaction is taken to have
when the property concerned becomes held by another person or subject to a trust
or as otherwise provided by this section.’
The section goes on to confirm
that a relevant property transaction can take effect upon the deceased’s
4.3.3 When a transferee enters into a subsequent relevant property
transaction, the court continues to hold power to make an order
designating
property as notional estate if it finds there are special
circumstances.
Succession Act
also deals with circumstances where a transferee dies and
the property becomes held by either their legal personal representative
distributed from their
Test that is applied
4.3.4 Broadly, for the court to make an order designating property as
notional estate, it must find that there has been disadvantage,
benefit, to the estate, or a person entitled to apply for a family provision
4.3.5 Specifically, the court must be satisfied that a relevant property
transaction:
• directly or indirectly disadvantaged:
o the estate of the principal party to the
transaction;
o a person entitled to apply for a family provision order; or
o if the deceased person was not the principal party to the transaction, the
deceased person; or
• involved the exercise (or failure to exercise) by the principal party
to the transaction or any other
of a right, a
discretion or a power of appointment, disposition, nomination or direction that,
if not exercised (or exercised), could
have resulted in a benefit to:
o the estate of the principal party to the transaction; or
o a person entitled to apply for a family provision order from the estate;
o if the deceased person was not the principal party to the transaction, the
deceased person.
Restrictions on power
4.4.1 There are a number of restrictions on the power of the court to
designate property as notional
4.4.2 First, the court can only make a notional estate order if it is
satisfied that:
• the deceased left no estate; or
• the deceased’s estate is insufficient for the making of the
family provision order or costs orders that the court thinks
should be made; or
• orders should not be made wholly out of the deceased’s estate
because there are other persons who could apply for family
provision orders, or
there are special
circumstances;
• the deceased’s estate has been distributed and no estate
remains, or the remainder is insufficient for the court making
family provision
orders or costs orders.
4.4.3 Secondly, the court may not exercise its power unless it has considered
the importance of not interfering with reasonable expectations
in relation to
property, the substantial justice and the merits involved in making or refusing
to make an order and any other matter
it considers
Factors considered when deciding what property is to be designated as
notional estate
4.4.4 The court must consider the following matters when deciding what
property should be designated as notional estate:
• the value and nature of any property the subject of a relevant
property transaction, or subject to a subsequent transaction;
• any consideration given in a relevant property transaction;
• any changes in the value of property or the consideration since the
relevant property transaction was entered into, distribution
consideration given;
• whether the property or consideration could have been used to obtain
• any other matter it considers relevant in the
circumstances.
4.4.5 The court may only designate property as notional estate to the extent
it considers necessary to make the provision that it
determines should be made
(or for costs to be
4.4.6 The NSW
Succession Act
also clarifies that, where property
becomes held by a person as a trustee only, the court may not designate any
property held by
that person as notional estate apart from the property held by
them as a trustee as a consequence of a relevant property transaction
distribution.
4.4.7 It is possible to apply to the court to vary a notional estate order to
change the property affected.
This enables property affected to be substituted for alternative property.
the defendant was
a friend of the deceased and the plaintiffs, the deceased’s adult
children. The entire estate, amounting
to almost $63,000, had been distributed
to the defendant to the exclusion of the plaintiffs.
4.4.9 The case considered whether the court can designate property of the
defendant as notional estate even in circumstances where
that property has not
been acquired with monies received from the deceased’s estate. Hallen AsJ
held that the NSW
Succession Act
does not require that the property
designated as notional estate has to be the same as the property distributed or
property into
which the distributed property can be traced. His Honour said:
It follows, then, that if the court is satisfied that someone (the Defendant)
has received a distribution from the deceased’s
estate (the distributed
property), it is possible to designate as notional estate, property of that
person (moneys in the Navigator
Personal Retirement Fund), even if that property
is not something into which it would be possible to trace any specific property
of the deceased.
4.4.10 Property of the defendant was designated as notional estate and
provision for the plaintiffs was made out of that estate.
Effect of notional estate order
4.5.1 An order designating property as notional estate extinguishes rights to
that property to the extent of the
Case examples
4.6.1 This next section summarises some decisions in New South Wales where
notional estate orders have been considered or made. These
cases demonstrate the
way that notional estate orders may be used to enlarge an estate for the purpose
of making an order for further
provision for a successful TFM applicant.
Superannuation Transactions
4.6.2 Section 76(2)(e) of the NSW
Succession Act
expressly provides
that where property becomes held by another person because of the
deceased’s membership of a superannuation
fund, that can form the basis of
a relevant property transaction. In addition, the making, not making or changing
of binding death
benefit nominations falls within the definition of a relevant
property transaction.
4.6.3 Problems in this area often arise in the context of self-managed
superannuation funds as was the case in
Kelly v Delucchi
, the deceased made a will leaving various cash gifts to
his three children. His will made a further gift to a friend, left the proceeds
of a life insurance policy to his grandchildren and the residue of his estate to
his wife (who was not the mother of his children).
This distribution was
frustrated by the size of the estate: it was not possible to pay the gifts in
full and as a result they abated
4.6.5 The deceased was a member of a self-managed superannuation fund.
Following the deceased’s death, his wife, in her capacity
as sole director
of the trustee company, presided at a general meeting where it was resolved to
allocate the deceased’s death
benefit to her. This resulted in the
deceased’s children not receiving any of the death benefits. The children
made applications
to the court as a result, and two of these, Peter and
Michelle, went to hearing.
4.6.6 Hallen AsJ had no difficulty in holding that the resolution was a
relevant property transaction falling within s 75 of the NSW
. His Honour also held that s 83(1)(a) of the NSW Act was satisfied in
that the relevant property transaction directly disadvantaged
each of the
plaintiffs, each of whom were persons entitled to apply for a family provision
order. Particularly, Hallen AsJ designated
the property of the superannuation
fund as notional estate to the extent that the actual estate was insufficient to
meet the order
for provision and costs.
Joint tenancies
4.6.7 Where the deceased is a joint tenant and does not sever the joint
tenancy before death so that the right of survivorship operates
to transmit
their property to the other joint tenant(s), that can constitute the basis of a
relevant property
transaction.
Cetojevic v
(decided under
Family Provision Act
), the deceased owned property as a joint
tenant with his parents. Following his death, his wife claimed provision from
his estate.
The question was whether the deceased’s interest as a joint
tenant could be designated as notional estate.
4.6.9 The New South Wales Court of Appeal upheld the original decision that
the parents held one third of the proceeds of the property
on a constructive
trust for the wife but went on to consider the notional estate question
(although not strictly necessary following
the constructive trust decision)
because there had been conflicting decisions in
4.6.10 On the one hand, in
Wade v Harding
, Young J had held that the
failure by the deceased to sever a joint tenancy was not a prescribed
transaction because, based on the
evidence before him, there was an ‘even
chance’ that the other joint tenant might have died first. In that case
the husband
survived the wife by only 20 days. His Honour held that what was
forgone in not severing the joint tenancy was received by continuing
joint tenant. In his view full valuable consideration was received.
Cameron v Hills
, Needham J disagreed with the view expressed
by Young J. In his Honour’s view, because the court had to consider the
immediately before the death of the deceased, he could not see how a
joint tenant about to die immediately can be said to have an
equal chance of
surviving the joint tenant. The Court of Appeal in
unanimously
preferred the approach of Needham J.
4.6.12 This being the case, the decision to remain a joint tenant cannot be
said to be ‘valuable consideration’ for the
purposes of determining
that no prescribed transaction (or under the current wording of the NSW
Succession Act
, a ‘relevant property transaction’) has been
Options for Reform
Introduction
5.1.1 Testamentary freedom is an issue close to many. Individuals want the
freedom to direct what happens to their assets, and the
reason for wanting this
basic freedom is simply the essence of property: ‘if I own this thing I
should have the freedom to
dispose of it in the way I want’.
5.1.2 Australia has tried to find a balance between allowing a certain amount
of freedom of testation and denying total freedom of
testation. One reason for
this is that, in the case of dependants of a deceased, there is no good reason
why the taxpayer should
bear the burden of support when that support could have
been provided from the deceased’s estate. As a result, TFM legislation
been introduced to limit freedom of testation, but only in relation to defined
dependants of the deceased and only if a court
considers that an applicant has
been left without adequate provision for their proper maintenance and support in
the circumstances.
5.1.3 Notional estate legislation works with TFM legislation — that is,
the courts have decided that a TFM application should be
allowed does the question of where provision should come from arise. In other
words, Australia has already accepted limited freedom of testation with the
introduction of TFM legislation. Notional estate legislation
merely broadens the
asset base available to satisfy an order. In that way, notional estate laws are
effectively ‘anti-avoidance’
provisions intended to complement
existing legislation.
5.1.4 The Institute has been asked to provide advice to the State Government
provisions.
explained that only assets in a person’s ‘estate’ can be
claimed in an application under the
. Part 3 summarised the
development of notional estate laws and previous views expressed about the
potential expansion of these laws
to other Australian jurisdictions beyond New
South Wales. Part 4 outlined the notional estate provisions that apply in New
Wales to extend the notion of a person’s estate to assets that would
otherwise not fall within an estate. This Part asks a
series of questions to
ascertain the degree of community support for introduction of notional estate
legislation in Tasmania and
the perceived advantages and disadvantages of each
Is there a problem?
5.2.1 In deciding whether to introduce notional estate legislation, the
preliminary question is ‘is it needed?’ Certainly
there are cases
from New South Wales that indicate that there is an amount of deliberate TFM
avoidance, but neither does there seem
to be an avalanche of instances of such
avoidance. Is there so much avoidance of TFM legislation in Tasmania that it is
in the community?
5.2.2 This is something about which there is little, if any, empirical
evidence. For this reason, the Institute seeks information
practitioners and others may have had in relation to TFM avoidance or TFM
implementation.
In your experience, do people deal with or structure their assets in order to
reduce the property that is available to make provision
for a successful
applicant under the
Testator’s Family Maintenance Act 1912
Please provide examples.
Advantages and disadvantages
5.3.1 There are various arguments advanced both for and against notional
estate legislation. These have been highlighted throughout
this Issues Paper. In
1977, the NSWLRC summed up the quandary as follows:
Should the Courts have power to override what would otherwise be valid
dispositions of property? The interests involved are fundamental:
hand, the interest of a person in arranging his affairs in his way and the
interest of a transferee of property in securing
his title and, on the other
hand, the interest of a family in not being disinherited. In trying to answer
these questions, any reformer
faces a dilemma. If all dispositions of property
made by a person in his lifetime are valid against the surviving members of his
family, the new Act will give incomplete protection to the family. And if the
surviving members can claim against property disposed
of by, say, their deceased
father, the new Act will be recognising a potential interest in that property
which must clog its alienability
and adversely affect its utility and
5.3.2 As demonstrated in Part 2, it is possible for Tasmanians to arrange
their affairs in a way that reduces the size of their estate.
This may be an
unintentional consequence of the way assets are held for other purposes, or it
may be to reduce the pool of funds
available to challenge through a TFM claim.
5.3.3 The NSWLRC points to two situations that it considers support the use
of notional estate legislation:
• where a father seeks, in favour of the children of his first
marriage, to defeat the claims of his second wife or, in favour
of his second
wife, to defeat the claims of the children of his first marriage or, in favour
of his mistress, to defeat the claims
of both his wife and his
• where there has been an ‘unjust gift’, perhaps from a
socially isolated, vulnerable individual who rewards a carer
months of institutional care ... at the expense of many years of family
5.3.4 In order to claim provision from assets gifted prior to death,
currently, a disgruntled beneficiary would have to resort to
equitable doctrines
to obtain an interest, or an argument based on a lack of capacity. A claim of
undue influence, for example, in
relation to an asset given away during life
simply determines whether the asset should be returned to the original donor
this situation, the donor’s estate). If such an argument is
successful, a claimant then needs to make a TFM claim in order
to obtain any
share of that property. A court with the ability to make a notional estate order
could simply recall that gift (providing
it was made within the relevant time
period) to fund provision for a successful TFM applicant if there were otherwise
insufficient
funds within the estate from which to fund that provision.
Consolidating these issues into the one proceeding may save time and money.
5.3.5 A key question is whether the Tasmanian community believes that
notional estate legislation is appropriate and necessary. To
this end, the
Institute seeks feedback on the following questions:
Should people be entitled to deal with their assets during their lifetime to
reduce the property that is in their estate and available
to claim under the
Testator’s Family Maintenance Act 1912
Please provide reasons
for your opinion.
Please indicate your level of support (if any) for the following proposition:
‘notional estate legislation should be introduced
in Tasmania’:
1. strongly agree;
3. somewhat agree;
4. neutral/no view;
5. somewhat disagree;
6. disagree;
7. strongly disagree.
Please provide reasons explaining your view.
Potential implications if notional estate provisions were
5.3.6 The VLRC observes that people deal with their assets in particular ways
before their death for a variety of reasons, including
to minimise tax and to
provide for their family during their lifetime, and that to introduce notional
estate legislation would interfere
5.3.7 The use of time limits to restrict notional estate orders to gifts or
transfers made within a certain period before (or at)
death could reduce these
issues. There is other legislation that affects gifts made during life for
longer periods — for example,
when calculating pension
entitlements,
bankruptcy legislation where assets are able to be clawed back for bankruptcy
Additionally, it
has been observed that the Family Court can clawback assets placed in trusts and
superannuation if a party is still
5.3.8 One matter that commonly gives rise to concern is farming property.
Farms are often handed down through a family for generations
and also are often
inherited by particular members of the family who are thought to be most likely
to keep the farm on foot and hand
it on to the next generation. The result can
be that some (non-farming) members of the family are left with very little in
of provision from (usually) their parents’
SALRI’s report
made the point that there is no ‘magic bullet’ to resolve this
This is particularly
so where there is one major asset that is relatively indivisible and a number of
claimants upon that asset.
5.3.9 The Institute requests feedback about any adverse implications that may
result if notional estate legislation were introduced
in Tasmania.
Do you consider that introduction of notional estate provisions in Tasmania
would create difficulties or issues? For example, in your
experience or opinion
how might notional estate legislation interfere with:
(a) tax planning;
(b) asset protection arrangements;
(c) provisions made for individuals during a person’s life;
(d) farming or business succession arrangements; or
(e) other aspects of estate planning?
The New South Wales
5.4.1 In order to fully consider the question of whether Tasmania should
introduce notional estate legislation, it is necessary to
articulate what those
provisions might look like. One option would be to simply introduce New South
Wales’ notional estate
laws without amendment. These provisions are
broadly consistent with the National Committee’s recommendations about the
that national uniform succession laws should take. Alternatively, it
may be that there is opposition to particular parts of the New
South Wales
approach and that, if notional estate laws are to be introduced, certain
variations to the New South Wales legislation
are required.
5.4.2 Part 4 of this Issues Paper summarised New South Wales’ notional
estate provisions. The Institute seeks feedback about
whether there are any
perceived difficulties with the NSW
Succession Act
and whether, if
Tasmania were to introduce notional estate legislation, there should be any
variation to the laws operating in New
South Wales.
If notional estate provisions were introduced in Tasmania, should the New
South Wales legislation be used as a precedent? If so, are
there any parts of
these provisions that you think should be changed? For example, do you consider
that there is a need to make any
(a) the types of property that may be affected;
(b) the acts (or failures to act) captured;
(c) the relevance of a person’s intentions;
(d) the period of time in which a relevant property transaction occurs that
is covered;
(e) the circumstances in which a notional estate order may be made; or
(f) any other provisions.
5.4.3 Finally, the Institute invites respondents to advance any other matters
that it is considered ought to be taken into account
when determining the
question of whether notional estate legislation should be introduced in
Are there any other matters in relation to introducing notional estate
legislation in Tasmania that you would like to comment on?
Testator’s Family Maintenance Act 1912
An Act to assure to the family of a deceased person a certain interest in
the estate of the deceased person
[Royal Assent 6 December 1912]
Be it enacted by His Excellency the Governor of Tasmania,
by and with the advice and consent of the Legislative Council and House
Assembly, in Parliament assembled, as follows:
Short title
This Act may be cited as the
Testator’s Family Maintenance Act
Interpretation
(1) In this Act –
adopted child
(a) in the case of a child that is adopted
in this State, means a child that is adopted by a person, or by a person and his
jointly, in accordance with the law relating to the adoption of children;
(b) in the case of a child that is adopted
elsewhere than in this State, means a child that is adopted by a person, or by a
and his spouse jointly, in accordance with the law of the State,
Territory, or country where the adoption takes place, as in force
at the date of
the adoption;
(a) an adopted child; and
(b) a stepchild; and
(c) a surrogate child;
means the Supreme Court;
includes the person with whom a person is, or was at the
time of his or her death, in a significant relationship, within the meaning
Relationships Act 2003
means, in relation to a person –
(a) a child of that person's
spouse; and
(b) a child whose natural parent
was the spouse of that person at the time of the natural parent's death;
surrogate child
means, in relation to another person, a person
(whether or not the person has attained the age of 18 years) –
(a) who is a child of the other
person by virtue of the operation of
section 26(1)
Surrogacy Act
, or a law, of another State or a Territory or a foreign country, that
corresponds to that Act; and
(b) who has not ceased to be a
child of the other person under that Act or law;
includes a codicil and a nomination made in accordance
with the rules of a society within the meaning of the Friendly Societies
(2) For the avoidance of doubt, the definition
of stepchild, as substituted by the
Justice and Related Legislation
(Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 2015
, does not apply in respect of a claim
against the estate of a person whose death occurred before the commencement of
. . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . .
3. Claims for maintenance against estate of deceased person
(1) If a person dies, whether testate or intestate,
and in terms of his will or as a result of his intestacy any person by whom or
on whose behalf application for provision out of his estate may be made under
this Act is left without adequate provision for his
proper maintenance and
support thereafter, the Court or a judge may, in its or his discretion, on
application made by or on behalf
of the last-mentioned person, order that such
provision as the Court or judge, having regard to all the circumstances of the
thinks proper shall be made out of the estate of the deceased person for
all or any of the persons by whom or on whose behalf such
an application may be
made, and may make such other order in the matter, including an order as to
costs, as the Court or judge thinks
(2) In addition to, and without prejudice to, any
other powers conferred on the Court or a judge by subsection (1) of this
the Court or judge may order that the provision to be made out of the
estate of the deceased person shall consist of –
(a) the payment to the applicant of a lump
(b) a life interest or any lesser interest in
any dwelling-house belonging to that estate; or
(c) a life interest or any lesser interest in a
dwelling-house that the Court or judge may order to be purchased for occupation
the applicant –
and may, in any case, order that that provision shall be made upon and
subject to such terms and conditions, if any, as the Court
or judge may think
desirable in the circumstances of the case.
(3) For the purposes of paragraph (c) of subsection
(2) of this section, the Court or judge may, notwithstanding any provision or
direction to the contrary in the will of a deceased person, order that any
moneys belonging to or forming part of the estate of that
person shall be
expended in the purchase of the fee simple of any real property.
(4) Where an application under subsection (1) of
this section is made by or on behalf of any person, the Court or a judge may
that it shall be regarded as an application on behalf of all persons who
are entitled under this Act to make such an application,
and if the Court or a
judge so orders, the application shall, for the purposes of section eleven , be
treated as an application made
by all of those persons.
(5) The executor or administrator of the estate of a
deceased person, on behalf of a person who is entitled to make an application
under subsection (1) of this section and who is not of full age or mental
capacity, may –
(a) make an application under that subsection;
(b) apply to the Court or a judge for directions
as to whether he should make an application under that subsection –
and, in the latter case, the Court or judge may treat the application for
directions as an application under that subsection on behalf
of that person.
Persons entitled to claim under this
An application under subsection (1) of section three for provision out of the
estate of a deceased person may be made by or on behalf
of all or any of the
following persons, that is to say:
(a) The spouse of the deceased person;
(b) The children of the deceased person;
(c) The parents of the deceased person, if the
deceased person dies without leaving a spouse or any children;
(d) A person whose marriage to the deceased person
has been dissolved or annulled and who at the date of the death of the deceased
person was receiving or entitled to receive maintenance from the deceased person
whether pursuant to an order of a court, or to an
agreement or otherwise;
(e) A person whose significant relationship, within
the meaning of the
Relationships Act 2003
, with the deceased person had
ceased before the date of the death of the deceased person and who was receiving
or entitled to receive
maintenance from the deceased person whether pursuant to
an order of a court or to an agreement or otherwise.
Application by summons in chambers
(1) Every such application shall be made by summons
in chambers, entitled “In the matter of the
Testator’s Family
Maintenance Act 1912
, and in the matter of the estate of _______
(2) A summons under this section shall be served on
(a) the executor of the will of the deceased
person or the person to whom letters of administration with the will annexed
granted, or, in the case of an intestate estate, the administrator of
that estate; and
(b) such other persons as the Court or a judge
may direct to be served therewith.
(3) The judge may, if he thinks fit, adjourn such
summons into Court.
. . . . . . . .
Powers of Court or judge
At the hearing of such application the Court or judge shall inquire fully
into the estate of the deceased person, and for that purpose
(a) summon and examine the persons who are entitled
to make an application under this Act, or such of them as the Court or judge may
think it desirable to examine, and also such witnesses as may be necessary;
(b) require the executor or person applying for
probate or letters of administration to furnish full particulars of the
Court or judge to consider net estate and
means of widow or child
In granting or refusing any such application, and in fixing the amount of the
provision to be made under this Act for any person who
is entitled to make an
application under subsection (1) of section three, the Court or judge shall have
(a) the net value only of the estate of the deceased
person, as ascertained by deducting from the gross value thereof all debts,
testamentary
and funeral expenses, and all other lawful liabilities to which the
said estate is subject; and
(b) whether any such person is entitled to
independent means, whether secured by any covenant, settlement, transfer, or
other provision
made by the deceased person during his life or derived from any
other source whatsoever.
Cases in which Court or judge may refuse
application
(1) The Court or judge may refuse any such
application if the character or conduct of any person by or on behalf of whom
the application
is made is such as in the opinion of the Court or judge should
disentitle him or her to the benefit of any provision under this Act.
(2) The Court or judge in making any order
under this Act may impose such conditions, restrictions, and limitations,
whether to prevent,
restrict, or defeat any alienation or charge of or upon the
benefit of any provision made under such order or otherwise, as the Court
judge may think fit.
. . . . . . . .
Evidence as to deceased’s reasons
for dispositions
(1) On the hearing of an application under
subsection (1) of section three, the Court or judge may have regard to the
deceased person's
reasons, so far as they are ascertainable, for making the
dispositions made by his will, or for not making any provision or further
provision, as the case may be, for any person, and the Court or judge may accept
such evidence of those reasons as it or he considers
sufficient, whether that
evidence would otherwise be admissible in a court of law or not.
(1A) Where an application under
section 3(1) relates to a will made under
by the Guardianship and Administration Board or the Court, the Court or
judge may have regard to the records of the Board or Court
relating to the
person for whom the will was made and the reasons given by the Board or Court
for making an order authorising the
making or alteration of a will in specific
(2) Nothing in this section shall be construed as
restricting the evidence that is admissible, or the matters that may be taken
account, on the hearing of an application under subsection (1) of section
Contents of order
(1) Every order under this Act making provision for
any person shall specify,
(a) the amount and nature of such provision;
(b) the manner in which such provision shall be
made; or be raised or paid, out of some, and what, part of the estate of the
(c) how and by whom the burden of any such
provision shall be borne; and
(d) any conditions, restrictions, or limitations
imposed by the Court or judge.
(2) The Court or judge shall in every case in which
provision is made under this Act direct that a certified copy of such order be
made upon the probate of the will or letters of administration, with the will
annexed, of the estate of the deceased person, or,
as the case may be, upon the
letters of administration of the estate of the deceased person, and for that
purpose shall retain such
probate or letters until such copy is made.
(3) Subject to this Act, every provision made under
this Act operates and takes effect –
(a) in the case of the estate of a person who
dies testate, as if it had been made by a codicil to the will of the deceased
executed immediately before his death; or
(b) in the case of the estate of a person who
dies intestate, as a modification of the provisions of the
Intestacy Act
(4) If in the opinion of the Court or a judge it is
desirable so to do, having regard to all the circumstances of the case, the
or judge may, in any order under this Act making provision for the spouse
of a deceased person, direct that that provision shall
operate for the benefit
of the spouse notwithstanding that he or she may, at any time after the making
of the order, remarry or enter
into a significant relationship, within the
meaning of the
Relationships Act 2003
(5) The Court or a judge may, at any time, on the
application of the executor or administrator of the estate of a deceased person
or of any person who is beneficially entitled to, or interested in, any part of
that estate –
(a) rescind any order making any provision under
this Act out of that estate or any part thereof; or
(b) alter any such order by increasing or
reducing the amount of any provision made thereby or by varying such order in
such manner
as the Court or judge thinks proper.
(5A) The Court or a judge shall not, in the
exercise of the power conferred on it or him by paragraph (b) of subsection (5)
section, alter an order under this Act so as to disturb a distribution
of any part of the estate that was lawfully made before the
making of the
application for the alteration.
(6) A person who makes an application under
subsection (5) of this section shall cause notice of the application to be
served on all
persons taking any benefit under the order sought to be rescinded
or altered.
(7) Upon an order being made under this Act, the
portion of the estate comprised therein or affected thereby shall be held
to the provisions of the order.
Provision for class fund
(1) Without prejudice to the powers conferred on
the Court or a judge under any other provision of this Act, the Court or a judge
may order that any amount specified in an order made on an application under
subsection (1) of section three shall be set aside out
of the estate to which
the order relates and held on trust as a class fund for the benefit of two or
more persons specified in the
order (being persons who are entitled under
section three A to make an application under that subsection).
(2) Where an amount is ordered to be held on trust
as a class fund for any persons, pursuant to this section, that amount shall be
invested, and the trustee may –
(a) in his discretion but subject to such
directions and conditions as the Court or judge may give or impose, apply the
capital of that amount, or so much thereof as the trustee from time
to time thinks fit, for or towards the maintenance or education
(including past
maintenance or education provided after the death of the deceased person), or
the advancement or benefit, of those
persons or of any one or more of them to
the exclusion of the other or others of them, in such shares and proportions,
and generally
in such manner, as the trustee thinks fit; and
(b) so apply the income and capital of that
amount notwithstanding that only one of those persons remains alive.
(3) For the purposes of this section, the
expression trustee means the executor or administrator of the estate of the
deceased person
unless the Court or judge appoints any other trustee (whether by
the order creating the class fund or subsequently), in which case
it means the
trustee so appointed.
(4) If the trustee is not the executor or
administrator of the estate of the deceased person, the Court or judge may give
such directions
as it or he thinks fit relating to the payment to the trustee of
the amount that is to be held on trust as a class fund, and may
exercise any
power conferred on the Court by section forty-seven of the
Trustee Act
, either on the creation of the class fund or at any time during the
continuance of the trusts thereof.
10A. Incidence of payments ordered
(1) The incidence of any payment directed to be
made by an order under this Act shall, unless the Court or a judge otherwise
fall ratably upon the whole estate of the deceased person, or, where the
authority of the Court does not extend or cannot be made
to extend to the whole
estate, ratably upon such part of the estate as is subject to the authority of
(2) The Court or a judge may exonerate any part of
the estate of a deceased person from the incidence of an order under this Act,
after hearing such of the parties who may be affected by the exoneration as the
Court or judge thinks necessary, and may, for that
purpose, direct any executor
or administrator to represent, or appoint any person to represent, any of those
(3) The Court or a judge may, at any time, fix a
periodical payment or lump sum to be paid by any beneficiary in the estate of
deceased person to represent, or in commutation of, such proportion of the
sum ordered to be paid as falls upon the portion of the
estate in which that
beneficiary is interested, and may exonerate that portion from further
liability, and may direct in what manner
the periodical payment shall be
secured, and to whom the lump sum shall be paid, and in what manner it shall be
invested for the
benefit of the person to whom the commuted payment is
Adjustment of estate duty
For the purpose of apportioning the duty payable on the estate of a deceased
person, any provision directed to be made by an order
under this Act shall
(a) if the deceased person died testate, be deemed
to be a bequest made by the deceased person by a codicil executed immediately
his death; or
(b) if the deceased person died intestate, be
deemed to be a bequest made by the deceased person as if effected by a will made
him immediately before his death.
Time within which application to be
(1) Except as provided by subsection (2) of this
section, the Court or judge shall have no jurisdiction to hear any application,
to make any order under this Act, unless the summons hereinbefore mentioned
be taken out before or not later than three months after
the date of grant of
probate of the will of the deceased person, or letters of administration of the
estate of the deceased person,
as the case may be.
(2) Notwithstanding anything in subsection (1) of
this section, upon application being made in that behalf by a person claiming
benefit of this Act, the Court or a judge may, after hearing such of the
persons affected or likely to be affected by that application
as it or he may
think fit, extend the time limited by that subsection for the taking out of a
summons for such further period as
the Court or judge may think necessary.
(3) The powers conferred on the Court or a judge by
subsection (2) of this section may be exercised notwithstanding that the time
limited by subsection (1) of this section for the taking out of a summons may
have expired (whether that time expired or expires
before or after the
commencement of this subsection).
(4) An application under subsection (2) of this
section shall be made before the final distribution of the estate of the
person, and no distribution of any part of the estate made before the
making of an application under that subsection shall be disturbed
by reason of
that application or of any order made thereon or in consequence thereof.
Succession Act 2006
(NSW) No 80
Chapter 3 Family Provision
Application of Chapter
55 Interpretation
(1) For the purposes of this Chapter,
administration
is granted in
respect of the estate of a deceased person if:
(a) probate of the will of the deceased person is granted in New South Wales
or granted outside New South Wales but sealed in accordance
section 107(1)
Probate and Administration Act 1898
(b) letters of administration of the estate of the deceased person are
granted in New South Wales or granted outside New South Wales
but sealed in
accordance with
section 107(1)
Probate and Administration Act
, whether the letters were granted with or without a will annexed and
whether for general, special or limited purposes, or
(c) an order is made under
NSW Trustee and
Guardian Act 2009
in respect of the estate of the deceased person, or
(d) an election is made by the NSW Trustee and Guardian under Division 1 of
NSW Trustee and Guardian Act 2009
in respect of the
estate of the deceased person, or
(e) an election is made by a trustee company under
section 15A
Trustee Companies Act 1964
in respect of the estate of the deceased
(2) For the purposes of this Chapter, the
legal representative
estate is the person to whom administration is granted.
(3) A reference in this Chapter to a
person entitled to
exercise a power
means a person entitled to exercise a power, whether or
not the power:
(a) is absolute or conditional, or
(b) arises under a trust or in some other manner, or
(c) is to be exercised solely by the person or by the person together with
one or more other persons (whether jointly or severally).
(4) A reference in this Chapter to
property held by a person
includes property in relation to which the person is entitled to exercise a
power of appointment or disposition in favour of himself
or herself.
– Notional Estate Orders
74 Definition
In this Part:
relevant property transaction
means a transaction or
circumstance affecting property and described in section 75 or 76.
75 Transactions that are relevant property transactions
(1) A person enters into a relevant property transaction if the person does,
directly or indirectly, or does not do, any act that
(immediately or at some
later time) results in property being:
(a) held by another person (whether or not as trustee), or
(b) subject to a trust,
and full valuable consideration is not given to the person for doing or not
doing the act.
(2) The fact that a person has entered into a relevant property transaction
affecting property does not prevent the person from being
taken to have entered
into another relevant property transaction if the person subsequently does, or
does not do, an act affecting
the same property the subject of the first
transaction.
(3) The making of a will by a person, or the omission of a person to make a
will, does not constitute an act or omission for the purposes
of subsection (1),
except in so far as it constitutes a failure to exercise a power of appointment
or disposition in relation to
property that is not in the person’s estate.
76 Examples of relevant property transactions
(1) The circumstances set out in subsection (2), subject to full valuable
consideration not being given, constitute the basis of a
relevant property
transaction for the purposes of section 75.
(2) The circumstances are as follows:
(a) if a person is entitled to exercise a power to appoint, or dispose of,
property that is not in the person's estate and does not
exercise that power
before ceasing (because of death or the occurrence of any other event) to be
entitled to do so, with the result
that the property becomes held by another
person (whether or not as trustee) or subject to a trust or another person
(immediately
or at some later time) becomes, or continues to be, entitled to
exercise the power,
(b) if a person holds an interest in property as a joint tenant and the
person does not sever that interest before ceasing (because
of death or the
occurrence of any other event) to be entitled to do so, with the result that, on
the person's death, the property
becomes, by operation of the right of
survivorship, held by another person (whether or not as trustee) or subject to a
(c) if a person holds an interest in property in which another interest is
held by another person (whether or not as trustee) or is
subject to a trust, and
the person is entitled to exercise a power to extinguish the other interest in
the property and the power
is not exercised before the person ceases (because of
death or the occurrence of any other event) to be so entitled with the result
that the other interest in the property continues to be so held or subject to
(d) if a person is entitled, in relation to a life assurance policy on the
person’s life under which money is payable on the
person's death or if
some other event occurs to a person other than the legal representative of the
person's estate, to exercise
(i) to substitute a person or a trust for the person to whom, or trust
subject to which, money is payable under the policy, or
(ii) to surrender or otherwise deal with the policy,
and the person does not exercise that power before ceasing (because of death
or the occurrence of any other event) to be entitled
(e) if a person who is a member of, or a participant in, a body (corporate or
unincorporate), association, scheme, fund or plan, dies
and property
(immediately or at some later time) becomes held by another person (whether or
not as trustee) or subject to a trust
because of the person's membership or
participation and the person’s death or the occurrence of any other event,
(f) if a person enters into a contract disposing of property out of the
person’s estate, whether or not the disposition is to
take effect before,
on or after the person’s death or under the person’s will or
(3) Nothing in this section prevents any other act or omission from
constituting the basis of a relevant property transaction for
the purposes of
section 75.
(4) For the purposes of this Chapter, in the circumstances described in
subsection (2) (b), a person is not given full or any valuable
consideration for
not severing an interest in property held as a joint tenant merely because, by
not severing that interest, the
person retains, until his or her death, the
benefit of the right of survivorship in respect of that property.
80 Notional estate order may be made where estate affected by relevant
property transaction
(1) The Court may, on application by an applicant for a family provision
order or on its own motion, make a notional estate order
designating property
specified in the order as notional estate of a deceased person if the Court is
satisfied that the deceased person
entered into a relevant property transaction
before his or her death and that the transaction is a transaction to which this
. The kinds of transactions that constitute relevant property
transactions are set out in sections 75 and 76.
(2) This section applies to the following relevant property transactions:
(a) a transaction that took effect within 3 years before the date of the
death of the deceased person and was entered into with the
intention, wholly or
partly, of denying or limiting provision being made out of the estate of the
deceased person for the maintenance,
education or advancement in life of any
person who is entitled to apply for a family provision order,
(b) a transaction that took effect within one year before the date of the
death of the deceased person and was entered into when the
deceased person had a
moral obligation to make adequate provision, by will or otherwise, for the
proper maintenance, education or
advancement in life of any person who is
entitled to apply for a family provision order which was substantially greater
moral obligation of the deceased person to enter into the transaction,
(c) a transaction that took effect or is to take effect on or after the
deceased person’s death.
(3) Property may be designated as notional estate by a notional estate order
under this section if it is property that is held by,
or on trust for:
(a) a person by whom property became held (whether or not as trustee) as the
result of a relevant property transaction, or
(b) the object of a trust for which property became held on trust as the
result of a relevant property transaction,
whether or not the property was the subject of the relevant property
transaction.
87 General matters that must be considered by Court
The Court must not make a notional estate order unless it has considered the
(a) the importance of not interfering with reasonable expectations in
relation to property,
(b) the substantial justice and merits involved in making or refusing to make
(c) any other matter it considers relevant in the circumstances.
88 Estate must not be sufficient for provision or order as to costs
The Court must not make a notional estate order unless it is satisfied that:
(a) the deceased person left no estate, or
(b) the deceased person’s estate is insufficient for the making of the
family provision order, or any order as to costs, that
the Court is of the
opinion should be made, or
(c) provision should not be made wholly out of the deceased person’s
estate because there are other persons entitled to apply
for family provision
orders or because there are special circumstances.
Supreme Court of Tasmania
– Probate and Administration <
https://www.supremecourt.tas.gov.au/probate_and_administration
In Tasmania, these laws are
contained within the
Intestacy Act 2010
Testator’s Family
Maintenance Act 1912
Provision Act 1969
Succession Act 2006
Provision Act 1970
Succession Act 1981
Inheritance (Family Provision) Act 1972
Administration and
Probate Act 1958
Family Provision Act 1972
Probate Rules 2017
(Tas) require those applying to the Court for a Grant to file an inventory of
the estate with their application:
That inventory must contain details
of ‘the real and personal estate which the deceased possessed, or was
entitled to, at the
time of his or her death’:
s 35(2)(a).
Succession Act 2006
Ken Mackie,
Principles of
Australian Succession Law
(LexisNexis Butterworths, 3
See John Stuart Mill,
Principles of Political Economy
(Longman, 1848).
Rosalind Croucher and Prue
Succession: Families, Property and Death
(LexisNexis Butterworths,
2014) 13–14.
Thomas Atkinson,
of the Law of Wills and Other Principles of Succession: Including Intestacy and
Administration of Decedents’ Estates
(West Academic Publishing,
ed, 1953) 36.
John De Groot and Bruce
Family Provision in Australia
(Lexis Nexis Butterworth,
ed, 2012) 3–4.
Widows and Young Children
Maintenance Act 1906
Testator’s Family Maintenance Act
Testator’s Family Maintenance and
Guardianship of
Infants Act 1916
Testator’s Family Maintenance Act 1918
Guardianship of Infants Act 1920
Administration and
Probate Ordinance 1929
Testator’s Family Maintenance
Ordinance 1929
Inheritance (Family
Provision) Act 1938
1 & 2 Geo 6, c 45. For a brief history of family
provision law see Gino Dal Pont and Ken Mackie,
Law of Succession
Nexis Butterworth, 2
ed, 2017) [15.5]–[15.8].
New South Wales,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Assembly, 3 August 1916, 578 (D R
Hall, Attorney General and Minister for Justice).
out in full in Appendix A.
Ibid s 3(1).
This is the so-called
‘twin tasks’ approach. See
Singer v Berghouse
(1994) 181 CLR
201, 15 (Mason CJ, Deane and McHugh JJ).
Bosch v Perpetual Trustee
(1938) AC 463.
Foley v Ellis
[2008] NSWCA 288
, [3] (Basten JA).
[1910] 29 NZLR 959,
Although not in New South
Wales, where it is regarded as a ‘gloss’ on the legislative
provisions. See for example,
Permanent Trustee Co Ltd v Fraser
(2005) 312 ALR 692.
See for example,
[2005] VSCA 127
, [8] (Callaway JA).
Ibid s 2(1) definition of
Defined to mean a child of
the parent’s spouse, and a child whose natural parent was the spouse of
that person at the time
of the natural parent’s death: ibid, s 2(1)
definition of ‘stepchild’.
Ibid definition of
Succession Act 2006
Administration and Probate Act 1958
definition of ‘eligible person’,
Succession Act
(definition of ‘dependant’).
Defined to mean a close
personal relationship (other than a marriage or a de facto relationship) between
two adult persons, whether
or not related by family, who are living together,
one or each of whom provides the other with domestic support and personal care:
Succession Act 2006
s 57(1)(f).
Administration and
Probate Act 1958
, definition of ‘eligible person’;
Family Provision Act 1969
Family Provision Act
Inheritance (Family Provision) Act 1972
Family Provision Act 1970
Inheritance (Family
Provision) Act 1972
Dal Pont and Mackie (n
A person’s estate can
also include assets that they are entitled to, for example debts owed to them by
third parties.
[1998] HCA 66
(1998) 194 CLR 457.
(2003) 214 CLR 169.
Schaefer v Schumann
[1972] AC 294
The facts in
involved specific real estate. The result may have
been different if the contract had simply related to all the estate or the
of the estate. In other words, residue after all claims have been made
against the estate, including family provision claims.
Dillon v Public
[1941] AC 294.
Calvert v Badenach
[2015] TASFC 8.
Ibid [74] (Porter J) quoting
Barns v Barns
(2003) 214 CLR 169, 184 [33] (Gleeson CJ).
[2.2.4]–[2.2.7] in relation to when gifts may be ineffective.
There are many authorities
Re Richardson
[1920] SALawRp 9
(1920) SALR 24
[2016] HCA 18
257 CLR 440.
The amount that the
deceased’s daughter was ultimately awarded following making a TFM claim:
Doddridge v Badenach
[2011] TASSC 34.
Calvert v Badenach
[2014] TASSC 61
, [3]–[4] (Blow CJ).
[1990] NZHC 852
[1990] 3 NZLR 243.
Russell v Scott
(1936) 55 CLR 440.
Statistics: Annual
Superannuation Bulletin
(June 2018, Reissued 22 January 2019) 6.
Metlife Insurance Limited,
Insurance Inside Super: A detailed report into members’ awareness,
attitude and engagement with Insurance Inside Super
Michael Easson, ‘Super
changes could leave thousands without enough superannuation’,
Morning Herald
(Sydney, 2 September 2018).
Ie, it complies with the
rules of the particular fund and superannuation legislation.
See discussion of White J in
Sam Wardy v Gordon Salier & Anor; William Wardy v Gordon Salier &
Anor; Hassiba Wardy v Estate of late Edmond Wadih Wardy
developer and Ch 3 of
Succession Act 2006
[2014] NSWSC 473
where it was held that
the deceased’s omission to appoint the assets of a trust to himself during
his life was covered by NSW
notional estate provisions, enabling the assets of
the trust to be considered as part of the deceased’s ‘notional
The National Committee for
Uniform Succession Law has pointed out, however, that: ‘If the power is of
the kind described as
general, that is, it can be exercised by the donee of the
power in favour of anyone, now the testator can deal with that property
virtually as if it was his or her own property’: Queensland Law Reform
Commission (‘QLRC’),
Report to the Standing Committee of
Attorneys General on Family Provision
(Miscellaneous Paper 28, December
Note that the
, however, provides that: ‘A general disposition in a
will of all or the residue of the testator’s property, or of all
residue of his or her property of a particular description, includes all the
property of the relevant description over which
he or she has a general power of
appointment exercisable by will and operates as an execution of the
Ibid s 11(4). See also
Easterbrook v Young
[1977] HCA 16.
Williams v Williams
[2018] TASSC 19.
Williams v Williams (No 2)
[2018] TASSC 61.
Williams v Williams
[2018] TASSC 19.
Williams v Williams
[2018] TASSC 61
See description of the QLRC
Succession Act 2006
Succession Laws: Family Provision
(Report No 110, 2005) 37.
Succession Act 2006
– Notional estate orders, Notes.
Inheritance (Provision
for Family and Dependants) Act 1975
(UK), see for example ss 9–13.
Uniform Probate Code
(US) §§ 2-202–2-209.
Family Maintenance and
Guardianship of Infants Act 1916
(Report No 28,
Established in 1991 by the
Joint Steering Committee of Attorneys-General.
Succession Law: A
Succession (Adjustment) Act
(Report 39, August 1997). See for example
127–135, C176–C191.
Family Provision
Supplementary Report to the Standing Committee of Attorneys General
No 58, July 2004).
Ibid Appendix 2.
Ibid [3.9]–[3.31].
Succession Laws:
Family Provision
(Consultation Paper No 12, 2012).
Ibid [2.69]–[2.93].
For the National Committee’s recommendations see [3.3.3] above.
Succession Laws
(Final Report, 2013) [6.180].
Ibid [6.181].
Ibid [6.183].
Ibid [6.185].
Uniform Succession
Laws for Australian States and Territories
(Working Paper No 47, 1995)
Ibid [6.175] citing R
Croucher, ‘Towards Uniform Succession Laws in Australia’
Australian Law Journal
Distinguishing
Between the Deserving and the Undeserving: Family Provision Laws in South
(Report No 9, December 2017) Part 8.
Looking After One
Another: Family Provision Laws in South Australia
(Background Paper,
February 2017). See also SALRI,
Review of the
Inheritance (Family Provision)
Factsheet 7 – Notional Estate and Clawback
(2 February 2017).
) [8.3.16]–[8.3.17].
Ibid [8.4.1].
Ibid [8.4.2] Recommendation
Craig Gregson LLM TEP,
principal solicitor at Gregson & Associates and Senior Associate at Havilah
Craig Gregson,
Estate Provisions: A Case for Implementation in Western Australia
2017) (A531550).
Ibid 11–12.
Ibid 16–28.
Ibid 42–50.
Appendix B contains a
full extract of
Succession Act
Succession Act
[1998] NSWSC 111
(1998) 43 NSWLR 422.
case concerned the estate of Charles Keith Hyland, who took steps since at least
1972 to limit claims on his estate by his wife
and children. As part of these
steps, Hyland formed a stiftung, the Gartner Foundation. A stiftung foundation
is a form of civil
law construct found mainly in German-speaking countries and
is a type of entity with its own legal personality but one which answers
absolutely to its founder. Hyland registered his Gartner Foundation in
Liechtenstein and transferred his assets to it. Before and
Hyland’s death, the Gartner Foundation was administered by Yves Defago,
who received all instructions regarding the
formation and running of the
Foundation from Hyland himself, or through Hyland’s representatives. The
nature of this relationship
was considered critical by the court, as the firms
that Defago ran were, by law, the founders of the Gartner Foundation. However
was the court’s view that in effect, Hyland ‘pulled the
strings’ that controlled the founder, in this case Defago’s
This was seen as important as, technically, it was the Gartner Foundation, not
Hyland himself, that actually made the decision
to exclude some family members
from the distribution of the estate.
Ibid 446–447.
(1987) 11 NSWLR 551.
[2005] NSWSC 670.
Succession Act
‘Principal party to
the transaction’ is defined as follows: ‘principal party to the
transaction, in relation to
a relevant property transaction, means the person
, enters into the relevant property
transaction’: ibid
Including alone, or
jointly or severally.
Succession Act
Ibid div 3.
[2011] NSWSC 1408.
Ibid [191].
Succession Act
[2012] NSWSC 841.
Succession Act
s 76(2)(b).
[2007] NSWCA 33.
(1987) 11 NSWLR 551.
(unreported 26 October
This question is based
upon a question originally formulated by the VLRC. See VLRC (n
) 34 Question FP7.
) [2.22.3].
Ibid [2.22.11].
Ibid [2.22.12].
This question was
originally formulated by the VLRC. See VLRC (n
) 34 Question FP8.
See for example
Security Act 1991
See for example
Bankruptcy Act 1966
The classic case is
Bridgewater v Leahy
[1998] HCA 66
(1998) 194 CLR 457
, in which Bill York made some
lifetime transactions to benefit his nephew, Neil York, whom he believed was the
only person who could
carry on his farm. (A portion of land was sold to Neil for
a substantial undervalue of around $546,000.) However, his benevolence
widow and four daughters with little in the way of assets from his estate. They
were successful in claiming undue influence
and unconscionable conduct in
relation to the lifetime transaction. However, the decision of the High Court
was split, and later
commentators have expressed disquiet at the acceptance of
the two doctrines in this case.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (467 KB)
PDF format (653 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter