URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/lawreform/QLRCMP/2007/42.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:46:51
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Public Justice, Private Lives: A Companion to the Confidentiality Report [2007] QLRCMP 42
Part 1 - Our report on confidentiality
INTRODUCING THE GUARDIANSHIP LAWS
OUR REPORT ON CONFIDENTIALITY
THE PURPOSE OF THIS COMPANION PAPER
Part 2 - A fresh look at confidentiality
WHAT DOES THE CURRENT LAW SAY?
FINDING OUR GUIDING PRINCIPLES FOR THIS REVIEW
Part 3 - What changes do we recommend?
More open hearings
Ensuring access to relevant documents
A right to know decisions and reasons
Greater public discussion of proceedings
Reframing the general duty of confidentiality: permitting appropriate use
Part 4 - The future of the review
Queensland Law Reform Commission
Public Justice, Private Lives: A Companion to the Confidentiality Report
August 2007
Acknowledgement
The Queensland Law Reform Commission would like to acknowledge the
contribution made by Ms Donna McDonald and Ms Katy O’Callaghan
preparation and writing of this Companion Paper.
The short citation for this Companion Paper is QLRC MP 42.
Published by the Queensland Law Reform Commission, August 2007.
ISBN: 978 0 7242 7754 4
Printed by: cpx printing & logistics
COMMISSION MEMBERS
Chairperson:
The Hon Justice R G Atkinson
Full-time member:
Dr B P White
Part-time members:
Mr J K Bond SC
Dr H A Douglas
Mr B J Herd
Mr G W O’Grady
SECRETARIAT
Ms C E Riethmuller
Mrs S Pickett
Mrs J Manthey
Principal Legal Officer:
Mrs C A Green
Legal Officers:
Ms M T Collier
Ms P L Rogers
Ms S-N Then
Administrative Officer:
Mrs Z Boldery
Address: 7th Floor, 50 Ann Street, Brisbane, Qld 4000
Postal address: PO Box 13312, George Street Post Shop, Qld 4003
Telephone: (07) 3247 4544
Facsimile: (07) 3247 9045
Email: LawReform.Commission@justice.qld.gov.au
http://www.qlrc.qld.gov.au
Our recommendations: reporting back to you
The Queensland Law Reform Commission has reviewed the role that
confidentiality plays in the guardianship system. As part of our
wrote a detailed Discussion Paper called
Confidentiality in the Guardianship
System: Public Justice, Private Lives
We also wrote a short paper,
Public Justice, Private Lives: A Companion
, as a guide to the longer Discussion Paper, and two pamphlets –
one for people who may need help with decision-making and one
families, friends and advocates. A CD-ROM was produced for people who need or
prefer to see and/or hear new information.
These documents outlined the purpose
of the review, discussed the features of the guardianship system and asked
questions about
the impact of confidentiality on decision-making processes in
the guardianship system and on people’s lives.
As part of finding out what people thought, the Commission held ten publicly
advertised community forums across the State in Brisbane,
the Gold and Sunshine
Coasts, Toowoomba, Bundaberg, Rockhampton, Mackay, Townsville, Cairns and Mt
Isa. In addition, the Commission
held fifteen focus groups with people
interested in, or affected by, the guardianship laws. Four of these meetings
were with groups
of people who may need help with decision-making. As a result
of our consultation, we received 260 submissions and heard the views
of hundreds
of people, which is the largest response we have ever had to our consultations.
We have included some of your views
in this Companion Paper.
We want to tell you about our recommendations to improve the law because:
• We appreciate your help during this stage of the review. In return,
we want to tell you what we did with your views, what
other views we heard and
what we now recommend to the Queensland Government.
• Our final report on confidentiality in the guardianship system is not
the end of the story. The Commission has further issues
that do not relate to
confidentiality. We want to keep talking with you as we will need your help to
consider those issues in the
For more information about the Commission’s Guardianship Review or
http://www.qlrc.qld.gov.au/guardianship
Table of Contents
COMPANION PAPER
REPORT CHAPTER
PART 1 – OUR REPORT ON CONFIDENTIALITY
Introducing the guardianship laws
Our report on confidentiality
The purpose of this Companion Paper
PART 2 – A FRESH LOOK AT CONFIDENTIALITY
What does the current law say?
Finding our guiding principles for this review
PART 3 – WHAT CHANGES DO WE RECOMMEND?
More open hearings
Ensuring access to relevant documents
A right to know decisions and reasons
Greater public discussion of proceedings
Reframing the general duty of confidentiality: permitting appropriate
PART 4 – THE FUTURE OF THE REVIEW
Appendix 1 –
Guardianship: an overview
Appendix 2 – Glossary
Appendix 3 – List of submissions
Appendix 4 – List of community forums and focus groups
For a more detailed discussion of the issues explored in this Companion
Paper, see the above chapters of the Commission’s Report,
Justice, Private Lives: A New Approach to Confidentiality in the Guardianship
report on confidentiality
INTRODUCING
THE GUARDIANSHIP LAWS
Queensland has two laws about guardianship: the
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
guardianship laws apply primarily to adults (people 18 years or older) who are
unable to make some or all of their own decisions.
The laws call this having ‘impaired capacity’. Someone has
impaired capacity if they cannot go through the process of
reaching their own
decision (free from inappropriate influence), having understood what that
decision will mean for them, and communicating
that decision. Impaired capacity
can be caused by dementia, intellectual disability, acquired brain injury or
damage, mental illness
or an inability to communicate in some way, for example,
because a person is in a coma.
While a person may have impaired capacity for some decisions, such as what
financial investment strategy to put in place, they may
be able to make other
decisions, such as where to live.
We talk more about how the guardianship system works in Appendix 1, but one
matter discussed now is the agencies and officials involved
in the system. An
understanding of what these agencies and officials do is an important part of
thinking about what role confidentiality
should play in the guardianship
Queensland’s
ardianship agencies and officials
Guardianship and Administration Tribunal
(‘the Tribunal’)
The Guardianship and Administration Tribunal is like a court but is less
formal. The Tribunal has the authority to appoint guardians
and administrators
for adults with impaired capacity and can give them directions or advice about
what to do. It can also make decisions
for an adult about certain special types
of health care.
The Tribunal works from the following principles:
• The Tribunal should only become involved when informal
decision-making is not working.
• Adults with impaired capacity do not need a guardian or
administrator unless informal decision-making is not working.
• The Tribunal’s main concern is the welfare of the adult with
impaired capacity.
Adult Guardian
The Adult Guardian is an independent official who protects the rights and
interests of adults with impaired capacity. One way the
Adult Guardian does
this is by acting as guardian for an adult. This happens when the Tribunal
appoints the Adult Guardian in this
role. The guardianship laws also give the
Adult Guardian power to consent to health care decisions for the adult if there
else who can.
The Adult Guardian also investigates allegations of neglect, exploitation
or abuse of an adult with impaired capacity.
Public Advocate
The Public Advocate is an independent official whose role is to promote and
protect the rights of adults with impaired capacity.
The Public Advocate also
has other functions such as monitoring and reviewing service and facility
delivery to adults. Unlike the
Adult Guardian, the Public Advocate’s
functions are aimed at systemic advocacy rather than advocacy on behalf of
adults. This involves identifying problems with the systems in our
society that impact on adults with impaired capacity, and working
towards the
improvement of those systems.
Community Visitor Program
The Community Visitor Program promotes the rights and protects the
interests of adults with impaired capacity, and adults with a mental
intellectual impairment. It does this through a network of community visitors
who regularly visit the facilities where these
people live or receive
Public Trustee of Queensland
The Public Trustee of Queensland is sometimes appointed by the Tribunal to
make decisions about financial matters for adults with
impaired capacity. When
acting in this role, the Public Trustee is the administrator of the adult.
OUR REPORT ON
CONFIDENTIALITY
In October 2005, the Attorney-General asked us, the Queensland Law Reform
Commission, being independent of the Queensland Government,
to review the
guardianship laws. Our review has two stages. We started by looking at the
confidentiality provisions in the guardianship
laws. Stage two involves
reviewing the rest of the guardianship laws.
In July 2006, we published a series of papers for stage one, including a
Discussion Paper called
Confidentiality in the Guardianship System: Public
Justice, Private Lives.
These papers asked questions about whether the
confidentiality provisions should be changed and, if so, what they should
We had an enormous response to these papers – the largest response the
Commission has ever received from a round of consultation.
People’s views
guided us in preparing a detailed final report on confidentiality for the
Attorney-General. This is the Companion
Paper to that report. It includes:
• the report’s guiding principles and the main issues about
confidentiality;
• what the Commission asked about the issues being reviewed;
• what people told the Commission during the review; and
• the Commission’s recommendations to improve the law.
The full report will be tabled in Parliament. The Queensland Government will
then consider whether it wants to implement the Commission’s
recommendations.
PURPOSE OF THIS COMPANION PAPER
The Commission wants to explain its report on the confidentiality provisions
and its recommendations to improve them to many people,
all of whom have
different needs and expectations of the guardianship laws. They include adults
who have impaired capacity, their
families and friends, carers, advocacy groups,
service providers, lawyers and interested members of the community.
To meet the different needs of so many people, the Commission has explained
the guardianship laws and our recommendations:
• comprehensively in a detailed report called
Public Justice,
Private Lives: A New Approach to Confidentiality in the Guardianship
• simply, so that you do not have to be a legal expert to understand
them. This companion paper,
Public Justice, Private Lives: A Companion to
the Confidentiality Report
, has been written as a guide to the longer
report, but can also be read independently of that report; and
• in pamphlets reporting on the major recommendations of the review.
Two versions are available:
A new approach to confidentiality: A guide for
people who may need help with decision-making
A new approach to
confidentiality: A guide for families, friends and advocates
In each of these papers:
• a reference to ‘the adult’ means a person 18 years or
older with impaired capacity;
• the term ‘guardianship laws’ refers to both the
of Attorney Act 1998
Guardianship and Administration Act
• the term ‘Tribunal’ refers to Queensland’s
Guardianship and Administration Tribunal.
A glossary of other terms used in this paper can be found in Appendix 2.
fresh look at confidentiality
DOES THE CURRENT LAW SAY?
The law sometimes protects certain types of private, personal or sensitive
information from being disclosed to other people. At present,
the guardianship
laws protect information as ‘confidential’ in three ways:
1. The laws allow the Tribunal to make
‘confidentiality
orders’ in some cases
. These orders are not commonly made but are
very important because of their potential impact on the people involved. They
certain people from:
• attending a Tribunal hearing, or part of a hearing;
• seeing a document being considered by the Tribunal; or
• knowing the Tribunal’s decision or the reasons it gives for a
2. The laws also stop people
publishing information about what happens
before the Tribunal
. This includes information such as who was at a
hearing, what they said, what documents were considered by the Tribunal, what
was made and what reasons were given for that decision.
3. The laws also protect personal
information people receive because of
their role under the guardianship laws
. This duty to keep information
confidential applies, for example, to members and staff of the Tribunal, the
Adult Guardian and Public
Advocate and their staff, guardians and
administrators. It also applies to people acting as attorneys, including
statutory health
attorneys. The duty protects information only if it could
identify the person it is about.
OUR GUIDING PRINCIPLES FOR THIS REVIEW
The Commission’s
views at a glance: a need for greater openness
During the review, we found that people strongly support greater openness in
the guardianship system. The Commission agrees that
the system currently leans
too heavily towards confidentiality. A careful balance must still be held
between the principle of open
justice, the requirements of procedural fairness
and the nature of the guardianship system. However, this balance must be found
within a guardianship system that increases the level of openness in its
decision-making processes. Two factors guide the Commission’s
The community must have confidence in the guardianship system
Greater openness will increase public confidence by bringing more accountability
and transparency to decision-making processes.
It will also increase public
awareness of the role of the guardianship system.
Good outcomes for the adult are put at risk by the failure to
disclose information.
Greater openness leads to better decision-making
because decisions are based on complete and tested information. Open
decision-making
is also more accountable. While some of the adult’s
interests (such as privacy) may be negatively affected, the adult’s
interests as a whole will be better served.
Revisiting and
rethinking the balance
Making a decision about how and when to impose confidentiality upon
information within the guardianship system is complex. We must
objectively
uphold the legal principles at stake while also being aware of the impact on
people of using private or sensitive information
when making decisions.
On the one hand, decisions affecting people’s lives must be transparent
and accountable.
Open justice
procedural fairness
fundamental principles of our legal system. The principle of open justice
requires that our courts and bodies like the Tribunal
be open to the public.
This includes conducting hearings in public and allowing proceedings to be
freely reported. The openness
required by this principle is at odds with
confidentiality.
Similarly, the rules of procedural fairness are a challenge for
confidentiality. They say everyone should have a chance to present
and to comment on any relevant adverse statements made about them before a
decision affecting them is made. It is unfair
to decide an issue without giving
the people affected a chance to respond. To do that, people need to know what
has been said about
On the other hand, some features of the guardianship system may suggest that
information should sometimes be kept confidential. We
need to examine the
special features of the guardianship system to decide how to rethink this
Special features of the
guardianship system
The Commission’s review revealed two features of the guardianship
system that distinguish it from other areas of law and influence
where the line
should be drawn between openness and confidentiality. These two features
suggest arguments both for and against openness.
1. Other people make decisions about a person’s fundamental
By their very nature, the guardianship laws give people enormous power in
others’ lives. For example, they allow people to
make decisions about
medical treatment for adults with impaired capacity.
When people are not able to defend their rights for themselves, the features
of open decision-making processes – accountability,
transparency,
consistency and predictability – help safeguard their rights.
A tick for openness
2. The adult’s interests come first
In Queensland, the guardianship system has moved away from the approach of
‘protecting’ adults with impaired capacity
towards promoting and
safeguarding the rights and interests of adults, including their right to the
greatest degree of autonomy and
their right to be supported in
decision-making.
Safeguarding rights and interests may mean taking steps to preserve an
adult’s privacy. Decisions made in the guardianship
system are private in
nature. They are only discussed publicly because the adult has impaired
capacity and needs the help of the
guardianship system.
Further, in some situations, disclosure of private information could actually
harm the adult. This could happen, for example, where
people use the
information they learn to take advantage of an adult. Confidentiality may be
important in these cases too.
A tick for confidentiality.
However, an adult’s rights and interests as a whole are strengthened if
people making decisions can rely on complete and tested
information, and make
their decisions in a transparent and accountable way.
A tick for openness.
The guardianship system is different from other areas in the legal system
because the focus of all parties is the same, that is, they
want the best
outcome for the adult with impaired capacity. Consequently, it is important
that the people who care about the adult’s
rights and interests are not
discouraged from participating in Tribunal proceedings because of fears that
their own private information
will become public. This would make the
guardianship system less effective.
A tick for confidentiality.
However, the focus of parties on the adult’s interests also means that
disputes may be resolved without the full testing of
issues that occurs when two
parties are battling for their own rights. When issues are not tested with the
same scrutiny as they
would be in the wider legal system, openness and
transparency can help ensure good decision-making.
A tick for openness.
What did people
Most people agreed that we must consider confidentiality in the context of
the nature of the guardianship system as well as the principle
of open justice
and what is required by procedural fairness. However, contrasting opinions were
expressed about how to resolve the
tension between these issues.
Some organisations and guardianship agencies said that the most important
principle to observe is respect for the adult’s rights
and interests,
including privacy. They said that this is particularly important because
private information would not be in the
public domain at all if the adult did
not have a disability. They also thought that the nature of the guardianship
system requires
that the adult’s rights and interests should be the
primary consideration.
However, the majority of submissions strongly supported greater openness in
the guardianship system. They said that greater openness
is needed to:
• ensure good decision-making;
• protect the rights of people involved in the guardianship system;
• promote community confidence in the guardianship system;
• meet concerns about accountability in decision-making;
• make the system fair; and
• improve community education and understanding.
Some people believed that open justice and procedural fairness do not have to
be in competition with the rights and interests of adults.
They thought that an
adult’s rights and interests are in fact improved by openness as it
increases the quality of decision-making
in the guardianship system.
‘How is it known that the primary focus of the guardianship system,
safeguarding the adult’s rights, is being achieved?
Without openness and
procedural fairness this may not be known. To me it is important enough that
this take preference to the protection
of privacy.’
A parent of an
adult with impaired capacity
Other people suggested that greater openness would strengthen the
community’s confidence in the guardianship system.
‘A system that applies open justice and procedural fairness might be
construed to provide greater transparency and more scrutiny
and therefore reach
better and fairer decisions. This will ultimately increase people’s
confidence and willingness to participate
in the system.’
Some people also favoured more openness because the rights and interests of
people other than the adult can be affected.
‘An order changing the accommodation of an adult may dramatically
impinge on other members of the family – who may have
relocated to be
close to the adult’s services, structured employment arrangements to suit
the adult’s needs, or invested
considerable energy and funds in converting
a house into a disability-accessible home.’
Caxton Legal Centre
Some people had strong views about who should be given information. The
general feeling was that people close to the adult, usually
family, have a
greater claim to information. However, it was agreed that it can sometimes be
difficult to identify who those people
‘Not all daughters or sons or spouses should necessarily be entitled
to access all information. The reality is that an adult
may have been close to
some family members and shared information freely with them, and not at all with
The Public Advocate
The Commission’s
guiding principles
The Commission decided that the following principles should guide its review
of confidentiality in the guardianship system:
• Three matters are relevant to determining the role of confidentiality
in the guardianship system: the principle of open justice,
the requirements of
procedural fairness, and the special nature of the guardianship system.
• The guardianship laws should promote greater openness in the
• The adult is entitled to know and obtain information about himself or
• The more involved and interested a person is in the adult’s
life, then the greater is that person’s claim to be
given information
What information should
be considered when making decisions?
A third special feature of the guardianship system that may affect the role
of confidentiality, while already part of the guardianship
laws, became more
apparent during the review.
The Guardianship and Administration Tribunal has
inquisitorial powers
. This means it has wide powers as to how its hearings
are conducted. It can determine its own procedures and it is not required
follow the rules of evidence. It also has a duty to inform itself of all
relevant information needed to make a decision where
this is possible. It can
do this by calling its own witnesses and asking for particular documents.
Consequently, the parties have little control over the information received
by the Tribunal. The Tribunal may, in fact, receive a
lot of highly personal,
private or sensitive information that is irrelevant. This also happens because
most people prepare for a
Tribunal hearing without a lawyer, resulting in a lot
of information being produced that may not be legally relevant to the issues.
This raises the distinction between irrelevant, relevant and confidential
information before the Tribunal.
A further guiding
The Commission believes that to protect people’s privacy, the Tribunal
must first work out what information is relevant to the
decision it has to make
a decision so it is only
information that needs to be disclosed
to the parties to a proceeding. Withholding
information is
not about confidentiality because not even the Tribunal will be looking at it.
The Tribunal may only make orders
to withhold information (currently called
‘confidentiality orders’) once it has determined whether that
information is
and would normally need to be disclosed to the
The Commission decided that another general principle should guide its review
of confidentiality in the guardianship system:
• The Tribunal must make a clear distinction between information that
is irrelevant to the proceedings and that which is confidential.
The question
of confidentiality only arises once it is determined that the information is
relevant and so must be disclosed to the
This diagram explains the Commission’s recommendations for how this
process of sorting irrelevant,
relevant and confidential information should occur.
changes do we recommend?
We asked questions about confidentiality on five main themes. The first four
related to the Guardianship and Administration Tribunal.
The last one related
to the general duty of confidentiality imposed on people involved in the
guardianship system.
1. Under what circumstances, if any, should the Tribunal be able to keep a
person out of a hearing?
2. Under what circumstances, if any, should the Tribunal be able to stop a
person involved in the proceeding from seeing documents
that the Tribunal is
considering?
3. Under what circumstances, if any, should the Tribunal be able to refuse to
give its decision or reasons for that decision to a
person involved in the
proceeding?
4. To what extent, if at all, should Tribunal proceedings be able to be
openly discussed by people outside those proceedings?
5. Apart from the situations referred to in questions 1–4 (which deal
with Tribunal proceedings), are there other circumstances
in which information
that is revealed within the guardianship system should be required to be kept
confidential?
We received many different ideas, opinions and suggestions from several
people throughout Queensland. Sometimes, a majority of people
held the same views. At other times, people’s opinions differed
In this Companion Paper, we include some of those agreements and differences
under the heading ‘What did people say?’.
We also give the Commission’s recommendations for improving those parts
of the guardianship laws that deal with confidentiality.
Sometimes these
recommendations may differ from what some people think. We give our reasons for
why we have made these recommendations.
If you want more information about any of these matters, you might like to
read the Commission’s full report,
Public Justice, Private Lives: A New
Approach to Confidentiality in the Guardianship System
. That document
discusses in more detail the law that is relevant to each of the issues, what
people said in their submissions and
at the forums we held across Queensland,
the Commission’s recommendations for reform and a full explanation of
those recommendations.
Finally, during our consultation the Commission also identified some new
significant issues relating to the guardianship system.
Because these issues
are not about confidentiality, they will be examined in stage two of the review.
However, as part of our continuing
conversation with you, we have outlined some
of them under a separate heading ‘The future of the review’ near the
of this Companion Paper.
open hearings
‘I am mindful of the argument that the privacy of
vulnerable people with decision-making incapacity is a right warranting
. . . (but) of equal if not greater value is their right to
appearances before a tribunal that is functioning optimally by virtue
adherence to the open justice principle.’
A journalist
the law currently says
What we asked
Section 109(1)
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
that Tribunal hearings are generally to be conducted in public.
section 109(2)(b)
says that if certain information is of a
confidential nature (or for any other reason), the Tribunal can make a
confidentiality order
to keep people out of the hearing or direct that all or
part of the hearing take place in private. The Tribunal may also prohibit
limit the disclosure of information given at a Tribunal hearing to some or all
of the people involved in a proceeding.
During our consultation, we asked:
• Under what circumstances, if any, should the Tribunal be able to
keep a person out of a hearing and why?
• Under what circumstances, if any, should information given at a
Tribunal hearing be able to be kept from a person involved
in a proceeding and
We also asked for other suggestions to deal with this issue.
DID PEOPLE SAY?
Open to the public
Most people, including the Public Advocate, the Adult Guardian, Queensland
Advocacy Incorporated, Caxton Legal Centre, some families
and carers of adults,
and media organisations, strongly supported Tribunal hearings being generally
open to the public
‘The highest standards of decision-making . . . are best achieved
through transparent, accountable, open proceedings and decision-making
emphasises the importance of the right to be heard and the right to test
Caxton Legal Centre
Some people said that open hearings would also provide an opportunity for
increased public awareness and education about the Tribunal’s
On the other hand, some people (including some
adults with impaired capacity) said that hearings should generally be
to the public
because matters discussed at hearings are essentially private
and personal. They felt that attendance by the public would invade
people’s privacy and could be embarrassing for the adult. Reasons put
forward for keeping Tribunal hearings private included
that they might be more
effective for obtaining information or to avoid adults being intimidated by
having to appear in front of
a large group of people.
A few people identified the benefits of both open and closed hearings,
depending on the circumstances. For example, it was suggested
that hearings
might be closed when held in a small regional community or where the application
was about a highly personal topic
such as a sterilisation or termination of
Some people identified practical issues about the openness of Tribunal
hearings, such as the lack of public notification of when and
where hearings are
held. Other concerns were that the need to complete a form before entering a
hearing room discouraged attendance
and that the doors to some hearing rooms
were locked.
Excluding people from hearings
Most people agreed that the Tribunal should have
power to exclude
a person from a hearing in certain circumstances
. Some common reasons given
by people included:
• concerns about the safety of the adult
with impaired capacity or another person, or about the adult being intimidated
to undue influence;
• the confidential, sensitive or private nature of the information
discussed in hearings;
• the desire to respect the wishes or interests of the adult who might
prefer that a particular person not attend a hearing;
• the positive or negative influence of the
presence of family, friends, support workers and media on the information people
give the Tribunal.
Several people said that the Tribunal should not be able to exclude people
involved in proceedings because allegations might be made
against them in their
absence. Some people also described their experiences of being excluded from
hearings and then not being told
what was said in their absence despite wanting
an opportunity to respond.
‘I believe that
section 109
was unfairly invoked and procedural
fairness was ignored when the members of the Tribunal banned [X] and I from the
telephone conference
A relative of an adult with impaired
Some people said that certain people with an interest in the adult –
for example, a guardian, relevant service providers, a
spouse or parents of the
adult – should
be kept out of a hearing. Other people,
including parents of adults with impaired capacity, said that the Tribunal
should have power
to exclude the adult from the hearing. One mother of an adult
with impaired capacity stated:
‘Some people with a disability react adversely to discussion
involving them. Too often people with a disability have to listen
to discussion
meaning people in the disability services
do not understand how this full on
discussion revealing every minute detail of the person can be a traumatic
experience and create
avoidable behaviour problems.’
In contrast, other people thought that the adult should be present throughout
all, or at least the majority, of a hearing. The President
of the New South
Wales Guardianship Tribunal considered that it would be ‘difficult to
envisage circumstances which would justify
the exclusion of the subject
A few people commented on the current practice of the Tribunal in speaking
with the adult in the absence of other people. Queensland
Advocacy Incorporated
noted the difficulties of assessing the effectiveness of this practice (given
that people are excluded from
the hearing room), but generally supported it:
‘In a more inquisitorial environment like the Tribunal other methods
like the panel simply speaking to the adult alone can be
effective . . . Often
there are assumptions made in relation to adults with impaired capacity by
parents, support workers and others
who purport to speak for them. The Tribunal
needs to satisfy itself by speaking to the adult as to the reality or otherwise
adverse effects of various persons’ presence. Again this ideally
will be raised with the person alone or in the presence of
support persons
chosen by the person.’
A few people suggested that this practice not only encourages the adult to
give full and frank information that he or she might not
otherwise disclose in
the presence of other people, but also lets Tribunal members test the
adult’s capacity. On the other
hand, two parents of an adult with
impaired capacity considered this practice unfair. They accepted that the
Tribunal spoke with
their son to find out what he thought, but considered that
the information gathered was flawed. Their son’s views change from
day and he could say ‘yes’ to a particular question on some days and
‘no’ on others.
Withholding information from parties
Some people, including the Adult Guardian, the Public Advocate, the Public
Trustee of Queensland and the Department of Justice and
Attorney-General,
thought that the Tribunal should be able to
withhold information from
in limited circumstances. Examples given were when:
• information could be used unfairly;
• it may be necessary to maintain the effectiveness of professional and
family relationships; and
• the disclosure of information may result in harm or have a
detrimental effect on the adult’s mental health.
While some people were particularly concerned about the consequences of
providing distressing information to the adult, one person
also noted that
information should be withheld only ‘after a lot of consideration’,
suggesting that the Tribunal would
‘ask itself what damage could be done by giving certain information
to the client? Should/would this client have known anyway?
(We all get bad
news.) Who benefits from information being withheld from the client?’
A daughter of an adult with impaired capacity
At a focus group of adults with impaired capacity, it was suggested that the
Tribunal should not disclose to other parties what the
adult has told it in
confidence and in the absence of others. Instead, it was suggested that the
Tribunal should use its powers
to investigate any allegations made by the adult.
The Tribunal said that one way it can assess the credibility of the information
given by the adult while others are absent is by testing it against the other
information it receives during a hearing.
However, many other people were concerned that adverse information about a
party was being given to the Tribunal without that party
knowing or having a
chance to respond. Some people considered that this goes ‘against the
laws of natural justice’ and
affects the quality of information received
by the Tribunal and the decision it makes. Australian Lawyers Alliance
‘If people who are involved in the proceedings do not have access to
all the information, the Tribunal may inadvertently be
restricting itself in
relation to evidence and information which it rightly needs in order to
formulate a decision which is in the
best interests of the incapacitated
A lot of people were in favour of adopting the special procedures that courts
normally use when hearing from vulnerable people. Suggestions
included using
technology such as video-recorded statements or a live closed circuit television
link to provide information away
from the hearing room, or having an independent
support person available before and during the hearing to make the adult feel
comfortable. It was thought that these procedures could reduce or avoid
the need to close a hearing or make information confidential.
Criteria for Tribunal powers
Many people suggested
criteria for when the Tribunal should be able to
close hearings to the public, exclude people from hearings or withhold
information
. Queensland Corrective Services and the Department of Justice
and Attorney-General considered that the current test is appropriate
flexible. However, other people, including the Public Advocate, media
organisations and Carers Queensland, thought the current
test is too broad.
Endeavour Foundation described it as ‘too open ended’.
Several people preferred a more specific test than the current law provides.
Some favoured including a reference to open justice
and procedural fairness, and
others preferred a test based on the best interests of the adult. Potential for
harm or disadvantage
to the adult or others, the confidential or sensitive
nature of the information, and the wishes of the adult were also suggested
possible criteria.
Some people suggested
different criteria for the three types of
that the Tribunal can make about hearings – closing a
hearing to the public, excluding people from a hearing, and withholding
information from a party.
There was some general support for the Tribunal to have specific criteria to
govern when it can close a hearing or exclude a person.
Suggested criteria
included where the Tribunal considers that there is a real risk of injustice or
serious disadvantage to anyone
as a result of giving information in a public
hearing. People suggested that other circumstances might be where the
information
dealt with in the hearing is ‘privileged’, where
conflicts of interest or personalities could cause friction, or where
‘criminal motives are intended’.
The Public Advocate considered that the appropriate test for when parties can
be excluded or denied information is if ‘serious
‘substantial injustice’ would result.
Carers Queensland and Caxton Legal Centre generally considered that there
would have to be ‘exceptional circumstances’
to exclude parties.
Two media organisations thought that the Tribunal should exclude a person only
where that person’s behaviour
during proceedings carries a genuine
possibility of disadvantaging a party, a witness or a person giving information.
Caxton Legal
Centre endorsed a similar test and also proposed an alternative
test based on whether the information is of such importance that
receiving it in
confidence is more likely to do justice than not receiving it. Some people also
thought the Tribunal should be required
to take as its starting point the
desirability of hearings being held in public.
Some people considered when the Tribunal might decide to close a hearing to
the public. The Public Advocate noted that this is different
from excluding
parties because the public, although having an interest in open justice and
accountability, is not entitled to procedural
fairness. She considered that
such a power should be exercised ‘sparingly’. Others suggested,
similar to the test proposed
by some for excluding a party, that closure to the
public is warranted if the Tribunal is satisfied there is a real possibility of
doing injustice to, or inflicting a serious disadvantage upon, a party, a
witness or a person giving information if the proceedings
are in public.
The Department of Justice and Attorney-General supported the current test for
withholding information from a party. The Public Trustee
of Queensland
considered that only in the ‘clearest and most compelling
circumstances’ should information not be available
to a party, for
example, if disclosure would ‘otherwise cause serious harm to the adult or
to another person, or put the safety
of someone at risk’.
Caxton Legal Centre suggested that simply not attending a hearing should not
mean that a person cannot know what is said there, provided
the party has an
ongoing interest in the case consistent with the adult’s. An adult with
impaired capacity said that an adult
who chooses not to attend a hearing should
have a right to a transcript of the proceedings. This is particularly important
with an acquired brain injury where memory problems can be an
COMMISSION’S RECOMMENDATIONS TO IMPROVE THE LAW
The Commission agrees with the strongly expressed view of most people that
Tribunal hearings should remain open to the
. The Commission notes concerns about the private, personal and
sensitive nature of the information discussed at Tribunal hearings,
the vulnerability of adults with impaired capacity. However, it considers that
open hearings strengthen the accountability
of the Tribunal and so are an
important safeguard for the people who appear before it.
The Commission also considers that the
policy of openness underpinning the
law should be better supported by the Tribunal’s procedures
of the public should be able to readily find out when and where Tribunal
hearings occur and be able to attend. For example,
the Commission considers
• The Tribunal should have a publicly
available law list, similar to other courts and tribunals, to tell members of
when and where hearings are to be held. It should be published on a
website or in a newspaper (or preferably both). This can be
done without
identifying the adult.
• Physical impediments that might
discourage public attendance should be removed. For example, the doors of a
hearing room
should not be locked while a hearing is in progress.
• Any procedures prior to a hearing, such as asking people to complete
an attendance form, should not discourage people from
attending a hearing. It
should be clear that hearings are open to the public.
However, the Commission considers that the
Tribunal should keep its
to: close a hearing to the public, exclude particular people
(including parties) from a hearing, and withhold information from a
to reflect the Commission’s view that greater openness is needed, we make
four further recommendations to improve
1. The guardianship laws should state that
parties are entitled to access
all information before the Tribunal
that is credible, relevant and
significant to the case. This right can be removed only by a specific
2. At present,
section 109
Guardianship and Administration Act
uses the same term – ‘confidentiality orders’ –
to describe several different actions such as closing a hearing
to the public,
excluding a person from a hearing, and withholding information from a party.
The Commission considers that clearer
distinctions need to be made between these
power to make ‘confidentiality orders’ should be replaced
with specific powers for the Tribunal to make the following
four types of
‘limitation orders’
‘adult evidence orders’
: The Commission
understands that the practice of speaking with the adult in the absence of
others is generally not done for reasons
of confidentiality but instead to make
sure that the Tribunal can obtain information it could not otherwise receive.
The Commission
considers that the Tribunal should be able to speak to the adult
in the absence of others for that reason, or if necessary to avoid
serious harm
or injustice, as long as it makes an order to do so.
‘closure orders’
: The Commission considers that if
it is necessary to avoid serious harm or injustice to a person, the Tribunal
should have power
to close a hearing to the public or exclude particular people,
including parties. The making of a ‘closure order’ or
evidence order’ will not make the information disclosed during that part
of the hearing confidential and will
not affect a party’s right to receive
that information. For that information to be kept confidential, the Tribunal
to make a separate ‘confidentiality order’.
‘confidentiality orders’
: The Commission considers
that the only ‘true’ confidentiality order is one that withholds
information from a party.
We consider that the Tribunal should only be able to
make a confidentiality order in the rare circumstances where it is necessary
avoid serious harm or injustice to a person. The Commission also recommends
that the Tribunal have this power in relation to
‘non-publication orders’
: This is an order to stop
people reporting Tribunal proceedings. This is discussed later in this
test applied for making limitation orders should be stricter
Because orders can be made only if it is ‘necessary to avoid serious harm
or injustice to a person’, they will be made
in very limited
circumstances. (There is a wider test for making adult evidence orders because
of the nature of the guardianship
system.) Further, the Commission recommends
that the guardianship laws should require the Tribunal, when considering whether
make a limitation order, to start with a presumption in favour of openness
and of parties having access to information.
4. To make limitation orders transparent and accountable, the Commission
considers that the following
should generally apply:
• The guardianship laws should be amended to clarify that parties and
anyone else affected by the order have the right to make
submissions to the
Tribunal before a limitation order is made. They should also have a right to
appeal such an order.
• The Tribunal should tell the Public Advocate when it is considering
making a limitation order (except for an adult evidence
order) and invite the
Public Advocate to comment on whether the order should be made. The Public
Advocate, as an independent statutory
official with systemic advocacy functions
under the guardianship laws, is in an ideal position to test whether a
limitation order
should be made.
• The Tribunal should produce written reasons for making a limitation
order (except for an adult evidence order). These reasons
should be provided to
the parties. Members of the public should also be able to request a copy in a
de-identified form.
The Commission recommends that, before making a limitation order, the
Tribunal should consider using alternative mechanisms
during hearings
such as video link-ups. This will help make the adult more comfortable but
still allow a party to participate as
much as possible in the hearing.
Finally, while not specifically about confidentiality, the Commission also
considers that the Tribunal should have
power to exclude a disruptive
from a hearing.
access to relevant documents
‘Limiting the disclosure of the documents to an active
party is a serious matter . . . It should be clear on the face of the
legislation to both the Tribunal and users of the guardianship system when the
Parliament considers it is appropriate to deny access
to documents. This is in the interests of accountability and
transparency, is protective of rights, and recognises a commitment
to provision of
procedural fairness to parties and open justice.’
The Public Advocate
What the law currently says
What we asked
Section 108
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
that people involved in a Tribunal proceeding must be given a reasonable chance
to present their case. This includes being
able to look at relevant documents
held by the Tribunal.
section 109
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
lets the Tribunal make a confidentiality order to prevent people involved in a
proceeding from seeing Tribunal documents.
During our consultation, we asked:
• Under what circumstances, if any, should the Tribunal be able to
stop a person involved in a proceeding from seeing documents
that the Tribunal
is considering, and why?
We also asked for other suggestions to deal with this issue.
DID PEOPLE SAY?
Inspection of documents
People raised concerns about the difficulties parties experienced when
inspecting documents
that the Tribunal has access to when making
In particular, the Tribunal’s practice of placing certain documents,
without making a confidentiality order, on an ‘inaccessible
so people could not see them was criticised. (Since February 2007, the Tribunal
has reorganised its filing system to
meet some of these concerns.) The Public
Advocate observed that this led to the perception that decisions about which
were relevant to the case and so were made available for inspection
were being made ‘on an arbitrary basis’. Part of
this perception
was due to the fact that it was a registry officer and not the Tribunal who was
deciding what documents were to be
put on the inaccessible spike. A few people
were also concerned about the Tribunal relying on documents that people had not
nor had the opportunity to comment on or correct.
Several people considered that the
period of time
between receiving
notice of a hearing and the hearing was too short for adequate document
inspection to occur.
‘People who are active parties to proceedings should be given
substantially more access and more timely access to documents
Tribunal, rather than less . . . In disability circles it is widely
accepted that where rights are diminished, confidentiality
is often the means of
camouflaging it.’
Queensland Advocacy Incorporated
Some people indicated that lack of time to inspect documents was worse in
regional areas where documents could only be viewed in the
few hours before a
hearing started.
Some comments to the Commission revealed the risks of a
poor awareness of
the document inspection process
‘Without assistance to effectively navigate the system, the
operational processes and procedures effectively deny people access
to important
information
Carers Queensland
Withholding documents from parties
People were divided in their views on the question
‘should the
Tribunal be able to make a confidentiality order in relation to
documents?’
Strong support was expressed by a range of people
– including the Adult Guardian, the Public Trustee of Queensland, the
Advocate and the Tribunal – for the Tribunal to keep a power to
make confidentiality orders about documents. At the same time,
many people said
that the requirements of procedural fairness and open justice mean that this
power should only be used in exceptional
circumstances.
‘Procedural fairness improves the evidence provided to the Tribunal
and the decision-making of the Tribunal. Otherwise, incorrect
information may
go unchallenged and be accepted as true . . . We have become aware of (many
examples) through our advocacy activities
where, as a result of unsubstantiated
claims, the family has been relieved of their caring responsibility resulting in
a disadvantageous
position for not only the family but also the family member
with disability.’
Carers Queensland
Reasons put forward
for keeping documents confidential included the need to:
• make sure that the Tribunal receives the best available information
because some people may be reluctant to provide information
if they know it will
be disclosed to all the
• maintain good relationships, for example, within families or between
service providers and
clients; and
• prevent the possibility of physical or emotional harm to the adult or
another person, or to deter elder abuse. This view
received strong support at
the community forums conducted by the Commission.
Some people said the
Tribunal’s power to make documents confidential should be limited to very
specific circumstances. For
example, one person said that no restrictions
should ever be placed on an adult’s or statutory health attorney’s
to access documents relating to the health of the adult. Others argued
that only certain types of documents – such as wills
and documents filed
by whistleblowers – should be kept confidential.
Many people believed that
documents should never be withheld from
to a proceeding. Their reasons included:
• Access to
documents is consistent with the requirements of procedural fairness and the
right to test the truthfulness or accuracy
of information. People thought this
was the most important reason – it received widespread support at
community forums and
from numerous individuals with personal experience in
attending Tribunal hearings.
‘Prior knowledge that anything stated in any document will be
protected by confidentiality emboldens people making such statements
and fanciful in doing so. To permit such a document a seal of confidentiality
is to display bias against the person adversely
affected and in favour of one
whose accusations have not been tested but are presumed true by the imposition
of the seal of confidentiality.’
A parent of an adult with impaired
• It ensures
the receipt of quality information and the promotion of quality decision-making.
That is, if access to documents
is denied the ‘full picture’ will
not be revealed and the Tribunal will not have all the relevant information it
• It assists
adequate preparation for a hearing. Several people considered that parties
require access to all documents to
allow them to prepare adequately for the
Tribunal hearing.
• The principle of open justice is undermined by not letting people see
Criteria for power to
withhold documents
The vast majority of people who supported keeping the Tribunal’s power
to make documents confidential were also in favour of
having legislative
criteria for when the power can be used. In response to the question
‘when should the Tribunal be able to make a confidentiality
, most people thought the current legislative criteria were
‘too broad’. On the other hand, the Department of Justice
Attorney-General considered that the current criteria provide the flexibility to
deal with the ‘complex and varied circumstances
of families’.
A significant number of people said that the criteria in the guardianship
laws needed to be ‘strict’, ‘stringent’
‘clear’, or to indicate a presumption in favour of openness and
procedural fairness.
‘We feel it would be useful to set out a presumption in favour of
openness regarding documents as between active parties. Significant
would need to be put forward and properly examined before access to documents
was denied.’
Queensland Advocacy Incorporated
‘There must be provision to allow the Tribunal to prevent
disclosure, but these times should be clearly spelled out so that
no subjective
attitude can influence what’s happening.’
Submission 67
Suggested criteria for making an order to keep a document confidential
included if:
• the Tribunal considered it was in the best interests of the adult to
• its release would result in physical or emotional harm to the adult
or another person, or vilification of an adult; or
• there is a real possibility of doing injustice or inflicting a
serious disadvantage upon a party, a witness or a person giving
information.
Some people also identified circumstances which they considered would not
justify the making of a confidentiality order in relation
to a document. For
example, Carers Queensland said that conflict within a family is not, on its
own, a sufficient reason for the
Tribunal to keep documents confidential.
Another view expressed at a focus group was that it is unacceptable to make
documents confidential
just because the information may cause a person
discomfort or embarrassment.
Some people thought there should be different criteria for withholding
documents from an adult than for withholding documents from
other people. For
example, Queensland Aged and Disability Advocacy said that the Tribunal should
be able to prevent the adult from
seeing a document if it would
‘forseeably affect the person’s ongoing medical treatment or
well-being’. However,
others, including the Adult Guardian, considered
the same criteria should apply to everyone.
People who commented on the issue of placing ‘restrictions’ on
the disclosure of documents said that it is desirable to
permit the Tribunal to
restrict access to documents either by allowing access to only parts of a
document or by imposing conditions
on the document inspection process.
‘One practical approach to the delicate balancing of competing
interests is to consider whether access should be granted to
the whole of a
document, only part of the document or indeed whether conveying the substance of
the material is sufficient. There
is High Court authority to support the
approach that only the substance of information provided to a tribunal needs to
be conveyed
in circumstances where there are concerns about
confidentiality.’
The President of the New South Wales Guardianship
Both the Public Advocate and the Adult Guardian said that, in their
experience, most applications for confidentiality orders are only
for partial
non-disclosure, for example, withholding the name of a doctor or part of a
medical report. The ability to restrict access
to documents rather than
withhold them altogether was also supported for the flexibility it provided.
Most people considered it appropriate to allow a party’s legal
representative
access to documents
that have been withheld from that
party. Some thought this was particularly important where a document has been
kept from the adult.
COMMISSION’S RECOMMENDATIONS TO IMPROVE THE LAW
The Commission notes the importance of
distinguishing between ‘relevance’ and
‘confidentiality’.
All documents that are credible, relevant and
significant
to a case must be available for
inspection by parties
Documents that do not meet this test cannot help the Tribunal make its decision
and so need not be available to the parties.
Tribunal’s filing system and the inspection policy should reflect this.
In addition, apart from the Tribunal’s own notes of a hearing and
documents that are the subject of confidentiality orders,
we consider that for
the purposes of the hearing the Tribunal and the parties should have access to
the same information. This means
that the Tribunal will make its decision based
only on the information that the parties know. The Commission notes that this
be the effect of the revised file structure adopted in February 2007.
However, in the past, Tribunal members had access for the
purposes of the
hearing to information that the parties did not see. Given the concerns
expressed during our consultation, we consider
that people will have greater
confidence in the Tribunal if its procedures ensure this does not happen (at
least without the Tribunal
having to make a specific order and invite the
parties to have their say on that issue).
As well as these changes in practice, we also
consider the guardianship laws should make clearer that a
party has a right
to access any documents
that are credible, relevant and significant to the
case, including before a hearing starts. This right can be removed only by a
specific order.
In response to people’s concerns about the
time provided for
inspection of documents
, the Commission appreciates that the Tribunal is
directed to conduct proceedings ‘as simply and quickly as the requirements
of this Act and an appropriate consideration of the matters before the Tribunal
allow’. However, we note that some matters
are complex and so more time
may be needed for inspection to be meaningful. We also note the problems for
inspections in regional
areas, where parties may only have the morning before a
hearing to read all the relevant material and consider their response to
certain circumstances, the Tribunal may wish to consider giving parties copies
of documents rather than relying on inspection
alone. The issue of copies will
be examined more fully in stage two of this review.
In relation to people’s responses to the question
‘should the
Tribunal be able to make a confidentiality order in relation to
documents?’
the Commission considers that the requirement of
procedural fairness to disclose all credible, relevant and significant
information
is essential for high quality decision-making. This allows both the
information and the credibility of persons supplying information
to be tested.
But sometimes disclosing a document or part of a document to a party could
cause the adult or another person serious harm or injustice.
Consequently, we
consider that the Tribunal should keep the power to make a document confidential
from a party. Because such an
order imposes confidentiality, the Commission
considers it should continue to be called a
‘confidentiality order’
To achieve our guiding principle of greater openness in the guardianship
system, we make three further recommendations:
test applied for making confidentiality orders should be
. The guardianship laws should impose a presumption in favour of
parties having access to documents and permit this right to be displaced
it is ‘necessary to avoid serious harm or injustice to a person’.
This means these orders will be made only
in very limited circumstances.
2. The Commission recommended earlier on pages
24-25 that certain
should apply to the making of
‘limitation orders’. Confidentiality orders in relation to
documents are one type of limitation
order and so these safeguards should also
apply to them.
3. The Tribunal should take
the least restrictive approach
when making a confidentiality order in relation to a document. This means that
only the information in the document that
is the cause for concern – such
as references to a person’s identity – should be withheld.
Another recommendation of the Commission is that the Tribunal should consider
disclosure to the adult or other parties
of certain documents or information should be facilitated
in some way. It
is desirable in the guardianship system that any distress or harm that might
occur when disclosing information to
the adult or others be minimised. One way
this might be done is to have a support person present when the party inspects
The Commission considers that it is appropriate for a
representative to have access to documents
or information
been withheld from a party. However, we note that parties are infrequently
represented at Tribunal hearings, and so it
would be unfair to require
information to be disclosed to a representative of one party, but not to a party
who is not represented.
right to know decisions and reasons
‘If people do not know the reasons behind decisions of
the Tribunal there will be continued suspicion about the process and
legislation in general.’
Endeavour Foundation
What the law currently says
What we asked
Section 158
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
that, generally, the Tribunal must give a copy of its decision and any written
reasons for that decision to the adult concerned
in a proceeding and to certain
other people.
section 109
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
lets the Tribunal keep its decision and reasons confidential from some or
all of the people involved in a proceeding.
During our consultation, we asked:
• Under what circumstances, if any, should the Tribunal be able to
refuse to give its decision or reasons for that decision
to a person involved in
a proceeding?
We also asked for other suggestions to deal with this issue.
DID PEOPLE SAY?
Almost all the submissions said that the Tribunal should have
no power to
withhold its decisions
from parties to proceedings.
‘There can be no reason or justification for denying a party their
right to know the decision in a matter. This notion is patently
clearly unworkable, particularly in the case of the adult concerned who may not
take kindly to his new guardian’s
involvement if he has never been
notified of it.’
Queensland Advocacy Incorporated
Only three submissions said that the Tribunal should have power to withhold
its decisions. However, one of these submissions also
said that the
Tribunal’s decisions should never be withheld from the adult or a
statutory health attorney.
Similarly, the majority of submissions said that the Tribunal should have
no power to withhold the reasons for its decisions
. Some submissions did
favour the Tribunal retaining this power, but thought that it should be used
only very rarely. They considered
that the legislative criteria that currently
govern this power are too wide. Possible situations identified where it might
be appropriate
to withhold reasons included where disclosure may result in
physical or emotional harm to the adult or another person.
In considering whether there should be a power to withhold decisions and
reasons, a number of arguments were discussed. Several people
said that such a
power is contrary to the principle of
open justice
and would undermine
the Tribunal’s accountability.
‘(It is) essential to the proper exercise of the power that is given
to the Tribunal, that there is transparency of Tribunal
decisions and to that
end, for written decisions to be provided by the Tribunal to parties.’
The Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Legal Service (Qld South)
Some people said that the giving of reasons is important in making sure that
procedural fairness
has been observed.
‘We also support an open and accountable justice system and believe
that evidence – especially when very serious and prejudicial
allegations are made about people – needs to be able to be tested and
findings noted on the record.’
Caxton Legal Centre
This was supported by the comments of people who said that, in their cases,
the reasons for decisions revealed that the Tribunal had
relied upon
inaccuracies and ‘wishy-washy’ information.
In contrast,
the guardianship system’s focus on promoting and
safeguarding the adult’s interests
led many people to argue that the
Tribunal should have power to withhold its reasons because of the vulnerability
of adults with
impaired capacity.
‘The guardianship system in Queensland is, of its nature, designed
to protect the adult and must have as its primary concern
avoiding harm to the
Australian Lawyers Alliance
A significant number of people, including the Public Advocate and some
members of the Tribunal, said that giving reasons for a Tribunal
decision has
the potential to cause an adult physical or emotional harm. They argued that
safeguarding an adult’s rights and
interests includes preserving
relationships in the adult’s life, such as with family, friends or
treating medical practitioners.
The power to withhold reasons is necessary
where their disclosure would damage or jeopardise those relationships, the adult
‘Some adults (who are) the subject of an application may have
challenging behaviour that means they are at risk of self-harm
or of causing
harm to others. Should the reasons for the decision cause them distress, this
may give rise to behaviour that results
in them harming themselves or becoming
violent to others.’
Disability Services Queensland
However, several other people said that the focus on the adult’s
interests in the guardianship system does not justify this
confidentiality.
‘To grant power to the Tribunal to make reasons confidential goes
against the very basis of open justice and procedural fairness.
(Although) the
nature of the guardianship system is designed to protect the rights and privacy
of the adult, those reasons are considered
to be insufficient to warrant a
Tribunal making such (a) confidential order.’
A parent of an adult
with impaired capacity
A large number of submissions and many views expressed at community forums
highlighted the importance of decisions and reasons to
‘The Tribunal’s decision and reasons are critical documents
for parties to determine whether they may take action . .
. in response to the
Tribunal’s decision in a matter.’
Department of Justice and
Attorney-General
‘The standards in the criteria (for withholding reasons) would have
to be extremely high, to ensure any aggrieved party’s
right to appeal is
not compromised.’
Queensland Aged and Disability Advocacy
Several people noted the importance of decisions and reasons in
acceptance of
the Tribunal’s orders
by those involved in a
proceeding. One parent of an adult with impaired capacity thought:
‘People have a right to be able to get on with their lives. A
decision with reasons in writing is something they can sit down,
understand how it is arrived at, and be more likely to accept it. One of the
biggest hurdles for people with an incapacity,
any incapacity, is the acceptance
of same, and the impact it makes on their day-to-day living. The withholding of
a decision or
reason for same just exasperates their situation and their likely
understanding of its effect on the total situation.’
Some adults with impaired capacity said that they do not need to be protected
from information.
Several people – including some at community forums – said that
giving decisions and reasons would
promote public awareness of, and
confidence in, the operation of the guardianship system
Several people also made a comment about
national legislative
‘It is difficult to understand why Queensland legislation is
currently out of step with every other jurisdiction in Australia
Endeavour Foundation
Provided it is
explained sensitively
, many people said that adults
would benefit from knowing the decision made in their case and the reasons for
it – even if that
information is potentially distressing. Suggestions for
facilitating this disclosure of information in an appropriate way included
so in the presence of a health professional, or having such a person advise the
Tribunal as to how its decisions and reasons
should be delivered in particular
cases. The Tribunal also considered that an express power in the guardianship
laws enabling the
Tribunal to direct the procedure for disclosure of its reasons
would be useful.
The Department of Justice and Attorney-General and Queensland Health
identified circumstances where it would be desirable for the
Tribunal to
delay telling some people of a decision
to protect the adult’s
health, well-being or safety. For example, Queensland Health noted:
‘A lack of available accommodation and support options can result in
the adult having to remain in an unsafe environment until
other options are
sourced. If the release of the decision could not be delayed whilst other
accommodation options were sourced,
vulnerable people could be placed at further
The Tribunal also favoured a power to delay notification of a decision or
reasons to deal with potential harm to an adult. It considered
the law should
be flexible as to the length of delay permitted.
COMMISSION’S RECOMMENDATIONS TO IMPROVE THE LAW
The Commission considers that people should
always have a right to know
the Tribunal’s decision and the reasons for that decision
should not be any power to withhold this information. This is consistent with
the Commission’s guiding principle that
there should be greater openness
in the guardianship system. As part of this, the Commission also considers that
any person should
be able to ask for a copy of a Tribunal decision and reasons
as long as those documents do not identify the adult.
At the same time, the Commission recognises that it is desirable for
potentially distressing information to be disclosed sensitively
should not be done by imposing conditions on disclosure as this could have the
effect of denying people information if the
conditions cannot be met. The
Commission instead prefers that in certain cases, the Tribunal consider whether
the disclosure of
a decision and reasons should occur in a supportive
environment. The Tribunal is to determine when and how this needs to happen
according to the individual circumstances of the case.
The Commission also considers that it might be appropriate for the Tribunal
delay the disclosure of its decision to certain people for up to 14
. This is allowed only if it is necessary to avoid serious harm to a
person or someone defeating the effect of a Tribunal decision.
This period of
time will allow substitute decision-makers or government officers to make the
necessary arrangements to address these
public discussion of proceedings
‘If public confidence in the regime is to be
maintained, the media should be allowed to discuss de-identified matters and
officials should be allowed to respond fully to issues, criticisms and
concerns . . .’
The Public Advocate
the law currently says
What we asked
Section 112
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
generally prohibits:
• publishing information about a Tribunal proceeding; and
• revealing the identity of a person involved in a Tribunal
proceeding.
There is some uncertainty in the law about whether ‘publishing’
information about proceedings means discussing it with
publicising it to a large group of people such as the general public.
Section 109
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
lets the Tribunal make a confidentiality order to keep certain information and
documents it has received confidential from members
of the public.
During our consultation, we asked:
• To what extent, if at all, should Tribunal proceedings be able to
be openly discussed by people outside those proceedings,
• What limits, if any, should there be on disclosing the identity of
a person involved in Tribunal proceedings, and why?
• Should any ban on publishing information relate to telling that
information to a single person or only to telling it to a
large group of people
such as the general public (for example, by the media)?
We also asked for other suggestions to deal with this issue.
DID PEOPLE SAY?
There was strong support for the guardianship laws to allow
openness in publishing information
People felt this would improve accountability, public confidence and community
Some people said that wider publicity would allow for better public scrutiny
and would highlight shortcomings in the system.
‘Quite often it is only when media become involved in certain issues
involving a person with a disability that justice is achieved.’
parent of an adult with impaired capacity
Having to ask permission to publish information about a proceeding can
sometimes delay the public’s access to timely information.
‘A journalist who sought the Tribunal’s permission to publish
information . . . received no reply for a period of six
weeks, and was then
given a hearing date for two months later. Such a lengthy delay will, in most
instances, defeat the purpose
for which access or permission was sought.’
Australian Press Council
It is also seen to contribute to the public’s limited – and
sometimes negative – understanding of the Tribunal’s
person noted that the current provisions prevent the public from being aware of
the valuable work being done by the Tribunal
and its consideration of cases in a
fair and just manner.
Some people did, however, favour keeping
some level of confidentiality to
preserve people’s privacy and avoid harm
. Some adults with impaired
capacity felt that limits should be imposed on what the media could report,
including matters about health
and matters that have an impact on a
person’s dignity. The Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Legal Service
(Qld South)
noted that Indigenous people are sensitive to intrusive public
scrutiny of private matters.
Some people felt that the public availability of information could lead to
financial exploitation and other abuse of adults. Others
noted that it can lead
to stigmatisation, discrimination and personal distress. This has particular
implications when the impaired
capacity is only temporary.
‘A middle-aged man with an extensive and successful business
suffered a stroke and had been unconscious for a period of weeks
. . . His wife
. . .was appointed as his administrator to see . . . (some) contracts to
conclusion. He recovered some 5-6 weeks
later, the administration order was
revoked and he resumed operation of the business. Public knowledge of the
proceedings would
have jeopardised the contracts and undermined the standing of
the business.’
President of the Tasmanian Guardianship and
Administration Board
People also expressed concerns about the accuracy and appropriateness of
media reporting. It was suggested that if the law is to
allow the media to
report on Tribunal proceedings, clear standards must be established as to what
is appropriate along with a standard
format for reporting stories.
Overall though, people felt that
prohibiting only the publication of
identifying information
would strike an appropriate balance between open
justice and preserving privacy.
What identifying information should be prohibited from being published
whose privacy should be protected
. Most people felt that not
only the privacy of the adult matters, but also the privacy of others involved
in Tribunal proceedings.
Some named specific people whose identity should
not be disclosed – the applicant and family, parents, parties,
whistleblowers
or any person who wishes for his or her identity to be protected.
People generally thought, however, that it is not appropriate for
bodies or organisations to be given protection from identification, as this
would limit public scrutiny.
Another issue discussed was
who should be prohibited from receiving
identifying information
– any person, or only large groups of people
such as the general public? Several people noted that the current law is not
clear about this.
‘The lack of clarity at present makes it very difficult to talk to
anyone about problems in the regime . . . Even informing
politicians of issues,
discussing matters with legal representatives and colleagues in advocacy groups,
even in a de-identified form,
seems problematic.’
Queensland Advocacy
Incorporated
Strong support was expressed (including from some adults with impaired
capacity) for permitting disclosures about Tribunal proceedings
adult’s family and friends, but not to the general public. People felt
that these personal discussions were necessary
to care for the adult properly
and to make decisions in his or her best interests. This was also seen as
necessary for the well-being
of people close to the adult. Families and carers
often feel the need to share and discuss information to know what steps they can
take and to cope with any difficulties they have experienced.
A few people were concerned about personal discussions ending up as gossip.
However, people also recognised that it was impractical
for the law to stop that
from happening.
Some people identified specific circumstances where disclosures should be
allowed, for example, to obtain legal advice, for medical
or health reasons or
to inform government about issues.
People also discussed
what level of de-identification is required
Some were worried that, even if a media report is de-identified so that the
general public cannot identify an adult, a neighbour
or those who know the adult
may be able to do so. However, most people felt that publication of that sort
of information should
still be allowed.
People had various ideas about
what information, other than names and
addresses, should never be published
because it might identify the person.
One parent of an adult with impaired capacity suggested that the only
information that should
not be published should be name, address, picture or
photograph, or voice recording of the person:
‘To extend it beyond this will be open to interpretation and could
result in facts which should be openly available being
confidential.’
Some pointed out that the amount of information needed to identify an adult
may be different in regional areas than in metropolitan
areas. People in small
towns know who in their community has a disability, and adults are therefore
more readily identifiable from
facts other than their names.
People generally agreed with the
Tribunal having power to allow the
publication of identifying information about a proceeding
considered necessary in some cases, either in the interests of the adult or when
legitimate public interests should prevail.
For example, publication of identifying information could be useful to seek
assistance from the public in locating an adult. It may
also be considered
important where systemic abuse is taking place and should be aired in a public
Some people argued for special cases where
identifying information can be
published without the permission of the Tribunal
. Some people, including
media organisations, strongly believed that an exception should apply when a
person, including an adult,
authorises publication of information about himself
or herself.
‘Guardianship legislation should not disenfranchise individuals who
choose to speak publicly of their experience in a Tribunal
The Courier-Mail
On the other hand, some people acknowledged that problems can arise in
determining whether an adult has sufficient capacity to make
this decision.
The Public Advocate proposed an exception be made for the re-publication of
identifying information that is already in the public
domain. The Adult
Guardian also felt that it was important to allow her office to respond to
public criticism. People also debated
how long any prohibition on the
publication of information should last, particularly after the adult has
‘If the argument is that we must protect the best interests of the
adult, if they have passed away, why is there a need for
confidentiality?’
A parent of an adult with impaired capacity
Most people felt the Tribunal should have an
additional power to prohibit
publication of any information about a particular proceeding
suggested that this power might be used when publishing even limited information
would reveal the identity of the adult,
for example, when a public figure has
lost capacity and is before the Tribunal. People generally thought that this
power should
be used only rarely and be governed by tightly constrained
criteria, for example, where it is necessary to avoid endangering the
a person or in the interests of justice.
Some people argued that the
prohibition on publication of information
should be consistent in the Tribunal and Supreme Court
. One respondent was
distressed to discover that his or her name, which had not been disclosed by the
Tribunal’s judgment,
was later publicly reported in the appeal before the
Supreme Court. This person did not want people to know of his or her
involvement
with the guardianship system and thought this public reporting
affected ‘the ability to get legal representation and a fair
other matters’.
COMMISSION’S RECOMMENDATIONS TO IMPROVE THE LAW
The Commission considers that
information about Tribunal proceedings
should generally be able to be published
. This is consistent with the
Commission’s guiding principle that there should be greater openness in
the guardianship system.
However, due to the personal, private and sensitive
information disclosed at hearings, there should be a
prohibition on
publishing information that identifies the adult
The Commission thinks it is generally unnecessary to protect the identity of
others involved in Tribunal proceedings. In most cases,
protecting the
adult’s identity will, incidentally, mean not identifying those people who
are close to him or her. In situations
where wider identity protection is
needed, for example where a whistleblower should remain anonymous, the
Commission recommends later
that the Tribunal be able to make non-publication
orders in specific cases.
Identifying information should
not be disclosed ‘to the public or a
section of the public’
, but disclosures to a person who has sufficient
interest in receiving that information should be permitted, as should personal
discussions.
While allowing personal discussions may have undesirable
consequences, such as permitting gossip, the law cannot stop people from
this. This test of ‘to the public or a section of the public’ will
also let people tell others information if
they need to as part of preparing
their case before the Tribunal. It would, however, stop the media publicly
reporting on a proceeding
if the story would reveal the adult’s
The Commission notes the confusion about
whether certain disclosures are
currently permitted
. Under our recommendations the following examples would
not be considered disclosures ‘to the public or a section of the
and so would be allowed:
• family members or close friends discussing Tribunal proceedings and
decisions with each other;
• a person involved in Tribunal proceedings discussing them with a
medical professional or counsellor;
• a person obtaining legal advice (for example, from an advocacy group)
as part of preparing for Tribunal proceedings;
• disclosing the appointment of a guardian or administrator for an
adult to nursing staff of an aged care facility where the
adult lives; and
• a guardian, administrator, attorney or carer disclosing identifying
information to Centrelink or other Government Departments,
to officials such as
the Public Advocate and the Adult Guardian, or to a Member of Parliament.
In deciding
what level of de-identification is required
Commission believes that prohibiting publication of information from which
could identify the adult would not work. This would allow only
very generic discussion of Tribunal proceedings because an adult’s
could identify him or her from a very small amount of information. This would
prevent meaningful reporting of proceedings.
The Commission instead recommends
that only information that is likely to lead to the identification of the adult
by a member of
the public or a member of the section of the public who receives
the information should be prohibited from publication.
The Commission suggests the Tribunal consider ways to de-identify its
judgments so that they still contain a sufficient account of
its reasoning but
are more ‘privacy-aware’. This is particularly important for
hearings in regional areas.
The Commission considers that the
Tribunal should have power to permit
publication of identifying information
if doing so is in the public interest
or in the interests of the adult.
The Commission also recommends that
identifying information should be able
to be published, without Tribunal authorisation
, in the following
circumstances:
• if the Adult Guardian or the Public Advocate believe it is necessary
in the public interest to publish identifying information
in order to respond to
identifying information that has already been published; and
• if the adult has died.
Further, a person should be able to publish identifying information if there
is a ‘reasonable excuse’ for doing so.
The Commission does not believe that an exception should be made if a person
authorises publication of information about themselves.
In this situation, an
adult with capacity (or a media organisation) can approach the Tribunal to
permit publication, if it is in
the adult’s interests or the public
The Commission agrees with the majority of people’s views that in some
circumstances
the Tribunal should have power to prohibit the publication of
any information about a particular Tribunal proceeding
. This might be
appropriate, for example, where whistleblowers wish to have their identity
concealed from the public for safety reasons,
or where the adult is being abused
and published information may allow the abuser to identify the adult and
continue that behaviour.
The Commission considers that such an order (a
‘non-publication
) should be made only where the Tribunal is satisfied it is
necessary to avoid serious harm or injustice to a person. In considering
whether to make such an order, the Tribunal must also take as its starting point
that it is desirable that hearings be held in public
and may be publicly
reported. A non-publication order is a type of limitation order and so the
safeguards recommended earlier on
pages 24-25 for making those orders should
also apply here.
The Commission also considers that the
prohibition on publication should
apply to some Supreme Court guardianship proceedings
, for example, where
there is an appeal from the Tribunal to the Supreme Court.
Finally, the Commission believes that the Tribunal should provide accessible
information about the confidentiality provisions that
apply to Tribunal
proceedings to anyone involved in a proceeding, or anyone who may wish to
attend, or report on, a proceeding.
the general duty of confidentiality: permitting appropriate use
‘Decency and good sense inherent in everyone should be
sufficient to prevent the irresponsible dissemination of any of this
information
A parent of an adult with impaired capacity
What the law currently says
What we asked
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
section 249
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
aim to keep certain information
confidential when it is gained by people who are acting under the guardianship
This includes people such as attorneys, guardians, administrators, Tribunal
members and staff, the Adult Guardian and staff, the Public
Advocate and staff,
and community visitors.
Both sections also have exceptions that allow disclosure of confidential
information. They include if disclosure is permitted by
the guardianship or
other laws, or by the person that the information is about.
An important exception is also provided for the Adult Guardian in
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
to disclose
information in the course of its investigations if it is ‘necessary and
reasonable in the public interest’.
During our consultation, we asked:
• Apart from the situations referred to in the earlier questions
(which relate to Tribunal proceedings), when should personal
information that is
gained by someone who is acting under the guardianship laws be kept
confidential, and why?
• Should there be any exceptions that allow a person to tell this
information to another person or body?
We also asked for other suggestions to deal with this issue.
DID PEOPLE SAY?
A general duty of
confidentiality
Some people expressed a general commitment to the
importance of the
of adults with impaired capacity.
‘The paramount consideration in all instances must be what is best
for and in the interests of the adult . . . Where possible
all efforts should
be made to retain the privacy and human dignity of the adult.’
Australian Lawyers Alliance
People were divided over whether there should be a
general duty of
confidentiality
under the guardianship laws, although most people agreed
that some form of confidentiality is needed. Views ranged from favouring
confidentiality provisions at all through to imposing confidentiality with
exceptions.
‘I believe that decency and good sense inherent in everyone should
be sufficient to prevent the irresponsible dissemination
of any of this
information to persons not entitled thereto and that to enforce a blanket
prohibition thereon would be to adopt a
totalitarian approach detrimental to
personal liberty . . .’
A parent of an adult with impaired
‘Given the nature of the business of the guardianship system,
information obtained within that system, for the limited purposes
system, should almost without exception be confidential.’
College of Nursing Australia
‘Information pertaining to the affairs of an adult with diminished
capacity should in the normal course . . . be treated as
confidential. However,
the Act should also allow persons, who are concerned that an adult’s best
interests and well-being
are not being protected or advanced, to disclose that
information to another person or body who may assist the adult.’
Most people who commented on the issue of
who should be subject to the
duty of confidentiality
said that it should continue to apply to the list of
people who are currently set out in the guardianship laws (guardians,
administrators,
attorneys and the statutory guardianship agencies and
officials). The Community Visitor Program and others also suggested that the
list should be extended to include, in addition to the community visitors, the
staff administering that program.
The Public Advocate said that the duty of confidentiality should apply only
to professionals, such as the Adult Guardian and the Public
Queensland. She said that lay guardians and administrators should be required
to respect an adult’s privacy under
more general provisions, like the
General Principles:
‘A daughter, son or parent, in most circumstances, will have freely
shared information with other relevant members of the adult’s
support network. The types of information commonly shared may in the future
become confidential if gained while guardian
or administrator. This seems
artificial and confusing for those involved.’
Some people also said that the duty should not apply to informal substitute
decision-makers because it would hinder appropriate discussion
adult’s support network.
‘Not only would enforcement be very difficult – such
prohibition would be likely to prevent a range of actions occurring
which might
be beneficial for an adult (or for others – without disadvantage to the
adult), and inhibit normal interaction
between the adult and the adult’s
family or the adult’s friends, between family members and others.’
Submission 119
Some people commented on
what kind of information the duty of
confidentiality should apply to
. The Department of Justice and
Attorney-General, the Adult Guardian, and the Public Advocate considered the
duty should cover ‘any
information gained through the person’s
involvement in the administration of the legislation.’
Some people suggested that the duty of confidentiality should cover
information that identifies a person. A few people also considered
duty should apply only if the information has not already been publicly
disclosed. Other people nominated particular types
of information that should
be covered by the duty, for example:
‘Information about a person’s financial affairs, state of
health, personal relationships, personal attributes or related
matters appears
to be the obvious matters that require protection.’
Caxton Legal
Some people also commented on
what kind of conduct the duty of
confidentiality should prevent
. Most said the duty should prevent the
information from being disclosed, but not from being recorded. The Public
Advocate commented,
for example, that it is necessary for guardians and others
performing functions under the guardianship laws to keep proper records
information. She considered that the real issue was disclosure of the
information to others.
Some people suggested that all disclosures of confidential information, even
those by people who are not fulfilling a role under the
guardianship laws and so
receive information informally, should be prevented. Others disagreed,
including Queensland Advocacy Incorporated
who expressed concern about
restricting ‘secondary disclosures’ which may be appropriate within
an adult’s family
and support network:
‘A process where a guardian shares information with individuals
within such groups but the recipients of the information cannot
share it within
the “family” or support circle is unworkable and could isolate the
adult from all the people in the world
who genuinely care for
Guardianship and Administration Reform Drivers
suggested that investigation reports by the Adult Guardian should be made
‘It is a matter of public interest that existing and potential
consumers of any service provider have access to information,
good or bad, about
the service so they can make an informed decision . . . Reservations about
publication of reports should only
arise where the vulnerability of the person
with the incapacity may be heightened.’
Exceptions to the duty
of confidentiality
Most people said the guardianship laws
should provide exceptions
the general duty of confidentiality. For example, Caxton Legal Centre said:
‘Because of the way in which decisions can impact so dramatically on
other people associated with an adult, some flexibility
confidentiality rules is required. A model where a duty of confidentiality is
applied with reasonable exceptions is the
most appropriate model for those
working in the administration of guardianship.’
Some people said that an adult’s right to privacy is just one of many
interests that are safeguarded in the guardianship system.
‘Confidentiality should not always be the paramount issue. It is
very possible, depending on the situation, for the best interests
of the adult
to be served through a stay of their right to confidentiality.’
Carers Queensland
Concerns were also raised about the duty of confidentiality being followed at
the expense of accountability and transparency.
‘Although the confidentiality provisions within the regime are
designed to protect the privacy of the clients for whom decisions
undertaken, the community view is that that ideal is simply invoked to provide
blanket protection for the conduct of public
officials.’
This ‘blanket of secrecy’ has:
‘led to anger, uncertainty, ambivalence and ambiguity.’
Cerebral Palsy League of Queensland
People suggested that
information might need to be disclosed
following circumstances:
• For consultation between formally
appointed substitute decision-makers.
• To gather information and views. Some
people said that confidentiality should not interfere with good decision-making.
is a need for consultation by a guardian, administrator or attorney with
members of the adult’s support network when gathering
information and
views to inform decision-making for the adult. But concerns were expressed that
this is not happening.
‘It is still insulting that a guardian would presume to know what my
mother’s needs are more than I who actually sees
her every week.’
A daughter of an adult with impaired
• When informing carers and families of decisions. Many people said it
is crucial that information is shared with an adult’s
carers and family
members, especially when decisions involve health matters. In their view, it is
essential for carers to be informed
appointments, medical test results, and prescribed medications – this
information assists
in the day-to-day care of the adult. This view was shared
by Queensland Advocacy Incorporated, Endeavour Foundation and Carers
Queensland.
‘While confidentiality concerning private and personal information
is important, this should not unnecessarily obstruct the
flow of information to
those close to the adult. The appropriate sharing of information with the
adult’s family and carers
is essential.’
Carers Queensland
• To disclose adverse information held by
decision-making bodies, like the Adult Guardian, in the interest of procedural
‘These complaints were made against me but at no stage was I
informed who had made them nor was I informed what the substance
complaints was. The secrecy provisions meant that these complaints and who had
made them need not be disclosed by the Adult
Guardian to me.’
of an adult with impaired capacity
Some people also said the
current exceptions provided by the guardianship
laws should continue
to apply, for example, to allow disclosure when: the
person gives his or her consent; the Tribunal or the Supreme Court gives its
permission; it is for a Tribunal or court proceeding; or it is permitted or
required under another law.
new exceptions for disclosures were also suggested
given were if disclosure of information would:
• advance the adult’s interests or prevent harm to the adult;
• assist the police or another law enforcement agency;
• protect the public interest by opening up the guardianship system for
greater discussion;
• assist in obtaining legal advice or preparing an application for
Tribunal proceedings; and
• let people tell the guardianship agencies and officials the
information they need to do their job.
Most people thought the guardianship laws should include a specific exception
to the general duty of confidentiality for the Adult
Guardian. People said the
existing exception for disclosures made by the Adult Guardian about
investigations should generally be
That exception permits a disclosure if it is ‘necessary and reasonable
in the public interest’, but only if it is not
‘likely to prejudice
the investigation’. The Adult Guardian may identify the complainant
‘only if it is necessary
and reasonable’. The exception also
provides that the Adult Guardian may express a criticism of a person only if the
has been given ‘an opportunity to answer the criticism’.
COMMISSION’S RECOMMENDATIONS TO IMPROVE THE LAW
A general duty of
confidentiality
The Commission considers that
a general duty of confidentiality
be applied to information that a person receives when performing a role under
the guardianship laws. The privacy of adults
and others who have contact with
the guardianship system should be respected.
However, the Commission considers that the
duty of confidentiality should
not interfere with the appropriate use of that information
guardianship laws. Under the current law, this is one of the exceptions to the
duty of confidentiality, but the Commission
thinks that it should be part of the
duty itself. It is important that confidentiality does not stop people in the
guardianship
system from carrying out their responsibilities properly.
The Commission therefore recommends that the duty of confidentiality should
a duty to use information only for the purposes of the guardianship
. This reframing of the duty is likely to encourage greater openness
and permit appropriate disclosures. Circumstances where disclosures
appropriately be made for the purposes of the guardianship laws include
• complying with an obligation under the guardianship laws;
• making a substitute decision for a matter;
• performing functions or exercising powers under the guardianship
• complying with procedural fairness.
A duty to use information for the purposes of the guardianship legislation
will also not stop people from making or keeping appropriate
information.
The duty of confidentiality should continue to
people who are acting under the guardianship laws
particular, the Commission considers the duty should apply to:
• attorneys, including statutory health attorneys;
• guardians and administrators;
• community visitors and other staff of the Community Visitor
• the Adult Guardian and his or her staff;
• the Public Advocate and his or her staff; and
• members and staff of the Tribunal.
Sometimes it will be difficult for family members or friends who are acting
as guardians, administrators or attorneys to decide whether
they received
information because of their guardianship role or because of their personal
relationship with the adult. Information
received in a guardianship role is
generally confidential but other information is not. This is a problem but can
be managed by
making the scope of the duty of confidentiality clear and by
educating people about how it works.
The Commission considers that the duty of confidentiality should
be extended to apply to informal decision-makers. They are not acting under the
guardianship laws. This means that people can share
information about the adult
and others. Nevertheless, informal decision-makers, like others in the
community, should exercise their
good judgment in respecting the privacy of
The Commission also thinks that the duty of
confidentiality should
be extended to apply to service providers who
may gain information about an adult. Other obligations of confidentiality
operate in this situation.
The Commission considers that the
duty of confidentiality should apply to
information
• is gained in connection with acting under
the guardianship laws;
• is about a person’s affairs (which
would include financial and business information); and
• enables someone to identify the
Information that is already
within the public
be covered by the duty of confidentiality. This
includes information about Tribunal proceedings (although other parts of the
guardianship
laws discussed earlier restrict the reporting of those
proceedings).
The Commission also considers that the duty of confidentiality should not
prevent a person from
disclosing information about another person
Exceptions to the duty
of confidentiality
The Commission considers that the guardianship
should provide exceptions
to the duty of confidentiality.
Flexibility is necessary if information is to be used appropriately and
responsively, and to ensure
that decision-making is accountable and
transparent.
The Commission also notes that the
duty of confidentiality appears to have been applied inflexibly sometimes. The
Commission therefore
considers the guardianship laws should clearly state when
disclosure is permitted.
The Commission
recommends that the current exceptions in the guardianship laws should be kept
(or changed only slightly) to allow
disclosure when it is:
• authorised or required
under another law
for a legal proceeding
arising out of or in connection with
the guardianship laws;
authorised by the person
to whom the information relates;
• authorised by the Tribunal or the Supreme Court
in the interests
The Commission does
think a new exception is needed for
disclosures made in the adult’s best interests. The Commission considers
that such an
exception is too broad and too open to subjective interpretation.
However, the Commission recommends the following new exceptions to permit
disclosures:
• when necessary to
prevent a serious risk to a person’s life,
health or safety
, especially in emergency situations;
• if made for the purpose of obtaining
legal or financial
, or giving information to
for the investigation of an
offence; and
statutory officials or government officers
as part of them
carrying out their functions under the guardianship laws.
The Commission also recommends that people should be able to discuss
otherwise confidential information if it is reasonable in the
counselling, advice or other treatment
. Further, a person
should not be held in breach of the duty if he or she has a ‘reasonable
The Commission recommends that an exception
allowing the Adult Guardian to disclose
information about investigations
should be kept. The Adult Guardian should be able to publicly disclose
confidential information about an ongoing investigation if
it is necessary and
reasonable in the public interest. But he or she should be required first to
consider: the likely prejudice
to the investigation; whether the identity of a
complainant or other person should be protected; and the urgency involved.
The Adult Guardian should also be required to consider whether the disclosure
would reveal adverse information about a person that
the person would normally
have a chance to comment on before it is released. Provided it is necessary and
reasonable in the public
interest, the Adult Guardian should be allowed to
disclose the information even if the person has not commented on it.
Other issues about the general duty of confidentiality raised during the
review include:
Administrative policies to facilitate post-hearing disclosure by
the Tribunal:
Some people said they had concerns about accessing information
after a hearing held by the Tribunal. For example, Guardianship and
Administration Reform Drivers said that access to Tribunal transcripts is
important if a person wants to appeal. The Public Advocate
also said that her
office should be able to receive a copy of Tribunal transcripts and files upon
request to allow her to perform
her statutory functions.
To deal with these and other concerns, the Freedom of Information and Privacy
Unit of the Department of Justice and Attorney-General
suggested that the
Tribunal develop an administrative policy to deal with requests for such
information.
The Commission agrees that the Tribunal should
develop a detailed information access policy, which takes into account all of
the confidentiality
provisions of the guardianship laws. In particular, that
policy should allow parties to access a Tribunal file after a hearing has
finished. This access policy should be publicly available and would improve
public confidence in the Tribunal.
Education and awareness:
Some people said that the
confidentiality obligations under the guardianship laws are generally not well
understood or even known
professionals, including lawyers, have had difficulty understanding the
confidentiality
provisions so it would be ‘safe to assume that lay people
are having problems’. Another person said people need to know
responsibilities are ‘so they can get on with things’.
‘The lack of support offered to people to understand the current
system generally, and . . . the confidentiality requirements,
means that people
may also unwittingly contravene the current system’s strict
confidentiality requirements governing the disclosure
of information. However,
the first that the party generally hears of these confidentiality provisions is
when they are warned of
a penalty for having breached them.’
The Commission agrees that people who are bound
by confidentiality obligations must be made aware of them. The Commission
that the Department of Justice and Attorney-General should provide
accessible information about the general duty of confidentiality
to substitute
decision-makers and others to whom the duty applies. The Department should also
provide resources for further training
on the operation of the duty for the
guardianship agencies and officials, designed in collaboration with those
agencies and officials.
This training should also be made available to other
substitute decision-makers.
The future of the
The Commission’s Guardianship Review has two stages. The first, which
dealt with the confidentiality provisions, is now complete.
The Commission has
started work on the second stage, which involves reviewing the rest of the
guardianship laws.
We have already learnt a great deal from our consultation process about what
issues need to be considered in stage two. One issue
mentioned in this paper is
whether parties to proceedings should be entitled to copies of documents rather
than just being able to
look at them. People have also raised other broader
issues such as:
• appeals from Tribunal decisions, and whether there should be a more
accessible avenue of appeal than the current right to
go to the Supreme
• the General Principles, and whether they are a comprehensive
statement of the factors that people should take into account
when making
decisions for adults with impaired capacity; and
• informal decision-making, and whether the guardianship laws should
provide greater recognition of an adult’s support
The Commission is also required by its terms of reference to look at other
issues such as: the powers and functions of the guardianship
agencies and
officials; the law relating to enduring powers of attorneys, advance health
directives and life-sustaining medical treatment;
and whistleblower
protection.
Once we have written a consultation paper explaining these and other issues,
we will ask you again for your views. To ensure you
know when we are
consulting, you can contact the Commission to register an interest in the review
on (07) 3247 4544 or complete the
online form at:
http://www.qlrc.qld.gov.au/guardianship/register.htm
Guardianship:
an overview
Our decisions define us. They not only shape the practical course of our
lives, they also illustrate to others how we see ourselves
and what our hopes
and dreams are. When our power to make our own decisions is impaired or taken
away from us, our sense of self-hood
is also at risk.
Generally decisions for adults with impaired capacity are made informally
within the adult’s network of family and friends.
It is only if a problem
arises that it may be necessary to formalise the decision-making process. This
might happen if:
• the person wishing to make the decision on behalf of the adult does
not have the necessary authority to do so;
• the authority of the person making the decision is disputed;
• there is no appropriate person to make the decision;
• the decision or decisions being made are considered inappropriate;
• a conflict occurs over the decision-making process.
The guardianship laws distinguish between decisions about:
Personal matters
, such as where we live, who we live with, where we
work, and what sort of lifestyle we have. Decisions for an adult about personal
matters can be made by a guardian – a person appointed by the Tribunal for
this purpose. This is called ‘guardianship’.
A guardian cannot
make a decision for the adult about financial matters. Decisions about personal
matters can also be made by an
attorney appointed by the adult under an enduring
power of attorney before he or she had impaired capacity.
Health matters
. Decisions about health matters relate to our
health care, such as what medical treatment we will receive. They are a type of
matter. Decisions about health matters can be made by an adult by
completing an advance health directive while he or she has capacity.
directive exists, these decisions can be made by an attorney appointed under an
enduring power of attorney or advance
health directive, by a guardian, or by a
statutory health attorney (who might be the adult’s spouse, unpaid carer,
friend or relation). The Tribunal can also make decisions about some
Financial matters
, such as day-to-day financial decisions (like
paying bills), buying and selling property, insuring property, making
investments and
entering into contracts. Decisions for an adult about financial
matters can be made by an administrator – a person appointed
Tribunal for this purpose. This is called ‘administration’. An
administrator cannot make a decision for the
adult about personal or health
matters. Financial decisions can also be made by an attorney appointed by the
adult under an enduring
power of attorney before he or she had impaired
Of course, in real life, the boundaries between personal, health and
financial matters are not so clear-cut; they tend to blur or
Active parties
in a Tribunal proceeding may include: the adult; the
applicant (if not the adult); the proposed guardian, administrator or attorney
for the adult if the proceeding is for the appointment or reappointment of such
a person; any current guardian, administrator or
attorney for the adult; the
Adult Guardian; the Public Trustee of Queensland; and any other person joined as
a party to the proceeding.
Administration
means making decisions for an adult about financial
Administrator
is a person appointed by the Tribunal to make decisions
for an adult about financial matters.
in this review means a person with impaired capacity who is 18
years or older.
Adult evidence order
is a type of order the Commission recommends
should be included in the guardianship laws to permit the Tribunal to obtain
information
from the adult at a hearing in the absence of others (such as in the
absence of members of the public, particular persons or parties).
Adult Guardian
is an independent official who works under the
guardianship laws to safeguard the rights and interests of adults. The Adult
can investigate complaints that adults are being neglected, exploited
or abused. The Adult Guardian can also sometimes make decisions
adult’s personal matters or health matters.
Advance health directive
is a formal document made by an adult giving
directions about his or her future health care. The document is made when the
has capacity, but applies only if the adult later has impaired capacity.
is someone who is appointed by an adult (when he or she has
capacity) in an enduring power of attorney to make decisions about personal,
health or financial matters for the adult. An attorney for health matters can
also be appointed in an advance health directive.
Attorney-General
is a Member of Parliament, Queensland’s first
law officer and the Minister for Justice.
Closure order
is a type of order the Commission recommends should be
included in the guardianship laws to permit the Tribunal to close a hearing
members of the public, or to exclude a particular person (including a party)
from a hearing.
means the Queensland Law Reform Commission, the body
conducting the Guardianship Review.
Community Visitor Program
is a program that promotes the rights and
protects the interests of adults with impaired capacity, and adults with a
mental or intellectual
impairment. It does this through regular visits by
community visitors to places where these adults live or receive services.
Confidentiality orders
are, under the current law, orders made by the
Tribunal to stop a person from:
• attending a Tribunal hearing, or part of a hearing;
• seeing a document being considered by the Tribunal; or
• knowing the Tribunal’s decision or the reasons it gives for a
However, the Commission has recommended that these powers should now be
exercised through four new types of orders (adult evidence
orders, closure
orders, non-publication orders and confidentiality orders) and that they be
collectively called ‘limitation
orders’. The new confidentiality
order that is recommended for inclusion in the guardianship laws would permit
the Tribunal
to stop a party from hearing information or seeing documents
considered by the Tribunal.
Confidentiality provisions
are the provisions in the guardianship laws
• allow the Tribunal to make confidentiality orders;
• stop information about what happens at Tribunal hearings being
published; and
• stop people telling others about personal information that they gain
when acting under the laws.
De-identified information
is information that has been modified to
prevent disclosure of a person’s identity.
Enduring power of attorney
is a formal document made by an adult
appointing an attorney or attorneys to make decisions about his or her personal,
financial matters. The document is made when the adult has capacity,
and remains effective if later the adult’s capacity becomes
Financial matters
are matters about an adult’s finances or
property. This includes paying rent or bills, running a business, and buying or
General Principles
are a list of 11 guidelines in the guardianship
laws that must be applied when a person makes decisions for an adult.
is a person appointed by the Tribunal to make decisions for
an adult about personal or health matters.
Guardianship
means making decisions for an adult about the
adult’s personal or health matters.
Guardianship and Administration Tribunal
(‘the Tribunal’)
is like a court but is less formal. It can decide if an adult needs a guardian
or administrator. Sometimes,
it can also make decisions for an adult about
certain special types of health care.
Guardianship laws
in Queensland are: the
Powers of Attorney Act
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
Guardianship system
is the system of laws and practices about
guardianship and administration for adults, and the agencies and officials that
Health matters
are those matters about an adult’s health care,
including any care needed for a physical or mental condition.
is when people meet with the Tribunal so that it can make a
decision. The Tribunal ‘hears’ information from people who
Impaired capacity
means when a person cannot go through the process of
reaching their own decision (free from inappropriate influence), having
what that decision will mean for them, and communicating that
decision. An adult may have impaired capacity for some decisions but
Informal decision-maker
is a person who is a member of the
adult’s support network but who is not appointed as an attorney, guardian
or administrator.
Limitation orders
are the four new types of orders the Commission
recommends should be included in the guardianship laws: adult evidence orders,
orders, non-publication orders and confidentiality orders.
Non-publication order
is a type of order the Commission recommends
should be included in the guardianship laws to permit the Tribunal to prohibit
the publication
of information about proceedings where the publication of that
information is not already prohibited.
Open justice
is the idea that courts and tribunals should sit in
public so that anyone can attend and hear what happens.
Personal matters
are those matters about an adult’s care or
welfare. This includes deciding where the adult will live and what work he or
will do. It also includes most health matters.
Procedural fairness
is a set of legal rules about fair decision-making
by courts, tribunals and other decision-makers. These rules say that everyone
affected by a decision should have a chance to have their say.
Public Advocate
is an independent official who works under the
guardianship laws to improve the systems in our society that impact on adults
impaired capacity. This focus on systems is different from the Adult
Guardian who supports individual adults.
Public Trustee
of Queensland
is a State Government official who
is sometimes appointed by the Tribunal as an administrator for an adult.
Statutory health attorney
is a person who can make decisions about an
adult’s health matters. A statutory health attorney is the first
available person
of: an adult’s spouse, an unpaid carer, or a close friend
or relation. If these people are not available, the Adult Guardian
adult’s statutory health attorney.
of submissions
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Legal Service (Qld South)
Acfield, Ms Laraine
Alt, Ms Christine
Appleyard, Mr Laurence
Aspergers Syndrome Support Network
Australian Broadcasting Corporation
Australian Lawyers Alliance
Australian Press Council
Bartlett, Mr Alan
Bates, Mr Garry
Berryman, Mrs Jessie
Betts, Ms Tammy
Bischof, Mr Harold & Mrs Irene
Bond, Mr Laurence & Mrs Grace
Booth, Mrs Barbara
Briais, Ms Della
Brown, Mr Stephen Graham
Buchanan, Mr James M
Burow, Ms Jess
Butler, Mr Bill
Cahill, Ms Maureen
Carers Queensland
Caxton Legal Centre
Cerebral Palsy League of Queensland
Community Visitor Program
Conaghan, Mr Mark
Connolly, Mr Peter
Courier-Mail, The
Cowper, Ms Elizabeth
Croll, Mr Trevor
Cullen, Mrs Enid
Curtis, Ms Karen (Federal Privacy Commissioner)
Cutler, Ms Gwenyth
Davis, Mr Ross
Daymon, Ms Lynne
de Voss, Mr Vincent
Dennison, Mr Cyril
Department of Justice and Attorney-General
Devine, Ms Kathleen A
Dillon, Ms Alison
Disability Services Queensland, Department of Communities
Doherty, Ms Jacqueline
Douglas, Mr Graham & Mrs Elspeth
Douglas, Mr James
Dover, Liga
Dunne, Mr Brien
Dunne, Mr Michael
Ebenezer, Mr Terry & Mrs Kay
Eichmann, Ms Libby
Endeavour Foundation
Festival of Light Australia
Free TV Australia
Freeman, Ms Anita
Geldard, Mr Paul
Gerrard, Ms Annette
Gevers, Ms Marianne
Goessling, Mr John & Mrs Janet
Gould, Mr Lewis
Greentree, Mr Kevin
Guardianship and Administration Reform Drivers (GARD)
Guest, Ms Henriette
Handyside, Ms Ann
Hardy, Ms Connie
Hart, Mr John
Henderson, Mr Alastair
Henderson, Ms Alison
Hobbs, Ms Jo
Hollingsworth, Mr Neil
Horne, Mr Brendan
Howard, Ms Michelle (Public Advocate, Queensland)
Hunt, Mr Farne
Irving, Ms Lynn
Jazazievska, Ms Bogica
Jefferis, Ms Elaine
Johnson, Evan & Debra
Kawak, Ms Norma
Keim SC, Mr Stephen
Kennett, Ms Fay
Killin, Ms Gabriel
Klein, Mr Greg (Public Trustee of Queensland)
Krome, Mr H
Kynaston, Dr Bruce
Lang, Ms Jude
Loveday, Mr & Mrs
McBryde, Ms Jennifer
McDowall, Ms Claudia
McFarlane, Ms Elizabeth
McMahon, Ms Olivia
McMullen, Ms Sheryl
Maddison, Ms Felicity
Moller, Mrs Edith
Moore, Ms Dianne
Morris, Mr Fred
Morrison, Mr Paul
Mudaliar, Ms Janine
Nationwide News
Nimmo, Ms Wendy
Nitz, Ms Dianne
O’Brien, Mr Pat
O’Brien, Ms Val
O’Connor, Mr Tony
Parker, Ms Penny
Pendergast, Ms Dianne (Adult Guardian, Queensland)
Peterson, Mr Doug
Phillips, Ms Anita (Public Advocate, ACT)
Queensland Advocacy Incorporated
Queensland Aged and Disability Advocacy Inc
Queensland Corrective Services
Queensland Health
Queensland Law Society
Rafter, Ms Carmen
Reid, Ms Marion
Rex, Ms Rosalene
Reynolds, Mr Neil
Right to Life Australia
Robinson, Ms Diane (President, NSW Guardianship Tribunal)
Roper, Ms Angelina
Royal College of Nursing Australia
Sargeant, Ms Bianca
Scully, Ms Paula
Shemlowski, Ms Trish
Sims, Mr Harley
Slinko, Ms Eugenia
Smith, Ms Anita (President, Tasmanian Guardianship and Administration
Sunshine Coast Citizen Advocacy
Tincknell, Mrs Jean
Torrens, Ms Gail
Toten, Mrs Catherine
Trappett, Dr Laurence
Treble, Mr John
Turnbull, Ms Katrina
Turner, Ms Rose
Tyrrell, Mr Darcy
Uni Research
von Schrader, Mr Matthaus
Walker, Ms Judy
Walsh, Cr Mary
Watchtower Bible and Tract Society of Australia
Watkins, Mr Col
Wenck, Dr Drew
Wenham, Ms Margaret
Widdicombe, Dr Neil
Willis, Mr Andrew
Williams, Mr J J
Williams, Ms Karen
Williamson, Mr Allan
Williamson, Mrs Beverley
Williamson, Mr Edward
Woodgate, Mr Jonathon
Wurth, Mr Mark
The Commission also received submissions from five individuals who asked not
to be identified.
of community forums and
focus groups
Carers Queensland Forum
7 March 2006
Endeavour Foundation Forum
23 May 2006
Office of the Adult Guardian Focus Group
12 July 2006
Endeavour Foundation Focus Group
13 September 2006
QLRC Community Forum
Sunshine Coast
15 September 2006
QLRC Community Forum
19 September 2006
QLRC Community Forum
26 September 2006
QLRC Community Forum
29 September 2006
QLRC Community Forum
Rockhampton
3 October 2006
QLRC Community Forum
4 October 2006
QLRC Community Forum
6 October 2006
QLRC Community Forum
10 October 2006
QLRC Community Forum
11 October 2006
QLRC Community Forum
12 October 2006
Focus Group with advocacy groups
18 October 2006
Office of Public Advocate Focus Group
31 October 2006
Guardianship and Administration Tribunal Focus Group
16 October 2006
Guardianship and Administration Tribunal Focus Group
12 December 2006
Focus Group with adults with brain injury
6 December 2006
Focus Group with adults with intellectual disability
7 December 2006
Focus Group with adults with mental illness and mental health advocacy
16 January 2007
Focus Group with adults with dementia and carers
1 February 2007
Office of the Adult Guardian Focus Group
29 January 2007
Community Visitor Program Focus Group
6 February 2007
Freedom of Information and Privacy Unit, Department of Justice and
Attorney-General Focus Group
29 November 2006
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (734 KB)
PDF format (869 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter