URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/lawreform/ALRCCP/2010/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:31:22
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Family Violence - Improving Legal Frameworks [2010] ALRCCP 1
The HTML version of this report has been generated from documents using
optical recognition software, and may
contain errors that do not appear in the
original printed version. Some tables and graphs also may not be accurately
reproduced.
PDF version
is also available.
Family Violence � Improving Legal Frameworks
Table of Contents
Terms of reference
List of Participants
List of Questions and Proposals
1. Introduction to the Inquiry
Concurrent inquiries and actions
Scope of the Inquiry
Definitions and terminology
Recurring themes
Structure of the Consultation Paper
Consultation and collaboration processes
Working with the NSWLRC and the Attorney-General’s Department
Consultation with designated bodies and groups
Consultation Paper and Summary
Processes of reform
2. Constitutional and International Settings
Introduction
Constitutional framework
International instruments
3. Purposes of Laws Relevant to Family Violence
Introduction
Family violence legislation
Criminal law
Victims’ compensation
Migration legislation
4. Family Violence: A Common Interpretative Framework?
Introduction
Definition of family violence or acts constituting family violence
Persons protected
Model provisions reflecting best practice?
5. Family Violence Legislation and the Criminal Law—An Introduction
Introduction
Definitions
Civil and criminal proceedings
Interaction with participants in criminal justice system
Interaction with criminal law procedures
6. Protection Orders and the Criminal Law
Introduction
Concurrent proceedings under family violence laws and the criminal law
Protection order conditions and the criminal law
Breach of protection orders
7. Recognising Family Violence in Criminal Law
Introduction
Family violence as an offence
Aggravated offences occurring in a family violence context
Family violence as an aggravating factor?
8. Family Violence Legislation and Parenting Orders
Introduction
The federal family courts
Parenting orders, protection orders and family violence
Awareness of pre-existing orders
Consideration of pre-existing orders
Resolving inconsistencies
A gap in protection?
9. Family Violence Legislation and the Family Law Act: Other Family Law Act Orders
Introduction
Protection orders and injunctive relief
Financial proceedings under the Family Law Act
Relocation and recovery orders
10. Improving Evidence and Information Sharing
Introduction
Protection orders as a factor in decision making about parenting orders
Improving evidence in protection order proceedings
Abuse of process
Removing impediments to information sharing
Strategies to promote information sharing
11. Alternative Processes
Introduction
Family dispute resolution and family violence
Dispute resolution in child protection
Restorative justice
12. Child Protection—Introduction
Introduction
Child protection history
Child protection overview
Child protection in a federal system
One family, competing discourses
Best interests of the child
13. Child Protection and the Criminal Law
Introduction
Grounds for a child protection intervention
Grounds for bringing criminal proceedings
Identifying child abuse and neglect
Responding to reports of child maltreatment
Information sharing
Protection of children from family violence
Children and young people at risk and juvenile justice
14. Child Protection and the Family Law Act
Introduction
Legal framework for interaction between the two systems
Administrative arrangements
15. Sexual Assault and Family Violence
Introduction
The prevalence of sexual violence
Sexual assault in the family violence context
History of activism and legal change
Historical approaches to sexual violence
The implementation gap
16. Sexual Offences
Introduction
Overview of sexual offences
Guiding principles and objects clauses
17. Reporting, Prosecution and Pre-trial Processes
Introduction
Decision points
Attrition in sexual assault cases
Recognising a sexual assault
Reporting to the police
The prosecution phase
Joint or separate trial
Pre-recorded evidence
18. Trial Processes
Introduction
Evidence issues
Sexual reputation and experience
Sexual assault communications privilege
Expert opinion evidence and children
Tendency and coincidence evidence
Relationship evidence
Evidence of recent and delayed complaint
Uniform Evidence Acts jurisdictions
Jury warnings
Cross-examination
Other aspects of giving evidence
Evidence on re-trial or appeal
19. Integrated Responses and Best Practice
Introduction
Integrated responses
Integrated responses in Australia
Common policies and objectives
Victim support
Training and education
Data collection and evaluation
20. Specialisation
Introduction
Specialised police
Specialised prosecutors
Specialised courts
Value of specialised courts
Designing specialised courts
‘Problem-solving’ courts
Best practice in courts generally
The role of the federal government
Appendix 1. List of Submissions
Appendix 2. List of Agencies, Organisations and Individuals Consulted
Appendix 3. List of Abbreviations
ALRC CP1 Family Violence � Improving Legal Frameworks
Terms of Reference
Terms of Reference
Reducing Violence against Women and their Children
Terms of reference
Terms of Reference
Reducing Violence against Women and
their Children
Terms of reference
The 2009 report of the National Council to Reduce Violence against Women and
their Children,
Time for Action
, acknowledged the complex interraction
between State and Territory family/domestic violence and child protection laws
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth). The National
Council also stressed the importance of consistent interpretation and
application of laws relating to family/domestic
violence and sexual assault,
including rules of evidence, in ensuring justice for victims of such
At its meeting of 16–17 April 2009, the Standing Committee of
Attorneys-General agreed that Australian law reform commissions
should work
together to consider these issues.
I refer to the Australian Law Reform Commission for inquiry and report
pursuant to
subsection 20(1)
Australian Law Reform Commission Act
the issues of:
1) the interaction in practice of State and Territory family/domestic
violence and child protection laws with the
Family Law Act
and relevant
Commonwealth, State and Territory criminal laws; and
2) the impact of inconsistent interpretation or application of laws in cases
of sexual assault occuring in a family/domestic violence
context, including
rules of evidence, on victims of such violence.
In relation to both issues I request that the Commission consider what, if
any, improvements could be made to relevant legal frameworks
to protect the
safety of women and their children.
Scope of the reference
In undertaking this reference, the Commission should be careful not to
a) the other actions being progressed as part of the Immediate Government
Actions announced by the Prime Minister on receiving the
Council’s report in April 2009;
b) the evaluation of the
Family Law Amendment (Shared Parental
Responsibility) Act 2006
reforms being undertaken by the Australian
Institute of Family Studies; and
c) the work being undertaken through SCAG on the harmonisation of uniform
evidence laws, in particular the development of model sexual
communications immunity provisions and vulnerable witness protections.
Collaboration and consultation
In undertaking this reference, the Commission should:
a) have regard to the National Council’s report and any supporting
material in relation to domestic violence and sexual assault
b) work jointly with the New South Wales
Law Reform Commission with a view to developing agreed recommendations
and consult with other
State and Territory law reform bodies as appropriate;
c) work closely with the Australian Government Attorney‑General’s
Department to ensure the solutions identified are practically
achievable and
consistent with other reforms and initiatives being considered in relation to
the development of a National Plan to
Reduce Violence against Women and their
Children or the National Framework for Protecting Australia’s Children,
which has been
approved by the Council of Australian Governments; and
d) consult with relevant courts, the Australian Government Department of
Families, Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs,
State and Territory agencies, State and Territory Legal Aid Commissions,
the Family Law Council, the Australian Domestic
Violence Clearinghouse and
similar bodies in each State and Territory.
Considering the scale of violence affecting Australian women and their
children and acknowledging the Australian Government’s
commitment to
developing a National Plan through COAG for release in 2010, the Commission
will report no later than 31 July 2010.
Dated: 17 July 2009
Robert McClelland
Attorney-General
ALRC CP1 Family Violence � Improving Legal Frameworks
List of Participants
Australian Law Reform Commission
Commissioners
Special Adviser
Family Violence Team
Child Protection Team
Sexual Assault Team
Expert Readers
Research Manager
Project Assistant
Legal Interns
New South Wales Law Reform Commission
Commissioners
Legal writing
Legal Research
List of Participants
Australian Law Reform Commission
Commissioners
Professor Rosalind Croucher, President
Magistrate Anne Goldsbrough, Part-time Commissioner
Special Adviser
George Zdenkowski
Family Violence Team
Isabella Cosenza, Senior Legal Officer, Team Leader
Dr Joyce Chia, Legal
Officer (1 November 2009–15 April 2010)
Anna Dziedzic, Legal Officer
(from 1 March 2010)
Lisa Eckstein, Legal Officer (1 January–19 March
Erin Mackay, Legal Officer (1 November 2009–6 January 2010)
Child Protection Team
Carolyn Adams, Senior Legal Officer (from 1 March 2010)
Chris Paul, Senior
Legal Officer (11 January–24 March 2010)
Althea Gibson, Legal Officer
(31 August–1 November 2009)
Sexual Assault Team
Bruce Alston, Senior Legal Officer, Team Leader (from 27 January 2010)
Jane Wangmann, Senior Legal Officer, Team Leader (2 November 2009–
29 January 2010)
Katy McGree, Legal Officer (from 11 January 2010)
Dr Anne Cossins (from 22 January 2010)
Expert Readers
Stephen Odgers SC
Professor Patrick Parkinson
Research Manager
Jonathan Dobinson
Carolyn Kearney
Project Assistant
Tina O’Brien
Legal Interns
Aaron Besser
Philip Boncardo
Mia Hollick
Tracey Kingsbury
Tamara Phillips
Calvin Shaw
James Small
[back to top]
New South Wales Law Reform Commission
Commissioners
Professor Hilary Astor (from 15 March 2010)
Professor Michael Tilbury
(until February 2010)
The Hon James Wood AO QC
Legal writing
Nicole Abadee (October–December 2009)
Francesca Di Benedetto (from February 2010)
Legal Research
Fiona Lam, Intern (January–February 2010)
Robyn Young
(January–February 2010)
ALRC CP1 Family Violence � Improving Legal Frameworks
List of Questions and
Part B – Family Violence
4. Family Violence: A Common Interpretative Framework?
5. Family Violence Legislation and the Criminal Law—An Introduction
6. Protection Orders and the Criminal Law
7. Recognising Family Violence in Criminal Law
8. Family Violence Legislation and Parenting Orders
9. Family Violence Legislation and the
Family Law Act
Family Law Act
10. Improving Evidence and Information Sharing
11. Alternative Processes
– Child Protection
13. Child Protection and the Criminal Law
14. Child Protection and the
Family Law Act
– Sexual Assault
16. Sexual Offences
17. Reporting, Prosecution and Pre-trial Processes
18. Trial Processes
Part E – Existing and Potential Responses
19. Integrated Responses and Best Practice
20. Specialisation
List of Questions and
Part B – Family
4. Family Violence: A Common
Interpretative Framework?
Proposal 4–1
(a) State and territory family violence
legislation should contain the same definition of family violence covering
physical and non-physical
violence, including conduct the subject of Proposals
4–3 to 4–5 and 4–7 to 4–10 below. The definition of
family violence in the
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
(Vic) should
be referred to as a model.
(b) The definitions of family violence in state and territory family violence
legislation should recognise the same types of physical
and non-physical
violence, including conduct the subject of Proposals 4–3 to 4–5 and
4–7 to 4–10 below. The
definition of family violence in the
Family Violence Protection
(Vic) should be referred to as a model.
Question 4–1
Should the definition of family violence in state
and territory family violence legislation, in addition to setting out the types
of conduct that constitute violence, provide that family violence is violent or
threatening behaviour or any other form of behaviour
that coerces, controls or
dominates a family member or causes that family member to be fearful?
Proposal 4–2
Crimes (Domestic and Personal Violence) Act
(NSW) should be amended to include a definition of ‘domestic
violence’, in addition to the current definition of ‘domestic
violence offence’.
Proposal 4–3
State and territory family violence legislation
should expressly recognise sexual assault in the definition of family violence
the extent that it does not already do so.
Proposal 4–4
State and territory family violence legislation
should expressly recognise economic abuse in the definition of family violence
the extent that it does not already do so.
Proposal 4–5
State and territory family violence legislation
should include specific examples of emotional or psychological abuse or
intimidation
or harassment that illustrate acts of violence against certain
vulnerable groups including: Indigenous persons; those from a culturally
linguistically diverse background; the aged; those with a disability; and those
from the gay, lesbian, bisexual and transgender
community. Instructive models of
such examples are in the
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
Intervention Orders (Prevention of Abuse) Act 2009
(SA). In each
case, state and territory family violence legislation should make it clear that
such examples are illustrative and
not exhaustive of the prohibited conduct.
Question 4–2
Some state and territory family violence
legislation lists examples of types of conduct that can constitute a category of
family violence.
In practice, are judicial officers and lawyers treating such
examples as exhaustive rather than illustrative?
Proposal 4–6
The definition of family violence in state and
territory family violence legislation should not require a person to prove
or psychological harm in respect of conduct which, by its nature,
could be pursued criminally—such as sexual assault. In particular,
Intervention Orders (Prevention of Abuse) Act 2009
(SA) should be amended
to ensure that sexual assault of itself is capable of meeting the definition of
‘abuse’ without
having to prove emotional abuse.
Proposal 4–7
Domestic Violence and Protection Orders Act
Domestic and Family Violence Act 2007
(NT) should be
amended expressly to recognise kidnapping or deprivation of liberty as a form of
family violence.
Proposal 4–8
Family Violence Act 1994
(Tas) should
be amended to recognise damage to property and threats to commit such damage as
a form of family violence.
Proposal 4–9
Crimes (Domestic and Personal Violence) Act
Violence and Protection Orders Act 2008
Restraining Orders Act
Domestic and Family Violence Act 2007
(NT) should be
amended to ensure that their definitions of family violence capture harm or
injury to an animal irrespective of whether
that animal is technically the
property of the victim.
Proposal 4–10
State and territory family violence legislation
should include in the definition of family violence exposure of children to
violence as a category of violence in its own right.
Proposal 4–11
Where state or territory family violence
legislation sets out specific criminal offences that form conduct constituting
family violence,
there should be a policy reason for the categorisation of each
such offence as a family violence offence. To this end, the governments
and the ACT should review the offences categorised as ‘domestic violence
offences’ in their respective family
violence legislation with a view to
(a) ensuring that such categorisations are justified and appropriate; and (b)
ascertaining whether
or not additional offences ought to be included.
Proposal 4–12
Incidental to the proposed review of
‘domestic violence offences’ referred to in Proposal 4–11
Crimes Act 1900
(NSW)—which deals with the
failure to provide any wife, apprentice, servant or insane person with necessary
food, clothing
or lodgings—should be amended to ensure that its underlying
philosophy and language are appropriate in a modern context.
Proposal 4–13
The definitions of family violence in a state or
territory’s family violence legislation and criminal legislation—in
context of defences to homicide—should align, irrespective of whether
the criminal legislation limits the availability of defences
to homicide in a
family violence context to cases involving ‘serious’ family
Proposal 4–14
The definition of ‘family violence’
in s 9AH of the
Crimes Act 1958
(Vic)—which largely replicates
the definition in s 3 of the
Domestic Violence Act
(NZ)—should be replaced with the definition of ‘family
violence’ in
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
(Vic). Alternatively, the definition of family violence in s 9AH of the
Crimes Act 1958
(Vic) should be amended to include economic abuse.
Question 4–3
Are there any other examples where the criminal
law of a state or territory would allow for prosecution of conduct constituting
violence in circumstances where a state or territory’s family
violence legislation would not recognise the same conduct as
warranting a
protection order?
Proposal 4–15
State and territory governments should review
their family violence and criminal legislation to ensure that the interaction of
terminology
or definitions of certain conduct constituting family violence would
not prevent a person obtaining a protection order in circumstances
criminal prosecution could be pursued. In particular,
(a) the definition of stalking in
Domestic and Family Violence Act
(NT) s 7 should be amended to include all stalking behaviour referred to in
Criminal Code Act
(NT) s 189; and
(b) the Queensland government should review the inclusion of the concepts of
‘wilful injury’ and ‘indecent behaviour
without consent’
in the definition of ‘domestic violence’ in s 11 of the
Domestic and Family Violence Protection Act 1989
(Qld), in light of how
these concepts might interact with the
Criminal Code
Proposal 4–16
The South Australian Government should review
whether the interaction of the definition of ‘emotional or psychological
in the definition of ‘abuse’ in
Intervention Orders (Prevention of Abuse) Act 2009
(SA), and ‘mental harm’ in
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
likely to confuse victims and their legal representatives involved in both civil
family violence and criminal proceedings.
In particular, the review should
consider whether it would be desirable for:
Intervention Orders (Prevention of Abuse) Act
to distinguish
between emotional and psychological harm;
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
‘psychological harm’; and
(c) both above mentioned Acts to adopt a commonly shared understanding of
the meaning of ‘psychological harm’.
Question 4–4
In practice, what effect do the different
definitions of family violence in the
Family Law Act
and in state and territory family violence legislation have in matters before
federal family courts:
(a) where a victim who has suffered family violence
(i) has obtained a state or territory protection order; or
(ii) has not obtained a state or territory protection order; and
(b) on the disclosure of evidence or information about family violence?
Question 4–5
Does the broad discretion given to courts
exercising jurisdiction under the
Family Law Act
the approach taken in the Family Court of Australia’s Family Violence
Strategy overcome, in practice, the potential
constraints posed by the
definition of ‘family violence’ in the
Family Law Act
Proposal 4–17
The definition of family violence in the
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) should be expanded to include specific
reference to certain physical and non-physical violence—including conduct
subject of Proposals 4–3 to 4–5 and 4–7 to 4–10
above—with the definition contained in the
Family Violence Protection
(Vic) being used as a model.
Proposal 4–18
The definition of ‘family violence’
Family Law Act
(Cth) should be amended by removing the
semi-objective test of reasonableness.
Question 4–6
How is the application of the definition of
‘relevant family violence’ in the
Migration Regulations 1994
(Cth) working in practice? Are there any difficulties or issues arising from its
application?
Proposal 4–19
The Tasmanian Government should review the
operation of the
Family Violence Act 2004
(Tas) and the
Justices Act
to establish equality of treatment of family members who
are victims of family violence.
Proposal 4–20
State and territory family violence legislation
should include as protected persons those who fall within Indigenous concepts of
as well as those who are members of some other culturally recognised
family group. In particular, the
Family Violence Act 2004
(Tas) and the
Restraining Orders Act 1997
(WA) should be amended to capture such
Question 4–7
Should state and territory family violence
legislation include relationships with carers—including those who are
paid—within
the category of relationships covered?
Proposal 4–21
State and territory family violence legislation
should contain guiding principles, which should include express reference to a
rights framework. The preamble to the
Family Violence Protection Act
(Vic) provides an instructive model, although it would be preferable if
the principles also referred expressly to relevant international
conventions
such as the
Declaration on the Elimination of Violence against Women
the United Nations
Convention on the Rights of the Child
Proposal 4–22
State and territory family violence legislation
should contain a provision that explains the nature, features and dynamics of
violence including: its gendered nature; detrimental impact on children;
and the fact that it can involve exploitation of power imbalances;
and occur in
all sectors of society. The preamble to the
Family Violence Protection Act
Crimes (Domestic and Personal Violence)
(NSW) provide instructive models in this regard. In addition,
family violence legislation should refer to the particular impact of
violence on: Indigenous persons; those from a culturally and linguistically
diverse background; those from the gay, lesbian,
bisexual and transgender
community; older persons; and people with disabilities.
Proposal 4–23
Family Law Act 1975
should be amended to include a provision that explains the nature, features
and dynamics of family violence.
Proposal 4–24
Restraining Orders Act 1997
should be amended to include an objects clause.
Proposal 4–25
State and territory family violence legislation
should articulate a common set of core purposes which address the following
(a) to ensure or maximise the safety and protection of persons who fear or
experience family violence;
(b) to ensure that persons who use family violence accept
responsibility—or are made accountable—for their conduct;
(c) to reduce or prevent family violence and the exposure of children to
family violence.
Proposal 4–26
objects clause in the
Domestic and Family Violence
Protection Act 1989
(Qld) should be amended to specify core purposes, other
than the existing main purpose of providing for the safety and protection
persons in particular relationships; and
(b) the objects clause in the
Family Violence Act 2004
(Tas) should
be amended to specify more clearly the core purposes of the Act.
Question 4–8
Are there any other ‘core’ purposes
that should be included in the objects clauses in the family violence
legislation
of each of the states and territories? For example, should family
violence legislation specify a purpose about ensuring minimal disruption
lives of those affected by family violence?
Proposal 4–27
State and territory family violence legislation
should adopt the same grounds for obtaining a protection order.
Proposal 4–28
The grounds for obtaining a protection order
under state and territory family violence legislation should not require proof
of likelihood
of repetition of family violence, unless such proof is an
alternative to a ground that focuses on the impact of the violence on the
seeking protection.
Question 4–9
Which of the following grounds for obtaining a
protection order under state and territory family violence legislation should be
(a) a person has reasonable grounds to fear, and, except in certain cases,
in fact fears family violence, along the lines of the
Crimes (Domestic and
Personal Violence) Act 2007
(b) a person has reasonable grounds to fear family violence;
(c) there are reasonable grounds to suspect that further family violence
will occur and the Court is satisfied that making an order
is appropriate in all
the circumstances, along the lines of the
Intervention Orders (Prevention of
Abuse) Act 2009
(d) either the person seeking protection has reasonable grounds to fear
family violence or the person he or she is seeking protection
from has used
family violence and is likely to do so again.
[back to top]
5. Family Violence Legislation and the Criminal
Law—An Introduction
Question 5–1
How are matters dealt with in practice that
(a) an overlap between state or territory family violence legislation and
federal criminal law; and
(b) a joint prosecution of state or territory and federal offences arising
in a family violence context?
In particular, do state and territory prosecutors seek the consent of the
Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions to prosecute
federal offences
arising in a family violence context, and inform it of the outcomes of any such
prosecutions?
Question 5–2
Are you aware of any cases where an offence
against federal criminal law has formed the basis for obtaining a protection
order under
state or territory family violence legislation?
Proposal 5–1
The definition of family violence in state and
territory family violence legislation should be broad enough to capture conduct
subject of potentially relevant federal offences in the family violence
context—such as sexual servitude.
Proposal 5–2
The Commonwealth Director of Public
Prosecutions—either by itself or in conjunction with other relevant
bodies—should
establish and maintain a centralised database of statistics
that records the number of times any federal offence has been prosecuted
family violence context including when such an offence is prosecuted:
(a) in addition to proceedings for the obtaining of a protection order under
state or territory family violence legislation;
(b) jointly with a state or territory offence in a family violence context;
(c) in the absence of any other criminal or civil proceeding.
Proposal 5–3
In order to facilitate the establishment and
maintenance of the centralised database referred to in Proposal 5–2, state
territory prosecutors—including police and directors of public
prosecution—should provide the Commonwealth Director of
Prosecutions with information about:
(a) federal offences in a family violence context which they prosecute,
including the outcomes of any such prosecutions;
(b) the prosecution of any federal offence in a family violence context
conducted jointly with a prosecution of any state or territory
family-violence
related offence; and
(c) whether the prosecution of the federal offence is in addition to any
protection order proceedings under state or territory family
legislation.
Question 5–3
Is there a need for lawyers involved in family
violence matters to receive education and training about the potential role of
offences in protection order proceedings under state and territory
family violence legislation? How is this best achieved?
Question 5–4
As a matter of practice, are police or other
participants in the legal system treating the obtaining of protection orders
under family
violence legislation and a criminal justice response to family
violence as alternatives rather than potentially
co-existing avenues of redress? If so, what are the practices or trends in this
regard and how can this best be addressed?
Question 5–5
Are criminal offences for economic and emotional
abuse in a family violence context necessary or desirable?
Question 5–6
In practice, where police have powers to issue
protection orders under family violence legislation, has the exercise of such
increased victim safety and protection?
Proposal 5–4
State and territory family violence legislation
which empowers police to issue protection orders should provide that:
(a) police are only able to impose protection orders to intervene in
emergency or crisis situations in circumstances where it is
not reasonably
practicable or possible for the matter to be dealt with at that time by a court;
(b) police-issued protection orders are to act as an application to the
court for a protection order as well as a summons for the
person against whom it
is issued to appear before the court within a short specified time period. In
particular,
Family Violence Act 2004
(Tas)—which allows
police-issued protection orders to last for 12 months—should be
Proposal 5–5
State and territory family violence legislation,
to the extent that it does not already do so, should
(a) impose a duty on police to investigate family violence where they have
reason to suspect or believe that family violence has been,
is being or is
likely to be committed; and
(b) following an investigation, require police to make a record of their
reasons not to take any action such as apply for a protection
order, if they
decide not to take action.
Question 5–7
In what circumstances, if any, should police be
required to apply for protection orders on behalf of victims? Should such a
requirement
be imposed by state and territory family violence legislation or by
police codes of practice?
Question 5–8
Should all state and territory governments ensure
that there are Indigenous-specific support services in courts to enable
people to apply for protection orders without police involvement?
Question 5–9
In what circumstances, if any, has the NSW
Director of Public Prosecutions instituted and conducted protection order
proceedings under
family violence legislation or conducted a related appeal on
behalf of a victim? Do Directors of Public Prosecutions in other states
territories play a role in protection order proceedings under family violence
legislation?
Question 5–10
Do any issues arise in relation to the
availability, scope and exercise in practice of police powers in connection with
family violence
(a) enter premises;
(b) search for and seize firearms or other articles; and
(c) arrest and detain persons?
Proposal 5–6
State and territory legislation which confers on
police powers to detain persons who have used family violence should empower
to remove such persons from the scene of the family violence or direct
them to leave the scene and remain at another specified place
for the purpose of
the police arranging for a protection order.
Question 5–11
Should state and territory legislation which
confers on police power to detain persons who have used family violence empower
to detain such persons for a reasonably short period for the purpose of
making arrangements to secure the safety of victims and affected
children to the
extent that it does not already do so?
Question 5–12
Is there a need for legislative amendments to
provide guidance in identifying the primary aggressor in family violence
Question 5–13
In practice, does the application of provisions
which contain a presumption against bail, or displace the presumption in favour
bail in family violence cases, strike the right balance between ensuring the
safety and wellbeing of victims, and safeguarding the
rights of accused
Question 5–14
How often are victims of family violence involved
in protection order proceedings under family violence legislation not informed
a decision to release the offender on bail and the conditions of
Proposal 5–7
State and territory legislation, to the extent
that it does not already do so, should impose an obligation on the police and
prosecution
to inform the victim of a family violence offence of: (a) decisions
to grant or refuse bail to the offender; and (b) where bail is
granted, the
conditions of release. The
Bail Act 1992
ACT) provides an instructive
model in this regard. Police codes of practice or operating procedures and
prosecutorial guidelines or
policies as well as appropriate education and
training programs should also address the obligation to inform victims of family
of bail decisions.
Question 5–15
How often are inconsistent bail requirements and
protection order conditions imposed on a person accused of committing a family
Proposal 5–8
Judicial officers should be allowed, on a grant of bail, to consider
whether the purpose of ensuring that the offender does not commit
while on bail or endanger the safety, welfare or property of any person might be
better served or assisted by a protection
order, protective bail conditions or
both, as recommended by the Law Reform Commission WA in relation to the
[back to top]
6. Protection Orders and the Criminal
Proposal 6–1
State and territory family violence legislation
should be amended, where necessary, to make it clear that the making, variation
revocation of a protection order or the refusal to make, vary or revoke such
an order does not affect the civil or criminal liability
of a person bound by
the order in respect of the family violence the subject of the order.
Question 6–1
Is it common for victims in criminal proceedings
to be cross-examined about evidence that they have given in support of an
application
to obtain a protection order under family violence legislation when
the conduct the subject of the criminal proceedings and the protection
substantially the same?
Proposal 6–2
State and territory family violence legislation
should be amended to clarify whether, in the trial of an accused for an offence
out of conduct which is the same or substantially similar to that upon
which a protection order is based, references can be made
(a) the making, variation, and revocation of protection orders in
proceedings under family violence legislation;
(b) the refusal of a court to make, vary or revoke a protection order in
proceedings under family violence legislation;
(c) the existence of current proceedings for a protection order under family
violence legislation against the person the subject
of the criminal proceedings;
(d) the fact that evidence of a particular nature or content was given in
proceedings under family violence legislation.
Such provisions will need to address separately the conduct which constitutes
a breach of a protection order under family violence
legislation.
Question 6–2
How is s 62 of the
Domestic and Family
Violence Protection Act 1989
(Qld)—which renders inadmissible in
criminal proceedings certain evidence about protection orders where those
proceedings arise
out of conduct upon which a protection order is
based—working in practice? In particular:
(a) how is it interacting in practice with
Evidence Act
(Qld) which states that ‘proof may be given’ of a previous
inconsistent statement;
(b) does it provide a model for other states and territories to adopt in
their family violence legislation in order to provide legislative
clarity about
the matters raised in Proposal 6–2 above; and
(c) is there a need to make express exception for bail, sentencing and
breach of protection order proceedings?
Question 6–3
In practice, to what extent are courts exercising
their powers to make protection orders in criminal proceedings on their own
where a discretion to do so is conferred on them?
Question 6–4
Are current provisions in family violence
legislation which mandate courts to make either interim or final protection
orders on: charging;
a finding or plea of guilt; or in the case of serious
offences, working in practice? In particular:
(a) have such provisions resulted in the issuing of unnecessary or
inappropriate orders; and
(b) in practice, what types of circumstances satisfy judicial officers in
NSW that such orders are not required?
Question 6–5
If provisions in state and territory family
violence legislation mandating courts to make protection orders in certain
circumstances
remain, is it appropriate for such provisions to contain an
exception for situations where a victim objects to the making of the
Question 6–6
To what extent are prosecutors in the Northern
Territory making applications for protection orders where a person pleads guilty
is found guilty of an offence that involves family violence? Is it desirable
for legislation to empower prosecutors in other states
and territories to make
an application for protection orders where a person pleads guilty or is found
guilty of such an offence?
Proposal 6–3
State and territory family violence legislation
should include an express provision conferring on courts a power to make a
order on their own initiative at any stage of a criminal
proceeding—including prior to a plea or finding of guilt.
Proposal 6–4
State and territory legislation should provide
that a court, before which a person pleads guilty or is found guilty of an
involving family violence, must consider any existing protection order
obtained under family violence legislation and whether, in
the circumstances,
that protection order needs to be varied to provide greater protection for the
person against whom the offence
was committed, irrespective of whether an
application has been made to vary the order.
Question 6–7
In practice, are the conditions which judicial
officers attach to protection orders under state and territory family violence
legislation
sufficiently tailored to the circumstances of particular cases?
Proposal 6–5
State and territory family violence legislation
should provide expressly that one of the conditions that may be imposed by a
making a protection order is to prohibit the person against whom the order
is made from locating or attempting to locate the victim
of family violence.
Proposal 6–6
Application forms for protection orders in each
state and territory should clearly set out the full range of conditions that a
may attach to a protection order. The forms should be drafted to enable
applicants to indicate the types of conditions that they
would like imposed. In
particular, the application form for a protection order in Western Australia
should be amended in this regard.
Proposal 6–7
State and territory family violence legislation
should require judicial officers considering the making of protection orders to
whether or not to make an exclusion order—that is, an order
excluding a person against whom a protection order is made from
premises shared
with the victim, even if the person has a legal or equitable interest in such
Proposal 6–8
State and territory family violence legislation
should specify the factors that a court is to consider in making an exclusion
is, an order excluding a person against whom a protection order
is made from premises shared with the victim, even if the person
has a legal or
equitable interest in such premises. Judicial officers should be required to
consider the effect that making or declining
to make an exclusion order will
have on the accommodation needs of the parties to the proceedings and on any
children, as recommended
by the ALRC in the Report
Domestic Violence
(ALRC 30) 1986.
Question 6–8
If state or territory family violence legislation
empowers police officers to make an order excluding a person who has used family
violence from premises in which he or she has a legal or equitable interest,
should they be required to take reasonable steps to
secure temporary
accommodation for the excluded person?
Proposal 6–9
State and territory family violence legislation
should require a court to give reasons for declining to make an exclusion
is, an order excluding the person against whom a protection
order is made from premises in which he or she has a legal or equitable
interest—where such order has been sought.
Question 6–9
How is the presumption in the family violence
legislation of the Northern Territory—that where a victim, person who uses
violence and child reside together, the protection of the victim and
child is best achieved by their remaining in the home—working
in practice?
In particular, has the application of the presumption resulted in the making of
exclusion orders?
Question 6–10
Should state and territory family violence
legislation include an express presumption that the protection of victims is
best served
by their remaining in the home in circumstances where they share a
residence with the persons who have used violence against them?
Proposal 6–10
State and territory family violence legislation
should be amended, where necessary, to allow expressly for courts making
orders to impose conditions on persons against whom protection orders
are made requiring them to attend rehabilitation or counselling
programs, where
such persons are suitable and eligible to participate in such programs.
Proposal 6–11
Application forms for protection orders should
specify conditions relating to rehabilitation or counselling or allow a victim
to indicate
whether she or he wishes the court to encourage the person who has
used violence to contact an appropriate referral service.
Question 6–11
Do judicial officers in jurisdictions, such as
NSW and Queensland, in which family violence legislation does not specify
rehabilitation or counselling programs as potential conditions
attaching to a protection order, in fact, impose such conditions as
their general power to impose any orders that they consider to be necessary or
Question 6–12
Are overlapping or conflicting obligations placed
on persons as a result of conditions imposed by protection orders under family
legislation requiring attendance at rehabilitation or counselling
programs and any orders to attend such programs either pre-sentencing
of the sentencing process?
Question 6–13
In practice, are courts sentencing offenders for
family-violence related offences made aware of, and do they take into account,
protection order conditions to which the offender to be sentenced is or has
been subject?
Question 6–14
Have there been cases where there has been
overlap or conflict between place restriction or area restriction orders imposed
on sentencing
and protection order conditions which prohibit or restrict the
same person’s access to certain premises?
Proposal 6–12
State and territory legislation should provide
that a court sentencing an offender for a family-violence related offence should
into account in sentencing the offender:
(a) any protection order conditions to which the person being sentenced is
subject, where those conditions arise out of the same
or substantially the same
conduct giving rise to the prosecution for the offence; and
(b) the duration of any protection order to which the offender is
Proposal 6–13
State and territory legislation should be
amended, where necessary, to provide that a person protected by a protection
order under
family violence legislation cannot be charged with or guilty of an
offence of aiding, abetting, counselling or procuring the breach
of a protection
Proposal 6–14
State and territory family violence legislation
should empower a court hearing an allegation of breach of a protection order to
leave to proceed in an application to vary or cancel a protection order of
its own motion where:
(a) there is evidence that the victim for whose benefit the protection order
was made gave free and voluntary consent to the breach;
(b) the court is satisfied that the victim wants to vary or revoke the
protection order.
Proposal 6–15
State and territory criminal legislation should
be amended to ensure that victims of family violence cannot be charged with, or
found guilty of, offences—such as conspiracy or attempt to pervert the
course of justice—where the conduct alleged to
constitute such offences is
essentially conduct engaged in by a victim to reduce or mitigate the culpability
of the offender. Legislative
reform in this area should be reinforced by
appropriate directions in police codes of practice, or operating procedures and
prosecutorial
guidelines or policies.
Question 6–15
In practice: (a) are persons who breach
protection orders raising consent of the victim to the breach as a mitigating
factor in sentencing;
and (b) are courts treating consent of a victim to a
breach of a protection order as a mitigating factor in sentencing?
Question 6–16
Should state and territory family violence or
sentencing legislation prohibit a court from considering the consent of a victim
breach of a protection order as a mitigating factor in sentencing?
Question 6–17
In practice, where breach of a protection order
also amounts to another criminal offence to what extent are police in each state
territory charging persons with breach of a protection order, as opposed to
any applicable offence under state or territory criminal
Question 6–18
If there is a practice of police preferring to
lay charges for breach of a protection order, as opposed to any applicable
criminal offence, how can this practice best be addressed to ensure
victims’ experiences of family violence are not underrated?
Proposal 6–16
State and territory courts, in recording and
maintaining statistics about criminal matters lodged or criminal offences proven
criminal matters or offences that occur in a family-violence related
Question 6–19
Should there be consistency of maximum penalties
for breach of protection orders across the jurisdictions? If so, why, and what
the maximum penalty be?
Question 6–20
In practice, what issues or concerns arise about
the sentences actually imposed on offenders for breach of protection orders?
Question 6–21
Should state and territory family violence
legislation contain provisions which direct courts to adopt a particular
approach on sentencing
for breach of a protection order—for example, a
provision such as that in
Crimes (Domestic and Personal
Violence) Act 2007
(NSW), which requires courts to sentence offenders to
imprisonment for breach of protection orders involving violence, unless they
otherwise order and give their reasons for doing so?
Question 6–22
What types of non-financial sanctions are
appropriate to be imposed for breach of protection orders where the breach does
not involve
violence or involves comparatively low levels of violence?
[back to top]
7. Recognising Family Violence in Criminal Law
Question 7–1
Is it necessary or feasible for state and
territory criminal laws to introduce a specific offence of committing family
violence? If
so, how should such an offence be conceptualised? For example,
would it be feasible to create a two-tiered offence which captures
both coercive
conduct and physical violence in a family violence context?
Question 7–2
Which, if either, of the following options for
reform should be adopted:
(a) state and territory criminal legislation should provide that an offence
is aggravated—and therefore a higher maximum penalty
applies—if an
offender is in a family relationship with the victim and the offence committed
formed part of a pattern of controlling,
coercive or dominating behaviour;
(b) state and territory criminal legislation should be amended to include
specific offences—such as assault and sexual assault—which
committed by an offender who is in a family relationship with the victim, but
which do not attract a higher maximum penalty?
Question 7–3
What kind of family relationships should be
included for the purposes of the offences referred to in Question 7–2?
Question 7–4
Should federal criminal legislation be amended to
include specific offences committed by an offender who is in a family
relationship
with the victim? If so, which offences should be included and
should they carry a higher maximum penalty?
Question 7–5
In practice, are representative charges in
family-violence related offences under-utilised? If so, why, and how can this
best be addressed?
Question 7–6
In practice, are courts imposing sentences for
family-violence related offences taking into account, where applicable, the fact
the offence formed part of a course of conduct of family violence? If so,
are courts taking into account (a) uncharged criminal conduct;
non-criminal family violence? Should they do so?
Question 7–7
In practice, to what extent are guilty pleas
entered to a family-violence related charge accompanied by an acknowledgement
are representative of criminality, comprising uncharged conduct as
well as charged conduct?
Proposal 7–1
Commonwealth, state and territory governments, and Commonwealth, state and
territory directors of public prosecution respectively,
should ensure that
police and prosecutors are encouraged by appropriate prosecutorial guidelines,
and training and education programs,
to use representative charges to the
maximum extent possible in family-violence related criminal matters where the
charged conduct
forms part of a course of conduct.
Question 7–8
Should the sentencing legislation of states and
territories be amended to allow expressly for a course of conduct to be taken
account in sentencing, to the extent that it does not already do so?
Question 7–9
Should the fact that an offence was committed in
the context of a family relationship be an aggravating factor in sentencing? If
to which family relationships should this apply? Is making a specific link
between a family relationship and the escalation of violence
an appropriate
Proposal 7–2
State and territory sentencing legislation should
provide that the fact that an offence was committed in the context of a family
relationship
should not be considered a mitigating factor in sentencing.
Proposal 7–3
The Australian Government—in conjunction
with state and territory governments, the National Judicial College of
Australia, the
Judicial Commission of NSW, and the Judicial College of
Victoria—should develop, and maintain the currency of, a model bench
on family violence, which incorporates a section on sentencing in family
violence matters.
Question 7–10
Are current defences to homicide for victims in
violent family relationships adequate in each Australian state and
Proposal 7–4
State and territory criminal legislation should
provide defences to homicide which accommodate the experiences of family
victims who kill, recognising the dynamics and features of family
Proposal 7–5
State and territory criminal legislation should
expressly allow defendants to lead evidence about family violence in the context
a defence to homicide. Section 9AH of the
Crimes Act 1958
is an instructive model in this regard.
Question 7–11
How can the criminal law best recognise family
violence as relevant to a defence to homicide? For example, should family
be expressly accommodated within an expanded concept of self-defence or
should jurisdictions introduce a separate defence of family
violence? What
problems or issues arise from current models which recognise family violence as
relevant to a defence to homicide?
[back to top]
8. Family Violence Legislation and Parenting
Proposal 8–1
State and territory child protection laws should
be amended to require a child protection agency that advises a parent to seek a
order under state or territory family violence legislation for the
purpose of protecting the child to provide written advice to this
ensure that a federal family court does not construe the parent’s action
as a failure to ‘facilitate, and encourage,
a close and continuing
relationship between the child and the other parent’ pursuant to
s 60CC(3)(c)
Family Law Act 1975
Proposal 8–2
Application forms for initiating proceedings in
the federal family courts and the Family Court of Western Australia should
seek information about existing protection orders obtained under state
and territory family violence legislation or pending proceedings
Proposal 8–3
State and territory family violence legislation
should provide mechanisms for courts exercising jurisdiction under such
legislation
to be informed about existing parenting orders or pending
proceedings for such orders. This could be achieved by:
(a) imposing a legally enforceable obligation on parties to proceedings for
a protection order to inform the court about any such
parenting orders or
proceedings;
(b) requiring courts making protection orders to inquire as to any such
parenting orders or proceedings; or
(c) both of the above.
Question 8–1
In practice, what steps does a police officer who
issues a protection order have to take in order to make ‘reasonable
order’, pursuant to the
Domestic and Family Violence Act 2007
Should this requirement apply to police who issue protection orders in other
states and territories?
Proposal 8–4
Application forms for protection orders in all
states and territories, including applications for variation of protection
should clearly seek information about existing parenting orders or
pending proceedings for such orders.
Proposal 8–5
The ‘additional consideration’ in
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth), which directs a court to
consider only final or contested protection orders when determining the best
interests of a child
in making a parenting order, should be:
(a) repealed, and reliance placed instead on the general criterion of family
violence contained in
s 60CC(3)(j)
(b) amended to provide that any family violence, including evidence of such
violence given in any protection order proceeding—including
proceedings in
which final or interim protection orders are made either by consent or after a
contested hearing—is an additional
consideration when determining the best
interests of a child.
Proposal 8–6
Rule 10.15A
Family Law Rules
(Cth) should apply to allegations of family violence in addition to
allegations of child abuse. A substantially equivalent rule should
proceedings in the Federal Magistrates Court.
Question 8–2
How often do federal family courts make consent
orders that are inconsistent with current protection orders without requiring
to institute parenting proceedings? Are additional measures needed to
prevent this—for example, by including a requirement
(Cth) for parenting proceedings to be initiated where parties
propose consent orders that are inconsistent with current protection
Question 8–3
Are additional measures necessary to ensure that
allegations of family violence in federal family courts are given adequate
consideration
in interim parenting proceedings? If so, what measures would be
beneficial?
Proposal 8–7
State and territory courts hearing protection order
proceedings should not significantly lower the standard of protection afforded
by a protection order for the purpose of facilitating consistency with a current
parenting order. This could be achieved by:
(a) a prohibition to this effect in state and territory family violence
legislation; or
(b) guidance in relevant state and territory bench books.
Question 8–4
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth), which requires a family court to specify any inconsistency between a
family law order and a family violence protection order,
working in practice?
Are any reforms necessary to improve the section’s operation?
Question 8–5
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth), which permits certain persons to apply for a declaration of inconsistency
between a family law order and a family violence
protection order, working in
practice? How frequently is this provision used?
Question 8–6
Do state and territory courts exercise their power
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) to revive, vary,
discharge or suspend a parenting order to give effect to a family violence
protection order?
Proposal 8–8
Family violence legislation should refer to the
powers under
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) to revive, vary,
discharge or suspend a parenting order to give effect to a family violence
protection order by:
(a) referring to the powers—the South Australian model; or
(b) requiring the court to revive, vary, discharge or suspend an inconsistent
parenting order to the extent that it is inconsistent
with a family violence
protection order—the Victorian model.
Question 8–7
Should proceedings for a protection order under
family violence legislation, where there is an inconsistent parenting order, be
to a specialist state and territory court?
Proposal 8–9
Application forms for protection orders under
state and territory family violence legislation should include a clear option
applicant to request a variation, suspension, or discharge of a current
parenting order.
Question 8–8
Are legal practitioners reluctant to seek
variation of parenting orders in state and territory courts? If so, what factors
to this reluctance?
Proposal 8–10
(Cth) should be reviewed to
clarify its intended application to magistrates courts in Western Australia
seeking to exercise their
powers under div 11 of the
Family Law Act
Question 8–9
Family Law Act 1975
amended to direct state and territory courts varying parenting orders to give
priority to the protection of family members
against violence and the threat of
family violence over a child’s interest in having contact with both
Question 8–10
Family Law Act
(Cth) be amended to empower state and territory courts to make
parenting orders in those circumstances in which they can revive,
discharge or suspend such orders?
Question 8–11
Do applicants for interim protection orders who
seek variation of a parenting order have practical difficulties in obtaining new
from a court exercising family law jurisdiction within 21 days? If
so, what would be a realistic time within which such orders could
Question 8–12
Should there be a defence to a breach of a
parenting order where a parent withholds contact beyond 21 days due to
family violence
concerns while a variation or suspension of a parenting order
made by a state or territory court is awaiting hearing in a federal
family court
or the Family Court of Western Australia?
Proposal 8–11
The Tasmanian Government should undertake an
evaluation of the protocol negotiated between the Magistrates Court of Tasmania
Tasmanian Registry of the Family Court in relation to coexisting family
violence protection orders and parenting orders. On the basis
evaluation, other states and territories should consider whether adopting
cooperative models would be an effective strategy
to deal with coexisting
Proposal 8–12
Application forms for family violence protection
orders should include an option for applicants to indicate their preference that
there should be no exception in the protection order for contact required or
authorised by a parenting order.
Question 8–13
Should contact required or authorised by a
parenting order be removed from the standard exceptions to prohibited conduct
under state
and territory protection orders?
Proposal 8–13
The Australian Government—in conjunction
with state and territory governments, the National Judicial College of
Australia, the
Judicial Commission of NSW and the Judicial College of
Victoria—should provide ongoing training and development for judicial
officers in state and territory courts who hear proceedings for protection
orders on the exercise of their powers under the
Family Law Act 1975
Question 8–14
Should the provisions for resolving inconsistent
orders under
div 11 of the
Family Law Act
(Cth) be expanded to include inconsistencies resulting from:
(a) a party’s rights or responsibilities under the
Family Law Act
other than those pursuant to an order, injunction or undertaking, such as
those deriving from the concept of parental responsibility;
(b) laws other than family violence laws prescribed in reg 12BB of the
Family Law Regulations 1984
(Cth), such as protective bail
conditions?
[back to top]
9. Family Violence Legislation and the
Family Law Act:
Family Law Act
Question 9–1
In order to improve the accessibility of
injunctions for personal protection under the
Family Law Act 1975
to victims of family violence, should the
Family Law Act
provide separate
procedures in relation to injunctions for personal protection and other family
law injunctions available under s
114 of the Act? If so, what procedures
would be appropriate?
Proposal 9–1
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) should be
amended to provide that a wilful breach of an injunction for personal protection
is a criminal offence, as recommended by the ALRC in
Equality Before the Law
Question 9–2
In practice, how often does a person who has
obtained an injunction under the
Family Law Act
subsequently need to seek additional protection under state or territory family
violence legislation?
Question 9–3
Should a person who has sought or obtained an
injunction for personal protection under the
Family Law Act
(Cth) also be able to seek a protection order under state or territory
family violence legislation?
Question 9–4
In practice, do problems arise from the provisions
dealing with inconsistencies between injunctions granted under
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) and protection orders made under
state and territory family violence legislation?
Proposal 9–2
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) should be
amended to provide that in proceedings to make or vary a protection order, a
state or territory court with jurisdiction
may revive, vary, discharge or
Family Law Act
injunction for the personal protection of a
party to a marriage or other person.
Proposal 9–3
Section 114(2)
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth), which permits a court to make an order relieving a party to a marriage
from any obligations to perform marital services or
render conjugal rights,
should be repealed.
Question 9–5
Is evidence of violence given in protection order
proceedings being considered in the context of property proceedings under
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth)? If so, how?
Proposal 9–4
The provisions of the
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) dealing with the distribution of property should refer expressly to
the impact of violence on past contributions and on future
needs, as recommended
by the ALRC in
Equality Before the Law
Proposal 9–5
The Australian Government should commission an
inquiry into the treatment of family violence in property proceedings under
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth). The inquiry should
consider, among other issues, the manner in which family violence should be
taken into account in determining
a party’s contribution under
and future needs under
; the definition of family
violence for the purpose of
proceedings; and interaction with other
schemes—for example, victims’ compensation.
Question 9–6
How often are persons who have been the subject of
exclusion conditions in protection orders made under family violence legislation
or victims of family violence taking possession of property which they do not
own or have a right to possess, or denying the other
person access to property?
If so, what impact does this have on any property proceedings or orders relating
to property under the
Family Law Act 1975
Proposal 9–6
Provisions in state and territory family violence
legislation dealing with exclusion orders should:
(a) limit the types of property which a court may order an excluded person
to recover to clothes, tools of trade, personal documents
and other personal
effects, and any other items specified by the court; and
(b) provide that any order to recover property should not include
(i) which are reasonably needed by the victim or a child of the victim;
(ii) in which title is genuinely in dispute; and
(c) provide that an order to recover property should not be made where other
more appropriate means are available for the issue to
be addressed in a timely
Question 9–7
Are there any types of property other than those
set out in Proposal 9–6 which should, or should not, be subject to
by an excluded person under state and territory family violence
legislation—for example, should an excluded person be able
property of his or her child?
Proposal 9–7
State and territory family violence legislation
should require applicants for protection orders to inform courts about, and
to consider, any agreement or order for the division of property under
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth), or any pending application for such an
Proposal 9–8
Application forms for protection orders in family
violence proceedings should clearly seek information about any agreement or
for the division of property under the
Family Law Act 1975
any pending application for such an order.
Proposal 9–9
State and territory family violence legislation
should provide that personal property directions made in protection order
proceedings
are subject to orders made by a federal family court or another
court responsible for determining property disputes.
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
(Vic) should be referred to as a
model in this regard.
Proposal 9–10
State and territory family violence legislation
should provide that personal property directions do not affect any ownership
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
should be referred to as a model in this regard.
Question 9–8
In practice, what issues arise from the
interaction between relocation orders and protection orders or allegations of
family violence?
If so, what legal or practical reforms could be introduced to
address these issues? For example, should there be a presumption that,
or all cases where a family court determines there has been family violence, it
is likely to be in the best interests of
a child to be able to relocate to a
safe distance from the person who has used violence? If so, to which type of
case should such
a presumption apply?
Question 9–9
Family Law Act 1975
amended to include provisions dealing with family violence in relocation matters
in addition to the provisions of the Act
that apply to family violence in
parenting proceedings?
Question 9–10
In practice, what issues arise from the
interaction between protection orders under state and territory family violence
legislation
and recovery orders under div VII of the
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) for return of a child pursuant to the
Convention on the Civil
Aspects of International Child Abduction
, as implemented by the
Law (Child Abduction Convention) Regulations 1986
(Cth)? If so, what legal
or practical reforms could be introduced to address these issues?
Question 9–11
Family Law Act 1975
amended to include provisions dealing with family violence in recovery matters,
in addition to the provisions of the Act
that apply to family violence in
parenting proceedings?
[back to top]
10. Improving Evidence and Information
Proposal 10–1
Judicial officers, when making a protection order
under state or territory family violence legislation by consent without
admissions,
should ensure that:
(a) the notation on protection orders and court files specifically states
that the order is made by consent ‘without admission
as to criminal
liability of the allegations in the application for the protection
(b) the applicant has an opportunity to oppose an order being made by
consent without admissions;
(c) the order gives attention to the safety of victims, and, if appropriate,
requires that a written safety plan accompanies the
(d) the parties are aware of the practical consequences of consenting to a
protection order without admission of liability.
Proposal 10–2
Before accepting an undertaking to the court from
a person against whom a protection order is sought, a court should ensure
(a) the applicant for the protection order understands the implications of
relying on an undertaking to the court given by the respondent,
rather than
continuing with their application for a protection order;
(b) the respondent understands that the applicant’s acceptance of an
undertaking does not preclude further action by the applicant
to address family
violence, if necessary; and
(c) the undertaking is in writing.
Question 10–1
What practical reforms could be implemented in
order to achieve the objectives set out in Proposal 10–2?
Question 10–2
In practice, do victims of family violence, who
rely on undertakings to the court from a person against whom a protection order
sought, often return to court because the undertaking has been breached, or
to seek further protection from family violence?
Question 10–3
In practice, do victims of family violence who
rely on undertakings to the court from a person against whom a protection order
sought inform federal family courts of the existence of such undertakings
during family law proceedings?
Proposal 10–3
Court forms for applications for a protection
order under state and territory family violence legislation should include
information
relevant jurisdiction.
Question 10–4
In order to improve the evidentiary value of
information contained in applications for protection orders under state and
family violence legislation, would it be beneficial for such
legislation to:
(a) require that applications for protection orders be sworn or affirmed;
(b) give applicants for protection orders the opportunity of providing
affidavit evidence in support of their application?
Question 10–5
What are the advantages or disadvantages of
providing written rather than oral evidence to a court when seeking a protection
Would a standard form of affidavit be of assistance to victims of family
Question 10–6
Are there any other ways to facilitate the use of
evidence given in proceedings for a protection order under state and territory
violence legislation in pending, concurrent or subsequent family law
proceedings where family violence is alleged?
Question 10–7
Are the provisions in state and territory family
violence legislation that allow the court to hear protection order proceedings
closed court effective in protecting vulnerable applicants and witnesses?
Question 10–8
How is the requirement in s 81 of the
and Family Violence Protection Act 1989
(Qld), that a court hearing an
application for a protection order should not generally be open to the public,
working in practice?
Proposal 10–4
State and territory family violence legislation
(a) prohibit a person who has allegedly used family violence from personally
cross-examining, in protection order proceedings, a
person against whom he or
she has allegedly used family violence; and
(b) provide that any person conducting such cross-examination be a legal
practitioner representing the interests of the person who
has allegedly used
family violence.
Question 10–9
Should state and territory family violence
legislation allow a court to:
(a) make an order that a person who has made two or more vexatious
applications for a protection order against the same person may
further application without the leave of the court; and/or
(b) dismiss a vexatious application for a protection order at a preliminary
hearing before a respondent is served with that application?
Proposal 10–5
State and territory family violence legislation
should provide that mutual protection orders may only be made by a court if it
satisfied that there are grounds for making a protection order against each
Proposal 10–6
State and territory family violence legislation
should require the respondent to a protection order to seek leave from the court
making an application to vary or revoke the protection order.
Question 10–10
In practice, are records of proceedings under
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) accessible—in a timely
fashion—to persons seeking access for the purpose of protection order
proceedings under
state and territory family violence legislation? If not, are
any amendments to the
Family Law Act
Family Law Rules 2004
(Cth) necessary or desirable—for example, to impose an obligation on
federal family courts to provide details of injunctions
or orders to a state or
territory court hearing proceedings under family violence legislation involving
one or more of the parties
to the family law proceedings?
Question 10–11
In practice, does the prohibition on publication
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) unduly restrict
communication about family law proceedings to persons involved in protection
order proceedings under state
and territory family violence legislation,
including police who enforce such orders? If so, are any amendments to
necessary or desirable?
Proposal 10–7
Certificates issued under
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) should include information about why family
dispute resolution was inappropriate or unsuccessful—for example, because
there has been, or is a future risk of, family violence by one of the parties to
the proceedings.
Question 10–12
If more information is included in certificates
issued under
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) pursuant to
Proposal 10–7, how should this information be treated by family courts?
For example, should such information
only be used for the purposes of screening
and risk assessment?
Question 10–13
Are the confidentiality provisions in
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) inappropriately
restricting family counsellors and family dispute resolution practitioners from
releasing information relating
to the risks of family violence to:
(a) courts exercising family law jurisdiction; and
(b) state and territory courts exercising jurisdiction under family violence
legislation?
Proposal 10–8
Sections 10D(4)(b)
(4)(b) of the
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) should be amended to permit family counsellors
and family dispute resolution practitioners to disclose communications where
they reasonably believe that disclosure is necessary to prevent or lessen a
serious threat to a person’s life, health or safety.
Proposal 10–9
Sections 10D(4)(c)
(4)(c) of the
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) should permit family counsellors and family
dispute resolution practitioners to disclose communications where they
believe that disclosure is necessary to report conduct that they
reasonably believe constitutes grounds for a protection order under
territory family violence legislation.
Question 10–14
Should there be any other amendments to
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) enabling the release of any
other types of information obtained by family counsellors or family dispute
resolution practitioners?
For example, should the legislation permit release
where it would prevent or lessen a serious threat to a child’s
Proposal 10–10
Sections 10E
Family Law Act
(Cth) should enable the admission into evidence of disclosures made by
an adult or child that a child has been exposed to family violence,
disclosures have been made to family counsellors and family dispute resolution
practitioners.
Question 10–15
(Cth) permit the admission into evidence of communications made to
family counsellors and family dispute resolution practitioners
which disclose
family violence? If so, how should such an exception be framed?
Question 10–16
Family Law Act
(Cth) be amended to apply expressly to state and territory courts when
they are not exercising family law jurisdiction?
Question 10–17
In practice, do prohibitions on publication in
state and territory family violence legislation unduly restrict communication
protection order proceedings which may be relevant to proceedings in
federal family courts?
Question 10–18
Should prohibitions on publication of
identifying information about adults involved in protection order proceedings
under state and
territory family violence legislation be modified in one or more
of the following ways to
(a) require the prohibition on disclosure to be activated by a court
(b) impose a requirement that the disclosure of identifying information must
be reasonably likely to expose a person to risk of harm
as a precondition for a
court to issue an order prohibiting publication; and/or
(c) include an exception to prohibitions on publication for disclosure of
pleadings, transcripts of evidence or other documents to
police or other persons
concerned in any court proceedings, for use in connection with those
proceedings—for example, the exception
set out in s 82(3)(a) of the
Domestic and Family Violence Protection Act 1989
Question 10–19
Are there any situations in which state and
territory family violence legislation should require courts to provide details
of protection
order proceedings or orders to federal family courts?
Question 10–20
Do privacy and/or secrecy laws unduly impede
agencies from disclosing information which may be relevant to:
(a) protection order proceedings under state and territory family violence
legislation; and/or
(b) family law proceedings in federal family courts?
Proposal 10–11
Legislative privacy principles applying to the
use and disclosure of personal information by Australian Government and state
and territory
government agencies should permit use or disclosure where an
agency reasonably believes it is necessary to lessen or prevent a serious
to an individual’s life, health or safety, as recommended by the ALRC in
For Your Information: Australian Privacy Law and Practice
(ALRC 108).
Proposal 10–12
State and territory family violence legislation
should authorise agencies in that state or territory to use or disclose personal
information
for the purpose of ensuring the safety of a victim of family
violence or the wellbeing of an affected child.
Proposal 10–13
Information-sharing provisions introduced
pursuant to Proposal 10–12 should permit disclosure to, at least,
relevant government
officers in other jurisdictions and federal, state and
territory court officers.
Proposal 10–14
Courts that hear protection order proceedings in
each state and territory should enter into an information-sharing protocol with
Family Court of Australia, Federal Magistrates Court, police, relevant
government departments and other organisations that hold information
in relation
to family violence.
Proposal 10–15
A national protection order database should be
established as a component of the Australian Government’s commitment to
the implementation
of a national registration system for protection orders. At a
minimum, information on the database should:
(a) include protection orders made under state and territory family violence
legislation as well as orders and injunctions made under
Family Law Act
(b) be available to federal, state and territory police officers, federal
family courts, and state and territory courts that hear
protection order
proceedings.
Question 10–21
Is there any other information which should be
included on, or are there any other persons who should have access to, the
protection order database, over and above those set out in
Proposal 10–15?
[back to top]
11. Alternative Processes
Question 11–1
Should any amendments be made to the provisions
relating to family dispute resolution in the
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth)—and, in particular, to
of that Act—to ensure
that victims of family violence are not inappropriately attempting or
participating in family dispute
resolution? What other reforms may be necessary
to ensure the legislation operates effectively?
Proposal 11–1
Australian governments, lawyers’
organisations and bodies responsible for legal education should develop ways to
ensure that
lawyers who practice family law are given adequate training and
support in screening and assessing risks in relation to family violence.
Proposal 11–2
The Australian Government should promote the use
of existing screening and risk assessment frameworks and tools for family
resolution practitioners through, for example, training, accreditation
processes, and audit and evaluations.
Proposal 11–3
Measures should be taken to improve collaboration
and cooperation between family dispute resolution practitioners and lawyers, as
recommended by the Family Law Council.
Question 11–2
Does the definition of family violence in the
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) cause any problems in family dispute resolution
Question 11–3
In practice, are protection orders being used
appropriately in family dispute resolution processes to identify family violence
manage the risks associated with it? Are any reforms necessary to improve
the use of protection orders in such processes?
Proposal 11–4
State and territory courts should ensure that
application forms for protection orders include an exception allowing contact
purposes of family dispute resolution processes.
Question 11–4
In practice, are alternative dispute resolution
mechanisms used in relation to protection order proceedings under family
legislation? If so, are reforms necessary to ensure these mechanisms
are used only in appropriate circumstances?
Question 11–5
How can the potential of alternative dispute
resolution mechanisms to improve communication and collaboration in the child
system best be realised?
Question 11–6
Is there a need for legislative or other reforms
to ensure that alternative dispute resolution mechanisms in child protection
family violence appropriately?
Question 11–7
Is it appropriate for restorative justice
practices to be used in the family violence context? If so, is it appropriate
only for certain
should these practices have?
Question 11–8
Is it appropriate for restorative justice
practices to be used for sexual assault offences or offenders? If so, what
limits (if any)
should apply to the classes of offence or offender? If
restorative justice practices are available, what safeguards should apply?
[back to top]
Part C – Child
13. Child Protection and the
Criminal Law
Question 13–1
Should offences against children for abuse and
neglect be contained in child protection legislation or in general criminal
Question 13–2
In practice, what issues, if any, arise from the
way in which the offence provisions are currently drafted?
Question 13–3
In those jurisdictions where the same conduct may
give rise to an offence under both child protection or criminal legislation,
factors are taken into account in practice when determining whether to
bring an action against an alleged offender under child protection
or criminal
legislation?
Question 13–4
What range of penalties should be available to
courts for offences under child protection legislation?
Question 13–5
In practice, what range of penalties are most
regularly imposed, and if conditional, what are the most usual conditions
Question 13–6
In what circumstances is it appropriate for
police to make child protection notifications when responding to incidents of
family violence?
Proposal 13–1
State and territory child protection legislation
should contain an exemption from the prohibition on the disclosure of the
of the reporter, or of information from which the reporter’s
identity could be deduced, for information disclosed to a law
enforcement agency
(a) the information is disclosed in connection with the investigation of a
serious offence alleged to have been committed against
a child or young person;
(b) the disclosure is necessary for the purpose of safeguarding or promoting
the safety welfare and wellbeing of any child or young
person, whether or not
the victim of the alleged offence.
Proposal 13–2
State and territory child protection legislation
should also provide that the exemption in Proposal 13–1 does not
apply unless
a senior officer of the law enforcement agency to which the
disclosure is made has certified in writing beforehand that:
(a) obtaining the reporter’s consent would prejudice the investigation
of the serious offence concerned; or
(b) it is impractical to obtain the consent.
Proposal 13–3
State and territory child protection legislation
should define law enforcement agency to be the police force of the relevant
the Australian Federal Police and the police force of any other state and
Proposal 13–4
State and territory child protection legislation
should provide that the person or body that discloses the identity of a
reporter—or
the information in a report from which the reporter’s
identity can be deduced— should notify the reporter of the disclosure
unless it is impractical to do so, or would prejudice the investigation of the
serious offence concerned.
Question 13–7
In practice, are the inter-agency protocols and
memorandums of understanding between key agencies involved in child
protection—such
as the police and child protection
agencies—effective to ensure that professionals in each part of the system
understand the
consequences of their actions for other parts of the system?
Question 13–8
What legal changes are required to facilitate
effective relationships between agencies to ensure that evidence is obtained in
that is appropriate not only for child protection purposes but also for
family law purposes?
Question 13–9
Should child protection legislation be amended
to require police to consult with the child protection agency before deciding to
investigate
an alleged offence against a child where the child is suspected of
being in need of care and protection?
Question 13–10
Should child protection legislation be amended
to require police to consult with the child protection agency before initiating
proceedings
in relation to an alleged offence against a child?
Proposal 13–5
States and territories should ensure that best
practice features of collaborative models of child protection are adopted,
(a) legislative provisions that allow agencies (including federal agencies)
to share relevant information about children and families
to make accurate
assessments of the needs of children and families and to ensure that appropriate
programs relative to those needs
are delivered in a timely and coordinated
(b) the establishment of a shared database which contains basic information
can access to see quickly
which other agencies may be dealing with a particular child or family; and
(c) the development of guidelines to assist agencies to clarify their
respective roles and functions, to assist them when performing
functions under
the legislation, and to assist them to resolve any issues that may arise.
Question 13–11
In care proceedings under child protection
legislation, where final orders are pending, should children’s courts in
and territories be given power to make protection orders in favour of
the child who is the subject of proceedings before it, where
the court considers
a protection order necessary to protect the child from serious harm arising from
the child’s exposure to
family violence?
Question 13–12
Should a children’s court be able to make
protection orders in favour of siblings of the child who is the subject of care
proceedings
before it? If so, should it be able to make such an order of its own
motion or should it be by application by a party to the proceedings
advocate for the child?
Proposal 13–6
State and territory child protection legislation
should be amended to allow a court, in the exercise of its criminal jurisdiction
where a child or young person who is a defendant before it, to refer a matter to
the child protection agency for investigation where
it considers that there are
legislative grounds for a protection application, or an application for a
therapeutic treatment order,
to be made.
Proposal 13–7
State and territory child protection legislation
should require the child protection agency to provide, within 21 days of the
a report to the court setting out the outcomes of its investigation
into the matter, and specifying whether a care and protection
therapeutic treatment order is being sought, or if the investigation reveals
that such an order is not warranted.
Proposal 13–8
A court exercising care jurisdiction under state
and territory child protection legislation should have a power to refer its
for the safety of other children or siblings of the child or young
person the subject of care proceedings before it to the child
protection agency
for investigation, and to require the child protection agency to furnish it with
a report of its investigation
within a certain time period specified in the
legislation.
Question 13–13
In practice, when sentencing young offenders,
how often does the court request information held by the child protection agency
the offender to be provided to it?
[back to top]
14. Child Protection and the
Question 14–1
Can children’s courts be given more powers
to ensure orders are made in the best interests of children that deal with
have, and what resources would be required?
Question 14–2
Family Law Act 1975
amended to extend the jurisdiction which state and territory courts already have
to make orders for a parent to spend time with a child?
Question 14–3
When should state and territory children’s
courts have power to determine contact between one parent and another in matters
that are before the court in child protection proceedings?
Question 14–4
What features of the Family Court of Western
Australia should be replicated in other jurisdictions?
Question 14–5
Is there any role for a referral of legislative
power to the Commonwealth in relation to child protection matters? If so, what
such a referral cover?
Proposal 14–1
To ensure appropriate disclosure of safety
concerns for children, the
Initiating Application (Family Law)
should be amended by adding an additional part headed ‘Concerns about
safety’ which should include a question along
the lines of ‘Do you
have any significant fears for the safety of you or your child(ren) that the
court should know about?’.
Question 14–6
What other practical changes to the applications
forms for initiating proceedings in federal family courts and the Family Court
Western Australia would make it clear to parties that they are required to
disclose current or prior child protection proceedings
and current child
protection orders?
Question 14–7
In what other ways can family law processes be
improved to ensure that any child safety concerns that may need to be drawn to
attention of child protection agencies are highlighted appropriately upon
commencement of proceedings under the
Family Law Act 1975
Proposal 14–2
Screening and risk assessment frameworks
developed for federal family courts should closely involve state and territory
child protection
Question 14–8
In what ways can cooperation between child
protection agencies and family courts be improved with respect to compliance
with subpoenas
Family Law Act 1975
Question 14–9
What role should child protection agencies play in
family law proceedings?
Question 14–10
Are amendments to the
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) and state and territory child protection legislation required to
encourage prompt and effective intervention by child protection
agencies in
family law proceedings? For example, should the
Family Law Act
to provide that the court may, upon finding that none of the parties to the
proceedings is a viable carer, on its own
motion join a child protection agency
or some other person (for example, a grandparent) as a party to proceedings?
Should federal
family courts have additional powers to ensure that intervention
by the child protection system occurs when necessary in the interests
safety of children?
Question 14–11
What are the advantages of registration of state
and territory child protection orders under
(Cth)? What are the interactions in practice of the registration
provisions and s 67ZK of the
Family Law Act
Question 14–12
How, in practice, can information exchange best
be facilitated between family courts and child protection agencies to ensure the
of children? Are changes to the
Family Law Act 1975
necessary to achieve this?
Proposal 14–3
All states and territories should develop a
Memorandum of Understanding or Protocol to govern the relationship between
federal family
courts and child protection agencies.
Question 14–13
Does the variation in the content of the
protocols cause any difficulties and, if so, what changes should be made to
facilitate the
flow of information between the family courts and child
protection agencies? What measures should be taken to ensure that the protocols
are effective in practice?
Question 14–14
How could the Memorandums of Understanding and
Protocols for exchange of information between federal family courts, child
agencies and legal aid commissions be better known within courts, and
beyond them?
Proposal 14–4
The Australian Government should encourage all
and territory child protection agencies which include procedures:
(a) for electing the jurisdiction in which to commence proceedings;
(b) for dealing with requests for documents and information under
Family Law Act 1975
(c) for responding to subpoenas issued by federal family courts; and
(d) which permit a federal family court to invite a child protection agency
to consent to an order being made which allocates parental
responsibility in the
child protection agency’s favour, in circumstances where it determines
that no order should be made in
favour of either parent.
Question 14–15
In what ways can the principles of the Magellan
project be applied in the Federal Magistrates Court?
Question 14–16
What changes to law and practice are required to
prevent children falling through the gaps between the child protection and
law systems?
Question 14–17
Can the problems of the interactions in practice
between family law and child protection systems be resolved by collaborative
arrangements
such as the Magellan project? Are legal changes necessary to
prevent systemic problems and harm to children, and, if so, what are
[back to top]
Part D – Sexual
16. Sexual Offences
Question 16–1
Do significant gaps or inconsistencies arise
among Australian jurisdictions in relation to sexual offences against adults in
(a) definition of sexual intercourse or penetration;
(b) recognition of aggravating factors;
(c) penalties applicable if an offence is found proven;
(d) offences relating to attempts; or
(e) definitions of indecency offences?
Question 16–2
Do these gaps or inconsistencies have a
disproportionate impact on victims of sexual assault occurring in a family
violence context?
If so, how?
Proposal 16–1
Commonwealth, state and territory sexual offences
legislation should provide that the age of consent for all sexual offences is 16
Question 16–3
How should ‘similarity in age’ of the
complainant and the accused be dealt with? Should it be a defence, or should
of consent be included as an element of the offence in these circumstances?
Question 16–4
At what age should a defendant be able to raise
an honest and reasonable belief that a person was over a certain age?
Question 16–5
Has the offence of ‘persistent sexual
abuse’ or ‘maintaining a relationship’ achieved its aims in
the prosecution of sexual offences against children in the family
context, where there are frequently multiple unlawful acts? If
not, what further
changes are required?
Proposal 16–2
Commonwealth, state and territory sexual offences
legislation should provide statutory definitions of consent based on ‘free
and voluntary agreement’.
Proposal 16–3
Commonwealth, state and territory sexual offences
legislation should prescribe a non-exhaustive list of circumstances where there
is no consent to sexual activity, or where consent is vitiated. These need not
automatically negate consent, but the circumstances
must in some way be
recognised as potentially vitiating consent. At a minimum, the non-exhaustive
list of vitiating factors should
(a) lack of capacity to consent, including because a person is asleep or
unconscious, or so affected by alcohol or other drugs as
to be unable to
(b) the actual use of force, threatened use of force against the complainant
or another person, which need not involve physical violence
or physical
(c) unlawful detention;
(d) mistaken identity and mistakes as to the nature of the act (including
mistakes generated by the fraud or deceit of the accused);
(e) any position of authority or power, intimidation or coercive
Question 16–6
To what extent are the circumstances vitiating
consent set out in current legislation appropriate to sexual assaults committed
a family violence context? Are any amendments required to draw attention to
the coercive environment created by family violence,
or are the current
provisions sufficient?
Proposal 16–4
Commonwealth, state and territory sexual offences
legislation should provide that a person who performs a sexual act with another
person, without the consent of the other person, knows that the other person
does not consent to the act if the person has no reasonable
grounds for
believing that the other person consents. For the purpose of making any such
finding, the trier of fact must have regard
to all the circumstances of the case
including any steps taken by the person to ascertain whether the other person
consents, but
not including any self-induced intoxication of the person.
Is an honest belief in consent more likely to be raised in cases
where the complainant has or has had an intimate relationship with
the accused?
If so, will the insertion of an objective element assist in these cases? Are
other measures required to clarify or restrict
the defence of honest belief in
these cases?
Proposal 16–5
State and territory legislation should provide that a direction must be
made to the jury on consent in sexual offence proceedings
where it is relevant
to a fact in issue. Such directions must be related to the facts in issue and
the elements of the offence and
expressed in such a way as to aid the
comprehension of the jury. Such directions should cover:
(a) the meaning of consent (as defined in the legislation);
(b) the circumstances that vitiate consent, and that if the jury finds
beyond reasonable doubt that one of these circumstances exists
complainant was not consenting;
(c) the fact that the person did not say or do anything to indicate free
agreement to a sexual act when the act took place is enough
to show that the act
took place without that person’s free agreement; and
(d) that the jury is not
to regard a person as having freely agreed to a sexual act just because she or
he did not protest or physically
resist, did not sustain physical injury, or
freely agreed to engage in another sexual act (whether or not of the same type)
that person, or a sexual act with another person, on an earlier
Where the defence asserts that the accused believed that the complainant was
consenting to the sexual act then the judge must direct
the jury to
(e) any evidence of that belief; and
(f) whether that belief was reasonable in all the relevant circumstances
having regard to (in a case where one of the circumstances
that vitiate consent
exists) whether the accused was aware that that circumstance existed in relation
to the complainant;
(g) whether the accused took any steps to ascertain whether the complainant
was consenting or might not be consenting, and if so,
the nature of those steps;
(h) any other relevant matters.
Proposal 16–6
State and territory sexual offences legislation should include a statement
that the objectives of the legislation are to:
(a) uphold the fundamental right of every person to make decisions about his
or her sexual behaviour and to choose not to engage
in sexual activity;
(b) protect children and persons with a cognitive impairment from sexual
exploitation.
Proposal 16–7
State and territory sexual offences, criminal
procedure or evidence legislation, should provide for guiding principles, to
which courts
should have regard when interpreting provisions relating to sexual
offences. At a minimum, these guiding principles should refer
(a) there is a high incidence of sexual violence within society;
(b) sexual offences are significantly under-reported;
(c) a significant number of sexual offences are committed against women,
children and other vulnerable persons, including persons
with a cognitive
impairment;
(d) sexual offenders are commonly known to their victims; and
(e) sexual offences often occur in circumstances where there are unlikely to
be any physical signs of an offence having occurred.
Question 16–8
Should such a statement of guiding principles
make reference to any other factors, such as recognising vulnerable groups of
or specifically acknowledging that sexual violence constitutes a form of
family violence?
[back to top]
17. Reporting, Prosecution and Pre-trial
Proposal 17–1
The Australian Centre for the Study of Sexual Assault, the Australian
Institute of Criminology and similar state and territory agencies
prioritise the collection of comprehensive data on attrition rates and outcomes
in sexual assault cases, including in relation
to sexual assault perpetrated in
a family violence context.
Question 17–1
Have specialist police squads for sex crimes
increased the policing and apprehension of sexual assault offenders, including
in a family
violence context?
Question 17–2
To what extent is the work of specialist police
hampered by lack of training and resources? In what ways can improvements be
Question 17–3
Are specialised police and integrated agency
responses effective in reducing the attrition of sexual assault cases during the
investigation phase? If not, what further measures should be taken?
Question 17–4
What impact are specialised police units having
on improving collection of admissible evidence and support for victims of sexual
in a family violence context?
Question 17–5
Should specialised sexual assault police units be
established in jurisdictions that do not have them?
Proposal 17–2
Commonwealth, state and territory Directors of
Public Prosecution should ensure that prosecutorial guidelines and policies:
(a) facilitate the referral of victims and witnesses of sexual assault to
appropriate welfare, health, counselling and other support
(b) require consultation with victims of sexual assault about key
prosecutorial decisions including whether to prosecute, discontinue
prosecution or agree to a charge or fact bargain;
(c) require the ongoing provision of information to victims of sexual
assault about the status and progress of proceedings;
(d) facilitate the provision of assistance to victims and witnesses of
sexual assault in understanding the legal and court process;
(e) ensure that family violence protection orders or stalking intervention
orders are sought in all relevant circumstances; and
(f) require referral of victims and witnesses of sexual assault of victims to
providers of personal legal advice in related areas,
such as family law and
victims’ compensation.
Question 17–6
What measures should be taken to reduce the
attrition of sexual assault cases during the prosecution phase, including in
to sexual assault committed in a family violence context?
Question 17–7
Are there any further prosecutorial guidelines
and policies that could be introduced to reduce the attrition of cases of sexual
committed in a family violence context?
Proposal 17–3
State and territory legislation should prohibit
any complainant in sexual assault proceedings from being required to attend to
evidence at committal proceedings. Alternatively, child complainants should
not be required to attend committal proceedings and,
for adult complainants, the
court should be satisfied that there are special reasons for the complainant to
Proposal 17–4
Commonwealth, state and territory legislation
(a) create a presumption that when two or more charges for sexual offences
are joined in the same indictment, it is presumed that
those charges are to be
tried together; and
(b) state that this presumption is not rebutted merely because evidence on
one charge is inadmissible on another charge.
Question 17–8
What impact has
Phillips v The Queen
the prosecution of sexual assaults where there are multiple complaints against
the same defendant and consent is a fact in
Question 17–9
Is there a need to
introduce reforms to overturn the decision in
Phillips v The Queen
Proposal 17–5
Commonwealth, state and territory legislation
should allow the tendering of pre-recorded audiovisual material of interview
investigators and a sexual assault complainant as the
complainant’s evidence-in-chief.
Proposal 17–6
Commonwealth, state and territory legislation
should permit child victims of sexual assault and victims of sexual assault who
vulnerable as a result of mental or physical impairment to provide an
audiovisual record of evidence at a pre-trial hearing attended
by the judge, the
prosecutor, the defence lawyer, the defendant and any other person the court
deems appropriate. Adult victims of
sexual assault should also be permitted to
provide evidence in this way, by order of the court. Audiovisual evidence should
be replayed
at the trial as the witness’s evidence. Recorded evidence
should be available for use at any re-trial following an appeal or
proceedings in appropriate circumstances.
Proposal 17–7
Commonwealth, state and territory governments
should ensure that participants in the criminal justice system receive
comprehensive
education about legislation authorising the use of pre-recorded
evidence in sexual assault proceedings, and training in relation
to interviewing
victims of sexual assault and creating pre-recorded evidence.
[back to top]
18. Trial Processes
Question 18–1
Should Commonwealth, state and territory evidence
law and procedural rules limit cross-examination and the admission of evidence
the sexual reputation and prior sexual history of all witnesses in sexual
assault proceedings?
Question 18–2
How best can judicial officers and legal
practitioners be assisted to develop a consistent approach to the classification
of evidence
as being either of ‘sexual reputation’, ‘sexual
disposition’ and ‘sexual experience’ (or ‘sexual
activities’)?
Proposal 18–1
Commonwealth, state and territory legislation
should provide that a court must not allow any questions as to, or admit any
of, the sexual reputation of the complainant.
Question 18–3
Under discretionary models, is evidence of a
complainant’s prior sexual history admitted more or less often in
proceedings concerning
offences perpetrated in a family violence context, as
compared to other sexual assault proceedings?
Proposal 18–2
Commonwealth, state and territory legislation
should provide that complainants of sexual assault must not be cross-examined,
court must not admit any evidence, as to the sexual activities (whether
consensual or non-consensual) of the complainant other than
those to which the
charge relates, without the leave of the court.
Proposal 18–3
Commonwealth, state and territory legislation
should provide that the court shall not grant leave for complainants of sexual
to be cross-examined about their sexual activities unless it is
satisfied that:
(a) the evidence has significant probative value to a fact in issue; and
(b) the probative value of the evidence substantially outweighs the danger
of unfair prejudice to the proper administration of justice,
taking into account
the matters in Proposal 18–4 below.
Proposal 18–4
Commonwealth, state and territory legislation
should provide that the court, in deciding whether the probative value of the
substantially outweighs the danger of unfair prejudice to the proper
administration of justice, must have regard to:
(a) the distress, humiliation, or embarrassment which the complainant may
suffer as a result of the cross-examination or the admission
of the evidence, in
view of the age of the complainant and the number and nature of the questions
that the complainant is likely
to be asked;
(b) the risk that the evidence may arouse in the jury discriminatory belief
or bias, prejudice, sympathy or hostility;
(c) the need to respect the complainant’s personal dignity and
(d) the right of the accused to make a full answer and defence; and
(e) any other factor which the court considers relevant.
Question 18–4
Should Commonwealth, state and territory
legislative provide that ‘sexual history evidence’ or sexual
experience evidence
(a) admissible to support an inference that the complainant is the type of
person who is more likely to have consented to the sexual
activity to which the
charge relates; and/or
(b) to be regarded as having substantial probative value by virtue of any
inference it may raise as to general disposition.
Proposal 18–5
Commonwealth, state and territory legislation
should provide that ‘sexual history evidence’ or sexual experience
is not to be regarded as being proper matter for cross-examination as
to credit unless, because of special circumstances, it would
materially to impair confidence in the reliability of the evidence of the
complainant.
Proposal 18–6
Commonwealth, state and territory legislation
should require an application for leave to admit or adduce sexual history
evidence to
(a) made in writing; and
(b) filed with the relevant court and served on the informant or the
Director of Public Prosecutions within a prescribed minimum
number of days,
and prescribe:
(a) the required contents of such an application;
(b) the circumstances in which leave may be granted out of time;
(c) the circumstances in which the requirement that an application for leave
be made in writing may be waived; and
(d) that the application is to be determined in the absence of the jury, and
if the accused requests, in the absence of the complainant.
Proposal 18–7
Commonwealth, state and territory legislation
should require a court to give reasons for its decision whether or not to grant
and if leave is granted to question the complainant, to state the nature
of the evidence which may be elicited by that questioning.
Proposal 18–8
Commonwealth, state and territory Directors of
Public Prosecution should introduce and implement a policy of writing to the
in sexual assault matters and informing them of the procedural
application requirements imposed under the relevant legislation in
relation to
admitting and adducing sexual experience evidence.
Question 18–5
In sexual assault proceedings, the sexual assault
communications privilege must generally be invoked by the complainant, who is
unrepresented. Assuming complainants continue to be unrepresented in
such sexual assault proceedings, what procedures and services
would best assist
them to invoke the privilege?
Proposal 18–9
State and territory evidence legislation should
provide that
(a) the opinion rule does not apply to evidence of an opinion of a person
based on that person’s specialised knowledge of child
development and
child behaviour; and
(b) the credibility rule does not apply to such evidence given concerning
the credibility of children.
Question 18–6
Should Commonwealth, state and territory
legislation provide for mandatory jury directions, containing prescribed
information about
children’s abilities as witnesses or children’s
responses to sexual abuse?
Proposal 18–10
Commonwealth, State and territory legislation
should provide that, in sexual assault proceedings, a court should not have
the possibility that the evidence of a witness or witnesses is the
result of concoction, collusion or suggestion when determining
the admissibility
of tendency or coincidence evidence.
Question 18–7
To what extent does the ‘striking
similarities’ test impede the ordering of joint trials in relation to sex
Question 18–8
Should the Western Australian reforms in relation
to the cross-admissibility of evidence be adopted in other jurisdictions?
Question 18–9
Should the ‘no rational view of the
evidence’ (
) test be applied to determine the admissibility
of relationship evidence at common law?
Question 18–10
Should Commonwealth, state and territory
legislation provide that, where complainants in sexual assault proceedings are
give evidence, the hearsay rule does not apply to evidence of a
preliminary complaint, regardless of when the preliminary complaint
Proposal 18–11
Commonwealth, state and territory legislation
should prohibit a judge in any sexual assault proceeding from:
(a) warning a jury, or making any suggestion to a jury, that complainants as
a class are unreliable witnesses; and
(b) warning a jury of the danger of convicting on the uncorroborated
evidence of any complainant.
Proposal 18–12
Commonwealth, state and territory legislation
should provide that:
(a) if the court, on application by the defendant, is satisfied that the
defendant has suffered a significant forensic disadvantage
because of the
consequences of delay, the court must inform the jury of the nature of the
disadvantage and the need to take that
disadvantage into account when
considering the evidence;
(b) the judge need not comply with (a) if there are good reasons for not
doing so; and
(c) no particular form of words needs to be used in giving the warning
pursuant to (a), but in warning the jury, the judge should
not suggest that it
is ‘dangerous to convict’ because of any demonstrated forensic
disadvantage.
Question 18–11
What issues arise in practice pursuant to s 165B
of the uniform Evidence Acts? Is the s 165B(5) abrogation of the trial
obligation and power to give a
warning sufficiently
Question 18–12
Are warnings about the effect of delay on the
credibility of complainants necessary in sexual assault proceedings?
Proposal 18–13
Commonwealth, state and territory legislation
should provide that, in sexual assault proceedings:
(a) (i) the issue of any delay in complaint, or absence of complaint, on
the credibility of the complainant should be a matter for
argument by counsel
and for determination by the jury;
(ii) subject to paragraph (iii), save for identifying the issue for the
jury and the competing contentions of counsel, the trial
judge must not give a
direction regarding the effect of delay in complaint, or absence of complaint,
on the credibility of the complainant,
unless satisfied it is necessary to do so
in order to ensure a fair trial; and
(iii) if evidence is given, or a question is asked, or a comment is made
that tends to suggest that the person against whom the
offence is alleged to
have been committed either delayed making or failed to make a complaint in
respect of the offence, the judge
must tell the jury that there may be good
reasons why a victim of a sexual offence may delay making or fail to make a
complaint in
respect of the offence.
(b) the judge:
(i) must inform the jury that there may be good reasons why a victim of a
sexual assault may delay or hesitate in complaining about
(ii) must not warn or suggest in any way to the jury that the law regards
the complainant’s evidence to be more reliable or
less reliable only
because of the length of time before the complainant made a preliminary or other
(iii) maintains a discretion to give appropriate directions to correct
statements by counsel that conflict with the evidence or are
stereotypical assumptions about reporting of sexual offences; and
(iv) maintains a discretion to comment on the reliability of the
complainant’s evidence in the particular case if the judge
considers it is
appropriate to do so in the interests of justice.
Proposal 18–14
Commonwealth, state and territory legislation
(a) prohibit an unrepresented defendant from personally cross-examining any
complainant or other witness in sexual assault proceedings;
(b) provide that any person conducting such cross-examination is a legal
practitioner representing the interests of the defendant.
Question 18–13
Are there significant gaps or inconsistencies
among Australian jurisdictions in relation to ‘alternative’ or
arrangements for the giving of evidence by complainants or
other witnesses in sexual offence proceedings?
Question 18–14
Should Commonwealth, state and territory
legislation permit prosecutors to tender a record of the original evidence of
the complainant
in any re-trial ordered on appeal?
[back to top]
Part E – Existing and Potential
19. Integrated Responses and Best
Proposal 19–1
State and territory governments should establish
and further develop integrated responses to family violence in their respective
building on best practice. The Australian Government should also
foster the development of integrated responses at a national level.
integrated responses should include the following elements:
(a) common policies and objectives;
(b) mechanisms for inter-agency collaboration, including those to ensure
information sharing;
(c) provision for legal and non-legal victim support, and a key role for
victim support organisations;
(d) training and education programs; and
(e) provision for data collection and evaluation.
Question 19–1
Should state and
territory legislation support integrated responses to family violence within
their jurisdictions and, if so, what
should this legislation address? For
example, should responsibility for coordinating integrated responses within a
placed on a statutory office-holder or agency?
Proposal 19–2
State and territory governments should, to the
extent feasible, make victim support workers and lawyers available at family
violence-related
court proceedings, and ensure access to victim support workers
at the time the police are called out to family violence incidents.
Proposal 19–3
The Australian Government should ensure that
court support services for victims of family violence are available nationally
family courts.
Proposal 19–4
State and territory victims’ compensation
legislation should:
(a) provide that evidence of a pattern of family violence may be considered
in assessing whether an act of violence or injury occurred;
(b) define family violence as a specific act of violence or injury, as in
and the Dictionary in the
Victims Support and Rehabilitation Act
(NSW) and cl 5 of the
Victims of Crime Assistance Regulation
(c) extend the definition of injury to include other significant adverse
impacts, as is done in respect of some offences in
Victims of Crime Assistance Act 1996
Victims of Crime Assistance Act 2009
Proposal 19–5
State and territory victims’ compensation
legislation should provide that:
(a) acts are not ‘related’ merely because they are committed by
the same offender; and
(b) applicants should be given the opportunity to object if multiple claims
are treated as ‘related’, as in
Crime Assistance Act 1996
Assistance Act 2009
Proposal 19–6
State and territory victims’ compensation
legislation should not require that a victim report a crime to the police, or
reasonable cooperation with law enforcement authorities, as a condition
of such compensation for family violence-related claims.
Proposal 19–7
State and territory legislation should provide
that, when deciding whether it was reasonable for the victim not to report a
or cooperate with law enforcement authorities, decision makers must
consider factors such as the nature of the relationship between
the victim and
the offender in light of the nature and dynamics of family violence.
Proposal 19–8
State and territory victims’ compensation
legislation should require decision makers, when considering whether victims
contributed
to their injuries, to consider the relationship between the victim
and the offender in light of the nature and dynamics of family
violence. This
requirement should also apply to assessments of the reasonableness of
victims’ failures to take steps to mitigate
their injuries, where the
legislation includes that as a factor to be considered. Section 30(2A) of the
Victim Support and Rehabilitation Act 1996
(NSW), which makes such
provision in relation to a failure to mitigate injury, should be referred to as
Proposal 19–9
State and territory victims’ compensation
legislation should not enable claims to be excluded on the basis that the
might benefit from the claim.
Proposal 19–10
State and territory victims’ compensation
legislation should ensure that time limitation clauses do not apply unfairly to
of family violence. These provisions may take the form of providing
(a) decision makers must consider the fact that the application involves
family violence, sexual assault, or child abuse in deciding
to extend time, as
Victims of Crime
(b) decision makers must consider whether the offender was in a position of
power, influence or trust in deciding to extend time,
as set out in
Victims of Crime Assistance Act 1996
Victims of Crime Assistance Act 2009
Proposal 19–11
State and territory victims’ compensation
legislation should ensure that victims of family violence are not required to be
at a hearing with an offender in victims’ compensation
Proposal 19–12
State and territory governments should ensure
that data is collected concerning the claims and awards of compensation made to
of family violence under statutory victims’ compensation schemes.
The practice of the Victims’ Compensation Tribunal
in NSW provides an
instructive model.
Proposal 19–13
State and territory governments should provide
information about victims’ compensation in all courts dealing with family
matters. The Australian Government should ensure that similar
information is available in federal family courts.
Question 19–2
In practice, are the current provisions for making interim compensation
awards working effectively for victims of family violence?
Question 19–3
Should measures be adopted to ensure that
offenders do not have access to victims’ compensation awards in cases of
family violence?
If so, what measures should be introduced?
Proposal 19–14
Australian universities offering law degrees
should review their curriculums to ensure that legal issues concerning family
are appropriately addressed.
Proposal 19–15
Australian law societies and institutes should
review continuing professional development requirements to ensure that legal
concerning family violence are appropriately addressed.
Proposal 19–16
The Australian Government and state and
territory governments should collaborate in conducting a national audit of
family violence
training conducted by government and non-governmental agencies,
in order to:
(a) ensure that existing resources are best used;
(b) evaluate whether such training meets best practice principles; and
(c) promote the development of best practice in training.
Proposal 19–17
The Australian Government and state and
territory governments should ensure the quality of family violence training
(a) developing minimum standards for assessing the quality of family
violence training, and regularly evaluating the quality of
such training in
relevant government agencies using those standards;
(b) developing best practice guidelines in relation to family violence
training, including the content, length, and format of such
(c) developing training based on evidence of the needs of those being
trained, with the ultimate aim of improving outcomes for victims;
(d) fostering cross-agency and collaborative training, including
cross-agency placements.
[back to top]
20. Specialisation
Proposal 20–1
Each state and territory police force should
ensure that:
(a) victims have access to a primary contact person within the police, who
specialises and is trained in family violence issues;
(b) a police officer is designated as a primary point of contact for
government and non-government agencies involved in responding
(c) specially trained police have responsibility for supervising, monitoring
or assuring the quality of police responses to family
violence incidents, and
providing advice and guidance to operational police and police prosecutors in
this regard; and
(d) there is a central forum or unit responsible for policy and strategy
concerning family violence within the police.
Question 20–1
What issues arise in practice concerning the role
and operations of police who specialise in family violence matters?
Question 20–2
What are the benefits of specialised family violence prosecutors, and the
disadvantages or challenges associated with them, if any?
Could the benefits of
specialised prosecutors be achieved in other ways, such as by training or
guidelines on family violence?
Proposal 20–2
State and territory governments should ensure
that specialised family violence courts determine matters relating to protection
and criminal proceedings related to family violence. State and territory
governments should review whether specialised family violence
courts should also
be responsible for handling related claims:
(a) for civil and statutory compensation; and
(b) in child support and family law matters, to the extent such jurisdiction
is conferred in the state or territory.
Proposal 20–3
State and territory governments should establish
mechanisms for referral of cases involving family violence to specialised family
violence courts. There should be principled criteria for determining which cases
could be referred to such courts. For example, these
criteria could include:
(a) where there are concurrent family-related claims or actions in relation
to the same family issues;
(b) where there have been multiple family-related legal actions in relation
to the same family in the past;
(c) where, for exceptional reasons, a judicial officer considers it
Proposal 20–4
State and territory governments should establish
or further develop specialised family violence courts in their jurisdictions, in
close consultation with relevant stakeholders. These courts should have, as a
(a) especially selected judicial officers;
(b) specialised and ongoing training on family violence issues for judicial
officers, prosecutors, registrars, and police;
(c) victim support workers;
(d) arrangements for victim safety; and
(e) mechanisms for collaboration with other courts, agencies and
non-government organisations.
Proposal 20–5
State and territory governments should review
whether, and to what extent, the following features have been adopted in the
in their jurisdiction dealing with family violence, with a view to
adopting them:
(a) identifying, and listing on the same day, protection order matters and
criminal proceedings related to family violence, as well
as related family law
act and child protection matters;
(b) providing victim and defendant support, including legal advice, on
family violence list days;
(c) assigning selected and trained judicial officers to work on cases
related to family violence;
(d) adopting practice directions for family violence cases;
(e) ensuring that facilities and practices secure victim safety at court;
(f) establishing a forum for feedback from, and discussion with, other
agencies and non-government organisations.
Proposal 20–6
State and territory governments should establish
centres providing a range of family violence services for victims, which would
the following functions:
(a) recording victim statements and complaints;
(b) facilitating access to victim support workers for referrals to other
(c) filing all claims relating to family violence from victims on behalf of
the victim in relevant courts; and
(d) acting as a central point of contact for victims for basic information
Proposal 20–7
The Australian Government should assist state and
territory governments in the establishment, development and maintenance of
family violence courts by, for example, facilitating the transfer of
specialised knowledge and expertise in dealing with family violence
assault across federal and state and territory jurisdictions; and establishing
and maintaining national networks of judicial
officers and staff specialising in
family violence or family law.
Proposal 20–8
The Australian Government should create positions
for Family Law Courts liaison officers. These officers should have the following
(a) facilitating information sharing between federal family law courts and
state and territory courts;
(b) developing and promoting best practice in relation to information
sharing between the federal family law courts and state and
territory courts;
(c) representing the federal family law courts in relevant forums for
collaboration with agencies, courts and non-government organisations.
ALRC CP1 Family Violence � Improving Legal Frameworks
1. Introduction to the
Time for Action
The extent of the problem
The gendered nature of the problem
Compounding factors
Cost of family violence
Concurrent inquiries and actions
Immediate Government Actions
Australian Institute of Family Studies evaluation
Standing Committee of Attorneys-General
The Chisholm Review
Family Law Council
Scope of the Inquiry
Terms of Reference
The intersecting nature of the Terms of Reference
Matters outside this Inquiry
Definitions and terminology
Culturally and linguistically diverse
Family violence
Family violence legislation
Indigenous peoples/Indigenous women
Intimate partner
Protection orders
Recurring themes
Criminal v civil
Public law v private law
Public v private realms
Seamlessness
Structure of the Consultation Paper
Arrangement of chapters
Processes of reform
Consultation and collaboration processes
Advisory groups
Written submissions
1. Introduction to the
[back to top]
1.1 On 17 July 2009, the Attorney-General of Australia, the Hon Robert
McClelland MP, asked the Australian Law Reform Commission (ALRC)
to conduct an
Inquiry together with the New South Wales Law Reform Commission (NSWLRC) into
particular questions in relation to family
violence that had arisen from the
2009 report of the National Council to Reduce Violence against Women and their
Time for Action
At its meeting on 16–17 April 2009, the Standing Committee of
Attorneys-General (SCAG) agreed that Australian law reform commissions
work together to consider these issues.
1.2 The ALRC was asked to consider the issues of:
1) the interaction in practice of State and Territory family/domestic violence
and child protection laws with the
Family Law Act
and relevant Commonwealth,
State and Territory criminal laws; and
2) the impact of inconsistent interpretation or application of laws in cases of
sexual assault occurring in a family/domestic violence
context, including rules
of evidence, on victims of such violence.
1.3 In relation to both these issues, the ALRC was asked to consider
‘what, if any, improvements could be made to relevant legal
frameworks to
protect the safety of women and their
1.4 On 14 July 2009, the NSWLRC received terms of reference in parallel terms
from the New South Wales Attorney General, the Hon J
Hatzistergos.
A joint project of
this nature, involving a state law reform body in conjunction with the ALRC, is
a practical way of tackling an
Inquiry in relation to matters many of which lie
at the intersections—or indeed fall between—federal and
state/territory
1.5 The National Council to Reduce Violence against Women and their Children
(the National Council), established in May 2008, was
given the role of drafting
a national plan to reduce violence against women and their
Time for Action
report, released in March 2009, identified six
core areas for improvement and strategies and actions to achieve
The report focused on
‘strategies and actions for prevention, early intervention, improved
service delivery, and
and identified
twenty-five outcomes with 117 strategies to achieve them. While the report
concentrated on ‘preventative measures
that challenge the values and
attitudes that support violence in the community’ and the need ‘to
develop respectful
relationships’,
it included
recommendations that the ALRC be given references on two specific tasks, which
are reflected in the Terms of
It was accompanied by a
background paper providing a fuller discussion of the matters in the report,
with more detailed
references.
1.7 Further background documents include:
Domestic Violence Laws in
published by the
Australian Government Solicitor in September 2009, providing an overview and
comparative analysis of Commonwealth,
state and territory and New Zealand
domestic violence legislation; and a report,
The Cost of Violence against
Women and their Children
published in March 2009 at the same time as
Time for Action
The extent of the
1.8 Time for Action
provided a summary of the extent of the problem of
violence against women in the Australian community. It reported the estimate
‘[a]bout one in three Australian women experience physical violence
and almost one in five women experience sexual violence
and that while
violence ‘knows no geographical, socio-economic, age, ability, cultural or
religious boundaries’,
experience of violence is not evenly spread.
1.9 For example, Indigenous women reported higher levels of physical violence
during their lifetime than did non-Indigenous women,
and the violence was more
likely to include sexual
Other groups may also
experience violence in a different and/or disproportionate way, for example:
women with disability;
identify themselves as lesbian, bisexual, transgender or
and immigrant
1.10 The National Council responded to this diversity of experience of
violence not by taking a ‘one size fits all approach’,
but rather by
on helping women in different circumstances and from different backgrounds to
live free from violence and the threat of violence.
It uses an intersectional
analysis to enhance our understanding of the way lifestyle factors affect women.
This is because the ways
in which women and their children experience violence,
the options open to them in dealing with violence, and their access to services
that meet their needs in all their diversity, are shaped by the intersection of
gender with factors such as disability, English language
fluency, ethnicity,
geographical location and migration
experience.
The gendered nature
of the problem
1.11 The National Council acknowledged that while women as well as men can
commit—as well as be victims of—family violence
or sexual assault,
the research shows that ‘the overwhelming majority of violence and abuse
is perpetrated by men against
Put very simply,
‘[t]he biggest risk factor for becoming a victim of sexual assault and/or
domestic and family violence is
1.12 The experience of violence in childhood also has a profound and
compounding effect on the adult data:
Witnessing or experiencing violence as a child increases sharply the risk of
becoming a perpetrator or victim of violence in later
life. Women who experience
abuse as a child are one-and-a-half times more likely to experience violence,
and twice as likely to experience
sexual violence as an adult than those who
have not. Women who are physically and sexually abused in childhood also have an
risk of being sexually abused in
1.13 The gendered nature of family violence lies behind the National
Council’s strategies that, in turn, led to the Terms of
Reference for this
Inquiry being focused on the reduction of violence against ‘women and
their children’.
Compounding
1.14 The National Council also pointed to a range of compounding factors in
the presentation of violence, especially
and geographical and
social isolation.
Moreover, both
have been identified as critical issues for Indigenous women and children:
Some groups of women within rural and remote communities experience particularly
high rates of domestic violence. For example, the
proportion of Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander Australians who reported being victims of physical or
threatened violence has
been found to be similar in remote and non-remote areas.
However, the proportion of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people
remote areas who said that they, their family or friends had witnessed violence
is three times as high as for Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander people in
non-remote areas. In remote and very remote areas, more than three-quarters of
homicide victims in 2005–06
were Aboriginal or Torres Strait
1.15 Social isolation in an urban setting also affects immigrant and refugee
women in particular:
For many immigrant and refugee women, insufficient knowledge of English creates
a specific disadvantage in comparison to men in their
families. English is often
used as a tool of power and control, engendering the total dependence of refugee
women on their husbands.
1.16 Not only are there compounding factors causing family violence, there
are also compounding consequences, such as: financial difficulty
flowing from
economic dependence on a violent
women are seeking to escape violence at
and health issues
associated with treating the effects of violence on the
Cost of family
1.17 In producing
Time for Action
, an estimate of the cost of family
violence in Australia was updated. A 2004 study by Access Economics had
estimated the total annual
cost of violence against women by their partners as
$8.1 billion.
was repeated by KPMG in January 2009 for the National Council with a forward
projection of costs to 2021–22. The
study concluded that an estimated
750,000 Australian women ‘will experience and report violence in
2021–22, costing the
Australian economy an estimated $15.6
[back to top]
Concurrent inquiries
and actions
1.18 The ALRC and NSWLRC (the Commissions) are not alone in looking at the
problem of family violence and seeking appropriate policy
responses. Several
other inquiries, state and federal, are being conducted at the same time as this
Inquiry. A number have also been
conducted before. The concurrent and previous
work is referred to throughout this Consultation Paper. In particular, the ALRC
been directed not to duplicate:
a) the other actions being progressed as part of the Immediate Government
Actions announced by the Prime Minister on receiving the
Council’s report in April 2009;
b) the evaluation of the
Family Law Amendment (Shared Parental
Responsibility) Act 2006
reforms being undertaken by the Australian
Institute of Family Studies; and
c) the work being undertaken through SCAG on the harmonisation of uniform
evidence laws, in particular the development of model sexual
communications immunity provisions and vulnerable witness protections.
1.19 In addition to these specific areas of concurrent work, there are two
further contributions of significance to this Inquiry.
Attorney-General commissioned a review by Professor Richard Chisholm, former
Justice of the Family Court of Australia,
of the practices, procedures and
laws that apply in the federal family law courts in the context of family
violence (the Chisholm
The review was completed at the end of November 2009, and released on 28 January
Secondly, the Family Law
Council provided an advice to the Attorney-General on the impact of family
violence on children and on parenting,
which was also released at the same time
as the Chisholm Review.
1.20 Each of these is summarised, in turn, below. Their relationship to
particular aspects under consideration in this Inquiry is
considered at relevant
points throughout this Consultation Paper.
Immediate Government
1.21 In response to
Time for Action
the Australian Government
announced a package of immediate
including investments
in a new national domestic violence and sexual assault telephone and online
crisis service; in primary prevention
activities towards building respectful
relationships; and to support research on perpetrator treatment.
1.22 The Government also committed to working with the states and territories
through SCAG to: establish a national scheme for the
registration of domestic
and family violence orders; improve the uptake of relevant coronial
recommendations; and identify the most
effective methods to investigate and
prosecute sexual assault cases.
1.23 Further immediate actions include the development of a
multi-disciplinary training package for lawyers, judicial officers, counsellors
and other professionals working in the family law system, to improve consistency
in the handling of family violence cases, and the
establishment of the Violence
Against Women Advisory Group to advise on the National Plan to Reduce Violence
against Women.
1.24 The list of actions also included asking the ALRC to work with state and
territory law reform commissions to examine the inter-relationship
and state and territory laws that relate to the safety of women and their
children. In the list of ‘priority actions’
the Australian
Government agreed to:
Make a reference to the Australian Law Reform Commission to examine the
integration of domestic violence, child protection and federal
Australian Institute
of Family Studies evaluation
1.25 In 2006, the Australian Institute of Family Studies (AIFS) was
commissioned by the Attorney-General’s Department (AGD)
and the Department
of Families, Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs (FaHCSIA) to
undertake an evaluation of the changes
introduced by the
Family Law Amendment
(Shared Parental Responsibility) Act 2006
(Cth) together with increased
funding for new and expanded family relationships services. The amendments
introduced significant procedural
and substantive changes to the legal framework
for resolving parenting disputes following parental separation—including a
presumption
in favour of equal parental responsibility, an increased focus on
protecting children from harm resulting from abuse, neglect and
exposure to
family violence and a more child-focused process for those disputes that do
proceed to court.
1.26 The purpose of the evaluation was to assess the extent to which the
reform package has been effective in achieving its policy
aims. There are three
components of the AIFS research program for the evaluation: the
Legislation and
Courts Project
Provision Project
. Each of these components involves a series of studies which will
combine to develop a composite picture based on multiple
perspectives.
1.27 The particular component that has the closest relationship to the Terms
of Reference in this Inquiry is the Legislation and Courts
Project, which
includes a number of studies that draw data from a variety of sources using a
mixture of methodologies. The main components
of the project are:
1. a qualitative study based on interviews and group discussions with
professionals in the family law system;
2. an analysis of family law cases; and
3. a repeat and extension of the national Family Lawyers Survey, first conducted
in 2006 as part of the collection of ‘baseline’
data prior to the
introduction of the reforms.
1.28 The report,
Evaluation of the 2006 Family Law Reforms
released at the same time as the Chisholm Review, on 28 January
It involved the collection
of data from 28,000 people involved in the family law system—including
parents, grandparents, family
relationship services staff and clients, lawyers,
court professionals and judicial officers—and the analysis of
administrative
data and court files.
1.29 Of particular relevance in the context of this Inquiry are the findings
in relation to family violence and safety concerns:
Around two-thirds of separated mothers and just over half of separated fathers
indicated that their child’s other parent had
emotionally abused them
before or during the separation. One in four mothers and around one in six
fathers said that the other parent
had hurt them physically prior to separation
and, among those who report such experiences, most indicated their children had
or heard some of the abuse or violence. When family court files ... were
examined, over half of the files contained an allegation
of family violence on
the written file.
Around one in five parents reported that they held safety concerns associated
with ongoing contact with their child’s other
parent and over 90% of these
parents had been either physically hurt or emotionally abused by the other
1.30 Notwithstanding the high incidence of family violence identified, the
evaluation also found that:
a majority of separated mothers (62%) and fathers (64%) had friendly and
cooperative relationships with each other about 15 months
after separation.
conflicted or fearful
relationship.
1.31 Even when there was violence, therefore, a large number of parents
separating after July 2006 were able to reach agreement about
their parenting
arrangements themselves.
1.32 The study also reported a ‘cultural shift’ from a primary
reliance on legal services to one where ‘a greater
proportion of
post-separation disputes over children are being seen and responded to primarily
in relationship terms’.
However, ensuring that families are able to reach appropriate services in a
timely way was also crucial to the success of this shift:
Pathways through the system need to be more defined and more widely understood.
There is still evidence that some families with family
violence and/or child
abuse issues are on a roundabout between relationship services, lawyers, courts
and state-based child protection
and family violence systems. While complex
issues may take longer to resolve, resolutions that are delayed by unclear
pathways or
lack of adequate coordination between services, lawyers and courts
have adverse implications for the wellbeing of children and other
1.33 Screening properly to identify family violence and child abuse was
another significant theme. The evaluation provided ‘clear
that the family law system had improved in relation to the identification of
concerns about family violence and child
abuse, although there were still
significant problems:
Relevant issues include a lack of understanding of family violence and child
abuse in various parts of the system, and perceptions
of there being pressure to
reach agreements notwithstanding the presence of such concerns. Problems also
stem from the intersection
of the state and federal systems, and with lawyers
(and family relationship sector professionals) finding child protection systems
difficult to engage with when there are concerns about risks to children. These
issues pre-date the reforms and are longstanding.
Further, some professionals
believed that some new aspects of the legislative framework have discouraged
concerns about family violence
and child abuse from being raised. These include
an obligation of courts to make costs orders against a party found to have
made a false allegation or statement in proceedings’
Family Law Act
s 117AB] and the requirement for courts to consider the
extent to which one parent has facilitated the child having a relationship
the other parent
(s 60CC(3)(c)).
While there was widespread concern that family violence and child abuse and
neglect are being inadequately responded to, some legal
professionals and
fathers also claimed that allegations about family violence and child abuse were
being used to impede fathers’
claims for a shared parenting role after
separation.
1.34 While ‘systematic attempts to screen such families in the family
relationship service sector and in some parts of the legal
sector’ have
improved the identification of such issues, the expectation that most families
will attempt family dispute resolution
(FDR) has meant that ‘FDR is
occurring in some cases where there are very significant concerns about violence
and safety’.
[There is a] need for professionals across the system to have greater levels of
access to finely tuned assessment and screening mechanisms
applied by highly
trained and experienced professionals. Protocols for working constructively and
effectively with state-based systems
and services (such as child protection
systems) also need further work. At the same time, the progress that continues
on improved screening practices will go only part of the way to
assisting victims of violence and
1.35 Another area of concern identified in the evaluation was the
misunderstanding that shared parental responsibility allows for
‘equal’ shared care time:
This confusion has resulted in disillusionment among some fathers who find that
the law does not provide for 50–50 ‘custody’.
This sometimes
can make it challenging to achieve child-focused arrangements in cases in which
an equal or shared care-time arrangement
is not practical or not appropriate.
Legal sector professionals in particular indicated that in their view the
legislative changes
had promoted a focus on parents’ rights rather than
children’s needs, obscuring to some extent the primacy of the best
interests principle
Further, they indicated that, in their view, the
legislative framework did not adequately facilitate making arrangements that
developmentally appropriate for
1.36 The overall conclusion of the evaluation was that the 2006 reforms to
the family law system have had ‘a positive impact
in some areas and have a
less positive impact in others’. More parents are sorting out their
parenting arrangements without
an automatic recourse to the court,
notwithstanding a high incidence of family violence and child abuse. However,
whether FDR is
appropriate in such cases, and, if so, when, is a matter
requiring further consideration:
This is an area where collaboration between relationship service professionals,
family law system professionals and courts needs
to be facilitated so that
shared understandings about what types of matters are not suitable for FDR can
be developed and so that
other options can be better
facilitated.
Standing Committee
of Attorneys-General
1.37 SCAG, through its Evidence Working Group, is developing amendments to
the model Uniform
Evidence Act
to provide an immunity in relation to sexual assault communications
(as distinct from a privilege); and
to deal with the protection of vulnerable
1.38 Under the second heading, the Working Group is
including not just children, but also people with disabilities, and traumatised
people—such as victims of sexual assault. The aim of this aspect of the
project is to develop a harmonised approach.
1.39 SCAG is also conducting an audit of best practice in the investigation
and prosecution of sexual assault.
The Chisholm
1.40 Professor Chisholm was required to ‘assess the appropriateness of
the legislation, practices and procedures’ that
apply in cases where
family violence is an issue and to recommend improvements. In acknowledging the
challenges for the family law
system in such cases—involving ‘more
than half the parenting cases that come to the courts’—Chisholm
in his opening remarks that ‘[v]iolence is bad for everyone,
and particularly dangerous for children, whether or not it is
specifically
directed at them’:
These cases present the courts with truly daunting tasks: to provide a setting
in which the parties feel safe and confident that
they will be treated with
respect; to deal with the cases with necessary efficiency but most importantly
with justice and fairness;
and to ensure as far as possible that arrangements
made for children, whether as a result of the parties’ consent or by the
court’s adjudication, are suitable for their needs, which will include
being safe and having both parents contribute to their
developmental
1.41 Chisholm identified a theme that recurred throughout his review:
‘that family violence must be disclosed, understood, and
In terms of the
family law system, this means that each component of it ‘needs to
encourage and facilitate the disclosure of
family violence, ensure that it is
understood, and act effectively upon that
understanding’.
1.42 With respect to the procedures of the family law courts, Chisholm
pointed to the importance of expertise in relation to children’s
a goal of achieving the same approach in both the Federal Magistrates Court and
the Family Court. In order to ensure disclosure
of family violence, Chisholm
targeted the document that is used to alert the court of allegations of violence
or abuse, and concluded
that ‘this system is not
He suggested,
instead, moving to a system of risk identification and assessment that applies
to all parenting cases.
1.43 Chisholm identified three particular provisions of the
Family Law Act
(Cth) to be amended:
In essence, the recommendations are that the ‘friendly parent’
provision [s 60CC(3)(c)] should be amended so it recognises
that parents
sometimes need to take action to protect children from risk; that the specific
and separate costs provision (s 117AB)
dealing with knowingly false
allegations and statements should be replaced by a simple reference to the
giving of knowingly false
evidence in the provision that deals with costs (s
177); and that the information that advisers are required to provide should
not only the importance of parental involvement but also the importance
of safety for children.
1.44 Key recommendations also focused on the provisions dealing with parental
responsibility and the guidelines included in the legislation—primary
additional considerations—for determining what is in the child’s
best interests.
As noted by
Chisholm, this is ‘a large and controversial
The package of
reforms introduced by the
Family Law Amendment (Shared Parental
Responsibility) Act 2006
(Cth), emphasised two main concerns as the primary
considerations:
(a) the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of
the child’s parents; and
(b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being
subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family
1.45 Although these two matters were principal motivating concerns behind the
2006 amendments, ‘the “twin pillars”
formula is not an ideal
guide to children’s best
interests’.
preferred instead guidelines that did not include ‘the artificial
distinction ... between “primary” and
“additional”
considerations’.
1.46 In addition, a central issue in the lead-up to the 2006 reforms was
whether there should be a presumption in favour of ‘equal
relation to parental
responsibility.
The formula,
that when making a parenting order in relation to a child, the court must apply
a presumption that it is in the best
interests of the child for the
child’s parents to have ‘equal shared parental
responsibility’,
created considerable controversy, particularly a confusion between ‘equal
responsibility’ and ‘equal time’.
Such misunderstandings were
also evident in the AIFS evaluation, described above. Chisholm preferred instead
a presumption simply
of each parent having ‘parental
responsibility’.
1.47 Other recommendations in the Chisholm Review include the provision of
additional funding to support the work of contact centres,
family dispute
resolution agencies, legal aid, and family consultants; and better education in
relation to issues of family violence
and recognition of the importance of
experience and knowledge of family violence in making appointments to
significant positions
in the family law
Improving Responses to Family Violence in the Family Law System:
An Advice on the Intersection of Family Violence and Family Law Issues
Family Law Council makes a number of recommendations about family violence
‘if and when it becomes visible in the Family
Law system in
Australia’.
The Council
recommended a number of strategies to improve the understanding and
identification of family violence, including that:
the definition of ‘family violence’ in the
be widened to include a range of threatening
a common knowledge base be established to assist all those in the
family law system to better understand the patterns and effects
Best Practice Guidelines for Lawyers Doing Family Law
be revised to incorporate detailed information on family violence;
the forms for notifying family law courts about family violence be
Family Law Council was concerned to address ‘certain widespread
misunderstandings’ about the
Family Law Act
through education, in
particular:
• Recurrent gossip that notification of family violence may lead to a
judicial perception that the notifier is an ‘unfriendly
• Widespread perception that each parent now has a ‘starting
right’ to equal time (50/50) with children
• Common belief that a parent will receive
substantial time
with a child, and equal shared parental responsibility, (similar to historic
‘guardianship’),
a history of poor communication and
hostility between parents; and
the long term health and emotional
consequences for children as casualties on such parental
battlefields.
1.50 Such misunderstandings were also identified in both the Chisholm Review
and the AIFS evaluations, considered above.
1.51 Co-ordination and collaboration between various participants in the
system was also seen as being of critical importance, for
between the state and territory child protection agencies, and the federal
Family Law Act
, including: the transportability of state family violence
injunctive orders; the establishment of a national register of family violence
orders; and the establishment of a network data base which records family
violence orders, and a residual family court power to require
state Child
Protection Agencies to become parties to Family Law Court proceedings about
1.52 A specific aspect of communication was also whether FDR practitioners
should have responsibility for providing to federal family
law courts any
information about family violence or other related issues disclosed during an
intervention.
1.53 A recommendation of structural significance is the possibility of a
referral of powers to federal family courts so that in determining
a parenting
application federal family courts have concurrent jurisdiction with that of
state courts to deal with all matters relating
to children including, where
relevant, family violence, child protection and parenting
The context for a
consideration of referral of powers, and the constitutional division of family
law matters between the states and
territories and the federal sphere are
considered in Chapter 2.
[back to top]
of the Inquiry
of Reference
1.54 The Terms of Reference are reproduced at the beginning of this
Consultation Paper. There are two terms of reference, the first
focusing on
‘interaction in practice’ of various laws, the second on
‘inconsistency’ in interpretation and
application of sexual assault
First Term of Reference
the interaction in practice of State and Territory family/domestic violence
and child protection laws with the
Family Law Act
and relevant Commonwealth,
State and Territory criminal laws
1.55 The Commissions have
interpreted this as requiring a consideration of the interaction of:
state and territory family violence laws with the
• state and territory
child protection laws with the
Family Law Act
state and territory family violence laws with relevant Commonwealth,
state and territory criminal laws;
state and territory child protection laws with relevant
Commonwealth, state and territory criminal laws.
1.56 There are
further areas of interaction that the Commissions consider lie within the first
Term of Reference, in particular, the
interaction of state and territory family
violence laws and child protection laws.
Second Term of Reference
the impact of inconsistent interpretation or application of laws in cases of
sexual assault occurring in a family/domestic violence
context, including rules
of evidence, on victims of such violence
1.57 The second Term of Reference requires the Commissions to focus on two
key facets of sexual assault legal responses: (1) inconsistency
interpretation or application of laws; and (2) a specific focus on sexual
assaults perpetrated by a person with whom the complainant
is in a domestic or
family relationship.
Inconsistency of laws
1.58 Inconsistency in the application and interpretation of sexual assault
laws can be considered on multiple levels:
inconsistency of approach between jurisdictions (for example, there
are different: offences, definitions of consent, ways in which
sexual experience
evidence is restricted, judicial directions to the jury, and so on);
• inconsistency
between the legal response to victims of sexual assault perpetrated in a family
violence context compared to
victims of sexual assault perpetrated in other
contexts (for example, by a stranger or an acquaintance);
inconsistency between the legal response to victims of sexual
assault perpetrated in a family violence context where those victims
different backgrounds and have different needs (for example, are Indigenous
victims of sexual assault treated in a different
way by the legal system
compared to other victims of sexual assault within this category?); and
inconsistency more generally—are individual cases of sexual
assault, regardless of who has perpetrated the sexual assault,
encounter a different response or different result depending upon the police,
prosecutors or judicial officers with whom
they come in
1.59 In this Inquiry the Commissions are adopting a broad
approach to considering the issue of inconsistency.
1.60 While the primary focus of the Inquiry will be on the interpretation and
application of laws in the criminal justice system,
it is important that this is
not seen as the only legal response to sexual assault. Sexual assault occurring
in a family violence
context may give rise to multiple legal issues (often
concurrently)—for example, issues of family law, civil protection orders,
child protection, crimes or victims’ compensation, as well as personal
injury law.
This multiplicity of
legal responses and avenues also directly relates to the first Term of
Reference, which is concerned with the
interaction between the areas of law that
respond to family violence.
1.61 In terms of the response of the criminal justice system, the use of the
term ‘laws’ is also to be understood broadly
to include not only the
laws prescribing certain offences, but the rules of evidence, criminal
procedures, and the application of
the common law. It also necessarily includes
the policies, procedures as well as training and education that apply to the key
players who implement and interpret those ‘laws’—police,
prosecutors and judicial officers. This wider interpretation
of law is also
important in meeting the continuing criticism about the gap between the law as
written and its practice.
Family violence context
1.62 The Commissions have been asked to focus on a particular category of
sexual assault: sexual assault committed in a family violence
context. This
reflects the fact that most sexual assaults are perpetrated by someone known to
the victim. Very few sexual assaults
are perpetrated by strangers.
Personal Violence Survey
conducted by the Australian Bureau
of Statistics (ABS) in 2005 found that of those women who had been sexually
assaulted in the 12
months prior to the survey, 22 per cent had been
assaulted by a stranger in the most recent incident, 21 per cent by a former
39 per cent by a family
member or friend, and 32 per cent by another known
Thus in 60 per cent of
cases, women were sexually assaulted by a former partner, family member or
The 2004 ABS report on
sexual assault noted that ‘all available data sources indicate that over
half of perpetrators ... are
known to their
1.64 The focus on sexual assault in a family violence context provides an
important opportunity to focus on the category of sexual
assault that comprises
the majority of sexual assaults experienced by women and children. It also
provides an opportunity to focus
more intently not only on the largest category
of sexual assaults, but the one that is more likely to remain unreported; and
it is reported is more likely to fall out of the legal system and less
likely to result in conviction (a process known as
‘attrition’).
this way, intimate and familial sexual assaults remain the most hidden from view
general—and from the purview of the legal
particular—despite forming the largest category of sexual assaults.
1.65 The Commissions recognise that there are continuing issues with sexual
assault laws and procedures for
victims of sexual assault, not only
those who are the focus of this Inquiry. In this regard the Commissions see
sexual assault within
a family violence context as an important case study that
will have significance for all victims of sexual violence and anticipate
any recommendations that are made to assist victims of sexual assault in a
family context would have benefits for all victims
of sexual assault engaging
with the legal system.
The intersecting
nature of the Terms of Reference
1.66 There are areas of intersection between the two Terms of Reference, as
sexual assault can also constitute family violence. However,
particular emphasis in
Time for Action
on sexual assault and the specific
strategy of giving the ALRC terms of reference in relation to it, a separate
term of reference
was warranted.
1.67 At the intersection of
all the areas under consideration, however, sits the issue of sexual assault of
children, potentially
bringing together all the areas of law under consideration
in this Inquiry—child protection, criminal law, the
Family Law Act
and family violence laws.
outside this Inquiry
1.68 While the scope of the problem of family violence is extensive, the
brief in this Inquiry is necessarily constrained both by
the Terms of Reference
and by the role and function of a law reform commission. Under the Terms of
Reference the Commissions are
required to consider ‘what, if any,
improvements could be made to relevant legal frameworks to protect the safety of
and their children’. The range of legal frameworks is also not
‘at large’, but limited, in the first Term of Reference,
specified areas of interaction; and, in the second, to the impact of
inconsistent interpretation and application of law in relation
1.69 The Commissions
recognise that the Inquiry concerns only a narrow slice of the vast range of
issues raised by the prevalence
of family violence—when women and children
encounter the legal system in its various manifestations. A comment made by the
Family Law Council in its advice to the Commonwealth Attorney-General, referred
to above, is equally apt as a comment with respect
to the problems of family
violence in a much wider sense. The Council, noting that it was only focusing on
family violence ‘when
it becomes visible in the Family Law system in
Australia’, stated that:
This visible pattern is only the tip of the iceberg of family violence,
alcoholism, drug addiction and mental illness which is apparently
entrenched in
1.70 Certainly the Commissions in their
consultations to date have noted the widespread concern about the link between
alcohol and
family violence, and recognise that any serious attempt to develop
preventative measures in the area of family violence must tackle
the problem of
alcohol abuse in Australian society. This issue is beyond the scope of the Terms
of Reference and, accordingly, will
not be pursued in this Inquiry.
1.71 The Commissions are also acutely aware that there is a limited range of
legal responses to the persistent, indeed, endemic, problem
of family violence.
In particular, punishment through imprisonment can be a blunt instrument which
can occasion further violent behaviour.
However, for the reasons canvassed by
the ALRC in its 2006 report on sentencing of federal
there is no realistic
alternative but to mark society’s condemnation of serious criminal
behaviour—such as serious family
violence—through imprisonment, in
appropriate circumstances, and in such circumstances, the Commissions will not
resile from
proposing suitably severe punishment. Nevertheless, the Commissions
acknowledge that much can be achieved through an enhanced recognition
understanding of family violence and that an integrated response to family
violence—not limited to severe penal measures—is
desirable. In the
chapters that follow, the Commissions make proposals and pose questions that
seek to elicit feedback on potential
law reform measures which take family
violence seriously, yet also seek to respond to it creatively and in a
multi-pronged fashion—to
the extent possible within the scope of the Terms
of Reference.
1.72 The Commissions note that
Time for Action
identified many other
strategies in areas beyond legal frameworks, to achieve outcomes such as
relationships that are respectful,
and services that meet the needs of women and
1.73 The Commissions note
that family violence is also relevant—or potentially relevant—to
other legislative schemes in
the Commonwealth arena, including, for example,
those regulating workplace relations, immigration, social security and child
The relationship between child support issues and the impact on
parenting time in the context of previous family violence is illustrated,
example in the following case study provided in a consultation with the
Australian Domestic and Family Violence Clearinghouse:
A couple have been separated for a couple of years. There is a court contact
arrangement for the two kids (aged 7 and 8) for five
nights to dad and 9 to mum
in a fortnight, with school holiday arrangements to bring the total to an amount
which reduces the husband’s
child support payment to $26 month. The mother
is trying to live on Newstart, with this little bit extra, and some work but
to pass the work/study test, given the ages of the children. The children
are quite distressed by the previous abuse they have witnessed
and with having
to spend so much time moving from house to house. They call their various houses
‘mum’s house’
and ‘dad’s house’ as they
don’t feel either is
During the last school holidays, contact was given to the father over the
post-Christmas period (till mid January). The mother was
not working/studying at
that time. The father returned to work after the New Year and placed the
children in childcare until their
offered to care for them while he was at work. They had not previously been
apart from her
for such an extended time and she knew they would both miss her
and she, them.
The father is trying to have his child support payments further reduced. Before
the separation the mother was the primary carer as
the father travelled a lot
The property settlement left the mother with under $100,000. She has a modest
$200,000) mortgage. She
is worried that she will be required to work in a job that does not allow her to
be with her children after
school, school holidays or if they are sick, as she
has little employment bargaining power and has had many solicitors appointments,
court appearances etc which means she has had to work only as a casual (cleaner,
lawn mowing etc).
1.74 A consideration of family violence and the child support legislation is
outside the Commissions’ current Terms of Reference.
Given the importance
of this issue the Commissions consider that the Australian Government should
initiate an inquiry into how family
violence is treated in this and other
federal legislative schemes not falling within the present Terms of Reference.
[back to top]
Definitions and
terminology
1.75 This chapter sets out
some of the terminology that will be used in this Consultation Paper in
referring to specific concepts,
orders and legislation in the family violence
sphere. In particular parts of the paper there may be other terms that are used
principally
in their specific contexts and they will be defined in those
and linguistically diverse
1.76 The phrase
‘culturally and linguistically diverse’—and the abbreviation
‘CALD’—are commonly
used in referring to people of diverse
backgrounds. The Commissions recognise that the discussion in this Consultation
apply to people who are ‘culturally
linguistically
diverse’ as well as those who are ‘culturally
linguistically diverse’. The phrase is used for convenience to embrace
both kinds of diversity.
1.77 The definition of ‘family’ or ‘domestic’
relationship varies across the Australian jurisdictions and
legislation. In this
Consultation Paper the particular definitions of ‘family’ are
considered in the context of the specific
legislation under consideration. For
example, for the purposes of the analysis of sexual assault in a family violence
context—under
the second Term of Reference—emphasis is placed on the
following relationships:
current/former intimate partners (defined as
spouses, de facto, and
boyfriend/girlfriend);
relatives (defined broadly to include, grandparents, parents,
step-parents, siblings, step-siblings, uncles/aunts, nephews/nieces,
cousins and
relatives considered part of the extended family and kinship system of an
Indigenous person).
1.78 The terminology that should be adopted to describe violence within
families and intimate relationships has been, and continues
to be, the subject
of controversy and debate.
Invariably there will be difficulties in attaching any one label to describe a
complex phenomenon varying in degrees of severity
and reflecting the diverse
experiences of persons from diverse cultural, socio-economic, geographical
groups, and those in same-sex
relationships or in family structures that do not
emulate the nuclear family structure.
1.79 Professors Belinda Fehlberg and Juliet Behrens note that:
The label attached to such violence has been a key issue in feminist struggles
to bring it out of the shadow of the private sphere,
where historically it
remained as a vestige of the era when husbands had the right to use physical
force to discipline not only their
children but also their wives. According to
feminist arguments, the lack of visibility of such violence in public discourse,
and in the legal system served to reinforce the gendered imbalances in
power that its physical enactment in private relationships
perpetuated.
Consequently both gender and power have been central to evolving feminist
definitions of domestic
1.80 State, territory and Commonwealth legislation that refers to violence
within families and intimate relationships uses various
descriptions—‘family violence’, ‘domestic
violence’ and ‘domestic abuse’. The term
has been criticised on the basis that it ‘qualifies
and arguably reduces the term
“violence”’.
The Macquarie Dictionary notes the colloquial use of the term
‘domestic’ as ‘an argument with one’s spouse
member of the household’.
Thus, from a cultural perspective, the term ‘domestic’ can
trivialise the impact of the violence on the victim. However
‘family violence’ has also been criticised:
The problem with the term ‘family violence’ is not even in its
gendered neutrality, but the picture that it paints that
violence in the family
is something in which all members are complicit, and which is just to do with
difficulties in relationships
between family members and problems in handling
conflict in non ‘violent’ ways. … The term is even less
than the more commonly used ‘domestic violence’.
‘Domestic’ with all its implications of ‘just a
at least cannot be taken to qualify the violence by reference
to the ungendered perpetrator, as ‘family’
1.81 Reports and writing in this area have adopted varying terminology. Some
have referred to both ‘family and domestic violence’,
others to ‘family
and some to
‘domestic violence’.
Fehlberg and Behrens adopt the terminology of ‘violence and abuse in
In each case,
the differing terminology—in the Australian context—attempts to
refer to the same type of conduct, although
the boundaries of such conduct have
expanded over the years.
1.82 In this Inquiry, and for the purposes of this Consultation Paper, the
Commissions will refer to ‘family violence’,
rather than
‘domestic violence’ or ‘domestic abuse’, unless
specifically quoting from sources including legislation
which use alternative
terminology. The Commissions adopt this terminology to reflect the language used
in the respective Terms of
Reference, and for the sake of convenience,
acknowledging that there is a robust debate about the appropriateness of such
terminology.
violence legislation
1.83 Each of the states and territories has legislation which provides for
the making of court orders to protect victims from future
incidents of family
In some cases the
legislation deals exclusively with the obtaining of protection orders in the
family violence context; in other
cases the legislation that deals with these
protection orders also deals with the obtaining of protection orders in
circumstances
outside the family violence context. For ease of reference, in
this Consultation Paper the Commissions refer generically to both
legislation as family violence legislation.
1.84 At the time of writing this Consultation Paper, the family violence
legislation current in South Australia is the
Domestic Violence Act 1994
(SA). This legislation, however, will be repealed once the
Intervention
Orders (Prevention of Abuse) Act
(SA)—which was assented
to on 10 December 2009—comes into effect. Parliamentary debates indicate
that this may be sometime
When the Commissions refer
to the South Australian family violence legislation, it is to the Act which is
yet to come into effect—unless
the text indicates
peoples/Indigenous women
1.85 In this Consultation Paper the Commissions use the term
‘Indigenous peoples’ to refer to Aboriginal and Torres Strait
peoples, consistently with the terminology adopted by the Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander Social Justice Commissioner
Social Justice Report
Aborigines and Torres Strait Islanders are referred to as ‘peoples’.
This recognises that Aborigines and Torres Strait
Islanders have a collective,
rather than purely individual, dimension to their livelihoods. ... The use of
the term ‘Indigenous’
has evolved through international
1.86 ‘Indigenous women’ and ‘Indigenous children’
also reflect this terminology.
1.87 As noted above, ‘intimate partners’ are defined as spouses,
de facto partners or boyfriend/girlfriend.
1.88 Protection orders under family violence legislation are variously
described as: apprehended violence orders, family violence
intervention orders,
violence restraining orders, family violence orders, domestic violence orders,
and domestic violence restraining
orders. For the purposes of this Consultation
Paper the Commissions use the generic term of ‘protection order’,
we are specifically quoting from legislation or case law which uses the
specific terminology adopted by a particular state or territory.
[back to top]
1.89 Legislation reflects its history and inherently expresses assumptions
and viewpoints. It has been said that ‘ideological
positions represent the
“covert values and assumptions that guide the implementation of
legislation and social policy”
but they are rarely made
The inclusion
of objects clauses or principles is one way of making express some of the
underlying philosophy of legislation.
1.90 In this Inquiry a number of different legislative schemes form the legal
framework in which issues of family violence arise.
Their ‘covert
values’ and particular history provide an explanation of their function
and purpose. At the commencement
of each of the following three parts of this
Consultation Paper, the particular conceptual framework of the material
considered in
that part is given to facilitate an understanding of the dynamics
at play in the area under review. The following list highlights
the kind of
tensions and principal conceptual dynamics in the material under review, to set
the scene for a deeper exploration in
the later parts of this Consultation
a broad generalisation, the criminal law may be described as
‘incident-based’, where the civil law may be described
‘relationship-based’. In its focus on incidents the criminal law
also requires evidence to a particular standard of
proof. The civil law not only
includes a different (lesser) standard of proof, but also includes considerable
discretion in many
of its areas of operation. Further, while a particular
emphasis of the
Family Law Act
is the regulation of future relationships,
the criminal law focuses on punishment for past incidents—although with a
the possibility of further offending.
law v private law
1.92 Public law concerns the state as a principal actor; private law concerns
litigation between individual litigants. Child protection
proceedings fall into
the former category, while family law proceedings are an example of the latter.
v private realms
1.93 Professor Stephen Parker remarked that:
The idea that we should distinguish between public and private spheres of life
has been a central one in liberal political philosophy
since the seventeenth
century, although the roots of the idea can be traced back to Aristotle. In
classical liberalism, the notion
of a private sphere was a crucial part of the
belief in limited government. There were certain parts of civil society in which
state had no business. And at the epicentre of the private sphere was the
family; more specifically, the patriarchal
1.94 The idea that the family is a ‘private’ space is a
continuing theme in law—and especially family
Intertwined in the idea
of the private space are ideas of rights. Contemporary discussion about the
family reflects both the importance
of the family as a ‘fundamental
unit’ in society,
also the increasing recognition of the public impact of, and responsibility for,
family violence. The public costs of family
violence are referred to above.
Moreover, international conventions—considered further in Chapter
2—play an increasing
role in terms of the characterisation of matters as
‘public’ or ‘private’, particularly in the area of
against women:
Violence against women is an important issue of concern to women in many
countries. Women have worked to ensure that State governments
responsibility to prevent and deal with such violence as a serious infringement
of women’s rights, and to move the issue
of violence from the area of
private action to that of public
responsibility.
Seamlessness
1.95 The idea of ‘seamlessness’ is expressed in a number of ways
in various reviews and discussions about responding to
family violence. At times
it is expressed as an aspiration of having one court deal with the wide range of
matters that can arise
in relation to a family and where women and children are
affected by family violence and child abuse. For example, in 2002 the Family
Council proposed that
In child protection matters, duplication of effort between state and federal
systems should be avoided, and a decision should be
taken as early as possible
whether a matter should proceed under the
Family Law Act
or under child
welfare law with the consequence that there should be only one court dealing
with the matter. This is to be known
as the ‘One Court
principle’.
1.96 At other times the idea of seamlessness may be seen, for example, in
recommendations for consistency of
definitions;
pleas for greater sharing of information and facilitation of
pathways between the various services, agencies and courts that are
involved in
family violence matters;
training programs, knowledge bases and professional development for
all those in the various systems that deal with issues of family
violence and
child abuse;
coordination or integration of responses to family violence
the point of view of the women and children engaging with the legal frameworks
in which issues of family violence and child
abuse arise, the Commissions
consider that the key issue for this Inquiry is to focus upon the experience of
those participants—to
see the system through the eyes of the women and
children. Seamlessness in practice may involve a combination of each and every
of the elements identified so far, and to be considered throughout this
[back to top]
Structure of the
Consultation Paper
1.98 While the coverage of this Consultation Paper reflects the Terms of
Reference, some areas are covered more fully than others
at this stage. The
Commissions have been directed not to duplicate significant other work—in
particular the AIFS evaluation
and the Chisholm review. Although the Terms of
Reference were issued in July 2009, the AIFS evaluation, the Chisholm Review and
Family Law Council’s advice were not available until 28 January
1.99 The Commissions have prioritised the coverage of certain material in
this Consultation Paper, hence some subject areas receive
more expansive
discussion than others. Depending on the response in submissions and further
consultations following the publication
of this Consultation Paper, the emphasis
in the final report may vary.
1.100 This Inquiry focuses on areas of intersection and interaction between a
wide number of laws, operating in different ways and
in different spheres. There
are state and territory, as well as federal, laws. There are criminal laws as
well as civil laws. Some
concern private law matters—between individuals;
some concern public law matters—between individuals and the state. The
Consultation Paper is arranged in five Parts: an introductory section, followed
by parts dividing up the subject areas of the Terms
of Reference as providing
the lens through which the interaction issues are considered.
1.101 Although these laws often operate effectively in ‘silos’,
the people affected are the same people, potentially being
bounced around and
falling between these various
While dividing the
Consultation Paper into parts may echo the sense of the law operating in silos,
the arrangement of material into
parts is a pragmatic one to make the
consideration of the wide ranging area of the Inquiry more manageable through
this dissection
1.102 The Commissions are of the view, however, that it is essential for a
proper understanding of the nature of family violence from
the perspective of
the families—and particularly the women and children in the family
context—to see the problems from
the perspective of those engaging with
the legal framework, rather than through the laws themselves. In order to
highlight the issues
in the Terms of Reference from the perspective of the women
and children engaging with the legal system, a number of case studies,
hypotheticals and illustrations will be used, integrated throughout the
Arrangement of
1.103 Part A comprises two chapters: this introductory chapter and a chapter
focused on the constitutional and international settings
for the Inquiry.
1.104 Parts B and C deal principally with the matters set out in the first
Term of Reference. Part B looks at the various interaction
issues from the
perspective of family violence laws;
looks at the intersections and
interactions from the perspective of child protection.
focuses on the second Term of Reference and considers sexual
assault in a family violence context.
1.106 Part E focuses on existing and potential responses to the range of
interaction and impact issues considered throughout the Consultation
[back to top]
Processes of reform
Consultation
and collaboration processes
1.107 Commitment to widespread consultation is a hallmark of best practice
law reform.
Moreover, under
the provisions of the
Australian Law Reform Commission Act 1996
the ALRC ‘may inform itself in any way it thinks fit’ for the
purposes of reviewing or considering anything that
is the subject of an
Similarly the NSWLRC
may ‘hold and conduct such inquiries as it thinks
1.108 For this Inquiry, the ALRC is directed to work closely with a number of
bodies and to consult particular groups, complementing
the multi-faceted
consultation strategy adopted for this Inquiry—using a broad mix of
face-to-face consultations and roundtable
discussions; online communication
tools and the release of this Consultation Paper together with a companion
Consultation Paper Summary.
1.109 The Terms of Reference require the ALRC to:
b) work jointly with the New South Wales
Law Reform Commission with a view to developing agreed recommendations
and consult with
other State and Territory law reform bodies as appropriate;
c) work closely with the Australian Government Attorney-General’s
Department to ensure the solutions identified are practically
achievable and
consistent with other reforms and initiatives being considered in relation to
the development of a National Plan to
Reduce Violence against Women and their
Children or the National Framework for Protecting Australia’s Children,
which has been
approved by the Council of Australian Governments; and
d) consult with relevant courts, the Australian Government Department of
Families, Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs,
State and Territory agencies, State and Territory Legal Aid Commissions,
the Family Law Council, the Australian Domestic
Violence Clearinghouse and
similar bodies in each State and Territory.
Working with the NSWLRC and the
Attorney-General’s Department
1.110 This Consultation Paper is released as a joint document between the
ALRC and the NSWLRC, reflecting the co-operative work in
the Inquiry. The use of
the term ‘the Commissions’ as appropriate throughout, reflects this
joint endeavour.
1.111 To ensure that the solutions developed in the Inquiry are
‘practically achievable and consistent with other reforms and
initiatives
being considered’, the ALRC provides regular briefings to key staff in the
Australian Government Attorney-General’s
Department.
Consultation with designated bodies and
1.112 The consultation strategy for this Inquiry includes all of the bodies
identified expressly in the Terms of Reference as well
as other key stakeholder
groups. The
e-newsletter provides a monthly update on past and projected consultations. To
date, consultations include—in addition to those
named in the Terms of
Reference—police, offices of public prosecutions, lawyers, legal services,
judicial officers, the Family
Law Council, AIFS, the Australian Centre for the
Study of Sexual Assault, specialist family violence courts, academics and the
Family and Domestic Violence Clearinghouse.
1.113 A two-pronged
strategy of seeking additional comments has been adopted. First, using internet
communication tools both to provide
information and obtain comment—an
e-newsletter and an online forum; and, secondly, through this Consultation Paper
companion Summary.
E-newsletter
1.114 In this Inquiry the ALRC has adopted a new and additional consultation
strategy, by way of monthly Family Violence Inquiry e-newsletters.
This provides
a way to keep stakeholders informed about the inquiry progress on a regular
basis, with a calendar of stakeholder consultations
or other key events in the
upcoming month, as well as a summary of consultations and other work in the past
month. Each
e-newsletter also highlights an ‘issue in focus’ and seeks views,
experience or recommendations in relation to the particular
topic. Links are
provided to give immediate feedback on the issue in focus through the online
comment form, as well as to information
addition, there are links to the other inquiries of immediate relevance to this
namely the Chisholm Review and the AIFS evaluation.
1.115 The comments received in response to the issues in focus have
provided—and continue to provide—an important additional
input into the Inquiry.
E-newsletters will continue to be published monthly for the remainder of the
Online forum
1.116 The second use of internet communication tools is the Family Violence
Online Forum conducted from November 2009 to January 2010
amongst women’s
legal services, assisted by a grant from the Government 2.0 Taskforce. The
Taskforce was formed in 2008 against
a backdrop of increased interest by
governments worldwide in the potential of online engagement. The ALRC received
funding from the
Taskforce to run an online stakeholder consultation pilot, with
the technical and strategic support of social business and development
consultancy,
1.117 The Family Violence Online Forum was conducted amongst a closed group
from the women’s legal services community across
Australia to facilitate
frank and open discussion in a secure online environment about issues relevant
to the concerns and experiences
of that stakeholder group.
Consultation Paper and Summary
1.118 In the past, the ALRC’s standard practice has been to produce an
issues paper and a discussion paper, prior to producing
a final report. In this
Inquiry, in response to the very wide-ranging and challenging Terms of
Reference, and a tight time frame—twelve
months and two weeks—the
Commissions have had to adopt different practices in relation to consultation
documents to provide
appropriate opportunities for community engagement without
overloading stakeholders.
1.119 First, only one consultation document—this Consultation
Paper—is being published, complemented by the monthly e-newsletters.
Secondly, the propositions put forward are presented differently. ALRC practice
has been to include questions in an Issues Paper,
and Proposals in a Discussion
Paper. In this Consultation Paper the Commissions have adopted a combined format
for propositions,
posing questions—particularly in highly contested
areas—as well as options and proposals for reform.
1.120 Moreover, because there is only one consultation document, the
Commissions have produced a Consultation Paper that is somewhat
longer and more
fully developed than previous practice, to enable the community to have access
to the detailed evidence and arguments
underpinning the questions and proposals.
However, a Summary is being released simultaneously in order to facilitate
contributions
by stakeholders in the restricted time frame for this Inquiry. All
the questions and proposals for reform are included in both documents,
same order, and numbered in the same way, for ease of reference. The Summary
includes a brief discussion of the background
to each question and proposal.
Full background information, such as discussion of various models and
legislation by jurisdiction,
is included in this Consultation Paper.
1.121 In most ALRC inquiries, proposals and recommendations for reform are
addressed to those appropriate persons or agencies in the
federal sphere best
placed to implement them. This reflects the ALRC’s functions under the
Australian Law Reform Commission Act 1996
The Commission has the following functions in relation to matters referred to it
by the Attorney-General:
(a) to review Commonwealth laws relevant to those matters for the purposes of
systematically developing and reforming the law,
particularly by:
(i) bringing the law into line with current conditions and ensuring that it
meets current needs; and
(ii) removing defects in the law; and
(iii) simplifying the law; and
(iv) adopting new or more effective methods for administering the law and
dispensing justice; and
(v) providing improved access to justice;
(b) to consider proposals for making or consolidating Commonwealth laws about
those matters;
(c) to consider proposals for the repeal of obsolete or unnecessary laws about
those matters;
(d) to consider proposals for uniformity between State and Territory laws about
those matters;
(e) to consider proposals for complementary Commonwealth, State and Territory
laws about those matters.
1.122 The NSWLRC’s functions are similarly set out in its constituting
New South Wales Law Reform Commission Act 1966
, s 10(1), which
provides that:
(1) The Commission, in accordance with any reference to it made by the Minister:
(a) shall consider the law, enacted or promulgated by the Legislature of New
South Wales or by any person under the authority of
that Legislature, with a
view to, or for the purpose of:
(i) eliminating defects and anachronisms in the law,
(ii) repealing obsolete or unnecessary enactments,
(iii) consolidating, codifying or revising the law,
(iv) simplifying or modernising the law by bringing it into accord with
current conditions,
(v) adopting new or more effective methods for the administration of the law
and the dispensation of justice,
(vi) systematically developing and reforming the law,
(b) shall consider proposals relating to matters in respect of which it is
competent for the Legislature of New South Wales or any
person under the
authority of that Legislature to enact or promulgate laws, and
(c) may for the purposes of this section hold and conduct such inquiries as it
thinks fit.
1.123 This Inquiry engages with Commonwealth laws, as well as state and
territory laws on many levels—and in both Terms of Reference.
As noted in
the constituting provisions above, the ALRC—as a Commonwealth
body—is principally concerned with Commonwealth
laws or matters of
uniformity and complementarity of Commonwealth laws with state and territory
laws; and the NSWLRC—as a state
body—is principally concerned with
1.124 In this Inquiry, however, both bodies, acting together, have been asked
to go further in their respective functions. Given the
importance of the
Australian Government’s commitment to reducing violence against women and
children, the nature of the Terms
of Reference, and the compelling and
widespread nature of the issues being considered, the nature of the proposals
and recommendations
are likely to be different from those in previous inquiries
of both Commissions.
1.125 In framing proposals, and eventually recommendations in this way, the
Commissions recognise that implementation of many recommendations
primarily the responsibility of the states and territories. The Commissions will
recommend, in due course, that reform in
this area be led by the Commonwealth
Attorney-General and NSW Attorney General cooperatively and through the Standing
Committee of
Attorneys-General.
1.126 A key aspect of ALRC procedures is to establish an expert Advisory
Committee or ‘reference group’ to assist with
the development of its
inquiries. Because of the complex nature of this Inquiry the Commissions are
taking the approach of using
roundtables of invited experts and advisers to
inform the consultative processes at key points during the Inquiry. In
particular,
Magistrate Anne Goldsbrough has been appointed as a part-time
Commissioner for the Inquiry and George Zdenkowski is acting as special
1.127 Advisory groups of experts have particular value in helping the
Commissions to identify the key issues and determine priorities,
quality assurance in the research, writing and consultation processes. The
advisory groups will also assist with the development
of recommendations for
reform as the Inquiry progresses. Ultimate responsibility for the Report and
recommendations, however, remains
with the Commissions.
submissions
1.128 With the release of this Consultation Paper, the Commissions invite
individuals and organisations to make submissions in response
to the specific
proposals, or to any of the background material and analysis provided, to help
advance the reform process in this
1.129 There is no specified format for submissions and they may be marked
confidential if preferred. The Commissions will gratefully
accept anything from
handwritten notes to detailed commentary and scholarly analyses on relevant laws
and practices. Although not
essential, the Commissions prefer electronic
communications and submissions may be made simply by contributing comments
the ALRC’s website—even simple dot-points are welcome. In
this Inquiry the Commissions are also providing an online space
comment and discussion on the Consultation Paper summary document and the
specific questions and proposals included.
1.130 The Commissions appreciate that the tight deadline for making
submissions places considerable pressure upon those who wish to
participate in
the Inquiry. The Commissions acknowledge the considerable amount of work
undertaken by those who have contributed
to the consultative processes to date.
Given the deadline for delivering the final report to the respective
Attorneys-General, and
the need to consider fully the submissions received in
response to this Consultation Paper, all submissions must be submitted on
time—by Friday 4 June 2010.
1.131 It is the invaluable work of participants that enriches the whole
consultative process of the Commissions’ inquiries.
The quality of the
outcomes is assisted greatly by the understanding of contributors in needing to
meet the deadline imposed by the
reporting process itself. This Inquiry is no
In order to ensure consideration for use in the final report, submissions
addressing the questions and proposals in this Consultation
Paper must reach the
Friday 4 June 2010
National Council to Reduce Violence
against Women and their Children,
Time for Action: The National
Council’s Plan for Australia to Reduce Violence against Women and their
of Reference for this Inquiry are set out at the front of this Consultation
New South Wales Law Reform
Commission,
Family Violence Inquiry—Terms of Reference
<www.lawlink.nsw.gov.au/lawlink/lrc/ll_lrc.nsf/pages/LRC_cref125> at 19
January 2010.
National Council to Reduce
Violence against Women and their Children,
Time for Action: The National
Council’s Plan for Australia to Reduce Violence against Women and their
(2009), 11.
16–20. The six ‘outcome areas’ listed are that: communities
are safe and free from violence; relationships
are respectful; services meet the
needs of women and their children; responses are just; perpetrators stop their
violence; and systems
work together
effectively.
Ibid, 119: Strategies for Action
4.2.1 and 4.1.2 are the background for the first limb and second limbs of the
Terms of Reference,
respectively.
National Council to Reduce Violence against Women and their Children,
Background Paper to Time for Action: The National Council’s Plan to
Reduce Violence against Women and their Children, 2009–2021
Australian Government
Domestic Violence Laws in Australia
The Cost of
Violence against Women and their Children
Department of Families, Housing,
Community Services and Indigenous Affairs on behalf of the National Council to
Reduce Violence Against
Women and their Children
National Council to Reduce
Violence against Women and their Children,
Time for Action: The National
Council’s Plan for Australia to Reduce Violence against Women and their
National Council to Reduce Violence against Women and their Children,
Background Paper to Time for Action: The National Council’s Plan to
Reduce Violence against Women and their Children, 2009–2021
Ibid, 29. See also: Family Law
Improving Responses to Family Violence in the Family Law System: An
Advice on the Intersection of Family Violence and Family Law Issues
The National Council to Reduce
Violence against Women and their Children,
Background Paper to Time for
Action: The National Council’s Plan to Reduce Violence against Women and
their Children, 2009–2021
Ibid, 33. The Family Law Council
also drew attention to the vulnerability of women and children in some
communities, contributing
factors to which include ‘cultural or religious
practices that subordinate women and cultural expectations that loyalty to
family and community take precedence over personal safety’: Family Law
Improving Responses to Family Violence in the Family Law System: An
Advice on the Intersection of Family Violence and Family Law Issues
The National Council to Reduce
Violence against Women and their Children,
Background Paper to Time for
Action: The National Council’s Plan to Reduce Violence against Women and
their Children, 2009–2021
Ibid, 43; KPMG,
The Cost of
Violence against Women and their Children
Department of Families, Housing,
Community Services and Indigenous Affairs on behalf of the National Council to
Reduce Violence Against
Women and their Children
Attorney-General’s
Department, ‘Family Courts Violence Review’ (Press Release, 28
January 2010).
Family Law Council,
Improving Responses to Family Violence in the Family Law System: An Advice on
the Intersection of Family Violence and Family Law Issues
Australian Government,
National Plan to Reduce Violence against Women—Immediate Government
For a summary of the 2006 changes,
see Australian Institute of Family Studies,
Evaluation of the 2006 Family Law
Reforms—Summary Report
(2009), 2. The Chisholm Review also includes a
summary of the background of the 2006 reforms: R Chisholm,
Family Courts
Violence Review
Australian Institute of
Family Studies,
Evaluation of the 2006 Family Law Reforms
Australian Institute of Family
<www.aifs.gov.au/familylawevaluation/aboutlcp.html> at 22 January
Australian Institute of Family
Evaluation of the 2006 Family Law Reforms
(2009); Australian
Institute of Family Studies,
Evaluation of the 2006 Family Law
Reforms—Summary Report
(2009); R McClelland (Attorney-General),
‘Release of Family Law Reviews’ (Press Release, 28 January
Australian Institute of Family
Evaluation of the 2006 Family Law Reforms—Summary Report
(2009), [3.1.1]. The family courts comprise the Family Court of Australia, the
Federal Magistrates Court and the Family Court of
Ibid, [3.9],
R Chisholm,
Family Courts
Violence Review
Ibid, 6. The document is the
Family Law Rules 2004
(Cth) r 2.04, sch
R Chisholm,
Family Courts
Violence Review
Ibid, 7. The
‘friendly parent’ provision is considered in
; the obligations
on advisers in
; and costs orders in
Section 60CC sets
out the matters that must be considered in determining what is in a
child’s best interests.
Family Law Act 1975
R Chisholm,
Courts Violence Review
(2009), 127.
Ibid, 8; Rec 3.4.
Family Law Act
R Chisholm,
Family Courts Violence Review
(2009), Rec
Ibid, recommendations in
Family Law Council,
Responses to Family Violence in the Family Law System: An Advice on the
Intersection of Family Violence and Family Law Issues
Ibid, 8; Rec
Ibid, 7; Rec
The importance of considering the
way other legal categories respond to sexual assault is highlighted in
Graycar, ‘Frozen Chooks Revisited: The Challenge of Changing Law/s’
in R Hunter and M Keyes (eds),
Changing Law: Rights, Regulation and
Reconciliation
(2005) 49, 59.
that the ABS defined a partner as current and former marital or de facto
partners: Australian Bureau of Statistics,
Personal Safety Survey
(2005), 60.
Ibid, 11. Other known
person includes an ‘acquaintance, neighbour, counsellor or psychologist or
psychiatrist, ex-boyfriend
or girlfriend, doctor, teacher, minister, priest or
clergy and prison officer’: Australian Bureau of Statistics,
Safety Survey
, 4906.0 (2005), 33.
Note that the ABS included former boyfriends/girlfriends within the definition
of ‘other known person’ (although current
boyfriend/girlfriend or
date was a category on its own reflecting, in some instances, ‘different
levels of commitment and involvement’
when compared to a marital or de
facto partner), thus the percentage of offenders with a close intimate or
familial relationship
with the victim would be larger if former
boyfriend/girlfriends was included within the definition of
‘partner’. For
the detailed explanation of the various relationship
categories relied on by the ABS see Australian Bureau of Statistics,
Safety Survey
, 4906.0 (2005), 60.
Australian Bureau of Statistics,
Sexual Assault in Australia: A Statistical
(2004), 26.
reporting and attrition are detailed
The wider implications of
the Commissions’ work in this regard also responds to the strategy 4.1.2
in National Council to
Reduce Violence against Women and their Children,
for Action: The National Council’s Plan for Australia to Reduce Violence
against Women and their Children,
Law Council,
Improving Responses to Family Violence in the Family Law System:
An Advice on the Intersection of Family Violence and Family Law Issues
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Same Crime, Same Time: Sentencing of Federal Offenders
103 (2006).
National Council to Reduce
Violence against Women and their Children,
Time for Action: The National
Council’s Plan for Australia to Reduce Violence against Women and their
(2009), Outcomes
Australian Domestic &
Family Violence Clearinghouse,
Consultation
, Sydney, 27 January
The Terms of Reference require
the Commissions to consider violence against ‘women and their
children’. The Commissions
acknowledge that this may include same-sex
relationships where women are the target of family
This largely complies with
the definition of ‘relative’ in
Crimes (Domestic and Personal
Violence) Act 2007
eg, Domestic Violence and Incest Resource Centre,
What’s In a Name?
Definitions and Domestic Violence—Domestic Violence? Family Violence?
Violence Against Women?
, Discussion Paper No 1
B Fehlberg and J Behrens,
Australian Family Law—The Contemporary Context
Anecdotally, the Commissions have
heard that the term is used in the context of police being called out to a
‘domestic’.
B Fehlberg and
Australian Family Law—The Contemporary Context
178 J Behrens, ‘Ending the Silence, But … Family Violence under the
Family Law Reform Act 1995
Australian Journal of Family Law
See, eg, National Council
to Reduce Violence against Women and their Children,
Time for Action: The
National Council’s Plan for Australia to Reduce Violence against Women and
their Children,
(2009); Australian Bureau of Statistics,
Framework for Family and Domestic Violence
(2009); Government of Western
Family and Domestic Violence Action Plan
(2007–2008)
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Review of Family Violence Laws: Report
(2006); Queensland Centre for Domestic and Family Violence Research,
Indigenous Family Violence Prevention Forum 2009—Report
See, eg, Australian
Government Solicitor,
The Giving of Evidence by Victims of Sexual Assault
(2008); M Pyke,
South Australian Domestic Violence Laws: Discussion and
Options for Reform
(2007); Australian Law Reform Commission,
, ALRC 30 (1986).
Fehlberg and J Behrens,
Australian Family Law—The Contemporary
(2008), 178.
(Domestic and Personal Violence) Act 2007
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
Domestic and Family Violence Protection Act
Restraining Orders Act 1997
Intervention Orders
(Prevention of Abuse) Act 2009
Family Violence Act 2004
Domestic Violence and Protection Orders Act 2008
Domestic and
Family Violence Act 2007
South Australia,
Parliamentary Debates
, House of Assembly, 27 October
2009, 4460 (V Chapman—Shadow
Attorney-General).
For example, when
reference is made to supporting documents–including application forms for
protection orders—the documents
under the old legislation are referred to,
as they are the forms available online at the time of
Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander Social Justice Commissioner,
Social Justice Report
A Freiberg, R Fox and M Hogan,
Sentencing Young Offenders—Sentencing Research Paper No 11
Australian Law Reform Commission, [171], citing S Reid and M Reitsma-Street,
Assumptions and Implications of New Canadian Legislation for Young
‘Rights and Utility in Anglo-Australian Family Law’
Modern Law Review
See eg, T Altobelli,
Family Law in Australia–Principles and Practice
(2003), 50; M
Thornton, ‘The Cartography of Public and Private’ in M Thornton (ed)
Public and Private—Feminist Legal Debates
(1995) 2; and R Graycar
and J Morgan,
The Hidden Gender of Law
(2nd ed, 2002), ch 2 and
references cited throughout.
E Evatt, ‘Eliminating
Discrimination Against Women: The Impact of the UN Convention’
[1991] MelbULawRw 26
Melbourne University Law Review
Family Law Council,
Law and Child Protection—Final Report
(2002), Rec 13. Another example
is the recommendation for a referral of power to federal family courts in
relation to all matters
in relation to children: Family Law Council,
Improving Responses to Family Violence in the Family Law System: An Advice on
the Intersection of Family Violence and Family Law Issues
(2009), Rec
For example, Family Law Council,
Improving Responses to Family Violence in the Family Law System: An Advice on
the Intersection of Family Violence and Family Law Issues
(2009), Recs 1,
For example, Ibid, Recs 4,
For example, Ibid, Recs 2,
See Ch 19 for a discussion of
integrated responses generally.
on a ‘roundabout’ as described in the AIFS evaluation: Australian
Institute of Family Studies,
Evaluation of the 2006 Family Law
Reforms—Summary Report
(2009), [4],
B Opeskin, ‘Measuring
Success’ in B Opeskin and D Weisbrot (eds),
The Promise of Law
Australian Law Reform
Commission Act 1996
New South Wales Law Reform Commission Act 1966
(NSW) s 10(1)(c).
ALRC CP1 Family Violence � Improving Legal Frameworks
2. Constitutional and International
Introduction
Constitutional framework
Commonwealth powers
Cross-vesting
The web of courts in family violence matters
Problems of fragmentation
Interactions and overlaps
International instruments
Universal Declaration of Human Rights
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
Convention on the Elimination of Discrimination Against Women
Declaration on the Elimination of Violence against Women
Convention on the Rights of the Child
Convention on the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction
2. Constitutional and International
Introduction
2.1 Family violence as a legal issue sits within a complex framework of laws,
state and federal. As the Family Law Council has remarked:
The volatile nature of family law, the involvement of such a large number of
laws relating to
children’s welfare all combine to provide a dynamic and constantly
changing legislative climate. These factors
in turn impact upon practices and
arguably also on outcomes.
2.2 It is that complex framework that generates the interaction and impact
issues that are the key focus of this
This chapter sets out the
broad constitutional landscape of family law and the international instruments
that provide a backdrop
for Australian law today. A further part of the legal
framework in which family violence issues may arise is the range of
courts—both
state and federal—and this chapter will also provide a
brief description of the nature of these jurisdictions.
[back to top]
Constitutional
2.3 Australia has a federal system of government in which legislative power
is divided between the Commonwealth and the states and
territories. In the area
of family law, neither the Commonwealth nor the states and territories have
exclusive legislative competence.
It has been remarked that ‘[i]f family law is viewed as an integral and
homogeneous subject area on which it is appropriate
to legislate, containing
within it subject matters requiring a uniform approach, the conferral of
legislative power has been
incomplete’.
Commonwealth
Constitution
gives the Commonwealth government the
power to make laws with respect to: (1)
‘marriage’;
‘divorce and matrimonial causes; and in relation thereto, parental rights,
and the custody and guardianship of
It also has the
power to legislate with respect to ‘matters incidental to the execution of
any power vested by this
Constitution
Parliament’.
2.5 The power of the states to legislate in relation to family law is not
limited in the same way, but where a state law is inconsistent
Commonwealth law, the Commonwealth law
2.6 Federal Magistrate Geoff Monahan and Associate Professor Lisa Young
comment, with respect to this division between the Commonwealth
and the states,
that ‘as a general principle, private rights were regarded as more
appropriately a matter for the states than
for the Commonwealth’. However,
questions of status—marriage and divorce—needed uniformity across
Australia and
hence were more appropriate for allocation to federal
what was chiefly in the minds of the framers of the
Constitution
was the need to
ensure the recognition of such a basic institution as marriage in the different
parts of the new Commonwealth and
beyond its borders, throughout what was then
known as the British Empire. Legislation for marriage necessarily also implied
legislation
for its dissolution, since the recognition of a person’s
status as a divorced person was a necessary precondition to the capacity
2.7 The Commonwealth Parliament did not race into the field. The first
Commonwealth legislation was the
Matrimonial Causes Act 1959
followed two years later by the
Marriage Act 1961
(Cth). These laws
superseded the laws of the states and provided a uniform Commonwealth law on
marriage and divorce.
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) and the establishment of the Family
Court of Australia ushered in the current framework of federal family law. The
reflected the intention ‘to exercise as plenary a power as the
Constitution
permitted the Commonwealth to take’, and was subject to a
series of constitutional
challenges.
2.9 The federal framework was later expanded by the referral of legislative
power from the states to the
Commonwealth.
Section 51(xxxvii)
Constitution
gives the Commonwealth Parliament
power to make laws with respect to:
matters referred to the Parliament of the Commonwealth by the Parliament or
Parliaments of any State or States, but so that the law
shall extend only to
States by whose Parliaments the matter is referred, or which afterwards adopt
2.10 Dr Anthony Dickey has noted that the referral of powers has been
‘the practical way in which problems resulting from the
division of State
and Commonwealth powers have most often been
2.11 A major addition to federal power was the referral to the Commonwealth
of the power to make laws with respect to the children
of unmarried
parents—‘ex-nuptial
Between 1986
and 1990, all states (with the exception of Western Australia) referred state
powers with respect to ‘guardianship,
custody, maintenance and
access’ in relation to ex-nuptial children to the
Commonwealth.
The states did
not, however, refer to the Commonwealth their power to legislate with respect to
child protection and adoption.
2.12 The effect of the referral is described by Dickey:
As a result of this referral of powers, the Parliament now has virtually
unlimited legislative power in respect of children in these
sole matters that are excluded by the States in their referral of powers concern
children who come within the
scope of State child welfare legislation, and
adoption. Only with respect to these matters are the limits of the
Commonwealth’s
power to legislate in respect of children likely to be of
continuing importance in these
2.13 As a consequence, in 1996, the
Family Law Act
was amended to
include a ‘welfare power’ in relation to
A further referral of
power led to the
Family Law Amendment (De Facto Financial Matters and Other
Measures) Act 2008
2.14 Western Australia took a different approach from the other states by
availing itself of the opportunity provided in the
Family Law Act
creation of a state family court exercising federal and state
The reasons for
doing so were explained in the Second Reading Speech to the
Family Court Act
(1) to provide a single court of unified jurisdiction, administering matters of
family law, both federal and state;
(2) to enable the state to continue to exercise jurisdiction in family law
matters which would otherwise have been removed into the
Family Court of
Australia, with the opportunity of retaining complementary action with other
responsibilities in the areas of welfare
and counselling services;
(3) in the public interest to keep the administration of justice as close as
possible to the people it is designed to serve;
(4) to obviate the creation of a further Commonwealth court in the
2.15 When the states referred power in relation to parenting disputes
involving parents who are not married to each other, Western
Australia again
enacted similar laws at a state level, in the
Family Court Act 1997
That Act reaffirmed the separate state Family Court in Western Australia and its
expanded jurisdiction on the basis that
the Western Australian Family Court allows us in Western Australia—the
tyranny of distance is always a problem with legislation—to
be responsive
to local demands and needs for the benefit of people using the Family
2.16 The court also has power to exercise jurisdiction under the
and Community Services Act 2004
(WA) and so, unlike the federal family
courts, it may issue care or protection orders in relation to children.
2.17 The effect of the establishment and expansion of the Family Court of
Western Australia has been described as follows:
As it happens, however, Western Australia has followed the federal law closely
and its Family Court has administered the [
Family Law Act
] in conformity
with guidelines set out by the Full Court of the Federal Court and by the High
Court. There has been full interchange
of judges between that court and the
Family Court and, to all intents and purposes, the existence of a separate
Family Court has
not affected the administration of the law under the federal
2.18 Given that Western Australia has kept family law matters within the
state, it provides, in some respects, a ‘control jurisdiction’
consideration of some of the issues generated by the fragmentation between the
state and federal spheres in the other states
and territories. As remarked by
the Family Law Council,
Western Australia is uniquely placed, as the only State Family Court in
Australia with a single court for family law matters, to
be the first State in
Australia to develop and implement a unified Family Law/Child Protection Court
to manage all cases involving
the welfare of children with the same judicial
officers able to determine both public [child protection] and private [parental
responsibility
and the care arrangements for children] family law
Cross-vesting
One of the most creative and effective schemes for addressing some of the
unsatisfactory issues arising out of the constitutional
limitations of power
between the Commonwealth and the states was the cross-vesting
2.19 The essence and objects of the scheme, introduced in 1987, were
explained by the then Attorney-General in his Second Reading
The essence of the cross-vesting scheme, as provided for in the Bill and
proposed in complementary state legislation, is that State
and Territory Supreme
Courts will be vested with all the civil jurisdiction—except certain
industrial and trade practices jurisdiction—of
the Federal Courts, at
present the Federal Court of Australia and the Family Court of Australia, and
the federal courts will be vested
with the full jurisdiction of the State and
Territory Supreme Courts.
The reasons for the proposed scheme are that litigants have occasionally
experienced inconvenience and have been put to unnecessary
expense as a result
of, firstly, uncertainties as to the jurisdictional limits of federal, state and
territory courts, particularly
in the areas of trade practices and family law;
and, secondly, the lack of power in these courts to ensure that proceedings
are instituted in different courts, but which ought to be tried together,
are tried in the one court. Jurisdictional difficulties
do the law and the
community no good. They result in litigants with a genuine dispute requiring
judicial determination being faced
with the anguish, delay and additional
expense which flow from the sterile and pointless need to search for a court or
courts, with
they occur in areas such as family law and trade practices which touch the
everyday activities of so many people and corporations
2.20 The scheme was ‘revolutionary (yet ultimately
and did not
withstand constitutional challenge. The essence of the scheme was uniform
cross-vesting legislation enacted by the Commonwealth
together with all the
states and territories.
purpose of the uniform scheme—‘as ingenious as it was
—is evident
in the preamble to the
WHEREAS inconvenience and expense have occasionally been caused to litigants by
Territory courts, and whereas
it is desirable—
(a) to establish a system of cross-vesting of jurisdiction between those courts,
without detracting from the existing jurisdiction
of any court;
(b) to structure the system in such a way as to ensure as far as practicable
that proceedings concerning matters which, apart from
this Act and any law of a
State relating to cross-vesting of jurisdiction, would be entirely or
substantially within the jurisdiction
(other than any accrued jurisdiction) of
the Federal Court or the Family Court or the jurisdiction of a Supreme Court of
or Territory are instituted and determined in that court, whilst
providing for the determination by one court of federal and State
appropriate cases; and
(c) if a proceeding is instituted in a court that is not the appropriate court,
to provide a system under which the proceeding will
be transferred to the
appropriate court.
2.21 The Explanatory Memorandum accompanying the federal Bill articulated the
hope ‘that no action will fail in a court through
lack of jurisdiction,
and that as far as possible no court will have to determine the boundaries
between federal, state and territory
territory Supreme Courts were vested with federal jurisdiction; federal courts
were vested with the full jurisdiction of
state and territory Supreme Courts;
and from 1988–1999, the scheme ‘overcame constitutional deadlocks
that used to bedevil
the Family Court’s
2.22 However, in
Re Wakim; Ex parte McNally
the High Court
held that Ch III of the
Constitution
exhaustively defined the
‘matters’ that may be the subject of the judicial power of the
Commonwealth—and this did
not include exercising the jurisdiction of the
That part of the scheme
that enabled federal courts to hear state matters—such as the Family Court
determining a claim under
state based de facto relationships legislation or
family provision legislation—was unconstitutional.
2.23 Re Wakim
struck down the cross-vesting scheme in one direction,
but not the other. While it held invalid the purported vesting in federal courts
of state judicial power, cross-vesting remains valid from the Commonwealth to
the states. In addition, a vesting of jurisdiction
between the Commonwealth and
the territories is still
permissible.
Young and Monahan
describe the impact of the failure of the cross-vesting scheme:
In addition to its impact on corporate law … the partial demise of the
cross-vesting scheme had an immediate effect on Australian
family law. While the
former was swiftly remedied by a reference of powers by the states to the
Commonwealth, the latter has proved
more difficult to solve. Many family law
matters now needed to be resolved in both a federal and state court. Of
immediate relevance
was the reality that cross-vesting had allowed de facto
families to seek orders in the Family Court to resolve both parenting disputes
(federal jurisdiction) and property disputes (state jurisdiction). This problem
was, of course, resolved by a state reference of
powers over de facto
relationships that resulted in amendments to the [
Family Law Act
Family Law Amendment (De Facto Financial Matters and Other Measures) Act 2008
(Cth) … Nevertheless, many other procedural benefits that cross-vesting
provided to family law litigants have now been
web of courts in family violence matters
2.24 Family violence issues may arise in a number of judicial
magistrates courts;
Supreme Courts;
children’s courts; and
family courts—including the Family Court of Australia, the
Federal Magistrates Court and the Family Court of Western
Magistrates
2.25 Many family violence matters are likely to arise first in a local court
of a state or territory, before a magistrate. Such matters
may include
proceedings for protection orders and summary criminal offences—such as
common assault, property damage, stalking,
and breach of a protection order.
Committal proceedings for serious criminal offences—for example, sexual
assault—may
also be heard in such
Magistrates courts also
exercise some limited jurisdiction in matters under the
District (County) and Supreme
2.26 State and territory District (County) and Supreme Courts exercise
serious criminal offences. Appeals regarding protection orders may go to the
District (County) Court.
2.27 Although
Family Law Act
originally vested the
Supreme Courts of the states and territories with jurisdiction in relation to
matrimonial causes, this vesting
arrangement was terminated by Proclamation in
1976, except in relation to the Northern Territory. However, the Supreme Courts
exercise the jurisdiction of the Family Court of Australia by virtue of the
cross-vesting of jurisdiction legislation discussed
Children’s courts
2.28 In all states and territories there are specialised children’s
courts that have jurisdiction related to the care and protection
of children and
young people, and also criminal cases concerning children and young
2.29 The proceedings are conducted with as little formality and legal
technicality as the case permits. Proceedings in the care and
Children’s courts take all measures practicable
to ensure that a child or
young person has every opportunity to be heard and participate in proceedings,
and that the proceedings,
decisions or rulings are understood by the child or
young person.
2.30 In Tasmania, the ACT and the Northern Territory, the Children’s
Court is presided over by a magistrate. In New South Wales,
Queensland, Western and South Australia, the head of the court is a specialist
judge from the District Court.
Most states have specialist children’s courts operating in the capital
cities. Outside these areas, the local magistrate can
convene a children’s
court when necessary.
Family courts
2.31 The Family Court of Australia, the Federal Magistrates Court and the
Family Court of Western Australia all exercise jurisdiction
to hear family law matters. The Family Court of Australia was
established by the
Family Law Act
as a superior court of record. Appeals
from a judge of the Family Court go to the Full Court of the Family Court with a
further appeal
to the High Court of Australia where the court grants special
2.32 The Federal Magistrates Court was established under the
Magistrates Act 1999
and commenced operation on 23 June 2000.
As set out in
, it is intended that the court: operate as informally as
possible; use streamlined procedures; and encourage the use of dispute
procedures.
Federal Magistrates Court exercises limited jurisdiction under the
including in relation to matrimonial causes, and matters arising under
(Children).
2.33 A very high proportion of the work in the court concerns family
law—in 2007–08, it was 91.7% of the
The majority of family law
matters overall are heard in the Federal Magistrates Court. For example, in the
period 2007–08,
over 79% of first instance family law applications were
filed in the Federal Magistrates
Appeals in family law
matters go to the Family Court.
2.34 The Family Law Council described the differences in the work of the two
courts as follows:
In the family law context, the Family Court of Australia deals with the most
intractable disputes and in particular with those parenting
applications where
there are extremely serious allegations of child abuse or physical abuse which
often involve allegations of substance
abuse and mental health issues. However,
issues of child abuse, substance abuse, mental health and family violence are
also highly
prevalent issues in parenting applications dealt with by the Federal
Magistrates Court.
2.35 As discussed above, the Family Court of Western Australia is a state
family court, exercising both federal and state jurisdiction.
It is invested
with jurisdiction in relation to most original proceedings arising under the
Family Law Act
, including matrimonial causes, and to hear appeals under
the Act from the Magistrates Court of Western Australia, other than appeals
against decisions made by a family law magistrate.
Problems of
fragmentation
2.36 Federal Magistrate Tom Altobelli has described the ‘chaos and
complexity of jurisdiction’ in family law matters as
mainly attributable
to Australia’s federal system of government and the distribution of powers
Constitution
Constitution
, neither the Commonwealth nor the states have exclusive
legislative competence in the area of family law. This has meant that a complex
and fragmented system for determining family law issues has developed and been
exacerbated by attempts to interpret constitutional
powers in various
2.37 The boundaries between the various parts of the system are not always
clear and jurisdictional intersections and overlaps are
‘an inevitable,
but unintended,
consequence’.
fragmentation of the system has a particular impact in relation to child
protection issues:
In essence, at least two court systems are potentially involved in any child
protection dispute: the State and Territory children’s
courts, and the
federal Family Court. With the introduction of the Federal Magistrates Service,
this fragmentation now extends to
three courts. Further, if a dispute extends
across State and Territory borders, more than one children’s court may be
Family violence issues are also often relevant when child protection
issues are raised, but the State and Territory courts that deal
with violence
issues are usually the generalist magistrates’ courts. This can add a
further layer of complexity.
2.38 Which laws apply across the state/federal divide is principally a
function of whether the family is ‘intact’ or not.
The rationale for
this has been questioned:
Why the separation of the parents should make such a difference in Australia has
much more to do with the peculiarities of state
and federal jurisdiction and
funding arrangements than any rational approach to child protection practice.
The current arrangements
have the potential to put some children at grave risk
of harm, and also make it much more difficult to deal speedily with unfounded
allegations of child abuse.
2.39 Family violence issues also have to encounter the ‘bifurcated
institutional framework’
generated by the federal/state divide:
Fragmentation of the law on jurisdictional lines results in the possibility of
differences of approach to similar problems. It may
result in an unevenness in
the development of facilities created for dealing with similar problems. It may
lead to manoeuvring and
the use of subterfuge as parties attempt to get
themselves within a particular jurisdiction not otherwise open to them.
These effects may seem pretty unsatisfactory to anyone who is concerned that the
best legal solutions and facilities should be available
for dealing with
problems which so closely affect the happiness of so many families and,
particularly, the children.
2.40 There is a danger, moreover, that issues concerning violence may fall
into the cracks between the systems:
To the extent that State and Territory child protection authorities do not
investigate such matters because there are proceedings
, there is a Catch 22. The family law system is to some extent
predicated on an assumption that State or Territory child protection
authorities
will investigate all serious cases of intrafamilial child abuse and make the
results of those investigations available
to the Court. State and Territory
child protection authorities may in some cases decline to allocate significant
resources to the
case because it is already proceeding in the family law system.
There is certainly a perception that State and Territory child protection
authorities are reluctant to get involved when a matter is in the family law
system already.
2.41 As noted by the Family Law Council in December 2009, the division of
powers means that ‘neither the Commonwealth nor the
solutions to address all of the legal issues
that may impact on a family in
respect of their
Interactions and
2.42 Protection issues concerning children are mainly the domain of the state
and territory children’s courts. They may also
arise when the Family Court
makes parenting orders.
For example, a parent in a Family Court proceeding may allege that the other
parent has been violent towards the child. Conversely,
in exercising their power
to make protection orders, State and Territory children’s courts sometimes
make orders on issues
that could also be the subject of parenting orders made by
the Family Court. For example, in making a protective order, a children’s
court may make orders regarding access and
2.43 State and territory child welfare laws take precedence over Family Court
In contrast, in the area
of family violence, contact and residence orders made under the
can be used to defeat state and territory family violence protection
2.44 The constitutional position is that the
Family Law Act
the resolution of private disputes about the parenting of all children in
Australia, while state and territory ‘child
laws’—that is, laws that aim to protect children from abuse and
—govern the
resolution of public disputes between state or territory governments and
individuals about the care and protection
of their children.
2.45 The nature of the different proceedings was described by the Family Law
[T]he applicant in family proceedings in State and Territory children’s
courts is always the State and Territory child protection
authority. Hence,
children’s court disputes are public law disputes with the State acting as
applicant. This is in contrast
to disputes under the Commonwealth [
] where both the applicant and respondent are usually a parent or family
member, and the dispute is thus a private one. There can,
however, be a private
element to child protection disputes and a public element to Family Court
disputes. For example, in a matter
before the Family Court an allegation of
abuse may be made requiring child protection authorities to become involved. At
and Territory level, once the public law threshold for intervention
has been met, a children’s court may make custody and access
favour of individuals in the context of exercising their protective jurisdiction
(although the ambit of this power depends
on the order made), thus creating a
private law dimension in such
2.46 The Council also observed that despite the differences between the
law’, the orders available under the state and territory family violence
and child protection legislation ‘cover
much of the same ground’ as
Family Law Act
Family violence
2.47 The primary mechanism exercised at state and territory level in relation
to family violence is that of protection orders—and
these may interact
Family Law Act
There is often interplay between State Protection orders which provide for the
protection of a parent and their children by prohibiting
the alleged perpetrator
(the other parent) from coming within a defined distance of the parent and
child, and federal family court
orders that provide for the child to spend time
with that parent.
2.48 Division 11 of the
Family Law Act
was introduced with the
objective of resolving inconsistencies between
Family Law Act
orders and state and territory family violence orders, however ‘the
possibility of inconsistent orders still exists
where one court orders contact
while another court prohibits
While the [
] permits contact orders to be inconsistent with State and Territory
family violence orders, providing ss 68K and
are complied with,
Family Law Act
] states that in the course of making or varying a family
violence order, a State and Territory court may make, revive, vary, discharge
suspend a [
Family Law Act
] contact order.
While the [
Family Law Act
] contains quite detailed procedures for the
Court to follow when the possibility of inconsistent orders arises, the written
not necessarily the same as the law in
2.49 As noted by the Family Law Council, the levels of complexity increase
the more ‘blended’ the family is:
The interplay between State child protection orders and orders by federal family
courts is heightened where there are differing arrangements
between parents of
children in a family or differing orders in respect of siblings within a family
unit. This is not uncommon in
blended families for a parent to have had children
with different partners. Often the arrangements in respect of each of the
may vary. For example, one child may be the subject of a State child
protection order (public law) and the arrangements in respect
of the other
child(ren) are determined under private law (federal family courts). There is
also the concern in respect of those children
who are the subject of temporary
child protection orders in the State courts but the orders are not pursued by
the child welfare
authority in the State or Territory courts on the basis that
the ‘relative’ is to apply to the federal family courts
parenting orders.
2.50 This is the kind of ‘interaction in practice’ issue that
sits within the Terms of Reference for this Inquiry. Put
at its simplest:
more than one court may be involved in a particular family breakdown. Disputes
cannot be neatly divided into private and public areas
of law and parties will
often have to institute or be engaged in proceedings in various legal forums to
have all of their issues
determined. ... The overlapping jurisdictions cause
significant angst for the parties involved and considerable difficulties for
[back to top]
International
instruments
2.51 Under its constituting legislation, the ALRC is directed to have regard
to ‘all of Australia’s international obligations
that are relevant
to the matter’.
of international conventions are relevant to the legal framework in relation to
violence against women and children in a
family violence context. In particular,
these reflect the acknowledgment that violence against women and children is a
of human rights.
2.52 Such international instruments do not become part of Australian law
until incorporated into domestic law by
But, as noted by the
High Court in
Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs v
a convention can still assist with the interpretation of domestic law:
The provisions of an international convention to which Australia is a party,
especially one which declares universal fundamental
rights, may be used by the
courts as a legitimate guide in developing the common law. But the courts should
act in this fashion with
due circumspection when the Parliament itself has not
seen fit to incorporate the provisions of a convention into our domestic
Declaration of Human Rights
2.53 The Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) was adopted and
proclaimed by the General Assembly of the United Nations on
10 December 1948, in
the wake of the Second World War, and as the first international expression of
rights to which all human beings
Comprising 30
articles, it provides the backdrop for a number of later instruments which
embody and expand upon its provisions.
International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
described as ‘one of the most important human rights conventions of the
United Nations era’,
adopted by the
United Nations General Assembly
16 December 1966 and ratified by the Australian Government in 1980. In making
any proposals or recommendations the ALRC is directed
to ensure that they are
consistent, ‘as far as practicable’, with the
2.55 A number of articles of the ICCPR are of particular relevance in the
context of a consideration of family violence. Article 23
provides that
‘[t]he family is the natural and fundamental group unit of society and is
entitled to protection by society and
includes protection for the family in stipulating that:
No one shall be subjected to arbitrary or unlawful interference with his
attacks on his honour
and reputation.
2.56 With respect to children, art 24 provides that:
Every child shall have, without any discrimination as to race, colour, sex,
language, religion, national or social origin, property
or birth, the right to
such measures of protection as are required by his status as a minor, on the
part of his family, society and
2.57 Another key right is the right to a ‘fair and public
hearing’ in art 14 with minimum procedural guarantees in the
criminal charges.
2.58 In the context of family violence, there are evident tensions in the way
that these articles—and the expectations they
engender—might
operate. The person accused of committing family violence is entitled to a fair
hearing (art 14); the family
itself, as a fundamental unit of society, is
entitled to protection (art 23); and the child is entitled to the expectation of
by his or her family and the state (art 24). When, for example, a
child is the subject of abuse by a family member, each of these
articles, and
their inherent expectations, may be in conflict. Similarly, where a woman is the
subject of family violence, the protection
of the family requires being open to
public scrutiny—notwithstanding the right to privacy and the protection of
the home (art
on the Elimination of Discrimination Against Women
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
Against Women
specifically targets discrimination against women. CEDAW came into force for
Australia on 27 August 1983.
2.60 CEDAW defines discrimination as any distinction, exclusion or
restriction which prevents the equal exercise or enjoyment by women
rights and fundamental freedoms ‘in the political, economic, social,
cultural, civil or any other
It supplements the
anti-discrimination provisions in the ICCPR, amongst
It has been called
‘an international bill of rights for
and described as
representing ‘a commitment by the international community to equality in
the enjoyment of human
2.61 In 1993 the ALRC was given Terms of Reference on equality before the law
as part of the Australian Government’s ‘New
National Agenda for
Women’ requiring the ALRC to consider whether laws should be changed or
new laws made to remove any unjustifiable
discrimination with a view to ensuring
women’s full equality before the law. Two reports
The ALRC noted in
particular that:
As a party to [CEDAW], Australia has undertaken to pursue ‘by all
appropriate means and without delay a policy of eliminating
discrimination
against women’.
2.62 The ALRC also noted that as a party to the ICCPR, considered below,
‘Australia must guarantee the equal protection of human
rights to men and
women without discrimination and equality before the
2.63 The ALRC concluded that a significant aspect of gender
inequality—and therefore of discrimination in contravention of
‘women’s experience and fear of
This was not a
new discovery. As noted by Young and Monahan, while academic commentators had
been writing about the dynamic of violence
in gender inequality ‘for some
The ALRC’s distinctive contribution was to raise the general public and
government awareness of the issue and to act as a mouthpiece
for the views of
women across Australia.
2.64 A further aspect of inequality highlighted by the ALRC was the impact
that violence has on women’s access to the legal
Violence directly impedes women in enforcing their legal rights through its
destructive impact on their personal confidence and because
they may fear
retaliation.
2.65 Although CEDAW does not expressly mention violence as a form of
discrimination, parties are asked to report on the protection
of women against
the incidence of all kinds of violence, ‘including sexual violence, abuses
in the family, sexual harassment
at the work place,
So, for example,
where art 16 calls for the elimination of discrimination in marriage and the
family, family violence ‘is clearly
a form of discrimination which denies
women equality’.
Declaration on the
Elimination of Violence against Women
2.66 The Declaration on the Elimination of Violence against Women was adopted
by the General Assembly of the United Nations on 20
December 1993, to complement
and strengthen CEDAW. The commencing articles of the declaration define violence
against women:
For the purposes of this Declaration, the term ‘violence against
women’ means any act of gender-based violence that results
likely to result in, physical, sexual or psychological harm or suffering to
women, including threats of such acts, coercion
or arbitrary deprivation of
liberty, whether occurring in public or in private life.
Violence against women shall be understood to encompass, but not be limited to,
the following:
(a) Physical, sexual and psychological violence occurring in the family,
including battering, sexual abuse of female children in
the household,
dowry-related violence, marital rape, female genital mutilation and other
traditional practices harmful to women,
non-spousal violence and violence
related to exploitation;
(b) Physical, sexual and psychological violence occurring within the general
community, including rape, sexual abuse, sexual harassment
and intimidation at
work, in educational institutions and elsewhere, trafficking in women and forced
prostitution;
(c) Physical, sexual and psychological violence perpetrated or condoned by the
State, wherever it occurs.
2.67 In 1999, the General Assembly designated 25 November as the
International Day for the Elimination of Violence against Women.
Convention on the
Rights of the Child
2.68 The United Nations
Convention on the Rights of the Child
has been described as
‘the most comprehensive statement of children’s rights ever drawn up
at the international
ratification by Australia on 17 December 1990, CROC has proved of significance
in ‘shaping the first wave of reforms
effected under the
Family Law Reform Act 1995
2.69 CROC sets out the full range of human rights—civil, cultural,
economic, political and social rights—pertaining to
children under 18
years of age.
CROC spells out
that children everywhere have the right:
to survival;
to develop to the fullest;
to protection from harmful influences, abuse and exploitation;
to participate fully in family, cultural and social
2.70 The four core principles of the Convention are
non-discrimination; devotion to the best interests of the child; the right to
life, survival and development; and respect for the views of the child. In a
joint 1997 report, the ALRC and the Human Rights and
Equal Opportunity
Commission stated that:
CROC recognises that children, as members of the human family, have certain
inalienable, fundamental human rights. It emphatically
endorses the proposition
that the family is the fundamental environment for the growth and well-being of
children and states that,
for the well-being of society, the family should be
afforded protection and assistance so as to fully assume its responsibilities.
At the same time, it recognises that children need special safeguards and care
where the family does not or cannot assume these
2.71 A number of CROC provisions are particularly relevant to this Inquiry.
First, ‘the best interests of the child’ is
a central principle:
In all actions concerning children, whether undertaken by public or private
social welfare institutions, courts of law, administrative
authorities or
legislative bodies, the best interests of the child shall be a primary
consideration.
2.72 Secondly, the maintenance of contact between a child and his or her
parents is affirmed, subject to the ‘best interests’
States Parties shall ensure that a child shall not be separated from his or her
parents against their will, except when competent
authorities subject to
judicial review determine, in accordance with applicable law and procedures,
that such separation is necessary
for the best interests of the child. Such
determination may be necessary in a particular case such as one involving abuse
of the child by the parents, or one where the parents are living
separately and a decision must be made as to the child’s place
2.73 Of particular note is the rider in the above provision—that
separation of a child from a parent may be in the child’s
best interests
where the child is subject to abuse or neglect by a parent. However,
notwithstanding this qualification, it is also
stated that:
States Parties shall respect the right of the child who is separated from one or
both parents to maintain personal relations and
direct contact with both parents
on a regular basis, except if it is contrary to the child’s best
2.74 The risk of violence and abuse to a child is given specific attention,
States Parties being required to
take all appropriate legislative, administrative, social and educational
measures to protect the child from all forms of physical
or mental violence,
injury or abuse, neglect or negligent treatment, maltreatment or exploitation,
including sexual abuse, while
in the care of parent(s), legal guardian(s) or any
other person who has the care of the
2.75 CROC also includes articles concerning protection from sexual
exploitation and sexual abuse;
and promoting physical and psychological recovery from, amongst other things,
any form of neglect, exploitation or
2.76 The child’s right to be heard in proceedings involving him or her
is also addressed:
States Parties shall assure to the child who is capable of forming his or her
own views the right to express those views freely in
all matters affecting the
child, the views of the child being given due weight in accordance with the age
and maturity of the child.
2.77 The right to express his or her own views may be satisfied by being
given an opportunity to be heard in any judicial or administrative
proceedings
affecting the child, either directly, or through a representative or an
appropriate body, in a manner consistent with
the procedural rules of applicable
national law.
2.78 These articles provide the base guidelines for children’s
interactions with legal processes. Some aspects of CROC, however,
further consideration—particularly in relation to the
such as art 12 dealing with the child’s right to be heard in
proceedings affecting it, either directly, or indirectly through
representative or appropriate
Family Law Reform Act 1995
, the Full Court of the
Family Court expressed the view that CROC
must be given special significance because it is an almost universally accepted
human rights instrument and thus has much greater
significance for the purposes
of domestic law than does an ordinary bilateral or multilateral treaty not
directed at such ends.
2.80 The relationship between CROC and the
Family Law Act
considered by the High Court in the context of mandatory detention of children
in immigration detention centres when proceedings
for the release of two boys
were brought under
The High Court held
that the welfare power was constrained by the constitutional head of power under
which it was enacted and, accordingly,
that the Family Court had no jurisdiction
either to order the release of the children from detention or to make general
orders concerning
the welfare of detained children.
Convention on the
Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction
2.81 The 1980
Hague Convention on Civil Aspects of International Child
(the Abduction Convention), to which Australia became a signatory
on 1 January 1988,
provide for the return of children under the age of 16 years who have been
wrongfully removed from, or retained outside,
their country of habitual
2.82 The Convention sets up a Central Authority in each country to deal with
requests for the return of children taken to or from
each country. Signatories
commit to the prompt return of children to the country in which they habitually
reside so that issues of
parental responsibility can be resolved by the courts
in that country.
2.83 The Convention was implemented in Australia through the
(Child Abduction Convention) Regulations 1986
(Cth). The Secretary of the
Attorney-General’s Department is designated as the
Commonwealth Central Authority
under the Convention with
responsibility for coordinating incoming and outgoing requests to and from
overseas Central Authorities
and liaising with the relevant state or territory
Central Authority in Australia to perform Australia’s obligations under
Convention.
2.84 Article 1 sets out the objects of the Abduction Convention:
a) to secure the prompt return of children wrongfully removed to or retained in
any Contracting State; and
b) to ensure that rights of custody and of access under the law of one
Contracting State are effectively respected in the other Contracting
2.85 There are a number of exceptions to the requirement to return the child
set out in art 13, in particular where:
a) the person, institution or other body having the care of the person of the
child was not actually exercising the custody rights
at the time of removal or
retention, or had consented to or subsequently acquiesced in the removal or
b) there is a grave risk that his or her return would expose the child to
physical or psychological harm or otherwise place the child
in an intolerable
The judicial or administrative authority may also refuse to order the return of
the child if it finds that the child objects to being
returned and has attained
an age and degree of maturity at which it is appropriate to take account of its
2.86 While these provide some qualification to the ‘prompt
return’ principle, the overall emphasis in the Abduction Convention
on ‘the best interests of the child’—language used, for
example, in CROC—but rather on the ‘rights
of custody and
access’—namely, rights of the parents. In a study on Abduction
Convention cases in Australia, Deborah
Fry remarked of this different emphasis
While the Convention is generally praised for providing hope and redress for
many parents in providing the prompt return of abducted
children, it is also
criticised for failing to adequately balance the needs and interests of
particular children against the needs
and interests of all children everywhere.
The Hague Convention does not rest upon consideration of the principle of the
interests of the child’ but rather purports to uphold the best
interests of children collectively by deterring international
abduction. It is
Utilitarian at its philosophical base, aimed at enforcing the greatest good for
the greatest number.
2.87 The Full Court of the Family Court summarised the effect of the
Abduction Convention and Regulations in
In the Marriage of Emmett and
Family Law (Child Abduction Convention) Regulations
impose upon the
court a primary obligation to promptly return children wrongfully removed or
retained. Matters coming before this
court are not to be treated as competing
claims for interim custody. Proceedings under the regulations are to be heard in
and summary way and it is only in exceptional circumstances that a
court would give consideration to refusing the application of
the Central
Authority for the return of the children.
Regulation 16
does vest in the court a
discretion to refuse to return children if certain conditions are established.
The onus of establishing
those preconditions rests upon the party resisting the
order for return of the children and that onus must necessarily be a heavy
2.88 Abduction Convention matters may sit at the intersection of
, child protection and family violence laws. For example, where there
has been violence to the mother of the child by her partner,
and the child has
witnessed the violence, how might this be considered in relation to an Abduction
Convention application for the
recovery of the child? How difficult is it for a
mother who seeks to escape violence by leaving her partner to argue that the
of the child to the violence on her ‘would expose the child to
physical or psychological harm or otherwise place the child
in an intolerable
situation’?
matter of particular relevance in this Inquiry and will be considered in Chapter
Family Law Council,
The Best Interests
of the Child? The Interaction of Public and Private Law in
Australia—Discussion Paper
The ambit of the Terms of
Reference is discussed in Ch 1.
The Best Interests of the Child? The Interaction of Public and
Private Law in Australia—Discussion Paper
(2000) provides a useful
discussion of the constitutional context of family law in Australia: ch
L Young and G Monahan,
Family Law in
(7th ed, 2009),
Constitution
s 51(xxii).
Section 109 of the
Constitution
provides that: ‘when a law of a State is
inconsistent with a law of the Commonwealth, the latter shall prevail, and the
shall, to the extent of the inconsistency, be invalid’. This
provision may operate in two ways: it may directly invalidate
state law where it
is impossible to obey both the state law and the federal law; or it may
indirectly invalidate state law where
the Australian Parliament’s
legislative intent is to ‘cover the field’ in relation to a
particular matter.
L Young and G Monahan,
Family Law in Australia
(7th ed, 2009),
Ibid, [3.7]. Dickey notes that
it would appear that members of the Constitutional Convention of
1897–1898 were averse to repeating the United States experience where the
law of divorce varies with the law of the different
states: A Dickey,
(5th ed, 2007), 13–14. Sir Garfield Barwick suggested another
reason—Queen Victoria, who proved reluctant to assent to
colonial Bills
which liberalised divorce, her approval being necessary for such Bills: G
Barwick, ‘Some Aspects of the New
Matrimonial Causes Act’
[1961] SydLawRw 1
Sydney Law Review
Young and G Monahan,
Family Law in Australia
(7th ed, 2009), [3.30] ff
discusses the various constitutional
challenges.
A referral of power to the
Commonwealth is not required from the ACT, the Northern Territory and Norfolk
Island because s 122 of
Constitution
assigns to the
Commonwealth plenary power to ‘make laws for the government’ of the
territories.
(5th ed, 2007), 40.
an attempt in 1983 to extend the categories of children covered by the
but this was held to be constitutionally invalid, necessitating the
referral of power: Ibid, 32. In
[1984] HCA 79
(1984) 156 CLR 170
it was held
that the marriage power could not extend to a child who is neither a natural
child of both the husband and wife, nor
a child adopted by them
Commonwealth Powers (Family
Law—Children) Act 1986
Commonwealth Powers (Family
Law—Children) Act 1986
Commonwealth Powers (Family
Law—Children) Act 1990
Commonwealth Powers (Family Law) Act
Commonwealth Powers (Family Law) Act 1987
Commonwealth Powers
(Family Law—Children) Act 1986
(NSW) s 3(2);
Commonwealth
Powers (Family Law—Children) Act 1986
(Vic) s 3(2);
Commonwealth Powers (Family Law—Children) Act 1990
Commonwealth Powers (Family Law) Act 1986
Commonwealth Powers (Family Law) Act 1987
(5th ed, 2007), 34.
Law Reform Act 1995
(Cth), introducing a new
The relationship
between the
Family Law Act
and the child welfare legislation of the
states and territories is considered in
Family Court Act 1975
(WA), replaced by
Family Court Act 1997
Western Australia,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Assembly, 21 October 1975, 3606
(D O’Neill—Minister for
Western Australia,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Assembly, 25 November 1997, 8534 (J
van de Klashorst—Parliamentary
Secretary).
L Young and G Monahan,
Family Law in Australia
(7th ed, 2009),
Family Law Council,
Best Interests of the Child? The Interaction of Public and Private Law in
Australia—Discussion Paper
T Altobelli,
Family Law in
Australia–Principles and Practice
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary
, House of Representatives, 22 October 1986, 2555
(L Bowen—Attorney-General),
L Young and G Monahan,
Family Law in Australia
(7th ed, 2009),
For a consideration of the
scheme see, eg, K Mason and J Crawford, ‘The Cross-Vesting Scheme’
Australian Law Journal
; C Baker, ‘Cross-Vesting of
[1987] UQLawJl 12
(1987) 14(2)
of Queensland Law Journal
; R Chisholm, ‘Cross-vesting and Family
Law: A Review of Recent Developments’
Australian Family Lawyer
L Young and G Monahan,
Family Law in Australia
(7th ed, 2009),
Explanatory Memorandum,
L Young and G Monahan,
Law in Australia
(7th ed, 2009),
Re Wakim; Ex parte
(1999) 198 CLR
Constitution
L Young and G Monahan,
Law in Australia
(7th ed, 2009),
The particular name of the
court in each jurisdiction may
Various lower courts generally
have their own legislation, eg
Local Court Act 2007
Magistrates
Court Act 1989
. See A Dickey,
2007), 110–111.
For example,
Crimes (Domestic and Personal Violence) Act 2007
The Supreme Court of the Northern
Territory still exercises original jurisdiction under the
Family Law Act
together with the Family Court of Australia: see A Dickey,
(5th ed, 2007), 108.
For example, the
NSW Children’s Court has jurisdiction to hearing protection order matters
where the defendant is less than
18 years of age:
Crimes (Domestic and
Personal Violence) Act 2007
s 91(1)(b).
South Australia and the
Northern Territory have a Youth Court and a Family Matters Court with
Cunneen, ‘Young People and Juvenile Justice’ in G Monahan and L
Young (eds),
Children and the Law in Australia
(2008) 187,
[9.11]—note that since this publication, the Chief Children’s
magistrate in NSW is a District Court Judge,
as reflected in the text
Federal Magistrates Act
Magistrates Court of Australia,
Annual Report 2007–08
Family Law Council,
Responses to Family Violence in the Family Law System: An Advice on the
Intersection of Family Violence and Family Law Issues
(2009), 49; drawing
upon L Moloney and others,
Allegations of Family Violence and Child Abuse in
Family Law Children’s Proceedings: A Pre-reform Exploratory Study
(2007) Australian Institute of Family
T Altobelli,
Family Law in
Australia–Principles and Practice
Family Law Council,
Interests of the Child? The Interaction of Public and Private Law in
Australia—Discussion Paper
Family Law Council,
Law and Child Protection—Final Report
L Young and G Monahan,
Law in Australia
(7th ed, 2009),
Family Law Council,
Law and Child Protection—Final Report
L Moloney and others,
Allegations of Family Violence and Child Abuse in Family Law Children’s
Proceedings: A Pre-reform Exploratory Study
(2007) Australian Institute of
Family Studies, [7.3.2].
The Best Interests of the Child? The Interaction of Public and
Private Law in Australia—Discussion Paper
Family Law Act 1975
See the discussion of
in Ch 14 and in Family Law Council,
Best Interests of the Child? The Interaction of Public and Private Law in
Australia—Discussion Paper
[2.21]–[2.22].
The Best Interests of the Child? The Interaction of Public and
Private Law in Australia—Discussion Paper
Children and Young Persons
(Care and Protection) Act 1998
Children, Youth and Families Act
Child Protection Act 1999
Protection Act 1993
Children, Young Persons and their Families Act
Children and Young People Act 2008
Protection of Children Act 2007
Family Law Council,
Interests of the Child? The Interaction of Public and Private Law in
Australia—Discussion Paper
Family Law Council,
Responses to Family Violence in the Family Law System: An Advice on the
Intersection of Family Violence and Family Law Issues
Family Law Council,
Interests of the Child? The Interaction of Public and Private Law in
Australia—Discussion Paper
Family Law Council,
Responses to Family Violence in the Family Law System: An Advice on the
Intersection of Family Violence and Family Law Issues
Australian Law Reform
Commission Act 1996
Minister for Immigration and
Ethnic Affairs v Teoh
[1995] HCA 20
(1995) 183 CLR 273
Universal Declaration of Human
, 10 December 1948, (entered into force generally on 10 December
B Opeskin and D Rothwell (eds),
International Law and Australian Federalism
Australian Law Reform Commission
Reflecting art 16 of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights
, 10 December 1948, (entered into
force generally on 10 December
International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights
, 16 December 1966,
[1980] ATS 23
, (entered into
force generally on 23 March 1976), art 17(1). This article reflects art 12 of
Ibid, art 14. This article
reflects art 10 of the
Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Discrimination against Women
, 18 December 1979,
, (entered into force generally on 3 September
Ibid; and see, eg, E Evatt,
‘Eliminating Discrimination Against Women: The Impact of the UN
Convention’
[1991] MelbULawRw 26
Melbourne University Law Review
2009 Australia became a party to the CEDAW Optional Protocol, which allows
individuals to bring a complaint directly to
the UN CEDAW Committee, after all
remedies domestically have been
Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women
, 18 December 1979,
[1983] ATS 9
, (entered into force generally on 3 September 1981), Arts
International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights
, 16 December 1966,
[1980] ATS 23
, (entered into
force generally on 23 March 1976), art 2.1. See also E Evatt, ‘Eliminating
Discrimination Against Women: The
Impact of the UN Convention’
[1991] MelbULawRw 26
Melbourne University Law Review
E Evatt, ‘Eliminating
Discrimination Against Women: The Impact of the UN Convention’
[1991] MelbULawRw 26
Melbourne University Law Review
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Equality Before the Law: Justice for Women
, ALRC 69 (1994);
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Equality Before the Law: Justice for Women
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Equality Before the Law: Justice for Women
L Young and G Monahan,
Family Law in Australia
(7th ed, 2009), [16.2], drawing attention to
R Graycar and J Morgan,
The Hidden Gender of Law
(2nd ed, 2002), ch
10 and the literature cited by them
L Young and G Monahan,
Law in Australia
(7th ed, 2009),
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Equality Before the Law: Justice for Women
(1994), [9.6].
‘Eliminating Discrimination Against Women: The Impact of the UN
Convention’
[1991] MelbULawRw 26
Melbourne University Law Review
21 citing Rec 12, 8th session
Convention on the Rights of the
, 20 November 1989,
[1991] ATS 4
, (entered into force generally on 2
September 1990).
L Young and G Monahan,
Family Law in Australia
(7th ed, 2009),
Convention on the
Rights of the Child—Introduction
<www.unicef.org/crc/index_30160.
html> at 18 January 2010.
Law Reform Commission and Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission,
and Heard: Priority for Children in the Legal Process
, ALRC 84 (1997),
Convention on the Rights of
, 20 November 1989,
[1991] ATS 4
, (entered into force generally on
2 September 1990), art 3(1).
Ibid, art 19(1). ‘Such
protective measures should, as appropriate, include effective procedures for the
establishment of social
programmes to provide necessary support for the child
and for those who have the care of the child, as well as for other forms of
prevention and for identification, reporting, referral, investigation, treatment
and follow-up instances of child maltreatment described
heretofore, and, as
appropriate, for judicial involvement’: art
L Young and G Monahan,
Family Law in Australia
(7th ed, 2009),
Family Law Reform
(1997) 21 Fam LR 676,
Minister for Immigration
and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs v B
[2004] HCA 20
(2004) 219 CLR
Convention on the Civil
Aspects of International Child Abduction
[1987] ATS 2
, (entered into force
generally on 1 December
Convention on the
Rights of the Child—Introduction
<www.unicef.org/crc/index_30160.
html> at 18 January 2010, arts 3,
Attorney-General’s
Department,
International Child Abduction
<www.ag.gov.au/www/
agd/agd.nsf/Page/Families_Children_Internationalchildabduction> at 16 March
‘Children’s Voices in International Hague Convention Child Abduction
Cases—An Australian Experience’
(Paper presented at 5th World
Congress on Family Law and Human Rights, Halifax, Canada, August 2009),
In the Marriage of Emmett and
(1995) 20 Fam LR 380
Convention on the Civil
Aspects of International Child Abduction
[1987] ATS 2
, (entered into force
generally on 1 December 1983), art 13(b).
ALRC CP1 Family Violence � Improving Legal Frameworks
3. Purposes of Laws Relevant to
Family Violence
Introduction
Family violence legislation
Purpose of family violence legislation
Achievement of objects
Guiding principles
Purpose of family violence protection orders
Historical policy underlying the
Family Law Act
Policy behind the
Family Law Act
as amended since inception
Criminal law
Retribution
Rehabilitation
Incapacitation
Denunciation
Restoration
Victims’ compensation
Victims’ compensation schemes
Restitution orders
Compensation for tort claims
Migration legislation
3. Purposes of Laws Relevant to
Family Violence
[back to top]
Introduction
3.1 The Commissions have been asked to consider how family violence laws
interact in practice with the criminal laws of the states,
territories and the
Commonwealth, and with the
Family Law Act
(Cth). The interactions
cross geographical jurisdictions, various areas of substantive law—namely
family law, family violence
law, criminal law and criminal procedure—and
span criminal and civil jurisdictions, and private and public law. This Part of
the Consultation Paper will consider this particular aspect of the
Commissions’ Terms of Reference.
3.2 This chapter discusses
the underlying policy justifications for various laws relevant to family
violence. These laws include those
specifically referred to in the Terms of
Reference—namely family violence laws, family law and the criminal
law—as well
as victims’ compensation schemes and migration law.
Victims’ compensation schemes are addressed because of their particular
interaction with the criminal law, and also because victims’ compensation
is inextricably connected to an assessment of how
legal frameworks can be
improved to assist victims of family violence to navigate various jurisdictions.
While, as noted in Chapter
1, there are a range of federal laws which intersect
with family violence laws and other laws the subject of the Terms of Reference,
Migration Regulations 1994
(Cth) are addressed because their
operation impacts on a group of women who are particularly vulnerable to family
violence, due to
the threat of deportation, as highlighted by the National
Council to Reduce Violence Against Women and their
3.3 An analysis of these policy considerations reveals that, while policy
justifications differ, in some cases different statutory
regimes share common
aims. This discussion is a necessary prelude to the consideration of the
desirability of pursuing a common interpretative
framework of what constitutes
family violence across the different legislative schemes under
consideration—an issue which is
canvassed in Chapter 4. A key theme
explored in this Part of the Consultation Paper is balancing the need for
synergies between statutory
definitions of family violence and the underlying
purposes of various civil and criminal legislative schemes relevant to family
with the benefits that could flow from the adoption of a common
interpretative framework.
3.4 A discussion of the underlying policy objectives of the various
legislative schemes also serves as a general background to the
discussion of
specific interaction issues between family violence laws and the criminal law,
and between family violence laws and
Family Law Act
, which are
considered in the following chapters in this
Chapters 5 to 7 discuss
interaction issues between family violence laws and criminal procedures and
criminal laws, as well as the
recognition of family violence in the criminal
law. Chapters 8 and 9 discuss interaction issues between family violence laws
Family Law Act
, including various orders under the
, such as parenting orders, property orders and injunctive relief.
Chapter 10 discusses potential avenues of reform to improve the
interaction of
family violence laws and the
Family Law Act
—namely ways to improve
evidence and information-sharing. Chapter 11 discusses the issue of whether
certain alternative processes—namely
family dispute resolution and
restorative justice—are
appropriate.
3.5 The organisation of the chapters in this Part—addressing issues of
interaction between specified legislative schemes—has
been decided upon
for convenience in writing, and to address the specific interactions of legal
frameworks referred to in the Terms
of Reference. As stated in Chapter 1, the
Commissions recognise that, in practice, issues may not present themselves in
such a siloed
manner. Matters may involve interactions between multiple legal
frameworks, and there may be different permutations of interactions
legal frameworks—such as interactions between family violence and child
protection laws.
[back to top]
violence legislation
3.6 The discussion below addresses the purpose and objects of family violence
legislation, as well as the specific purpose of family
violence protection
Purpose of family
violence legislation
3.7 Family violence legislation was enacted in most
states and territories in the 1980s and 1990s as a response to growing
recognition
that existing legal mechanisms failed to protect
victims—predominantly women—from family violence. Feminist critiques
in the 1970s and 1980s, for example, highlighted the inability of the criminal
justice system to protect women from future violence,
as well as systemic
institutional failure to tackle family
3.8 Most family violence acts contain objects clauses which set out their
purposes—though the degree of articulation and specificity
Some family violence acts
also contain preambles or articulate specific principles which assist in
identifying the policy underpinning
the legislative scheme. The objects and
principles set out in family violence legislation—and identified in second
speeches—are addressed in turn below.
3.9 Objects that are expressly stipulated in family violence
legislation—in varying language—include:
ensuring, facilitating or maximising the safety and protection of
persons, including children, who fear or experience family violence
exposed to it;
reducing or preventing family violence and the exposure of children
to the effects of family violence;
ensuring that people who use family violence accept responsibility
for their conduct,
or promoting the
accountability of those who use family violence for their
enacting provisions that are consistent with certain principles
underlying the
Declaration on the Elimination of Violence against Women
and with the United Nations
Convention on the Rights of the
providing special police powers of arrest, detention and search in
connection with issuing, serving and enforcing protection
further protecting persons suffering or witnessing family violence
in the giving of evidence and the protection of
3.10 The Tasmanian legislation cites in its objects clause ‘the
safety, psychological well-being and interests of people affected
violence’ as paramount considerations in the administration of the
3.11 The family violence legislation of Western Australia does not have an
objects clause setting out the purposes of the Act. It
does, however, set out
certain matters to be considered by the court in considering whether to make a
protection order, from which
certain objects can be
As stated in the Second
Reading Speech:
The first three [matters in s 12] are the primary considerations: that is,
to protect the applicant from personal violence; secondly
to prevent behaviour
that could reasonably be expected to cause fear that the applicant will suffer
personal violence … the
third prime consideration is … the welfare
of children.
Protection as the primary concern
3.12 Significantly, some legislation and second reading speeches state an
intention to prioritise the protection of victims of family
violence as the main
objective. For example, the Queensland family violence legislation provides that
the main purpose of the Act
is to provide safety and protection for victims of
family violence, and it does not nominate any additional
In the Second Reading
Speech of the Northern Territory family violence legislation, the
Attorney-General stated that:
The primary objective of the bill is to ensure the safety of all people,
including children, who experience domestic and family violence,
and the second
objective, to ensure that those who commit violence in their relationships must
accept responsibility for their
3.13 The Second Reading Speech of the
Domestic Violence and Protection
Orders Bill 2008
(ACT) also emphasised the object of
protection:
The purpose of this act is to provide enforceable court orders to protect people
who experience domestic violence and other people
who have good reason to fear
… People who experience violence require and deserve the assistance of our
justice system to aid their protection. …
It is well recognised from the significant body of research that has been
undertaken in this field that many people who are subjected
to this form of
violence never report the offence to police. Recognising this, it is essential
that the protection afforded to those
in need under this act be readily
available and accessible.
3.14 Similarly, the Second Reading Speech of the
Intervention Orders
(Prevention of Abuse) Bill 2009
(SA) stresses the priority of
protection:
In enacting these reforms, Parliament will be sending a clear message that it
will not tolerate the use of violence to control or
intimidate another person,
particularly in a domestic setting; that it recognises and abhors the lasting
psychological and emotional
damage to children from exposure to such violence;
that it expects perpetrators to accept full responsibility for their violent
and that the paramount consideration is always the protection and
future safety of the victims of abuse and the children who are exposed
Other objectives revealed in second reading
3.15 A number of other objectives are also revealed in second reading
speeches. For example, in the Second Reading Speech of the Northern
legislation, the Attorney-General stated that:
Another central objective of the legislation is to ensure minimal disruption to
the lives of families affected by violence. There
will be a new presumption when
making orders in favour of an applicant with children in their care remaining in
the family home.
3.16 In the Second Reading Speech of the
Intervention Orders (Prevention of
Abuse) Bill 2009
(SA) the Attorney-General stated that the
legislation
will also be offering perpetrators of domestic or personal abuse the means to
deal with associated problems of substance abuse, mental
health, problem
gambling and anger control, in the expectation that they will then be able to
reflect upon and appreciate the effects
of their abusive behaviour on others,
take responsibility for it and learn to treat other people, particularly those
close to them,
with respect and
3.17 In the Second Reading Speech of the
Family Violence Protection Bill
(Vic) Ms Marshall stated that:
This bill seeks to address two main issues: the attitude that family violence is
a domestic matter and therefore not a crime worthy
of response; and the need to
ensure that the justice system itself does not inadvertently compound the
devastating effects of family
Overlap with family law policy
3.18 The policy of giving consideration to the best interests of the child
is consistent with the approach taken in family law in
the context of parenting
Importantly, the
policy behind some aspects of family violence legislation is also to give
paramount consideration to the best interests
of the child. This is specifically
referred to in the Second Reading Speech of the
Crimes (Domestic and Personal
Violence) Bill 2007
(NSW) in a discussion of the provisions requiring the
inclusion of children in protection
It is also referred to
in the Second Reading Speech of the
Domestic and Family Violence Bill 2007
in the context of reforms which aim to ensure that children are protected from
family violence and that their long-term development
is not damaged by the
experience of, or exposure to, family violence. It is stated that such reforms
are ‘consistent with the
principle of the best interests of the child
contained in the
Convention on the Rights of the
3.19 Another—perhaps less obvious—area of overlap between the
policy objectives in family violence legislation and family
law is revealed in
the Second Reading Speech of the Domestic Violence (Family Protection) Bill 1989
(Qld), in which the Minister
for Family Services emphasised the importance of
the role of family in society, and the institution of
No one should doubt that the family is the natural and fundamental unit in our
society … The widest possible protection and
assistance needs to be given
to the family unit and the institution of marriage …
The Queensland Government is committed to doing all in its power to promote the
family unit and strengthen and support its role.
Many victims of domestic violence have indicated that they do not wish to end
their marriages. They just want the violence to stop.
The proposed legislation
may allow this to occur in those cases without the disintegration of the family
Achievement of
3.20 Most family violence legislation states the manner in which they intend
to achieve their specific objects. These include statements
the following:
the making of protection orders by the court—or police where
they are empowered to do so—to protect people from family
violence or
further family violence,
encourage those committing family violence to change their
the registration of orders made in other
the enforcement of protection
an effective and accessible system of family violence protection
orders—including those that are issued by
—and access to
courts that is as safe, speedy, inexpensive and simple as is consistent with
the creation of offences for the contravention of family violence
the issuing of associated orders relating to problem gambling and
tenancy agreements;
special arrangements for witnesses in family violence protection
proceedings;
limitations on publishing reports about proceedings or orders under
family violence legislation.
3.21 The family violence legislation in NSW and Victoria sets out guiding
principles and features about family violence, which provide
a contextual
framework for the legislative response. The NSW legislation does so in its
objects clause; and the Victorian legislation
does so in its preamble. The
family violence legislation of South Australia also contains principles which
must be taken into account
in determining both whether it is appropriate to
issue a protection order and the terms of such
In particular, the family
violence legislation of those states highlights the following principles and
features about family violence:
it is unacceptable behaviour in all its
and in any community or
it is a fundamental violation of human
that in responding to it the justice system should treat the views
of victims of family violence with
it is predominantly committed by men against women and
it affects the entire
and occurs in all
sectors of the community;
it extends beyond physical
it may involve the overt or subtle exploitation of power imbalances
and may consist of patterns of abuse over many
or of isolated
it occurs in traditional and non-traditional
children who are exposed to family violence—as victims or
witnesses—are particularly vulnerable, and can suffer detrimental
to their current and future physical, psychological and emotional
well-being;
it is best addressed through a coordinated legal and social response
of assistance and prevention.
3.22 The family violence legislation of the ACT states that family
violence is ‘a particular form of interpersonal violence
that needs a
greater level of
protection’.
Purpose of family
violence protection orders
3.23 The purpose of family violence protection orders is to protect victims
violence—typically by the imposition of conditions
regulating the behaviour and movements of persons who have committed family
violence. The focus on restraining future behaviour is similar to the granting
of injunctive relief. The emphasis is on the immediate
protection of victims,
often as a response to a crisis situation. The need to provide immediate
protection is facilitated by legislative
provisions for emergency orders or
interim orders.
3.24 These objectives are evidenced in second reading speeches, as well as in
family violence legislation. For example, the Second
Reading Speech of the
Restraining Orders Bill 1997 (WA) states that protection orders ‘play a
central role in the legal response
to domestic violence by affording what is
intended to be ready access to legal protection for
3.25 The family violence legislation of the ACT provides that in deciding an
application for a protection order, the paramount consideration
need to ensure that the aggrieved person, and any child at risk of exposure to
domestic violence, is protected from
3.26 The ACT legislation, however, also provides that if a protection order
is to be made it is one that must be the
least restrictive of the personal rights and liberties of the respondent as
possible that still achieves the objects of the Act and
gives effect to [the
paramount consideration to ensure
protection].
3.27 In the Second Reading Speech of the South Australian legislation, the
Attorney‑General emphasised the policy underlying
new police powers to
issue interim protection orders:
This new police power, combined with improved powers to hold a defendant pending
preparation and service of process and while making
arrangements for the
security of the victim, is designed to give victims and their children immediate
protection from abuse without
first needing to go to court first, in
circumstances where the alleged perpetrator can be served on the spot and is
therefore instantly
bound by the
[back to top]
Family Law Act
sets out the rights, duties, powers and
liabilities between spouses and children, and provides for enforcement of those
liabilities and the dissolution of
The discussion below
canvasses the historical policy behind the original
Family Law Act
well as the policy underlying the Act as amended since inception.
Historical policy
underlying the
Family Law Act
3.29 There are a number of policy strands underpinning the
Family Law Act
These include a philosophy of no fault; the best interests of the child;
preserving the institution of marriage; promoting reconciliation;
and protecting
the notion of the family.
3.30 No fault philosophy
One of the main
ideological foundations for the introduction of the
Family Law Act
the removal of the previous requirement of fault for divorce and a move towards
a ‘no-fault’ system for the dissolution
As consultation
conducted by the Senate Standing Committee on Constitutional and Legal Affairs
in the early 1970s revealed, the community
considered that the previous
provisions were costly and protracted, and also involved indignity and
humiliation to the parties because
of the court’s inquiry into the
breakdown of marriage.
Consequently, all inquiries as to fault were removed from the legislation.
3.31 The original
Family Law Act
did not expressly mention family
violence, or the need to protect women and children from harm. In the Second
Reading Speech of the
Family Law Bill 1973 (Cth), the then Attorney-General,
Lionel Murphy, said:
I have given a great deal of thought to whether there should be another ground
to meet the cases such as where the husband repeatedly
comes home drunk and
beats up his wife and terrifies the children, if not beating them as well. The
marriage may become intolerable
for the wife, and yet she cannot physically
separate from her husband because there is nowhere she can go ... however [an
intolerable
conduct] ground would of necessity contain an element of fault, and
there would have to be an inquiry to satisfy the court that the
respondent’s conduct was intolerable. This is what we are trying to
3.32 In addition, it appears that the government considered that there would
be no need for an ‘intolerable conduct’ ground
to address family
violence because ‘the petitioner will be able to obtain the relief she
wants in other ways’ through
an application for an
injunction.
The conduct that
could potentially form the basis for an injunction was said to include molesting
or ‘using insulting, indecent
or humiliating language’ to or in
front of the victim.
3.33 Whilst the removal of fault considerations related to the grounds for
dissolution of marriage, this ideology influenced other
provisions of the Act,
the reasoning of the Family Court of Australia in its early days, and its
reluctance to entertain an evaluation
of conduct during marriage. The Family
Court, at its outset, was therefore not conceptually set up as a court that
would deal with
issues of family violence.
3.34 Interests of the children
From the beginning, the
importance of the interests of children has been evident in the
In the Second Reading
Speech of the Family Law Bill the then Attorney-General stated that:
In custody matters the court is required by the Bill—as it is by the
present Act—to regard the interests of the children
as the paramount
consideration.
3.35 The original
Family Law Act
contained a provision that in
custodial proceedings, the court was to regard the welfare of the child as the
paramount consideration.
outlined below, this policy has since evolved to one that advocates a
consideration of the ‘best interests’ of children.
3.36 In addition, one of the principles that the Family Court has had to take
into account since the inception of the Act is ‘the
need to protect the
rights of children and to promote their
3.37 Preserving the institution of marriage
principle that courts exercising family law jurisdiction
have been required to consider in decision-making since the inception of
is ‘the need to preserve and protect the institution of marriage as the
union of a man and a woman to the exclusion
of all others voluntarily entered
into for life’.
3.38 As stated by Dr
Anthony Dickey:
Family Law Act
has a variety of functions, many of which are designed
to support marriage and family life rather than put an end to
3.39 After a consideration of Canadian and United Kingdom divorce
legislation, the then Attorney-General Murphy stated in the Second
Speech of the Family Law Bill that:
whilst none of these laws was an entirely suitable precedent to be followed
here, I am in agreement with the two criteria adopted
by the English Law
Commission for a good divorce law: that it should buttress, rather than
undermine, the stability of marriage and,
when a marriage has irretrievably
broken down, it should enable the empty legal shell to be destroyed with the
maximum fairness and
the minimum bitterness, distress and
humiliation.
3.40 The policy of preserving the marital relationship presents some
conceptual difficulties when the court is dealing with an issue
such as family
3.41 Reconciliation
Closely connected to the goal of
preserving the marital relationship is the aim of encouraging parties to
reconcile. In the Second
Reading Speech of the Family Law Bill, then
Attorney–General Murphy stated that ‘the Bill recognises the
desirability
of reconciliation being kept in mind at all stages until the
marriage is dissolved’
decided against a compulsory reconciliation conference because it would be
‘unacceptable to the Australian
commencement of the
Family Law Act
courts exercising family law
assisting parties to a marriage
to consider reconciliation or the improvement of
their relationship to each other and to their
3.42 Murphy said that the
Family Law Act
would adopt ways for
‘helping persons for whom reconciliation is not possible to resolve their
differences with the minimum
bitterness and
hostility’.
3.43 Protection of the notion of family
fundamental rights codified in the
International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights
is that ‘the family is the natural and fundamental
group unit of society and is entitled to protection by society and the
It was noted in
the Second Reading Speech of the Family Law Bill that this statement underlies
the provisions of the
Section 43 of the
Act provides that one of the overarching principles to be applied by the courts
in their deliberations is
the need to give the widest possible protection and assistance to the family as
the natural and fundamental group unit of society,
particularly while it is
responsible for the care and education of dependent
3.44 While the term ‘family’ is seldom used explicitly in
Australian law, it is apparent that the notion of the nuclear
family—comprising a mother, father and their children—still
underlies the
This focus on the
nuclear family may be, in part, due to the heads of Commonwealth legislative
power under the
Constitution
in relation to marriage; divorce and
matrimonial causes; and in relation thereto, parental rights, custody and
guardianship of infants.
However, a growing number of families do not fit that pattern—including
within the context of Indigenous families and same-sex
3.45 The public/private divide
has some ideological foundations in the well established principle of
non-intervention in the private sphere of family life. In the
Second Reading of
the Family Law Bill the then Attorney-General Murphy stated:
It does not seem right to me that divorce itself should be an occasion for
judicial intrusion. It may be different in custody, maintenance
and property
disputes, but even in those the parties should be encouraged to resolve their
differences themselves.
3.46 The principle of non-intrusion into family life has its origins as far
back as ancient Greek philosophy and the liberal philosophers
developed the
concept of a ‘private sphere’ in the seventeenth
Family law disputes are
‘private’ in the sense that they are disputes between two parties,
and the state generally has
no role in these disputes—apart from enacting
the legislation that establishes the framework pursuant to which the disputes
are to be resolved.
Policy behind the
Family Law Act
as amended since inception
3.47 Despite a changing social context, many of the historical policies
underpinning the
Family Law Act
still influence how it is applied. The
principles in s 43 of the Act— noted above—still apply. In
addition, a new principle
was introduced by the
Family Law Reform Act
(Cth) requiring consideration of the need to ensure safety from family
reflecting the
influence of the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
Against Women
Declaration on the Elimination of Violence against
Family Law Act
does not have an objects clause specifying its
overarching objects. Instead, provisions set out specific objects and principles
relation to: obligations to inform people about family services based outside
the courts and about the court’s processes and
the court’s
powers in relation to family services both in and outside of
injunctions;
and superannuation
3.49 Of particular importance is the objects and principles provision in
relation to children.
paramount principle in children’s matters is that of the best
interests of the child.
order to ensure this, the following objects were introduced in 2006:
(a) ensuring that children have the benefit of both parents having a
meaningful involvement in their lives; and
(b) protecting children from physical or psychological harm or being
subjected to, or exposed to abuse, neglect or family
3.50 Importantly, the objects provision stresses ‘meaningful’
relationships, suggesting that the quality of time parents
spend with their
children is a significant
3.51 The primary considerations listed in
reflect these
In determining what is
in a child’s best interests the court must have regard to the following
primary considerations:
(a) the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both
of the child’s parents; and
(b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm or
from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or
3.52 These objects reflect the increased emphasis since 1996 on protecting
families from violence and the move towards shared parenting
in 2006. The shared
parenting amendments were
following the 2003
Every Picture Tells A Story
Inquiry and the Report from the House of
Representatives Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional
3.53 The 2006 reforms sought to reflect the changing patterns of parenting,
the transition of traditional roles and the fragmentation
structures.
The amendments were
supported by research from psychologists indicating that some children could
benefit from a meaningful relationship
with both parents.
3.54 There has been considerable controversy and debate over the issue of
shared parenting. As noted in Chapter 1, in 2009, the Australian
Institute of
Family Studies completed an evaluation of the reforms introduced by the
Family Law Amendment (Shared Parental Responsibility) Act 2006
3.55 Another significant change to principles introduced by the 2006 reforms
was recognition of the importance of cultural
and addressing what
this means for Indigenous children. For example,
provides that the right of an ‘Aboriginal or Torres Strait
Islander’ child to enjoy culture includes the right to maintain
with that culture and to have the support and opportunity to explore and develop
a positive appreciation of that culture.
[back to top]
3.56 Central to the concept of criminality are the notion of individual
culpability and the criminal intention for one’s
Criminal law is
‘public’ in the sense that the state has a clear role to play in the
investigation and prosecution of
offences. It has been said that the criminal
law is designed to maintain the social order and to stipulate the fundamental
requirements
for a person’s treatment of
However, it is
difficult to identify a single underlying philosophy of the criminal law. As
some criminal law academics have contended:
What we choose to call criminal law in fact comprises a number of different
practices with a variety of rationales rather than a
single principled response
to diverse social behaviour. We have criminal
rather than criminal
3.57 Professor Andrew Ashworth has described the construction of the criminal
law as ‘unprincipled and
that criminal law is
not the product of any principled inquiry or consistent application of certain
criteria, but largely dependent on the fortunes of
successive governments, on
campaigns in the mass media, on the activities of various pressure groups, and
3.58 Nonetheless, the following discussion describes some functions of the
criminal law, particularly in the context of sentencing.
Chapter 5, which
contains an introductory discussion of the interaction of family violence
legislation and the criminal law, also
discusses the policy basis of a specific
aspect of criminal procedure, namely bail.
3.59 Judicial pronouncements and legislative provisions have emphasised the
protective role of the criminal law, particularly in seeking
to protect innocent
members of the community who are unable to protect
themselves.
Australian sentencing legislation, for example, states that primary objectives
of the criminal law include to protect the
safety of the
and, in particular,
children from sexual predators by ensuring that in any sentence for an offence
involving sexual exploitation
of a child, paramount consideration is given to
the need for deterrence.
3.60 Punishment for past criminal conduct is an essential component of any
criminal justice system. There is a significant amount
of academic literature on
the underlying justification for punishment, largely dominated by two theories.
The utilitarian theory
of punishment justifies punishment on the basis that its
benefits outweigh its detrimental effects. Proponents of this theory consider
that punishment has the potential to reduce
On the other hand, the
retributive theory of punishment justifies punishment as an appropriate moral
response to the voluntary commission
of an offence, regardless of its
3.61 To the extent that the criminal justice system integrates and considers
restoration and rehabilitation—either at the sentencing
stage or as a
diversionary practice—the orientation is forward-looking, with an emphasis
on prevention of further offending
via treatment and healing.
3.62 Understanding the various purposes of sentencing is integral to a
consideration of the policy basis of criminal
When a person is
sentenced for a family violence offence or for a breach of a protection order
that sentence will be imposed in furtherance
of specific objects.
3.63 Many state and territory sentencing acts expressly set out the purposes
of sentencing.
The commonly
cited purposes of sentencing are retribution, deterrence, rehabilitation,
incapacitation, denunciation, and in more
recent times, restoration. In The
sentencing acts of NSW and the ACT also specify that a purpose of sentencing is
to make the offender
accountable for his or her
3.64 The main purposes of sentencing are considered below. The purposes of
sentencing may sometimes conflict but some purposes, such
as retribution and
deterrence, can be pursued simultaneously.
Retribution
3.65 Retribution—often
referred to as ‘punishment’ in legislation and case law—is
derived from the retributive
theory of punishment. It is the oldest theory of
punishment based on concepts of vengeance and
responsibility.
advocated in the ‘eye for eye’ principle in the Book of Leviticus in
the Old Testament.
3.66 Proponents of the
retribution theory disagree about why offenders deserve to be punished. Some
argue that it is to eliminate
the unfair advantage the offender gained over
other law abiding citizens by committing the offence; while others say that it
satisfy a debt to
Those who advocate
for ‘just deserts’ consider that offenders deserve to be punished
but that the punishment should be
proportionate to the gravity of the
3.67 A number of state and
territory sentencing acts set out retribution as a sentencing purpose in varying
to ensure that the offender is adequately punished for the
to punish the offender to an extent or in a way that is just in all
the circumstances;
to ensure that the offender is adequately punished for the offence
in a way that is just and
appropriate.
3.68 Deterrence is derived from the utilitarian theory of
punishment.
widespread support for the proposition that the mere existence of a criminal
justice system has the effect of deterring
persons from committing criminal
This systemic
effect is commonly referred to as ‘absolute deterrence’. Other forms
of deterrence arise specifically in
the context of sentencing, and describe the
deterrent effect of the sentence both on the future behaviour of other people
the offender. These types of deterrence are known respectively as general
deterrence and specific deterrence.
General deterrence
3.69 General deterrence assumes that offenders are rational and will
therefore refrain from engaging in criminal conduct if the consequences
actions are perceived to be sufficiently harsh. The assumption that offenders
are rational—when some do not in fact
undertake a rational analysis of
their actions prior to committing an offence—is one basis upon which the
effectiveness of
general deterrence has been challenged.
3.70 In its 1988 report
, the ALRC objected to general
deterrence on the basis that it was unfair to punish one person by reference to
the hypothetical crime
However, in its
Same Time Same Crime: Sentencing of Federal Offenders
agreed that general deterrence is an established and legitimate purpose of
sentencing, having regard to judicial pronouncements
on the importance of
general deterrence, and the purposes of sentencing articulated in other
3.71 A number of state and territory sentencing acts set out general
deterrence as a purpose of sentencing. This is usually done in
language to the
effect that a purpose of sentencing is to prevent crime by deterring or
discouraging other persons from committing
the same or similar
Australian sentencing legislation specifies the deterrent effect any sentence
under consideration may have on other persons
as a matter
that a court is
to have regard in determining sentence, to the extent that it is relevant and
known to the court.
3.72 The importance placed upon general deterrence in sentencing for family
violence offences will depend on the circumstances of
particular cases. For
example, in
R v Collins: Ex parte Attorney-General
, the Crown appealed
against the inadequacy of sentence imposed on a 17 year old father for causing
grievous bodily harm to his three
and half month old
In dismissing the
appeal, the court made the following observations about general deterrence:
So far as general deterrence is concerned, this crime was not one of calculation
but a spur of the moment explosion of anger and
frustration. It is important
here to keep steadily in mind that the respondent was little more than a child
himself at the time of
the offence. How the respondent came to find himself at
the age of 17 years in the position of father to a three and half month old
without the assistance of adult supervision and care was not satisfactorily
explained. ... The social structure which should
have been in place to prevent
the appalling situation in which the care of the child was left to the
respondent and the child’s
16 year old mother were, lamentably, absent.
In relation to general deterrence, I consider that the suggestion that juvenile
fathers, similarly situated to the respondent, will
be deterred by reflecting
upon a custodial element in the sentence imposed on the respondent when they are
minded to act violently
towards an infant in their care out of tiredness,
frustration and personal inadequacy is not so compelling as to persuade me that
this consideration affords a ‘reason of substance’ to conclude that
this Court should impose a sentence which includes
a period of
3.73 Officers of the ALRC observed that in a case of family violence at
Burwood Local Court, Sydney, general deterrence was said not
to be a factor in
sentencing because the family violence was said to be at the ‘lower
end’ of the scale of seriousness
and it was unlikely that the offender
would re-offend.
Specific deterrence
3.74 Specific deterrence seeks to prevent offenders from engaging in further
criminal conduct by demonstrating to them the adverse
consequences of their
offending. Specific deterrence may be afforded greater emphasis when sentencing
a repeat offender because there
is an assumption that the previous sentence was
ineffective in its deterrent
Specific deterrence
may not be as significant in circumstances where an offender is considered
unlikely to reoffend, such as where
an offender has demonstrated significant
3.75 A number of state and territory sentencing acts set out specific
deterrence as a sentencing purpose, usually in language to the
effect that a
purpose of sentencing is to prevent crime by deterring or discouraging the
offender from committing the same or similar
The South Australian
sentencing legislation specifies the deterrent effect any sentence under
consideration may have on the defendant
as a matter
that the court must
have regard to in determining sentence, to the extent that it is relevant and
Rehabilitation
3.76 Rehabilitation is derived from the utilitarian theory of
punishment.
Susette Talarico
While retribution, deterrence and incapacitation are based on assumptions of
free will, rationality and simple confinement, rehabilitation
looks to the
offender in a rather innovative and distinctly contemporary perspective.
Assuming that criminal behaviour can be explained
and predicted, rehabilitation
focuses on a treatment approach to crime
3.77 Rehabilitation looks to identify and address the underlying causes of
criminal conduct, by changing an offender’s personality,
habits, beliefs, outlooks or skills to stop them from
re-offending.
3.78 A number of state and territory sentencing acts set out rehabilitation
as a purpose of sentencing in the following terms:
to promote the rehabilitation of the
to establish conditions within which it is considered by the court
that the rehabilitation of the offender may be
facilitated.
3.79 The Tasmanian sentencing legislation states that a purpose of
the Act—as opposed to a purpose of sentencing—is to
crime and promote respect for the law by allowing courts to impose sentences
aimed at the rehabilitation of
Australian sentencing legislation specifies the rehabilitation of the offender
as a matter that the court must have regard
to in determining sentence, to the
extent that it is relevant and known to the
3.80 In sentencing for family violence offenders, courts have remarked on the
offenders’ prospects of
rehabilitation,
suspended sentences on the basis that offenders will—among other
things—undergo
Incapacitation
3.81 Incapacitation aims to restrain an offender in order to render him or
her incapable of
re-offending.
Imprisonment is
one form of incapacitation. Other sentencing options that curtail an
offender’s liberty—such as the use
of electronic surveillance to
track an offender’s movements—are also forms of incapacitation.
3.82 Collective incapacitation is the strategy of seeking to reduce crime by
incapacitating more offenders, or incapacitating them
for longer periods of
incapacitation is the strategy of trying to identify, and then incapacitate,
certain offenders who are likely to
This strategy
relies on predictions of future criminality—which have been criticised by
some as inherently unreliable
and often erroneous.
3.83 Provisions in sentencing legislation of a number of states and
territories provides for the selective incapacitation of certain
In addition, a
number of state and territory sentencing acts state that a purpose of sentencing
is to protect the community from
The Western
Australian sentencing legislation provides that a court must not impose a
sentence of imprisonment unless it decides—among
other things—that
it is required to protect the
Denunciation
3.84 Denunciation is premised on the theory that a sentence can serve the
purpose of communicating to the offender and the community
the message that the
law should not be flouted.
this regard, denunciation performs an educative role. Further, a sentence that
denounces the conduct of an offender represents
a symbolic, collective statement
of society’s censure of the criminal
The public opinion
to be taken into account is ‘informed public opinion’ as opposed to
actual public opinion.
Inkson v the Queen
, Underwood J stated that:
The community delegates to the Court the task of identifying, assessing and
weighing the outrage and revulsion that an informed and
responsible public would
have to criminal conduct.
3.85 A consideration of informed public opinion cannot lead to the imposition
of a sentence that is contrary to
3.86 A number of state and territory sentencing acts set out denunciation as
a purpose of sentencing in the following terms:
to denounce the conduct of the
to manifest the denunciation by the court of the type of conduct in
which the offender engaged;
to make it clear that the community, acting through the court,
denounces the sort of conduct in which the offender was
sentencing offenders for family violence offences, courts have specifically
referred to the need for
denunciation.
Restoration
3.88 While there is no universally accepted definition of restorative
justice, it is essentially an approach to crime that is principally
with repairing the harm caused by criminal conduct and addressing the underlying
causes of criminality. In this regard,
restoration integrates elements of
rehabilitation.
3.89 Restorative justice initiatives in Australia are diverse and employed at
different stages of the criminal justice process, including
sentencing. Examples
of such initiatives are victim-offender mediation, conferencing and circle
sentencing. Restorative justice is
discussed more fully in Chapter 11.
3.90 The sentencing legislation of some states and territories refers either
to restorative aims or restorative initiatives. For example,
the sentencing
legislation of NSW and the ACT states that a purpose of sentencing is ‘to
recognise the harm done to the victim
of the crime and the
community’.
Australian sentencing legislation mandates sentencing conferencing prior to the
sentencing of Indigenous offenders. Victims
of crime may choose to be present at
such conferences.
[back to top]
compensation
3.91 The avenues of redress for compensation for victims of crime are not
exclusively based on
legislation.
crime—including victims of family violence—may be financially
compensated in three ways: through an award
of compensation in the civil courts,
typically through a claim that a tort has been committed; through an order that
an offender
pay restitution or reparation to the victim, as part of the
offender’s sentence; and through a claim to a statutory compensation
scheme in which awards are assessed and paid by the government.
3.92 Compensating victims of crime has been part of a wider social and
legislative trend towards greater recognition of the importance
of the interests
of the victims of crime in the criminal process. The general philosophy
underlying victims’ compensation is
expressed in the preamble to the
Declaration of Basic Principles of Justice for Victims of Crime and Abuse of
, adopted by the United Nations General Assembly in 1985, as a
recognition that victims of crime and
frequently their families, witnesses and others who aid them, are unjustly
subjected to loss, damage or injury and that they may,
in addition, suffer
hardship when assisting in the prosecution of
3.93 The Declaration includes basic principles of restitution—that is,
that offenders should pay for the costs of their crimes—and
compensation—that is, where such costs are not recoverable from offenders
or elsewhere, states should endeavour to provide
financial compensation to such
victims and their families.
The principle of restitution underlies the power to sentence an offender by
ordering restitution or reparation, as well as damages
for tort, while the
development of statutory compensation schemes has been driven by the principle
of compensation. Although the
different avenues for compensation share the
general philosophy of recognition of the injustice that a victim should bear the
of a crime, there are some distinctions between the purposes of those
forms of compensation. These purposes are addressed below.
compensation schemes
3.94 All Australian states and territories have legislation establishing
statutory victims’ compensation schemes. In some jurisdictions,
Queensland and South Australia, these schemes are established in broader
legislation that also encompasses other measures
to support victims, such as the
inclusion of fundamental principles of justice underlying the treatment of
victims or the establishment
of a levy upon offenders for the purposes of
compensating victims.
other jurisdictions, such as Victoria, the legislation is concerned primarily
with the establishment of a compensation
3.95 The legislation of NSW, Victoria, Queensland, South Australia and the
Northern Territory include provisions setting out statutory
purposes and
objects. Apart from the aim of establishing a compensation scheme (and other
mechanisms under the
legislation),
these objects
clauses include the following purposes and objects (variously expressed):
to provide assistance (or support and rehabilitation) to victims of
to assist victims of crime to recover from the crime (and, in South
Australia, ‘to advance their welfare in other
to give statutory recognition to victims of crime and the harm that
they suffer from criminal
objects clauses also make clear that the awards under the compensation scheme
are not intended to reflect the level of compensation
to which victims of acts
of violence may be entitled at common law or
In addition to
these common provisions, the Victorian and Queensland acts include the further
objective of adding to, or complementing,
other victims’ services and, in
Victoria, the objective of ‘allow[ing] victims of crime to have recourse
to financial
assistance under this Act where compensation for the injury cannot
be obtained from the offender or other
3.97 As well as these statutory objectives, victims’ compensation
schemes are seen as enhancing the efficacy of criminal justice
encouraging victims of crime to come forward and prosecute
perpetrators.
restitution orders, victims’ compensation schemes provide a more informal
and efficient forum than civil
litigation.
They are also
more effective in that victims have access to a pool of dedicated funds, whereas
restitution from an offender depends
upon the offender’s capacity to
Restitution
3.98 In all Australian jurisdictions except Western Australia, there is power
to order an offender to pay compensation for loss, injury
or damage as a
consequence of an offence, as a sentencing
In Western Australia,
the power to order compensation is restricted to property damage or property
3.99 The ‘fundamental purpose’ of such powers is to give victims
‘easy access to civil
As Bell J has
When an offender has been dealt with by the courts, the judge can be in a good
position to consider the issue of compensating the
victim. The factual
circumstances relevant to compensation may have been fully or at least
sufficiently established by the evidence
led or the admissions made by the
offender. It can be clear that the offender’s crime has caused loss or
damage to the victim.
Once the court receives evidence of the extent and value
of such loss or damage, it can then expeditiously determine whether and
compensation to order. This saves the victim the time, expense, inconvenience
and possible additional trauma of having to institute
a civil proceeding. Not
doing so may deprive the victim of ready access to just compensation, leaving
them with an understandable
3.100 The making of restitution orders shares some philosophical
underpinnings with the sentencing aim of restoration.
Compensation for
tort claims
3.101 Victims of family violence, including sexual assault, may be able to
seek damages from an offender if a tort has been committed.
Such claims are
largely governed by the common law and are pursued in the civil courts.
3.102 The basic function of an award of damages in tort is:
to compensate the plaintiff for loss suffered as a result of the tort; the
plaintiff is entitled to
restitutio in integrum
, that is, to be put in
the position they would have been in had the tort not been
3.103 Along with this general purpose of restitution, individual torts may
serve different purposes. Family violence most commonly
gives rise to a claim in
assault or battery. A battery is committed when a person directly and
intentionally causes contact with
the body of the victim without the
latter’s consent.
assault is committed when a person directly and intentionally threatens the
victim in such a way that the victim reasonably apprehends
imminent contact with
his or her body by the person, or something within the person’s
Assault and battery
are also criminal offences.
The fundamental principle underlying these torts is that every person’s
body is inviolable—that is, these torts protect
the physical integrity of
3.104 Negligence, on the other hand, is directed to ensuring that persons do
not behave carelessly or negligently, in such a way as
to harm others.
Negligence may arise in the context of family violence where, for example, a
third party such as a parent fails to
take reasonable care to ensure a child is
not subject to violence.
3.105 Compensation claims
by way of tort are not easy methods of redress for victims of family violence,
for a number of reasons.
has been partly addressed through the power to order restitution and the
development of statutory victims’ compensation
[back to top]
legislation
3.106 The object of the
Migration Act
(Cth) is expressed
broadly as being to ‘regulate in the national interest, the coming into,
and presence in Australia, of
non-citizens’.
Commissions, however, are only focussed on the objectives of particular
provisions in the
Migration Regulations 1994
(Cth) which relate to family
3.107 These provisions permit certain persons applying for permanent
residence in Australia to proceed with their application after
the breakdown of
their married or de facto relationship if they or a member of their family have
experienced family violence at the
hands of their
3.108 The family violence provisions were
introduced in response to community concerns that some partners might feel
compelled to remain in abusive relationships rather than
end the relationship
and be forced to leave
3.109 The Queensland Centre for Domestic and Family Violence Research reports
that the vast majority of persons intended to be protected
by these provisions
and that the
provisions were intended to respond to
the incidence of abuse occurring in relationships where one partner was being
sponsored for residence in Australia. Anecdotal and
statistical evidence at the
time revealed significant levels of verbal, emotional, social, racial, physical,
sexual and financial
abuse in spousal relationships occurring in this
3.110 The National Council to Reduce Violence Against Women and their
Children stated that:
Women who are sponsored by Australian citizens and residents are particularly
vulnerable to abuse due to the threat of deportation.
In the late 1980s and
early 1990s, domestic violence practitioners became concerned about the number
of repeat or serial sponsors
who abused the women and then triggered their
deportation. Predominantly, the concern related to the abuse of Filipino women
sponsors, although more recently concerns have increased about women
sponsored from other countries such as Russia, Thailand, Indonesia
3.111 Under the
Migration Regulations
, a person whose relationship
ends after the person has applied for permanent residence will still be able to
be considered for permanent
residence if he or she can provide evidence of
family violence that is acceptable under the Regulations. The Regulations
for both judicially and non-judicially determined claims of family
The National Council to Reduce Violence
against Women and their Children,
Background Paper to Time for Action: The
National Council’s Plan to Reduce Violence against Women and their
Children, 2009–2021
(2009), [2.5].
International conventions relevant to
the legal framework governing family violence are discussed in Ch 2.
Elements of those conventions
are reflected in certain policy justifications for
laws relevant to family violence.
Chapters 19 and 20—which discuss integrated responses and specialisation
respectively—also discuss options for reform
relevant to family violence,
as well as child protection and sexual
B Fehlberg and J Behrens,
Australian Family Law—The Contemporary Context
(2008), 198
(citations omitted).
For example, the
Queensland legislation sets out one main purpose, whereas some other
clauses are also discussed in
Ch 4 and the Commissions make proposals in this
Crimes (Domestic and Personal
Violence) Act 2007
Family Violence Protection Act
Domestic and Family Violence Protection Act
(Qld) s 3A(1);
Domestic Violence and Protection Orders Act
(ACT) s 6(b);
Domestic and Family Violence Act 2007
Crimes (Domestic and
Personal Violence) Act 2007
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
Intervention Orders (Prevention of
Abuse) Act 2009
Domestic Violence and Protection Orders
(ACT) s 6(a);
Domestic and Family Violence Act 2007
Domestic and
Family Violence Act 2007
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
This purpose concerning
accountability is similar to those expressed in the sentencing legislation of
NSW and Victoria, which is
discussed below. See also
Intervention Orders
(Prevention of Abuse) Act 2009
which states that
intervention should be designed to encourage defendants to accept responsibility
and take steps to avoid committing
Crimes (Domestic and
Personal Violence) Act 2007
, (d). These conventions are
described in Ch 2.
Intervention
Orders (Prevention of Abuse) Act 2009
Family Violence Act
Restraining Orders Act 1997
(WA) s 12. Section 12 was amended in
2004 to insert a further paragraph (ba)—‘the need to ensure that
children are not
exposed to acts of family and domestic
Western Australia,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Assembly, 29 May 1997, 1219 (J
McGinty), 3485.
Domestic and Family
Violence Protection Act 1989
Northern Territory,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Assembly, 17 October 2007, 4846
(S Stirling—Attorney-General), 4846.
Australian Capital Territory,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Assembly, 7 August 2005, 3005
(S Corbell—Attorney-General, Minister for Police and Emergency
Services), 3005–3006.
Parliamentary Debates
, House of Assembly, 10 September 2009,
3937 (M Atkinson—Attorney-General), 3944 (emphasis added).
Northern Territory,
Parliamentary
, Legislative Assembly, 17 October 2007, 4846
(S Stirling—Attorney-General), 4848. A similar intention is expressed
Parliamentary Debates
, House of Assembly, 10
September 2009, 3937 (M Atkinson—Attorney-General), 3943. The
Intervention Orders (Prevention of Abuse) Act 2009
also expresses the principle that intervention should be designed to minimise
disruption to protected persons and the children living
South Australia,
Parliamentary
, House of Assembly, 10 September 2009, 3937
(M Atkinson—Attorney-General),
Parliamentary
, House of Assembly, 21 August 2008, 3190 (K Marshall),
Family law policy is discussed
separately below.
New South Wales,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Council, 29 November 2007, 4652
(T Kelly—Minister for Lands, Minister for Rural Affairs, Minister for
Development, and Vice-President of the Executive Council),
Northern Territory,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Assembly, 17 October 2007, 4846
(S Stirling—Attorney-General),
Queensland,
Parliamentary
, Legislative Assembly, 15 March 1989, 3797 (C Sherrin—Minister
for Family Services), 3797.
(Domestic and Personal Violence) Act 2007
(NSW) s (2);
Domestic and
Family Violence Protection Act 1989
(Qld) s 3(2);
Intervention
Orders (Prevention of Abuse) Act 2009
Domestic and
Family Violence Act 2007
Domestic and Family
Violence Act 2007
Intervention Orders
(Prevention of Abuse) Act 2009
Domestic and Family
Violence Act 2007
Intervention Orders
(Prevention of Abuse) Act 2009
Domestic and Family
Violence Act 2007
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
Crimes (Domestic and
Personal Violence) Act 2007
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
Intervention Orders
(Prevention of Abuse) Act 2009
Crimes (Domestic and
Personal Violence) Act 2007
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
(Vic) preamble.
Crimes (Domestic and
Personal Violence) Act 2007
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
(Vic) preamble.
Crimes (Domestic and Personal Violence) Act 2007
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
(Vic) preamble;
Intervention
Orders (Prevention of Abuse) Act 2009
s 10(1)(a).
Crimes (Domestic
and Personal Violence) Act 2007
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
(Vic) preamble.
Crimes (Domestic and Personal Violence) Act 2007
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
(Vic) preamble;
Intervention
Orders (Prevention of Abuse) Act 2009
s 10(1)(b).
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
(Vic) preamble;
Intervention Orders (Prevention of
Abuse) Act 2009
Crimes (Domestic and Personal Violence) Act 2007
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
(Vic) preamble. See also
Intervention Orders (Prevention of Abuse) Act 2009
which states that it is of primary importance to prevent family violence and to
prevent children from being exposed to
Crimes (Domestic and Personal
Violence) Act 2007
Domestic Violence and
Protection Orders Act 2008
Western Australia,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Council, 12 March 1997, 156 (P
Foss—Attorney-General), 157.
Domestic Violence and Protection Orders Act 2008
South Australia,
Parliamentary Debates
, House of Assembly, 10 September 2009, 3937
(M Atkinson—Attorney-General), 3940. Police powers to issue
protection orders are
discussed in
(5th ed, 2007), 43.
L Young and G
Family Law in Australia
(7th ed, 2009),
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary
, Senate, 3 April 1974, 640 (L Murphy—Attorney-General),
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary
, Senate, 13 December 1973, 2827 (L Murphy—Attorney-General),
2829. See also Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates
, Senate, 3 April 1974,
640 (L Murphy—Attorney-General),
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary
, Senate, 13 December 1973, 2827 (L Murphy—Attorney-General),
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary
, Senate, 3 April 1974, 640 (L Murphy—Attorney-General),
Family Law Act 1975
made in 1975 s 64(1)(a).
s 43(1)(c).
s 43(1)(a).
(5th ed, 2007), 43.
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates
, Senate, 13 December 1973, 2827 (L
Murphy—Attorney-General), 2828.
R Hunter, ‘Narratives of Domestic Violence’
[2006] SydLawRw 31
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates
, Senate, 13 December 1973, 2827 (L
Murphy—Attorney-General), 2829.
Family Law Act 1975
s 43(1)(d).
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates
, Senate, 3 April 1974, 640 (L
Murphy—Attorney-General), 759.
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
, 16 December 1966,
[1980] ATS 23
, (entered into force generally on 23 March 1976),
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates
, Senate, 3 April 1974, 640 (L
Murphy—Attorney-General), 641.
Family Law Act 1975
s 43(1)(b).
B Fehlberg and J
Australian Family Law—The Contemporary Context
Constitution
, (xxii). The constitutional framework is discussed in
Commonwealth of Australia,
Parliamentary Debates
, Senate, 1 August 1974, 758 (L
Murphy—Attorney General), 760.
Fehlberg and J Behrens,
Australian Family Law—The Contemporary
(2008), 157, (citations omitted). See also Ibid, 159 for a synthesis
of feminist critiques of the public/private dichotomy.
D Higgins and R Kaspiew,
‘“Mind the Gap…”: Protecting Children in Family Law
Australian Journal of Family Law
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
, 16 December
[1980] ATS 23
, (entered into force generally on 23 March 1976),
art 17, set out in Ch 2.
Family Law Act 1975
s 43(1)(ca).
These instruments
are discussed in Ch 2.
Law Act 1975
Ibid s 90MA. The
Family Law Act
does not codify the objects and principles behind the
provisions relating to property and spousal
maintenance.
B Fehlberg and J Behrens,
Australian Family Law—The Contemporary Context
Family Law Act 1975
s 60CC(2)(a)
Family Law Amendment (Shared
Parental Responsibility) Bill 2005
House of Representatives
Standing Committee on Family and Community Affairs—Parliament of
Every Picture Tells a Story: Report on the Inquiry into Child
Custody Arrangements in the Event of Family Separation
(2003); House of
Representatives Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional
Affairs—Parliament of Australia,
Report on the Exposure Draft of the
Family Law Amendment (Shared Parental Responsibility) Bill 2005
House of Representatives
Standing Committee on Family and Community Affairs—Parliament of
Every Picture Tells a Story: Report on the Inquiry into Child
Custody Arrangements in the Event of Family Separation
(2003), 12–13.
Australian Institute of Family
Evaluation of the 2006 Family Law Reforms
Family Law Act 1975
s 60B(2)(e).
Law Reform Commission,
Principled Regulation—Federal Civil and
Administrative Penalties in Australia
, ALRC 95 (2002), [2.9].
S Talarico, ‘What Do We
Expect of Criminal Justice? Critical Questions of Sanction Policy, Sentencing
Purpose and the Politics
of Reform’ (1979) 4
Criminal Justice Review
D Brown and others,
Brown, Farrier, Neal and Weisbrot’s Criminal Laws—Material and
Commentary on Criminal Law and Process in New South Wales
(4th ed, 2006),
A Ashworth, ‘Is the
Criminal Law a Lost Cause?’
Law Quarterly Review
R v Collins; Ex
parte Attorney-General (Qld)
[2009] QCA 350
Criminal Law (Sentencing)
(SA) s 10(1b).
Ibid s 10(4).
Crime, Guilt, and Punishment: A Philosophical Introduction
The ALRC considered
the purposes of sentencing in Australian Law Reform Commission,
Same Crime,
Same Time: Sentencing of Federal Offenders
, ALRC 103 (2006), ch 4. This
section draws from that report.
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
Penalties and Sentences Act 1992
Sentencing Act 1997
Crimes (Sentencing) Act
Sentencing Act 1995
Crimes (Sentencing
Procedure) Act 1999
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
S Talarico,
‘What Do We Expect of Criminal Justice? Critical Questions of Sanction
Policy, Sentencing Purpose and the Politics
of Reform’ (1979) 4
Criminal Justice Review
See Leviticus, 25:
(1991), 73–75.
von Hirsch,
Doing Justice: The Choice of Punishments—Report of the
Committee for the Study of Incarceration
Crimes (Sentencing
Procedure) Act 1999
Penalties and
Sentences Act 1992
Sentencing Act 1995
Sentencing Act 1991
is expressed in similar terms.
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
Guilt, and Punishment: A Philosophical Introduction
See, eg, P Robinson and
J Darley, ‘Does Criminal Law Deter? A Behavioural Science
Investigation’
Oxford Journal of Legal Studies
N Demleitner and others,
Sentencing Law and Policy: Cases, Statutes and
(2003), 10; P Robinson and J Darley, ‘The Role of
Deterrence in the Formulation of Criminal Law Rules: At Its Worst When Doing
Georgetown Law Journal
, 951; N Walker,
(1991), 15.
Law Reform Commission,
, ALRC 44 (1988), [37].
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Same Crime, Same Time: Sentencing of Federal Offenders
, ALRC 103 (2006),
Crimes (Sentencing
Procedure) Act 1999
Sentencing Act 1991
Penalties and Sentences Act 1992
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
Sentencing Act
Sentencing Act 1997
Criminal Law
(Sentencing) Act 1988
s 10(1)(j).
R v Collins; Ex
parte Attorney-General (Qld)
[2009] QCA 350.
Ibid, [34],
Court Observation: Burwood
Local Court: Apprehended Violence Order/All Charges and Summons/Defended
Hearings List
, 18 December 2009.
M Bagaric, ‘Incapacitation, Deterrence and Rehabilitation: Flawed Ideals
or Appropriate Sentencing Goals?’
Criminal Law Journal
Crimes (Sentencing
Procedure) Act 1999
Sentencing Act 1991
Penalties and Sentences Act 1992
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
Sentencing Act
Sentencing Act 1997
Criminal Law
(Sentencing) Act 1988
s 10(1)(j).
Guilt, and Punishment: A Philosophical Introduction
S Talarico, ‘What
Do We Expect of Criminal Justice? Critical Questions of Sanction Policy,
Sentencing Purpose and the Politics
of Reform’ (1979) 4
Justice Review
55, 57–58 (citations
See, eg, Victorian
Sentencing Committee,
Crimes (Sentencing
Procedure) Act 1999
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
Penalties and Sentences Act
Sentencing Act 1995
(NT)s 5(1)(b)
which are expressed in similar
Sentencing Act 1997
s 3(e)(ii).
Law (Sentencing) Act 1988
s 10(1)(m).
For example, in
R v Rindjarra
[2008] NTCCA 9
, [79], the trial judge commented that the
offender’s prospects were poor.
For example, in
R v Taylor (No
[2008] ACTSC 97
, [28] the offender’s 12 month sentence of
imprisonment for breach of a protection order was suspended on condition that he
present himself for assessment for and, if found suitable, complete, the ACT
Corrective Service Family Violence Program as well as
any program deemed to be
necessary for his rehabilitation by ACT Corrective Services.
M Bagaric, ‘Incapacitation,
Deterrence and Rehabilitation: Flawed Ideals or Appropriate Sentencing
Criminal Law Journal
, 24; A von Hirsch,
‘The Problem of False Positives’ in A von Hirsch and A Ashworth
Principled Sentencing: Readings on Theory and Policy
S Talarico, ‘What Do We Expect of Criminal Justice? Critical
Questions of Sanction Policy, Sentencing Purpose and
the Politics of
Reform’ (1979) 4
Criminal Justice Review
D Weatherburn,
Law and Order in
Australia: Rhetoric and Reality
N Demleitner and others,
Sentencing Law and Policy: Cases, Statutes and Guidelines
(2003), 11;
American Law Institute,
Model Penal Code: Sentencing Report
A von Hirsch, ‘The
Problem of False Positives’ in A von Hirsch and A Ashworth (ed)
Principled Sentencing: Readings on Theory and Policy
Sentencing Act
(indefinite sentence for offender convicted of
serious offences where there is a high probability that offender is a serious
to the community);
Penalties and Sentences Act 1992
s 163(indefinite
sentence for violent offender who poses a serious danger
to the community);
Sentencing Act 1995
(indefinite
sentences where a superior court is satisfied on balance of probabilities that
offender, if released, would be a danger
Crimes (Sentencing
Procedure) Act 1999
Sentencing Act 1991
Penalties and Sentences Act 1992
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
Sentencing Act
Sentencing Act 1995
Why Punish?
(1991), 26. See also
Ryan v The Queen
(2001) 206 CLR 267
Why Punish?
(1991), 31.
Inkson v The
[1996] TASSC 13
(1996) 6 Tas R 1
[2003] SASC 375
87 SASR 168
(Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
Crimes (Sentencing)
Sentencing Act 1997
s 3(e)(iii)
which provides that a purpose of the Act is to help prevent
crime and respect for the law by allowing court to impose sentences that
denounce the conduct of offenders.
Sentencing Act 1991
Penalties and
Sentences Act 1992
Sentencing Act 1995
For example,
R v Gazdovic
[2002] VSC 485
, [28], [30] in relation to the sentencing
for incitement to murder the offender’s wife and sister and incitement to
intentionally
cause serious injury to the offender’s
brother-in-law.
(Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
Crimes (Sentencing)
Sentencing Act 1997
which provides that a purpose of the Act is to recognise the
interests of victims of offences.
Criminal Law (Sentencing) Act 1988
compensation is discussed more fully in
Declaration of Basic
Principles of Justice for Victims of Crime and Abuse of Power
, UN GAOR, 40th
sess, 96th plen mtg, UN Doc A/RES/40/34
Ibid cls 8–9,
Victims of Crime Assistance
Victims of Crime Act 2001
Victims of Crime
Assistance Act 1996
objects clauses, for example, commonly provide that it is an object or purpose
of the Act to establish a victims’ compensation
scheme and other
associated schemes under the legislation. For example, in Queensland and South
Australia, another ‘object’
is to set out principles of justice
underlying the treatment of victims. These instrumental objects are not included
in this summary.
Crime Assistance Act 1996
Victims Support and
Rehabilitation Act 1996
Victims of Crime Assistance
Victims of Crime Assistance Act 1996
Victims of Crime Assistance Act 2009
Crime Act 2001
Victims of Crime Act 2001
Victims of Crime
Assistance Act 1996
Victims of Crime Assistance Act
Victims of Crime Assistance Act 2009
Victims of Crime Assistance Act 2009
of Crime Act 2001
(‘limited’ compensation).
Victims of Crime Assistance Act
Victims of Crime Assistance Act
Finestone, ‘Crimes Compensation: A National Perspective’ in M Heenan
Legalising Justice for All Women: National Conference on Sexual Assault
and the Law
Victims Support and
Rehabilitation Act 1996
Sentencing Act 1991
Penalties and Sentences Act 1992
Criminal Law (Sentencing) Act 1988
Sentencing Act
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
Sentencing Act 1995
Sentencing Act 1995
(WA), which defines ‘victim’ as a person
who or which has suffered loss of or damage to his, her or its property as a
direct or indirect result of the
F Trindade and P Cane,
of Torts in Australia
(3rd ed, 1999),
In some jurisdictions, a
summary conviction for an offence acts as a bar to any subsequent civil
proceedings for the offence, and
civil proceedings taken against a person for an
offence act as a bar to subsequent criminal proceedings for the same offence:
Crimes Act 1900
[1984] 1 WLR 1172
, 1177. See also
Secretary, Department of Health
and Community Services v JWB and SMB (Marion’s Case)
[1992] HCA 15
(1992) 175 CLR
This is discussed in
Ch 19. See also C Forster, ‘Good Law or Bad Lore? The Efficacy of
Criminal Injuries Compensation Schemes
for Victims of Sexual Abuse: A New Model
of Sexual Assault Provisions’
University of Western Australia
Migration Act 1958
Regulations 1994
(Cth) Div 1.5; Australian Government Department of
Immigration and Citizenship,
Media Fact Sheet 38—Family Violence
(2009) <www.immi.gov.au/media/
fact-sheets/38domestic.htm> at 19 January
Australian Government
Department of Immigration and Citizenship,
Media Fact Sheet 38—Family
Violence Provisions
<www.immi.gov.au/media/fact-sheets/38domestic.htm> at 19 January
It is reported that the
Department of Immigration’s policy is that if the applicant is a male it
is considered reasonable
to refer a non-judicially determined claim of family
violence unless there is ‘strong evidence’ that the claim is
Immigration Advice and Rights Centre Inc,
IARC Client Information
Sheet 14A—The Family Violence Provisions
<www.iarc.asn.au/publications/pdfs/familyViolence.pdf> at 12 April
Queensland Centre for
Domestic and Family Violence Research,
The Domestic Violence Provisions in
Migration Law
(2002) CDFVR Online
<www.noviolence.com.au/migrationarticle.html> at 19 January
The National Council to
Reduce Violence against Women and their Children,
Background Paper to Time
for Action: The National Council’s Plan to Reduce Violence against Women
and their Children, 2009–2021
(2009), [2.5] (citations omitted).
ALRC CP1 Family Violence � Improving Legal Frameworks
4. Family Violence: A Common
Interpretative Framework?
Introduction
Definition of family violence or acts constituting family violence
Introduction
Family violence legislation
Criminal law
Victims’ compensation
Migration legislation
Summary and effect of Commissions’ overall approach
Persons protected
Commissions’ views
Model provisions reflecting best practice?
Guiding principles and a human rights framework
Grounds for obtaining a protection order
4. Family Violence: A Common
Interpretative Framework?
Introduction
4.1 This chapter explores various conceptualisations of family violence.
Understanding what constitutes family violence—or domestic
violence or
domestic abuse as it is referred to in some jurisdictions—is integral to a
consideration of interaction
Definitions of family
violence vary widely across family violence
legislation,
Family Law Act
(Cth), the criminal law, and other types of legislation such as
victims’ compensation legislation and migration regulations.
In addition,
disciplines other than law—for example, the social sciences, health and
welfare service providers—may conceptualise
family violence differently.
4.2 This chapter considers whether it is appropriate or desirable to aim for
a common interpretative framework for what constitutes
family violence across
the different legislative schemes under
consideration.
This issue is
considered in light of the underlying policy justifications for each of the
legislative schemes, which are discussed
in the preceding chapter. An analysis
of these policy considerations reveals that while policy justifications differ,
in some cases
different statutory regimes share common aims. A key theme is
therefore balancing the need for synergies between statutory definitions
statutory purposes, with the benefits that could flow from the adoption of a
common interpretative framework.
4.3 The appropriateness or desirability of a commonly shared understanding of
family violence across various legislative schemes is
also discussed in the
context of the relationship between the definitions of family violence in family
violence legislation, the
criminal law, and the
Family Law Act
4.4 This chapter also raises the appropriateness or desirability of
addressing key differences in family violence legislation—for
example, by
model provisions which contain best practice approaches—even where no
issues arise from the interaction of family
violence laws with other relevant
legal frameworks. This discussion acknowledges that achieving consistency with
respect to family
violence legislation across the states and territories is not
feasible, questionable as a goal in itself and, in any event, outside
of Reference for this Inquiry. This Inquiry does, however, present the
Commissions with a unique opportunity to comment
on ways in which legal
frameworks could be improved to respond to family violence. Exploring the
desirability of model provisions
in particular areas of family violence
legislation can be seen as falling within that aspect of the Terms of Reference.
In particular,
the Commissions propose the adoption of similar guiding
principles in each family violence Act, which should contain express reference
to a human rights framework.
[back to top]
Definition of family
violence or acts constituting family violence
Introduction
4.5 There is no common understanding or single definition of family violence.
As noted in Chapter 2, the United Nations
Declaration on the
Elimination of Violence against Women
defines violence against women as
‘any act of gender-based violence that results in, or is likely to result
in, physical, sexual
or psychological harm or suffering to women, including
threats of such acts, coercion or arbitrary deprivation of liberty, whether
occurring in public or private
4.6 As the Australian Bureau of Statistics has noted, definitions of what
constitutes family violence are inherently likely to differ
between the legal
sector, researchers and service providers. These definitions do not necessarily
align with community understandings,
or victim and offender perspectives, of
what constitutes family violence.
It has been noted that in NSW alone, there are 17 different definitions of
family violence across various
4.7 Partnerships Against Domestic Violence—an Australian
intergovernmental taskforce on family violence—adopted the following
definition of family violence:
Domestic violence is an abuse of power perpetrated mainly (but not only) by men
against women in a relationship or after separation.
It occurs when one partner
attempts physically or psychologically to dominate and control the other.
Domestic violence takes many
forms. The most commonly acknowledged forms are
physical and sexual violence, threat and intimidation, emotional and social
and economic deprivation. Many forms of domestic violence are against the
For many indigenous people the term family violence is preferred as it
encompasses all forms of violence in intimate, family and
other relationships of
mutual obligation and support.
4.8 Conduct constituting violence can encompass varying degrees of severity
and take many forms—physical abuse, sexual abuse,
damage to property,
emotional abuse, social abuse, economic abuse, psychological abuse, and
spiritual abuse.
4.9 Whatever form violence takes, a central feature is that it involves a
person exercising control and power over the victim by inducing
example by using threatening
Definitions of family
violence usually recognise that violence can constitute more than single
‘incidents’. It can involve
‘a continuum of controlling
behaviour and violence, which can occur over a number of
4.10 While the definition of family violence may not appear to be a
practically important issue, it is necessary to understand precisely
constitutes family violence in each of the state and territory jurisdictions in
order to consider
family violence laws interact with the
Family Law Act
or with the criminal law in any particular matter and, if
they do, the nature of that interaction. The scope of the various definitions
family violence in family violence legislation may, in a particular case, mean
that there will be no interaction with the
Family Law Act
or with the
criminal law. For example, certain definitions cover conduct that may justify a
protection order but the conduct does
not amount to a criminal offence.
Conversely, some definitions of family violence in family violence legislation
are linked expressly
to the criminal law, and result in an interaction between
family violence and criminal legislative regimes at some level.
4.11 Critically assessing definitional issues is relevant to the important
question of when it is appropriate for the law to intervene
protection or other forms of redress to victims. On the one hand, excessively
narrow definitions of family violence might
cause gaps in protection to victims.
On the other, excessively broad definitions may detract from the significance of
family violence
or devalue the experience of its victims or—as noted by
one stakeholder—promote the abuse of the protection order
4.12 The discussion below focuses on the definition of family violence across
various legislative schemes. It also addresses definitions
across family
violence and criminal legislation of
acts or conduct that may
constitute family violence, such as stalking or assault.
violence legislation
4.13 Table A below provides a snapshot of variations in the definitions of
family violence across the states and territories. The
following discussion
addresses various aspects of the state and territory definitions. Key
differences include the extent to which
definitions:
are linked to criminal offences;
capture non-physical violence;
turn on the impact on the victim or the intent of the person
committing family violence;
capture abuse specific to certain groups in the community—such
as those from a culturally and linguistically diverse
background,
the aged, persons
with a disability and persons in same-sex
relationships.
Sexual assault
Kidnap/deprive of liberty
Property damage
Harm animal
Economic abuse
psych abuse *
Wilful injury
Indecent behaviour without consent
Eg of wilful property damage
Eg of property damage
Physical injury-result or intent
Eg of emotional or psych abuse
Eg of emotional or psych abuse
Result or intent
Eg of emotional or psych abuse
✓ plus physical or personal injury
✓(animal violence offence)
Eg of conduct causing harm
Eg of conduct causing harm
* Psych = Psychological
In addition to the conduct captured in Table A, some types of threats
constitute family violence in all jurisdictions; and specific
criminal offences
in NSW and the ACT also constitute family violence.
Intimidate/
Expose child to violence
Breach protection order
Eg of emotional abuse
Eg of emotional abuse
Pursuing with intent to intimidate
Captured in examples of emotional or psych*abuse
Captured in examples of emotional/psych abuse plus denial of
social/personal autonomy
✓ or offensive conduct
Eg of intimidation
* Psych = Psychological
Extent of linkage of definitions of family
violence to the criminal law
4.14 A key difference between the state and territory definitions of family
violence in family violence legislation is the extent
to which those definitions
are directly linked to specific criminal law offences. When family violence is
defined by reference to
criminal offences, the behaviour that constitutes family
violence can form the basis for a protection order as well as a prosecution
a criminal offence, although the latter will require proof beyond reasonable
4.15 At one end of the spectrum, NSW family violence legislation does not
define family violence. Rather it defines ‘domestic
offence’ by referring specifically to 55 ‘personal violence’
offences in the
Crimes Act 1900
(NSW) where those offences are committed
by persons in defined domestic relationships against other
The offences include,
for example, murder, manslaughter, wounding or causing grievous bodily harm with
intent, assault, sexual assault,
kidnapping, child abduction and destroying or
damaging property. The list also includes narrower offences such as discharging
with intent, causing bodily injury by gunpowder, not providing a wife
with food, and setting traps.
4.16 Some of the ‘personal violence’ offences included in the
definition of ‘domestic violence offence’ in
the NSW family violence
legislation have been repealed.
These historical offences are retained because such offences can be recorded on
a person’s criminal record as ‘domestic
and this has a
number of important
consequences.
4.17 The NSW family violence legislation also provides that stalking,
intimidation with intent to cause fear of physical or mental
harm, and attempts
to commit any specified offence can amount to ‘domestic
4.18 The ACT family violence legislation sets out a general definition of
‘domestic violence’ which covers, for example,
any conduct that
causes physical or personal injury to a relevant person, or is harassing or
offensive. The definition also provides
that a ‘domestic violence
offence’ is an offence against scheduled legislative
provisions.
The scheduled
offences cover a broad range of conduct. They include offences traditionally
recognised as including forms of family
violence, such as assault and wounding,
as well as offences that are less obviously related to family
violence—such as causing
bushfires, arson, trespass on government
premises, and refusing or neglecting to leave government premises when
4.19 Interestingly, the offences constituting family violence are not the
same in NSW and the ACT.
raises a more general issue of whether, in some cases, family violence is
over-defined or whether gaps in definitional parameters
translate to gaps in
protection in practice.
4.20 Other state and territory definitions of family violence pick up
selected definitions of criminal law offences. For example,
the Victorian family
violence legislation provides that the definition of ‘assault’ is
the same as the definition of
Crimes Act 1958
Similarly, the Western
Australian family violence legislation provides that various definitions,
including those of ‘assault’,
‘intimidate’,
‘kidnapping or depriving the person of his or her liberty’ and
‘pursue’ are the
same as the equivalent definitions in the
Criminal Code
4.21 At the other end of the spectrum, other state and territory definitions
largely describe conduct that constitutes family violence
without linking that
conduct to specific criminal offences or, where that conduct could constitute an
offence, without defining the
conduct or attempting to align the definitions
with those used in the criminal law. While in these cases there may be an
between conduct constituting family violence for the purpose of
obtaining a protection order and the conduct forming the basis for
prosecution, the scope of the definition for the purposes of the protection
order may be somewhat unclear. Specific examples
of non-alignment of definitions
or terminology across family violence legislation and the criminal law are
discussed more fully below.
4.22 In other cases, the conduct described as falling within the definition
of family violence may not amount to a criminal offence,
for example, emotional
abuse, but may provide grounds for the making of a civil protection
The Victorian
legislation, for example, explicitly provides that ‘to remove doubt it is
declared that behaviour may constitute
family violence even if behaviour would
not constitute a criminal
Specific elements of the definition of family
4.23 The discussion below gives a snapshot of the various elements that may
comprise family violence across the state and territory
Sexual assault
4.24 Significantly, not every jurisdiction expressly refers to sexual assault
in the definition of family violence—nor do the
1999 Model Domestic
Violence Laws.
The Victorian Law
Reform Commission (VLRC) recommended that the definition of family violence
should include specific references
to sexual forms of family
The National Council
to Reduce Violence Against Women and their Children also stated that ‘it
is important that legislation
acknowledges sexual offences as
constituting domestic and family
4.25 Where the definition of family violence recognises sexual assault as a
form of family violence, the prominence it is given in
the definition varies.
For example, the general definition of ‘domestic violence’ in
s 13 of the
Domestic Violence and Protection Orders Act 2008
does not refer to sexual assault, although various sexual assault offences are
included in sch 1, which lists all ‘domestic
offences’. In the Northern Territory, sexual assault is cited in the
definition as an example of conduct causing harm,
whereas in Victoria and
Tasmania it is cited as a category of conduct in its own right.
4.26 Part D of this
Consultation Paper deals with sexual assault, and the ‘invisibility’
of sexual assault in family violence
cases is discussed in Chapter 15.
Economic abuse
4.27 Only some jurisdictions include ‘economic abuse’ in their
definition of family violence—namely Victoria, South
Australia, Tasmania
and the Northern Territory.
4.28 There are some differences in the precise formulations of economic
abuse. It may include, for example:
unreasonable controlling behaviour without consent that denies a
person financial autonomy;
withholding financial support reasonably necessary for the
maintenance of a partner;
coercing a partner to relinquish control over assets;
unreasonably preventing a person from taking part in decisions over
household expenditure or the disposition of joint property; and
preventing the person from seeking or keeping
employment.
4.29 There are differences in the extent to which the provisions
require a particular intention on the part of the person engaging
in economic
abuse. Only the Tasmanian provision criminalises economic abuse, requiring that
the person committing it has the intention
unreasonably to control or intimidate
his or her spouse or partner or cause mental harm, apprehension or fear in
committing certain
acts of economic
Emotional or psychological abuse
4.30 Only some state legislation expressly refers to emotional or
psychological abuse as a form of family violence. There are differences
way these terms are defined, if they are
More significantly,
only the Tasmanian legislation makes emotional abuse (and intimidation) a
criminal offence.
Fehlberg and Juliet Behrens state that the Tasmanian provisions:
bring criminal law in line with the civil definition by creating new offences
that fill the gap between the legal definitions of
criminal conduct constituting
offences such as assault and the non-physical, control based types of violence.
This creation of special
domestic violence offences is unique in Australia and
was not, for example, proposed in the Model Domestic Violence Laws, nor by
Victorian Law Reform Commission, which focused instead on the grounds for
obtaining a civil protection
4.31 The 2008 review of the Tasmanian family violence legislation noted that,
as at that time, no charge had been brought for emotional
abuse and intimidation
but that the ground had been used in support of applications for protection
4.32 Both the Victorian and South Australian family violence legislation
define emotional or psychological abuse as well and give
examples of such abuse.
The Victorian family violence legislation defines emotional or psychological
abuse as behaviour that ‘torments,
intimidates, harasses or is
offensive’.
Examples of
such behaviour are racial taunts, threatening to disclose a person’s
sexual orientation or to commit suicide, preventing
a person from keeping family
and cultural connections, and threatening to withhold a person’s
medication.
The South Australian
family violence legislation defines emotional or psychological harm as including
mental illness; nervous shock;
and distress, anxiety or fear that is more than
Examples of such conduct include threatening to institutionalise the person and
threatening to withdraw care on which the person
4.33 In contrast, Western Australian family violence legislation includes
‘emotionally abusive conduct’ but neither defines
nor gives examples
of such conduct.
4.34 Emotional abuse or intimidation under the Tasmanian legislation is
defined as the pursuit of ‘a course of conduct that
he or she knows, or
ought to know, is likely to have the effect of unreasonably controlling or
intimidating, or causing mental harm,
apprehension or fear, in his or her
4.35 Other legislation refers to conduct that is
intimidating,
Intimidation is
defined variously to include conduct that: causes reasonable apprehension or
a reasonable apprehension
or violence to the
person or the person’s property;
has the effect of unreasonably controlling the person or causing mental
causes physical
prevents the person from
doing any act that the person is lawfully entitled to do or compels the person
to do an act that the person
is legally entitled to abstain
and conduct that amounts
to harassment or molestation.
Intimidation is usually included either as a subcategory of emotional abuse or
as a ground of family violence in its own right. Similarly,
in some cases
harassment and offensive behaviour are treated as subcategories of emotional
abuse or of intimidation, while in other
cases they form an aspect of family
violence in their own right.
Kidnapping or deprivation of liberty
4.36 Most jurisdictions expressly include kidnapping or deprivation of
liberty as a form of family
The South Australian
family violence legislation includes it as an example of abuse that results in
emotional or psychological
4.37 The family violence legislation of Queensland and the Northern Territory
do not include kidnapping or deprivation of liberty
in their definitions of
family violence. The Australian Government Solicitor (AGS) has expressed the
view that kidnapping could constitute
intimidation under those legislative
Damage to property
4.38 All of the states and territories, except Tasmania, specify damage to
property as constituting family violence. The 2008 review
of the Tasmanian
family violence legislation stated:
Stakeholders did note the absence of property damage within s 7(a) [the
definition of family violence]; which was reported to be
a common feature of
family violence incidents, and at present cannot be pursued under this
4.39 The Queensland family violence legislation provides that the damage to
property must be
Domestic Violence Legislation Working Group remarked that the inclusion of the
element of ‘wilfulness’ in the Queensland
provision ‘is more
appropriate to criminal behaviour and unnecessarily complicates what is required
to be proved’.
Injuring animals
4.40 Most jurisdictions provide that injuring or killing an animal
constitutes family violence. In Queensland, Western Australia and
the Northern
Territory, harm to an animal is included as a type of property
The ACT legislation
separates damage to property from conduct directed to a pet, and makes the
latter family violence where it constitutes
a defined animal violence
The Victorian
legislation, however, includes conduct that threatens or causes the death or
injury of an animal irrespective of whether
the animal belongs to the relevant
family member where such conduct is aimed at dominating or coercing the family
4.41 The other jurisdictions are silent on whether harm to animals
constitutes family violence. Harm to animals may fall within the
category of damage to property, but the Tasmanian legislation does not include
damage to property in its definition of family
violence. Harm to an animal may
in some cases be covered by more general provisions such as emotional
4.42 Four jurisdictions expressly include stalking as conduct that
constitutes family violence,
with three of those jurisdictions linking the conduct to the criminal offence of
The situation in the
Northern Territory warrants special mention because of the disjunction between
the civil and criminal definitions
of stalking. This is discussed
4.43 Other jurisdictions do not expressly refer to stalking as conduct that
may constitute family violence, but their definitions,
to varying degrees,
encompass conduct that includes certain stalking
Exposing child to violence
4.44 Victoria is the only Australian jurisdiction where causing a child to
witness or otherwise be exposed to the effects of family
violence itself
constitutes family violence.
legislation in Western Australia and the Northern Territory does not treat
exposure of a child to family violence as constituting
family violence but
expressly allows for the making of protection orders to protect children from
such exposure.
The legislation
in NSW provides that a child must be included in a protection order if the child
is in a domestic relationship with
the person subject to the
4.45 Where jurisdictions have definitions that include emotional or
psychological abuse, these may encompass the exposure of a child
Breach of protection orders
4.46 In NSW, Tasmania and the ACT a breach of a protection order is included
in the definition of family
Threats to commit acts of family violence
4.47 In most jurisdictions the threat to commit certain acts of family
violence also constitutes family
In some jurisdictions
threats to assault, cause physical injury, or damage property are included, but
threats to intimidate or be
emotionally abusive or engage in conduct amounting
to stalking are not.
as intimidation, stalking and economic abuse—are
specifically
Commissions’ views
4.48 The Commissions note the conclusion of the AGS in
Domestic Violence
Laws in Australia
that the family violence legislation of states and
territories
does not appear to be ‘substantially different’ across the
the types of conduct
that may constitute domestic
4.49 Nonetheless, the Commissions consider that there are some key
differences that ought to be addressed. One option for reform is
standard definition of family violence across state and territory family
violence legislation. A uniform definition would
remove any confusion about the
meaning of family violence across the jurisdictions. A model definition was
proposed in the Model
Domestic Violence Laws Report but was not taken
The Commissions note that
drafting a uniform definition acceptable to all states and territories would be
a significant task, especially
given that jurisdictions adopt differing
terminology to describe family violence—including domestic violence and
domestic abuse.
The protection of victims of violence should not, however, be
compromised by achieving a consistent definition, if consistency represents
lowest common denominator. The Commissions seek stakeholder views on the
feasibility of this option.
4.50 An alternative is to concede that while definitions of family violence
across state and territory family violence legislation
need not be drafted in
precisely the same terms, there should be a shared understanding of the types of
conduct that constitute family
violence, covering both physical and non-physical
violence. The Victorian family violence legislation provides an instructive
in this regard. As illustrated by the discussion of the purposes of family
violence legislation and protection orders in Chapter
3, the underlying purposes
are substantially similar
adoption of a shared understanding of the elements of family violence does not
appear to be controversial.
4.51 The Commissions agree with the following recommendation made by the
United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs
Division for the
Advancement of Women:
Legislation should include a comprehensive definition of domestic violence,
including physical, sexual, psychological and economic
4.52 In advocating a shared understanding of the elements that comprise
family violence, the Commissions note the significant educative
definitions can play in communicating what family violence is to those within
the legal system, as well as the broader
community. Removal of confusion which
may result from conflicting understandings of what constitutes family violence
may also provide
reassurance to the community.
4.53 The Commissions are interested in hearing views about whether the
definition of family violence—in addition to setting
out examples of
conduct which constitute violence—should also provide that family violence
is violent or threatening behaviour
or any other form of behaviour that coerces,
controls and/or dominates a family member and/or causes him or her to be
fearful. The
Commissions note that this formulation was proposed by the VLRC and
part of this formulation is contained in the definition of family
violence in
the Victorian family violence
legislation.
4.54 The Commissions express views on particular legislative schemes and
certain elements of the definition of family violence, below.
Need for a definition
of family violence in NSW family violence legislation
4.55 The NSW family violence legislation is notable in its omission to define
‘domestic violence’—although it defines
a ‘domestic
violence offence’. The Commissions reiterate the view, previously
expressed by the NSW Law Reform Commission,
that there should be a separate
definition of ‘domestic violence’ in the NSW family violence
legislation which should
include reference to psychological
It is important for the
definition to capture conduct which of itself may not amount to a criminal
offence, expanding the circumstances
in which victims of violence may seek
protection. Apart from physical violence, the definition should capture the
other types of
family violence addressed below.
Sexual assault
4.56 In the Commissions’ view, sexual assault should be expressly
recognised in the definitions of family violence in the family
legislation of each state and territory. Raising the profile of sexual assault
in the definitions may go some way to addressing
the general invisibility of
sexual assault as a form of family
4.57 The Commissions agree with the conclusions of the VLRC in this regard
Including sexual forms of family violence in the definition serves two main
purposes. First, it makes it clear to family violence
victims that they do not
have to endure sexual assault, that it is not considered acceptable in our
society and that legal protection
is available. Secondly, it educates the
community about sexual violence within family relationships and that it is
unacceptable.
4.58 This will clearly necessitate amendment to the family violence
legislation of Western Australia, which does not recognise sexual
assault. The
Commissions are interested in views about whether the general definition of
‘domestic violence’ in s 13
of the ACT family violence
legislation should be amended to include express reference to sexual assault
even though various offences
of sexual assault are included in sch 1 as
‘domestic violence’ offences. The Commissions tend to the view,
however, that
the general definition in the ACT family violence legislation
should refer expressly to sexual assault.
4.59 Further, as discussed below, the Queensland definition of family
violence—although it refers to ‘indecent behaviour
consent’—may also need to be amended to capture sexual offences
against children where consent is not a defence.
Economic abuse
4.60 Economic abuse should be expressly recognised in the definitions of
family violence in the family violence legislation of each
state and territory.
This will necessitate amendment to the family violence legislation of NSW,
Queensland, Western Australia and
the Northern Territory.
4.61 Economic abuse is a particular form of violence that has been identified
as used against older women. The Australian Domestic
and Family Violence
Clearinghouse has highlighted the problem of abuse of older women being
‘lost in the cracks’ between
the family violence and elder abuse
services systems.
It notes the
serious under-reporting of violence against older women, noting a greater
reluctance of older women to disclose personal
Older women living
alone may be more vulnerable to economic abuse by an adult child following the
death of a partner.
4.62 Ideally, legislation should set out examples of economic abuse. Such
examples help to educate judicial officers, lawyers and
those engaging with the
legal system. The family violence legislation of Victoria and South Australia
provide instructive models
in this regard.
4.63 The Commissions propose below that
(NSW)—a ‘domestic violence offence’ dealing with
failure to provide any wife, apprentice, servant or insane person
with necessary
food, clothing or lodgings—should be amended to ensure that its underlying
philosophy and language are appropriate
in a modern
The Commissions
consider that the proposed inclusion of economic abuse in the family violence
legislation of NSW may be more appropriate.
Emotional or psychological harm/abuse
4.64 The Commissions note the various formulations of emotional or
psychological harm or abuse—or related conduct that
‘intimidates,’
‘harasses’ or
‘coerces’—referred to in the family violence legislation of
the various states or territories.
While one option is to have a consistently
worded definition, the Commissions consider that, at the least, the emphasis
on a shared understanding that emotional abuse is a recognised form of
family violence.
4.65 However, there are two respects in which the Commissions offer a
tentative view. One is in relation to the use of legislative
examples; the other
concerns possibly inappropriate emphasis on proof of emotional abuse in relation
to certain types of family violence.
Each of these is addressed below.
4.66 Use of legislative examples.
The category of violence
covering emotional or psychological abuse or intimidation/coercion is one that
is particularly likely to
impact differently on various groups in the community.
It is therefore desirable that the family violence legislation of each state
territory include examples of such conduct that would affect diverse groups in
the community. In this regard, the Commissions
endorse the recommendation made
by the VLRC that a definition of family violence ‘should be broad enough
to include abuses
specific to certain groups in the
community’.
4.67 Examples of such conduct as they affect varying groups and that appear
desirable to include in family violence legislation include:
threatening to: institutionalise a person; withdraw care on which
the person is dependent; withhold medication or prevent the person
necessary medical equipment or treatment—potentially relevant to aged
persons and those suffering from a disability
or illness;
racial taunts; and preventing a person from making or keeping
connections with the person’s family, friends or culture, including
cultural or spiritual ceremonies or practices—potentially relevant to
migrants, Indigenous people and persons from diverse
cultural and linguistic
backgrounds; and
threatening to disclose a person’s sexual orientation against
the person’s wishes—relevant to those from the gay,
bisexual and transgender community.
4.68 Highlighting such examples
in legislation will serve an important educative function. The Commissions note
that some concern
has been expressed about judicial officers relying on
legislative examples as exhaustive rather than illustrative of prohibited
An example was given on the ALRC’s Family Violence Online Forum
of a judicial officer who took the approach that the two examples
‘harassment’ in the Northern Territory family violence legislation
constrained a consideration of conduct that did
not fall within the ambit of
those examples.
4.69 The Commissions are interested in hearing whether, in practice,
legislative examples of certain types of family violence conduct
treated as exhaustive.
event, family violence legislation should make it clear that such examples are
not intended to be exhaustive. Moreover, proper
statutory interpretation is an
issue appropriately addressed by judicial and legal education.
4.70 Appropriate use of emotional or psychological abuse category.
In some cases, family violence legislation refers to emotional or
psychological abuse to describe conduct that would not otherwise
amount to a
criminal offence (if proved to the requisite standard), for example, repeated
derogatory taunts. This approach is appropriate.
In other cases, even where
conduct could amount to a criminal offence, a person must also prove emotional
abuse to obtain a protection
order. For example, the South Australian family
violence legislation focuses on either the impact of harm to a victim or the
of the person engaging in family violence. Sexual assault is included
as an example of conduct that could result in emotional or
psychological
The Commissions are
concerned that requiring a person to prove emotional or psychological harm as
the result of sexual assault adds
a further evidentiary burden. The very fact of
sexual assault should fall within conduct constituting family violence, without
need to prove that such conduct had a certain effect on the victim. The same
could be said of depriving a person of his or her liberty,
which is also cited
as an example of conduct that could cause emotional or psychological harm in the
South Australian
legislation.
4.71 There is some room for definitions of family violence to focus on the
harm to the victim. However, where conduct would, in any
event, amount to a
criminal offence if it could be proven to the criminal standard of proof, a
definition should not add an unnecessary
evidentiary burden on victims to prove
that such conduct caused them emotional or psychological harm. Proof of
emotional harm following
sexual assault is not necessary for a criminal
prosecution—nor ought it to be to obtain a protection order.
Kidnapping or deprivation of liberty
4.72 The Commissions consider that, for the sake of clarity, the definition
of family violence in the family violence legislation
of Queensland and the
Northern Territory should include kidnapping or deprivation of liberty.
Damage to property
4.73 In the Commissions’ view, the family violence legislation of
Tasmania should be amended to include damage to property and
the threat to
commit such damage in the definition of family violence. The absence of this
category of violence is anomalous. As
stated in the review of that
violence incidents.
Property damage is recognised as family violence not only
across the family violence legislation of the other states and territories
also, for example, in the
Migration Regulations 1994
(Cth) and in
overseas jurisdictions such as New Zealand. The absence of property
damage—as a traditionally recognised form
of violence—in the
Tasmanian legislation is in contrast to Tasmania’s recognition and
criminalisation of less commonly
recognised forms of family violence, namely
emotional and economic abuse.
Injury to animals
4.74 The definition of family violence in each of the states and territories
should be broad enough to capture relevant conduct that
causes death or harm to
an animal, such as a family pet, irrespective of whether the animal is
technically the property of the victim.
There are a number of ways of achieving
this. Harm to an animal can be specifically incorporated into the definition of
family violence,
or it can fall within the general category of emotional or
psychological abuse. Where harm to an animal is linked to property damage,
definitions of property can be extended to make it clear that property covers
not only property that is owned by the victim but also
property in his or her
possession or otherwise used or
4.75 It appears that the family violence legislation of the following
which may not
technically be the property of the victim:
NSW—as its legislation does not refer to such harm, nor does
it contain the category of emotional or psychological abuse, nor
an expanded
definition of property either in s 7—which refers to
intimidation—or insofar as it picks up property offences
, which refers to property ‘belonging to
Queensland—as its legislation only specifically refers to
wilful damage to the other person’s property—including
pet—and does not contain a category of emotional or psychological
Western Australia—as its legislation links harm to an animal
to property belonging to the victim, and although it contains
covering emotional abuse, it requires such abuse to be
two instances of killing or injuring a family pet may not qualify as
Northern Territory—as its legislation allows for injury or
death of an animal either on the basis that it damages the victim’s
property or intimidates the victim by causing reasonable apprehension of harm to
of children to violence
4.76 The National Council’s report,
Time for Action: The National
Council’s Plan for Australia to Reduce Violence Against Women and their
noted that:
Children and young people exposed to sexual assault and domestic and family
violence experience anger, sadness, shame, guilt, confusion,
despair. Children do not need to be physically present when violence occurs to
suffer negative consequences. Living
in an environment where violence occurs is
extremely damaging to children and there is little difference in outcomes for
whether they see the violence or not.
Living with domestic and family violence can directly affect infants, causing
negative developmental, social, emotional and behavioural
consequences. At a
time of rapid neurological growth, an infant’s development may be
compromised by exposure to ongoing violence,
whether or not they are the target
of the violence. Infants may have symptoms typical of post-traumatic
4.77 The Commissions are of the preliminary view that family violence
legislation ought to acknowledge the detrimental impact of family
violence on
children. Later in this chapter, the Commissions propose that each family
violence Act expressly acknowledge these effects
either in a preamble or a
provision setting out the nature, features and dynamics of family
4.78 In addition, the Commissions tend to the view that the definitions of
family violence in the family violence legislation of each
state and territory
should either acknowledge exposure of children to family violence as a category
of violence in its own right—as
is the case in Victoria—or enable
the making of orders to protect children from such exposure.
4.79 The Commissions note that Maurine Pyke’s
Review of South
Australian Domestic Violence Laws
in 2007 identified, as an option for
reform, amending the definition of family violence to include causing or
allowing a child to
see or hear family violence, or putting or allowing the
child to be put at real risk of such
4.80 Exposure of children to family violence encompasses more than just
witnessing family violence. Indeed the terminology of ‘witnessing’
may be problematic in the sense that it may have a tendency to downplay the fact
that children are living with the reality of family
violence. The Victorian
family violence legislation provides instructive examples of behaviour that
causes a child to hear or witness
or otherwise be exposed to family
These include the
child comforting or providing assistance to a family member who has been
physically abused by another family member,
and being present when police
officers attend an incident involving physical abuse of a family member by
another family member.
4.81 In making these proposals, the Commissions have been persuaded by the
considerable amount of research documenting the fact that
exposure of children
to family violence causes long-term emotional, psychological, physical and
behavioural issues. For example,
Emma Bevan and Daryl Higgins’ research
concluded that:
Physical abuse and witnessing family violence significantly predicted
psychological spouse abuse and trauma symptomatology, with
witnessing family
violence individually predicting the two outcomes.
4.82 Family law judgments have also referred to the dangers of children being
exposed to violence. For example, in
, Mullane J referred to the
risk of injury and fear, as well as the risk that children will learn from the
abusive behaviour and ultimately
treat it as
acceptable.
, Moore J referred to the ‘abundance of research from social
scientists about the highly detrimental effect upon young children
of exposure
to violence and the serious consequences such experiences have for their
personality formation’ and went on to
catalogue such
4.83 The Commissions are, however, interested in hearing whether such a
proposal would have negative effects for mothers who are victims
violence and are held accountable for not protecting children from violence at a
time when they are under intense pressure.
Linkage to criminal law
4.84 The Commissions note that family violence legislation in both NSW and
the ACT sets out certain offences which are ‘domestic
offences. The Commissions consider that the states and territories should have
flexibility to do this in their definitions
of family violence provided that
other elements of family violence are also acknowledged in the definition.
Linking family violence
to certain criminal offences has the advantage of
clarity. However, the Commissions consider that the list of offences should be
reviewed by the respective state and territory governments with a view to
ascertaining whether:
each of the offences ought to remain classified as a ‘domestic
violence offence’;
there are any additional offences that ought to be included;
there are any offences that need to be updated or
stated above, over-definitions of family violence can detract from, or devalue,
the experience of victims of family violence,
and under-definitions can cause
gaps in protection.
4.86 The Commissions are particularly interested in understanding why it is
necessary to categorise the following offences as ‘domestic
violence’ offences (as the ACT legislation does) and whether they have
been used as the basis for obtaining protection orders:
causing bushfires;
engaging in unreasonable obstruction in relation to the use of
government premises;
behaving in an offensive or disorderly manner while in or on
government premises; and
refusing or neglecting to leave government premises when
4.87 There may, of course, be valid reasons why particular
offences that do not appear obviously to be of a ‘family violence’
nature have been categorised in this way. For example, the reason for the
inclusion of trespass in the ACT legislation was justified
as follows:
The inclusion of trespass as a domestic violence offence in this Act is in
response to concern raised in the community that its exclusion
can potentially
have implications for a victim’s safety. Police identified circumstances
where they have been obliged to grant
bail to a person who has been apprehended
for trespass in a domestic violence context. As trespass is currently not
included as a
domestic violence offence, the offender is released back into the
community within a short period of time. The inclusion of trespass
as a domestic
violence offence gives police an option to remand an offender in custody when
the offence trespasses in a domestic
violence context. Its inclusion will
enhance the intention of the Act to raise a presumption against bail for
domestic violence offences
on the basis of protecting victims from further
4.88 The Commissions consider that the NSW and ACT Governments, in
undertaking the proposed review of ‘domestic violence offences’,
should also give particular attention to those offences in respect of which
their legislation differs. For example, NSW does not
categorise incest, causing
bushfires and negligent driving as ‘domestic violence offences’, but
the ACT does.
(a) State and territory family violence legislation should contain
the same definition of family violence covering physical and non-physical
violence, including conduct the subject of Proposals 4–3 to 4–5 and
4–7 to 4–10 below. The definition of
family violence in the
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
(Vic) should be referred to as a
(b) The definitions of family violence in state and territory family violence
legislation should recognise the same types of physical
and non-physical
violence, including conduct the subject of Proposals 4–3 to 4–5 and
4–7 to 4–10 below. The
definition of family violence in the
Family Violence Protection
(Vic) should be referred to as a model.
Should the definition of family violence in state and territory
family violence legislation, in addition to setting out the types
that constitute violence, provide that family violence is violent or threatening
behaviour or any other form of behaviour
that coerces, controls or dominates a
family member or causes that family member to be
Proposal 4–2
Crimes (Domestic and Personal Violence) Act
(NSW) should be amended to include a definition of ‘domestic
violence’, in addition to the current definition of ‘domestic
violence offence’.
Proposal 4–3
State and territory family violence legislation
should expressly recognise sexual assault in the definition of family violence
the extent that it does not already do so.
Proposal 4–4
State and territory family violence legislation
should expressly recognise economic abuse in the definition of family violence
the extent that it does not already do so.
Proposal 4–5
State and territory family violence legislation
should include specific examples of emotional or psychological abuse or
intimidation
or harassment that illustrate acts of violence against certain
vulnerable groups including: Indigenous persons; those from a culturally
linguistically diverse background; the aged; those with a disability; and those
from the gay, lesbian, bisexual and transgender
community. Instructive models of
such examples are in the
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
Intervention Orders (Prevention of Abuse) Act 2009
(SA). In each
case, state and territory family violence legislation should make it clear that
such examples are illustrative and
not exhaustive of the prohibited conduct.
Some state and territory family violence legislation lists
examples of types of conduct that can constitute a category of family violence.
In practice, are judicial officers and lawyers treating such examples as
exhaustive rather than illustrative?
Proposal 4–6
The definition of family violence in state and
territory family violence legislation should not require a person to prove
or psychological harm in respect of conduct which, by its nature,
could be pursued criminally—such as sexual assault. In particular,
Intervention Orders (Prevention of Abuse) Act 2009
(SA) should be amended
to ensure that sexual assault of itself is capable of meeting the definition of
‘abuse’ without
having to prove emotional abuse.
Proposal 4–7
Domestic Violence and Protection Orders Act
Domestic and Family Violence Act 2007
(NT) should be
amended expressly to recognise kidnapping or deprivation of liberty as a form of
family violence.
Proposal 4–8
Family Violence Act 1994
(Tas) should be
amended to recognise damage to property and threats to commit such damage as a
form of family violence.
Proposal 4–9
Crimes (Domestic and Personal Violence) Act
Violence and Protection Orders Act 2008
Restraining Orders Act
Domestic and Family Violence Act 2007
(NT) should be
amended to ensure that their definitions of family violence capture harm or
injury to an animal irrespective of whether
that animal is technically the
property of the victim.
Proposal 4–10
State and territory family violence legislation
should include in the definition of family violence exposure of children to
violence as a category of violence in its own right.
Proposal 4–11
Where state or territory family violence
legislation sets out specific criminal offences that form conduct constituting
family violence,
there should be a policy reason for the categorisation of each
such offence as a family violence offence. To this end, the governments
and the ACT should review the offences categorised as ‘domestic violence
offences’ in their respective family
violence legislation with a view to
(a) ensuring that such categorisations are justified and appropriate; and (b)
ascertaining whether
or not additional offences ought to be included.
Proposal 4–12
Incidental to the proposed review of
‘domestic violence offences’ referred to in Proposal 4–11
Crimes Act 1900
(NSW)—which deals with the
failure to provide any wife, apprentice, servant or insane person with necessary
food, clothing
or lodgings—should be amended to ensure that its underlying
philosophy and language are appropriate in a modern context.
4.89 The discussion below addresses interaction issues between the
definitions or terminology in family violence laws and the criminal
in the limited circumstances where the criminal law defines
‘family violence’; and
where each law defines a
constitute family
Interaction of definitions
of ‘family violence’ in criminal and family violence laws
4.90 There are limited examples of definitions of ‘family
violence’ or ‘domestic violence’ in the criminal
Australia. One area where the criminal law has defined ‘family
violence’ is in the context of defences to
This is the case
Crimes Act 1958
(Vic), and the Criminal Code Abusive Domestic
Relationship Defence and Another Matter) Amendment Act 2010 (Qld), each of which
addressed below.
4.91 A consideration of the Victorian and Queensland legislation below raises
the issue of how family violence should be defined where
it is recognised as
relevant as a defence to homicide, either in its own right, or as part of a
broader concept of self-defence.
Victorian criminal legislation
4.92 Section 9AH of the
Crimes Act 1958
(Vic) allows evidence of
family violence to be adduced in cases of
manslaughter,
where family
violence is alleged. It does not operate as a separate defence in itself, but
allows considerations of family violence
to be relevant to
self-defence.
evidence that can be adduced include evidence about the history of the
relationship between the accused person and a family
member, and the general
nature and dynamics of relationships affected by family violence. Under
s 9AH, where family violence is alleged,
the defence of self-defence is
available even if an accused person is responding to harm that is not immediate,
or his or her response
uses disproportionate force.
4.93 ‘Violence’ is defined more narrowly in s 9AH of the
than it is under the Victorian family violence
legislation. It is defined in the
to include physical abuse,
sexual abuse, psychological abuse—including intimidation, harassment,
damage to property, and certain
threats—and causing a child to see or hear
certain types of abuse or putting a child at real risk of seeing or hearing that
abuse. Unlike the Victorian family violence legislation, it does not include
economic abuse or the more general category of behaviour
that in any other way
controls or dominates the person and causes the person to feel fear for his or
her or a family member’s
well-being.
4.94 However, an historical analysis of the definition of family violence in
Crimes Act 1958
reveals no intention to introduce a definition that
was more limited than that in Victoria’s family violence legislation. The
amendments to the
Crimes Act 1958
were made in response to
recommendations made by the VLRC in its report on defences to homicide in 2004.
At the time, Victoria’s
family violence legislation was the
(Family Violence) Act 1987
, which did not contain a definition of family
violence. The VLRC in its report on defences to homicide stated that it had
to adopt as a model the definition under the
Domestic Violence Act
(NZ), which had received some support in consultations on its inquiry
into family violence.
4.95 The adoption by the VLRC of the New Zealand definition preceded its
later recommendation, in its 2006 report on family violence,
of the definition of family violence—which did include, for example,
economic abuse. The definition of family
violence adopted in the
is the New Zealand definition of family violence. The broader
definition of family violence in the
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
(Vic) did not exist at the time the amendments to the
Crimes Act 1958
Queensland criminal legislation
4.96 On 16 February 2010 the
Criminal Code (Abusive Domestic Relationship
Defence and Another Matter) Amendment Act 2010
(Qld) was assented to and
commenced. The Act amends the
Criminal Code Act 1889
(Qld) to insert a
new section 304B which introduces a new partial defence to murder of
‘killing in an abusive domestic relationship’.
In the Second Reading
Speech, the Attorney-General Cameron Dick stated:
The new partial defence to murder will apply to victims of seriously abusive
relationships who kill their abusers. The defence will
be the first of its kind
in the country and will operate to provide legal protection for victims in this
category of offending.
4.97 The defence only applies where the person killed had committed
‘serious domestic violence’ against the accused in
the course of the
relationship. Significantly, the Act provides that references to ‘an act
of domestic violence in a domestic
relationship’ are to be interpreted in
the same way as that state’s family violence legislation—the
Domestic and Family Violence Protection Act 1989
‘domestic violence’ in Queensland has the same meaning under civil
and criminal legislation. The distinguishing
factor in the criminal legislation
is the requirement for the family violence to be ‘serious’ in order
for the defence
to apply. The Attorney-General stated in the Second Reading
Speech that:
The use of the term ‘serious’ within the provision in relation to
the level of domestic violence is used as a matter
of emphasis to place the
nature of the domestic violence in the Supreme Court murder trial in context.
… All domestic violence
must be condemned not only by government but in
all our communities and in our homes. However, the use of the term
in the bill acts to create an appropriate threshold for
the application of this partial defence to a charge of
Commissions’ views
4.98 In the Commissions’ preliminary view, where a state or
territory’s criminal legislation recognises family violence
as relevant to
a defence to homicide—either in its own right or as part of a broader
concept of self-defence—family violence
should be defined broadly to
include both physical and non-physical violence, in the same way that it should
be defined under family
legislation.
4.99 In the Commissions’ preliminary view there is considerable merit
in a jurisdiction’s family violence legislation
and criminal legislation
adopting a common understanding of the types of conduct that constitute family
violence, in those cases
where the criminal law recognises family violence as
relevant to a defence to homicide. This is irrespective of whether the criminal
legislation limits the availability of defences to homicide in a family violence
context to cases involving ‘serious’
family violence. Ideally, the
definition of family violence used in a state or territory’s civil and
criminal legislation should
align. There would appear to be a stronger case for
of the definition of ‘family violence’ within a
state or territory’s family violence and criminal laws, than is
across state or territory jurisdictions. In the latter case, the emphasis should
be on adopting a shared understanding of
what constitutes family violence.
4.100 The Commissions have considered whether the differing policy objectives
of civil protection legislation and criminal legislation
warrant a more
restrictive definition of family violence in the criminal context. On balance,
the Commissions tend to the view that
the different policy objectives of the
criminal law and family violence legislation are not compromised by the adoption
of a commonly
definition.
Those different
policy objectives may be addressed by placing emphasis, where necessary, on the
seriousness
of the family violence, rather than excluding certain types
of violence. That is the approach taken in the Queensland criminal legislation,
which provides one model for reform. It appears appropriate that the degree of
severity of family violence capable of being relied
upon as a defence to murder
is higher than that which may be needed to obtain a protection order.
4.101 Where a jurisdiction allows evidence of family violence to be adduced
in the context of a broader concept of self-defence, like
Victoria, the issue of
severity will most likely be one of the factors considered by the jury in
determining whether the accused
had reasonable grounds for believing his or her
conduct was necessary.
4.102 In Chapter 7 the Commissions pose a series of questions about how
the criminal law can best recognise family violence as a defence
to homicide,
including seeking feedback on problems or issues which arise from current models
that recognise family violence as relevant
to a defence to homicide.
4.103 As discussed above, the fact that the Victorian criminal legislation
has a narrower definition in its family violence legislation
is more accidental
rather purposeful. The definition of family violence used in Victoria’s
family violence legislation was
not enacted at the time the family violence
amendments were made to the Victorian
Commissions’ preliminary view, the definition of family violence in
s 9AH of the
should be replaced with the definition of
family violence in
of Victoria’s family violence legislation.
Alternatively, the definition of family violence in s 9AH of the
should be amended to include economic abuse. The Commissions understand
is currently under review.
4.104 The inclusion of economic abuse in the definition of family violence in
s 9AH of the
Crimes Act 1958
(Vic) will not necessarily mean that
economic abuse of itself will constitute a defence to homicide. Rather, it will
ensure that
the pattern of family violence to which a person has been
subjected—including physical and non-physical violence—will
relevant to self-defence where a person kills a family member who has been
violent towards her or him.
Proposal 4–13
The definitions of family violence in a state or
territory’s family violence legislation and criminal legislation—in
context of defences to homicide—should align, irrespective of whether
the criminal legislation limits the availability of defences
to homicide in a
family violence context to cases involving ‘serious’ family
Proposal 4–14
The definition of ‘family violence’ in
s 9AH of the
Crimes Act 1958
(Vic)—which largely replicates
the definition in s 3 of the
Domestic Violence Act
(NZ)—should be replaced with the definition of ‘family
violence’ in
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
(Vic). Alternatively, the definition of family violence in s 9AH of the
Crimes Act 1958
(Vic) should be amended to include economic abuse.
Definitions of, or terminology referring to,
acts that may constitute family violence across criminal and family violence
4.105 As stated above, some state and territory definitions of family
violence pick up some definitions of criminal law offences.
For example, the
Victorian family violence legislation provides that the definition of
‘assault’ for the purpose of family
violence is the same as the
definition of assault in
Crimes Act 1958
Similarly, the Western
Australian family violence legislation provides that various definitions,
including those of ‘assault’,
‘intimidate’,
‘kidnapping or depriving the person of his or her liberty’ and
‘pursue’ are the
same as the equivalent definitions in the
Criminal Code
4.106 However, there are some examples where the different ways in which the
family violence law and criminal law of a jurisdiction
define family violence
produces potentially anomalous outcomes. Some specific examples are set out
below, as are the Commissions’
proposals to address such anomalies.
4.107 Stalking—Northern Territory
. ‘Stalking’
is defined differently—and in some respects more narrowly—under
Domestic and Family
Violence Act
(NT) than it is for the purpose of delineating conduct
constituting a criminal offence under the
Criminal Code
(NT). Under the
Criminal Code
(NT) s 189 relevant stalking behaviour extends, for
example, to telephoning or sending electronic messages to the victim,
interfering
with property in the victim’s possession and giving offensive
material to the victim—none of which is canvassed in the
definition of
stalking in the family violence legislation. The definition of
‘stalking’ in the
Criminal Code
(NT) (unlike the family
violence legislation) also allows for a combination of behaviours to constitute
stalking, in addition to repeated
instances of the same conduct. In theory, this
could mean that a victim in the Northern Territory may not be able to obtain a
order in family violence proceedings against a person engaging in
stalking for conduct that could be the subject of a criminal prosecution
4.108 The Commissions are interested in hearing about practical interactions
between the stalking provisions in the Northern Territory’s
criminal and
family violence laws.
Domestic violence’—Queensland
definition of ‘domestic violence’ in s 11 of the
Domestic and Family Violence
Protection Act 1989
(Qld) includes ‘wilful injury’. How does
this interact in practice with ‘common assault’ as it is defined
s 245 of the
Criminal Code
(Qld)? The latter includes striking,
touching or moving a person without his or her consent. A person may touch or
move someone without
causing injury, which appears to make the definition of
‘wilful injury’ in the family violence legislation more restrictive
than the definition of ‘assault’ in the criminal legislation. The
definition of ‘domestic violence’ in s
11 also includes
‘indecent behaviour to the other person without consent’. However,
Criminal Code
there are some sexual offences against children
where consent is not a defence. The scope of the definition of ‘domestic
in the family violence Act means that a person would not be able
to obtain a protection order—for example, on behalf of a child—in
circumstances where criminal redress may be available.
4.110 The Commissions are interested in hearing about whether there are other
examples where the scope of conduct that could warrant
prosecution is broader
than conduct that could warrant an application for a protection order.
Are there any other examples where the criminal law of a state or
territory would allow for prosecution of conduct constituting family
violence in
circumstances where a state or territory’s family violence legislation
would not recognise the same conduct as
warranting a protection
4.111 There may of course be occasion for a particular term in family
violence legislation to be defined more broadly than its corresponding
criminal legislation, given the different objectives of the civil protection
order regime. However, this should not be done
in a way that may cause
confusion. An example where different definitions and terminology across state
or territory family violence
and criminal legislation may cause confusion is
discussed next.
4.112 Emotional or psychological harm, mental
Intervention Orders
(Prevention of Abuse) Act 2009
(SA) one of the categories of abuse is that
which causes, or is intended to cause, ‘emotional or psychological
Such harm is defined as including:
mental illness;
nervous shock; and
distress, anxiety or fear, that is more than
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
(SA) uses the term ‘mental
harm’. It defines ‘harm’ as meaning ‘physical or mental
harm (whether temporary
permanent)’.
‘Mental harm’ is in turn defined as ‘psychological harm and
does not include emotional reactions such as distress,
grief, fear or anger
unless they result in psychological harm’.
4.114 On first reading, the scope of each of the definitions—read in
isolation—is arguably ambiguous, and when read together,
confusing—especially from the point of view of a victim of family violence
who may try to obtain a protection order
based on emotional or psychological
harm, in circumstances where there is also the prospect of commencing criminal
proceedings for
offences such as: causing serious
acts endangering life
or creating risk of serious
4.115 It appears that the definition of ‘mental harm’ in the
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
excludes emotional harm—given that
any emotional reaction within the ambit of the definition has to amount to
psychological
harm. That may be a valid policy position. However, the criminal
law does not define psychological harm. The absence of a definition
term, combined with the fact that the
Intervention Orders
(Prevention of Abuse) Act 2009
conflates the definition of ‘emotional
or psychological harm’, has the potential to cause confusion. Would proof
illness’ or ‘nervous shock’—for the
purpose of obtaining a protection order—qualify as proof of ‘mental
harm’ for the purposes of a criminal prosecution for an offence, such as
‘causing harm’—assuming that proof
is established beyond
reasonable doubt?
4.116 At the time of writing, the
Intervention Orders (Prevention of
Abuse) Act 2009
had not come into effect, so it is not known whether the
interaction in practice of the definitions discussed above is problematic.
Commissions’ views
4.117 In terms of policy, it is not justifiable to have a definition of
family violence in family violence legislation that makes
it more difficult for
a victim to obtain a protection order than to commence a prosecution—in
circumstances which warrant criminal
prosecution.
4.118 State and territory governments should review the definitions and
terminology used in defining family violence in their respective
family violence
Acts to ensure that they align with corresponding concepts or definitions in
their criminal laws or, at least, ensure
that the interaction of such
terminology or definitions does not prevent a person obtaining a protection
order in circumstances where
a criminal prosecution could be pursued.
4.119 In particular, the definition of ‘stalking’ in the Northern
Territory family violence legislation should be amended.
Further, those aspects
of the definition of ‘domestic violence’ referring to ‘wilful
injury’ and ‘indecent
behaviour without consent’ in the
Queensland family violence legislation should be reviewed.
4.120 In addition, the Commissions consider that the South Australian
Government should review whether the interaction of the definition
‘emotional or psychological harm’ in its family violence
legislation, and ‘mental harm’ in its criminal
legislation is likely
to confuse victims and their legal representatives involved in both civil and
criminal proceedings. This review
should consider whether it would be desirable,
for example, for (a) the family violence legislation to distinguish between
and psychological harm; or (b) the criminal legislation to define
‘psychological harm’; and (c) for both the family violence
criminal legislation to adopt a commonly shared understanding of the meaning of
‘psychological harm’.
Proposal 4–15
State and territory governments should review
their family violence and criminal legislation to ensure that the interaction of
terminology
or definitions of certain conduct constituting family violence would
not prevent a person obtaining a protection order in circumstances
criminal prosecution could be pursued. In particular,
(a) the definition of stalking in
Domestic and Family Violence Act
(NT) s 7 should be amended to include all stalking behaviour referred to in
Criminal Code Act
(NT) s 189; and
(b) the Queensland government should review the inclusion of the concepts of
‘wilful injury’ and ‘indecent behaviour
without consent’
in the definition of ‘domestic violence’ in s 11 of the
Domestic and Family Violence Protection Act 1989
(Qld), in light of how
these concepts might interact with the
Criminal Code
Proposal 4–16
The South Australian Government should review
whether the interaction of the definition of ‘emotional or psychological
in the definition of ‘abuse’ in
Intervention Orders
(Prevention of Abuse) Act 2009
(SA), and ‘mental harm’ in
Law Consolidation Act 1935
(SA) is likely to confuse victims and their legal
representatives involved in both civil family violence and criminal proceedings.
In particular, the review should consider whether it would be desirable for:
Intervention Orders (Prevention of Abuse) Act
to distinguish
between emotional and psychological harm;
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
‘psychological harm’; and
(c) both above mentioned Acts to adopt a commonly shared understanding of
the meaning of ‘psychological harm’.
Family Law Act
distinguishes between ‘family
violence’ and abuse of a child. Potentially, the same conduct in relation
to a child constitutes
both family violence and child
Family violence is
defined to mean
conduct, whether actual or threatened, by a person towards, or towards the
property of, a member of the person’s family that
causes that or any other
member of the person’s family reasonably to fear for, or reasonably to be
apprehensive about, his
or her personal wellbeing or safety.
A person reasonably
fears for, or reasonably is apprehensive about, his or her personal wellbeing or
safety in particular circumstances
if a reasonable person in those circumstances
would fear for, or be apprehensive about, his or her personal wellbeing or
4.122 This definition of ‘family violence’ is a semi-objective
definition, as it requires reasonableness (objective element)
but also requires
the decision-maker to place themselves in the position of the potential victim
(subjective element).
stricter than the purely subjective test for family violence which previously
existed under
The definition is
also narrower in some respects than the definitions in state and territory
family violence legislation. Objective
definitions have been criticised as
‘it is essentially a contradiction in terms to apply the notion of
reasonableness to the
experience of fear, and to do so fails to understand the
psychological impact of violence, particularly in situations where there
been a history of
4.123 Conduct that causes a victim to fear for his or her safety may seem
benign to an outsider. Dr Elspeth McInnes of the National
Council of Single
Mothers and their Children gave the following example to the Senate Legal and
Constitutional Legislation Committee:
We had a case where a mother detailed how her ex partner had brutally murdered
the family pet, a cat, in front of the child and the
mother. It was in an
episode of high agitation and aggression and he had threatened that this would
happen to other family members
who defied him. He used to like to send kitten
cards to the child and the mother when she was attending court. Everybody would
at that on the outside and say ‘Isn’t that nice, he’s
sending a lovely card with a kitten’. But the message
was ‘remember
4.124 Women’s Legal Services Australia submitted to the
Courts Violence Review
(Chisholm Review) that the definition of
‘family violence’ in the
Family Law Act
should be broadened
to reflect better the nature and dynamics of family violence as a pattern of
behaviour, including by removing
the reasonableness
There is a tendency to see family violence as a series of incidents, when in
fact it is a pattern of behaviour that involves the
use of violence as a tool of
power and control. Victims of family violence learn to ‘read’ the
perpetrator of violence
and know what is coming next. It may appear to an
outsider that a specific incident should not ‘reasonably’ cause the
victim to fear for their safety, but her experience tells her
4.125 A number of other stakeholders also submitted to the Chisholm Review
that the definition of ‘family violence’ in
was too narrow including National Legal Aid, which submitted that
‘an expanded and more prescriptive definition’ similar
to the one in
the Victorian family violence legislation should be
4.126 Abuse in relation to a child is defined to mean:
(a) an assault, including a sexual assault, of the child which is an offence
under a law, written or unwritten, in force in the
State or Territory in which
the act constituting the assault occurs; or
(b) a person involving the child in a sexual activity with that person or
another person in which the child is used, directly or
indirectly, as a sexual
object by the first-mentioned person or the other person, and where there is
unequal power in the relationship
between the child and the first-mentioned
4.127 Significantly, the Family Violence Strategy of the Family Court of
Australia acknowledges that the definition of ‘family
violence ’in
Family Law Act
is too narrow to meet the objectives of the Strategy.
As a result, the Family Violence Committee adopted ‘a more comprehensive
definition of the elements of violence’:
Family violence covers a broad range of controlling behaviours, commonly of a
physical, sexual, and/or psychological nature, which
typically involve fear,
harm, intimidation and emotional deprivation. It occurs within a variety of
close interpersonal relationships,
such as between spouses, partners, parents
and children, siblings, and in other relationships where significant others are
of the physical household but are part of the family and/or are
fulfilling the function of
4.128 Dr Rae Kaspiew notes that differences in legislative definitions and
practice-based definitions risk potentially inconsistent
approaches in legal and
family dispute resolution
Interaction of definitions: family violence
legislation and the Family Law Act
4.129 One of the principles to be applied by the Family Court of Australia
and other courts exercising jurisdiction under the
Family Law Act
they must have regard to the need to ensure safety from family violence, as
defined in the Act.
a number of other provisions which require the Family Court to consider family
violence. Insofar as the Family Court has
to decide what is in a child’s
best interests, a primary consideration is the need to protect the child from
physical or psychological
harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse,
neglect or family violence.
An additional consideration is any family violence involving the child or a
member of the child’s
On its face, this
means that the Family Court of Australia is potentially considering family
violence in much narrower terms than
the generally broader conceptualisations
under state and territory family violence legislation.
4.130 However, while the definition of ‘family violence’ in the
Family Law Act
is comparatively narrow, the definition of ‘family
violence order’ captures orders—including interim orders—made
under prescribed laws of a state or territory to protect a person from family
This is important
because the Family Court is bound to consider family violence orders that apply
to a child or a member of the child’s
family in ascertaining what is in a
child’s best interests, but only if they are final or
In addition, in
making parenting orders, the Family Court has to ensure that the order is
consistent with any family violence order
and does not expose a person to an
unacceptable risk of family
4.131 The prescribed laws under sch 8 of the
Regulations
cover: state
and territory family violence legislation; other Acts that confer jurisdiction
on courts to make family violence orders
and; at least in one
an Act that confers
family violence context as defined
in that state’s family violence
legislation.
4.132 This means that the Family Court has to take family violence orders
‘as they are’, that is, orders based on the
particular definitions
and the grounds for obtaining those orders in the particular state or territory
in practice, the Family Court may be required to
consider a conceptualisation of family violence that is broader than that
Family Law Act
. In cases where a person appearing
before the Family Court has a pre-existing final or contested protection order,
the differences
in definitions between the state or territory and federal scheme
may have little effect. Further, in ascertaining what is in a child’s
interests, the Family Court has broad discretion to consider any other fact or
relevant circumstance that the court thinks is
which may extend to
a consideration of violence falling outside the parameters of the definition of
family violence in the
Family Law Act
4.133 However, it appears to the Commissions that
there may be unjustified
anomalies in the treatment of family violence issues, which turn on whether a
party to family law proceedings
who is a victim of family violence has, in fact,
obtained a state or territory protection order. Consider the following
hypothetical:
Hypothetical
from Victoria and is involved in family law proceedings involving the
determination of parenting orders. A has obtained a final
family violence order
under the Victorian family violence legislation on the grounds of a pattern of
economic abuse. In making a
parenting decision under the
Family Law Act
a family court is bound to consider that final order.
B is from Victoria and
is also involved in family law proceedings involving the determination of
parenting orders. B never applied
for, and therefore never obtained a protection
order under Victorian family violence legislation, even though B has suffered
violence including economic abuse. In making a parenting decision under
Family Law Act
the Family Court is bound to consider family
violence—and given the absence of a state protection order, B—unlike
need to satisfy the semi-objective test in
Family Law Act
. If B does not satisfy that test, the Family Court may not
be bound to consider the family violence suffered by B—although
so in its broad discretion if it considers the conduct constituting the claim to
be a relevant fact or circumstance that
it should take into account.
Queensland and is involved in family law proceedings involving the determination
of parenting orders. Under Queensland family
violence legislation C was not able
to obtain a family violence order on the basis of suffering economic abuse, even
though she suffered
such abuse over a period of years. In order for C’s
claim of family violence to be considered by the Family Court C—unlike
counterpart A in Victoria—will need to satisfy the semi-objective test in
Family Law Act
. If C fails to satisfy this test, the
Family Court is not bound to consider the family violence suffered by C,
although it may do
so in its broad discretion if it considers the conduct
constituting the claim to be a relevant fact or circumstance that it should
into account.
4.134 The Commissions are interested in hearing whether, as a matter of
practice, the different definitions between family violence
and in the family violence laws of a particular state or territory have
any impact in matters where there are pre-existing state and
territory family
violence orders, as well as in matters where there are not. Preliminary
consultations that the Commissions have
conducted tend to indicate that
definitional issues do not have great significance in practice. Nonetheless, the
Commissions seek
input from stakeholders on the following questions.
In practice, what effect do the different definitions of family
violence in the
Family Law Act
(Cth) and in state and
territory family violence legislation have in matters before federal family
(a) where a victim who has suffered family violence
obtained a state or territory protection order; or
(ii) has not obtained a
state or territory protection order; and
(b) on the disclosure of evidence
or information about family violence?
Question 4–5
Does the broad
discretion given to courts exercising jurisdiction under the
(Cth) and the approach taken in the Family Court of
Australia’s Family Violence Strategy overcome, in practice, the potential
constraints posed by the definition of ‘family violence’ in the
Family Law Act
4.135 An extension of the definition of family violence in the
has consequences for the current legislative scheme. Under
, the presumption of equal shared responsibility does not apply
where there is family violence. Dr Altobelli argues that the fact
family violence falling within the definition in s 4 of the
Act rebuts the presumption is both a strength and a weakness. The strength
signalling the unacceptability of any family violence; the weakness is fettering
the judiciary’s ability to craft appropriate
parenting orders in the best
interests of children.
is linked to a consideration of the typologies of violence, discussed below.
Typologies of violence
4.136 An issue that arises in considering the parameters of the legislative
definition of family violence in the
Family Law Act
is whether it is
feasible for the Act to differentiate between types of family violence.
4.137 Since the 1980s social scientists—including the American
sociologist Michael Johnson—have developed various theories
to describe
different types of family
The typologies
generally reflect the proposition that family violence committed by men, and
that committed by women, have different
meanings and impacts. These typologies
have been the subject of extensive debate. The following five typologies have
been identified:
coercive controlling violence—also referred to as intimate or
patriarchal terrorism;
common couple violence—also referred to as situational couple
violent resistance;
separation-instigated violence; and
mutual violent control.
4.138 The typologies do not
purport to deal with other types of violence, such as violence against children,
or family violence within
communities.
Coercive controlling violence
4.139 This type of violence has control at its core and is almost exclusively
committed by men against women. Johnson describes it
as ‘a product of
patriarchal traditions of men’s rights to control “their”
as a form of terroristic control of wives by their husbands that involves the
systematic use of not only violence but economic subordination,
isolation and other control
4.140 Other features of this category of violence are that the violence
usually escalates and that the victim rarely fights back or
stops fighting back
after initial attempts to do
Joan Kelly and Johnson
comment that it is not atypical for victims of this category of violence to
report that the psychological
effect of their experience is worse than the
physical impact.
Common couple/situational couple violence
4.141 This type of violence is not characterised by the dynamics of power and
control. It arises from specific situations or arguments.
It usually involves
minor forms of violence compared to coercive controlling violence. Kelly and
Johnson state that this form of
violence is used by both men and women. It is
less likely to escalate over time, and is more likely to cease after
separation.
Violent resistance
4.142 This category of violence describes the situation where a spouse uses
violence—but not control—in response to coercive
controlling
violence. Violent resistance is almost entirely engaged in by
Separation-instigated violence
4.143 As its name suggests, separation-instigated violence is violence
instigated by the separation of an intimate couple where there
was no prior
history of violence in the relationship or in other
Kelly and Johnson
comment that the violence represents an ‘atypical and serious loss of
psychological control’; that
it is unlikely to occur again; and that those
who use it ‘are more likely to acknowledge their violence rather than use
4.144 A 2009 study by the University of Sydney found that of 181 parents in
Australia who had been involved in parenting disputes
after separation:
While there were certainly some histories of severe pre-separation violence, for
a majority of respondents, the basis for the family
violence order was
post-separation conflict, without any reported history of violence in the course
of their cohabitation.
Mutual violent control
4.145 This form of violence refers to situations where both partners use
violence to control the other. Johnson and Kathleen Ferraro
note that this type
of violence is rare and that not much is known about its
Role of typologies in law
4.146 There are issues about whether such typologies have any role to play in
legal frameworks and, if they do, what that role should
be. Altobelli advocates
the use of typologies of family violence espoused by social scientists such as
Johnson, Kelly and Peter Jaffe
to enable more nuanced judicial responses to
family violence in crafting parenting arrangements which are child-focused but
protect victims and
He stresses the
importance of considering the context of violence, noting that the definition of
family violence in the
Family Law Act
focuses on conduct having a certain
effect, irrespective of
Altobelli relies, in
part, on Nancy Ver Steegh’s following hypothetical to support the case for
differentiation:
Consider a situation where partner A slaps partner B. First imagine that when
the incident takes place there is no prior history
of physical violence or of
other abusive behaviours between A and B. Then imagine that, although this
incident is the first instance
of physical violence, A has previously undermined
B’s efforts to seek employment, denigrated B’s parenting in front of
the children, and isolated B from her family and friends. Then imagine a
situation where A broke B’s nose the week before and
A is threatening to
kill B and harm their children. The act of slapping is the same in each
situation but the outcome and consequences
4.147 Altobelli notes the dangers in the differentiation process:
The consequences of inaccurate differentiation are potentially serious. At one
end of the spectrum there is the risk of endangering
victims and their children.
At the other end there is the danger of unnecessarily restricting parental
4.148 These typologies have been the subject of criticism and debate. For
example, Fehlberg and Behrens, while acknowledging that
the typologies provide
useful ways of thinking about violence, also caution that they may tend to
oversimplify a complex problem,
particularly if they are applied in a legal
There are potential dangers with taking it further. Its use in actual legal
application could justify the adoption of an unhelpful
set of dichotomies, in
which violence is classified as ‘common couple’ violence and
therefore not harmful, or ‘patriarchal
terrorism’ and therefore
4.149 Dr Wangmann also cautions against the incorporation of the typologies
into the legal system, including on the basis that the
categories ‘may
inadvertently reinforce current myths about [family]
Commissions’ views
Expanding definition
4.150 It is unacceptable that differences in definitions across family
violence legislation and the
Family Law Act
may result in different
treatment of persons suffering similar types of family violence.
4.151 In the Commissions’ preliminary view, the definition of family
violence in the
Family Law Act
is too narrow. The definition should be
expanded to include certain types of conduct recognised under state and
territory family
violence legislation. This would include the types of conduct
the subject of the Commissions’ proposals in relation to the
definition of
family violence in family violence legislation—such as economic abuse,
sexual assault, and exposing children
to violence. The Commissions consider that
the definition of family violence in the Victorian family violence legislation
is an instructive
model in this regard.
4.152 A more expansive definition would assist in educating those engaged in
the family law system about the complexities and nuances
of family violence. The
explicit recognition of economic abuse, for example, may also be of particular
relevance to victims who are
resolving property disputes and spousal maintenance
orders under the
4.153 The Commissions note that this suggested approach is consistent with
that taken by the Family Law Council in its December 2009
advice to the
Australian Government
Attorney-General.
The Council
advocated that the
Family Law Act
define ‘family violence’ in
the same way that it has been defined under the Victorian family violence
legislation,
noting that this
approach would remove the objective element contained in the
definition.
4.154 The Commissions consider that the definition of family violence should
be widened by removing the semi-objective test of reasonableness.
inappropriate to apply a test of reasonableness to the experience of fear. To do
so ignores the psychological impact of family
violence, especially within the
context of a controlling
relationship.
4.155 The Commissions note that the Chisholm Review recommended that, if the
Australian Government did not adopt its recommendations
shared parenting provisions, then it should
strengthen the provisions of the Act relating to family violence, including more
detail about the nature and consequences of family
violence, and that it
consider in this connection adapting some of the provisions of the Victorian or
other state and territory legislation
relating to family
4.156 The Commissions note, however, that the Chisholm Review took a
different stance on the removal of the reasonableness requirement,
the view that the:
correct interpretation of the requirement of reasonableness would take the
context into account, and ask whether a person in the
victim’s position,
having experienced the history of violence, and knowing the meaning [for
example, of a particular gesture]
would have a reasonable fear … [and
that] the inclusion of the concept of reasonableness has merit, and the question
it has in fact been interpreted in ways that is unfair to
4.157 The Chisholm Review stated that the information available before it did
not indicate that the definition had in fact malfunctioned
in that way, and did
not recommend removal of the ‘reasonableness’ requirement. The
Review did, however, state that ‘further
consideration should be given to
this issue if more relevant information comes to light about the operation of
the definition in
4.158 As noted above, the Commissions tend to the view that the
reasonableness requirement should be removed, and are particularly
interested in
views from stakeholders about the operation of the requirement in practice. A
consultation with some federal magistrates
suggests that the reasonableness
requirement has little practical impact.
4.159 The Commissions recognise that an expansion of the definition of family
violence may affect the operation of the shared parental
responsibility
provisions in the Act, and note that reform of these provisions was considered
in the Chisholm Review. The Commissions
agree with the Family Law Council that
further consideration be given to the ‘possible legislative side-effects
of broadening
definition’.
Role of typologies of violence in definition
4.160 While the typologies developed by social scientists may have an
important role to play in increasing understandings about the
potential dynamics
of different types of family violence, it is inappropriate for such typologies
to be translated into legislative
frameworks. Legislative inclusion of the
typologies could lead to a rigid and artificial hierarchy. It is the
Commissions’
preliminary view that the definition of family violence in
Family Law Act
should not distinguish family violence on the basis of
typologies, although these may form an instructive and illustrative component
judicial education on family violence. Judicial officers should retain a broad
discretion to deal with matters on their facts
in the best interests of
Cultural change
4.161 Changes in definition cannot in themselves bring about cultural change
in attitudes towards violence. One stakeholder has expressed
concern about the
extent to which family violence is referred to as ‘conflict’ or
‘entrenched conflict’ in
the family law system, including in the
There is room for
improvements in judicial and legal education in this regard. The Commissions
endorse the recommendation made by
the Chisholm Review that:
The Government, the family law courts and other agencies and bodies forming part
of the family law system consider ways in which
those working in the family law
system might be better educated in relation to issues of family
Proposal 4–17
The definition of family violence in the
Law Act 1975
(Cth) should be expanded to include specific reference to
certain physical and non-physical violence—including conduct the
of Proposals 4–3 to 4–5 and 4–7 to 4–10 above—with
the definition contained in the
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
being used as a model.
Proposal 4–18
The definition of ‘family violence’ in
Family Law Act
(Cth) should be amended by removing the
semi-objective test of reasonableness.
compensation
Definition of family violence in
victims’ compensation legislation
4.162 Most victims’ compensation Acts do not define family violence.
Compensation is generally triggered by a nexus to a criminal
consequent injury or death.
The victims’ compensation schemes in NSW and the Northern Territory,
however, expressly define or refer to family violence,
as set out below.
Victims Support and Rehabilitation Act
expressly recognises ‘domestic violence’ as a compensable ‘act
of violence’. It also recognises as
compensable injuries ‘domestic
violence injuries’, and injuries arising from the intimidation and
stalking of a person
within the meaning of the
Crimes (Domestic and Personal
Violence) Act
(NSW) in apparent contravention of a protection
Victims Support and Rehabilitation Act
‘domestic violence offence’ as a personal violence offence within
the meaning of the
Crimes (Domestic and Personal Violence) Act
persons in defined
relationships.
The definition
of ‘domestic violence’ is therefore linked to that in the family
violence legislation of NSW. The definition
does not include, for example,
economic or emotional abuse, as these are not recognised under the
(Domestic and Personal Violence) Act
Victims of Crime Assistance Regulations
(NT) defines when a
victim suffers ‘domestic violence injuries’ in the following
(1) A victim suffers domestic violence injuries if:
(a) the victim suffers 1 or more injuries as a direct result of:
(i) a violent act involving a pattern of abuse, committed by an offender with
whom the victim is in a domestic relationship; or
(ii) a violent act of unlawful stalking under section 189 of the
in contravention, or apparent contravention, of a domestic violence
(iii) a combination of violent acts mentioned in subparagraphs (i) and (ii)
if committed by the same offender; and
(b) the injuries are more than transient or trifling, though they need not be
4.166 The Regulations also define a ‘pattern of abuse’ and link
the definitions of ‘domestic relationship’
and ‘domestic
violence order’ to the definitions of those terms in the
Domestic and
Family Violence Act 2007
Commissions’ views
4.167 As discussed in Chapter 3, the purpose of victims’
compensation schemes include providing assistance to victims of crime,
them in recovering from crime, and giving statutory recognition to the harm that
they suffer from criminal offending.
4.168 It would therefore be inappropriate for legislation establishing
victims’ compensation schemes to adopt definitions of
family violence used
in family violence legislation to the extent that those definitions include
conduct that does not constitute
a criminal offence—such as emotional
abuse or economic abuse.
adoption of a definition that captures non-criminal conduct would clearly be in
direct conflict with the purposes of such schemes,
as they are currently
4.169 The Commissions note that they have proposed that the NSW family
violence legislation should be amended to include a wider definition
violence, which may capture conduct that is not necessarily a criminal
The Commissions do
not propose, however, that this extended definition of family violence be
applied in the context of the NSW victims’
compensation legislation, which
awards victims for injuries resulting from a criminal act.
4.170 However, there are other ways that legislation governing victims’
compensation schemes can be amended to allow victims
of family violence to be
better compensated for their injuries. These options are discussed in Chapter
legislation
4.171 Under the
Migration Regulations
, ‘relevant family
violence’ is defined as conduct, whether actual or threatened towards:
(a) the alleged victim; or
(b) a member of the family unit of the alleged victim; or
(c) a member of the family unit of the alleged perpetrator; or
(d) the property of a member of the family unit of the alleged victim; or
(e) the property of a member of the family unit of the alleged perpetrator
that causes the alleged victim to reasonably fear for, or to be reasonably
apprehensive about, his or her own wellbeing or
4.172 The focus of the definition is therefore not on categorising certain
the effect of conduct on the victim. In this regard, the definition has a
similar approach to that of ‘family violence’
adopted in the
Family Law Act
4.173 For emotional abuse to qualify as family violence under the
Migration Regulations
, it must be considered to have been serious enough
to cause fear or apprehension for the person’s well-being or safety. Acts
that only have the ‘effect of causing diminution of a person’s
feeling of well being’ will not
Commissions’ views
4.174 The Commissions are interested in hearing from stakeholders affected by
the operation of the definition of family violence in
Regulations
. Persons from a culturally diverse background—including
women who are sponsored by Australian citizens and residents, who are
particularly vulnerable to abuse due to the threat of deportation—are
important voices in this Inquiry.
4.175 The Commissions note the similarity of approach between the
Migration Regulations
Family Law Act
in defining family
violence. The Commissions’ initial impression is that the definition in
Migration Regulations
is too narrow, for the same reasons expressed
in relation to the definition in the
Family Law Act
. One option,
therefore, would be to amend the definition in a similar way as that proposed
for the definition in the
Family Law Act
—namely to expand it to
recognise specific types of physical and non-physical violence, with the
definition in the Victorian
family violence legislation being used as model, and
by removing the test of reasonableness.
4.176 The Government may wish to reconsider the appropriateness of locating
the family violence provisions—which impact on the
lives and safety of a
particularly vulnerable group in our society—in regulations, where they
are currently housed, as opposed
to primary legislation. Such provisions may be
more appropriately placed in the
Migration Act
4.177 However, the Commissions make no formal proposals in this regard,
noting that reform of migration legislation is outside the
Commissions’
Terms of Reference. As noted in Chapter 1, the Commissions consider that the
Australian Government should initiate
an inquiry into how family violence is
treated in federal legislative schemes not falling within the present Terms of
Information received by the Commissions concerning the practical
application of the definition of family violence in the
Regulations
may be used in any further inquiry into the treatment of family
violence in federal legislative schemes.
How is the application of the definition of ‘relevant family
violence’ in the
Migration Regulations 1994
(Cth) working in
practice? Are there any difficulties or issues arising from its application?
and effect of Commissions’ overall approach
4.178 The overall effect of the
Commissions’ approach, reflected in Proposals 4–1 to Proposals
4–18, is that a common
understanding of the types of conduct (both
physical and non-physical) that constitute family violence would be adopted in
the definition
of family violence in the following legislation:
state and territory family violence legislation;
Family Law Act
the criminal law—in the limited circumstances where
‘family violence’ is defined in the context of defences to
potentially, the
Regulations
4.179 This does not mean that each piece of
legislation must define family violence in precisely the same words, or even use
language in describing certain categories of conduct, although that is
an alternative option for reform. In addition, state and territory
governments
should retain the flexibility to link family violence to particular criminal
offences in their respective jurisdictions.
4.180 The Commissions tend to the view that conduct is either family violence
or it is not. That is not to say that all types of conduct
that constitute
family violence should be criminalised nor that family violence should be given
the same treatment in the various
legal frameworks under consideration. In each
case, the severity and context of particular family violence may carry varying
in different legal proceedings, depending on the reasons for advancing
evidence of family violence and the purposes of the respective
frameworks.
4.181 The Commissions do not therefore consider that the adoption of a common
understanding of what constitutes family violence—including,
as proposed
later in this chapter, a common understanding of the features and dynamics of
family violence—in any way compromises
the objects and purposes of the
legislative schemes that are the subject of this
4.182 The Commissions have also considered the significant benefits that
would flow from the adoption of a common interpretative framework.
Currently, a
victim of family violence involved in multiple proceedings has to contend with
the fact that conduct recognised in one
necessarily be recognised as such in another. One stakeholder noted that this
may not only
cause confusion but may ‘even feel like systemic
4.183 The adoption of a common understanding of family violence is likely to
have a positive flow-on effect in the gathering of evidence
of family violence
for use in more than one set of proceedings. This is likely to be of practical
importance given the frequency,
for example, of family violence allegations in
the Family Court,
frequency of overlap of family law proceedings and protection order proceedings.
4.184 Such adoption is also likely to overcome the potential for family
violence to be treated differently in family law proceedings
depending on
whether or not a party to those proceedings—who is a victim of family
violence—has, in fact, obtained a
state or territory protection order.
4.185 Another significant benefit of adopting a commonly shared understanding
of family violence is that it will facilitate the registration
and enforcement
of protection orders under the proposed national registration of family violence
orders scheme.
4.186 In addition, it will facilitate the capture of statistics about family
violence based on a commonly shared understanding of
family violence, thereby
providing more useful and comparable data upon which policies to address family
violence can be addressed.
4.187 As well, the Commissions consider that the adoption of a commonly
shared understanding of what constitutes family violence will
complement the
recommendations made by the Family Law Council to establish a common knowledge
base regarding family
4.188 The Commissions note than an alternative approach would have been to
adopt a pyramid-like structure of definitions of family
violence—possibly
with the broadest definition to be applied in the family violence legislation
and the narrowest in the criminal
law. However, this approach is problematic. It
is unclear where one would place family law and migration law in this pyramid.
also appears to be no policy reason for carving out particular types of
conduct that are recognised as family violence in law under
one legislative
regime, without implicitly passing judgment that such types of violence are not
worthy of recognition by the legal
4.189 The Commissions acknowledge that the adoption of a broad commonly
shared definition of family violence may increase the risk
of litigation
abuse—particularly in the vexatious use of cross applications for
protection orders. Mechanisms to manage such
risks will need to be identified
and adopted.
However, the
benefits to victims and the systemic advantages of adopting a broad commonly
shared definition appear to outweigh the
potential disadvantages.
[back to top]
Family violence legislation
4.190 In each jurisdiction, in order for a person to obtain a protection
order under family violence legislation that person needs
to be in a defined
relationship with the person engaging in violence. The relationships covered by
family violence legislation across
the jurisdictions differ widely in some
respects. Table B below sets out a snapshot summary of the relationships that
are covered
across the jurisdictions.
Partner (not married) incl same sex)
Intimate personal relationship
Other relationships
definition of relative includes son, daughter etc but
definition does not expressly refer to child
defined categories
live in same household; long-term residents in
same residential facility at same time
linked to residence or child of intimate relationship
defined categories
any person regarded as family member
includes either biological parent
also whether or not sexual if dated and lives enmeshed.
included in definition of relative
by blood or marriage (non-exhaustive examples
referred to in definition of relative
informal care relationships- defined
definition of relative includes person whom
relevant person regards as a relative or vice versa eg members of certain
communities
with NESB and people with particular religious beliefs
linked to residence or guardianship
concept of ‘related’ is defined
personal relationship of a domestic nature
where lives interrelated and actions affect the other
domestic partners
linked to custody, guardianship, loco parentis
role, residence)
by blood, marriage, domestic partnership,
members of some other culturally recognised family group
Partner (not married) incl same sex)
Intimate personal relationship
Other relationships
significant relationships as defined
Domestic partner
domestic partner
intimate relation other than domestic
partnership—not linked to living in same household
child of domestic partner or former domestic
partner—no other restriction on this
sets out defined categories plus anyone else
who could reasonably be considered to be a relative
included as example of anyone else who could
reasonably be considered to be a relative
definition of relative includes anyone else
who could reasonably be considered to be a relative
whether or not sexual if dating or if engaged
covered by reference to relative
examples of relatives given. Non exhaustive
included in definition of family
relationship
any person who has or had custody or guardianship or right
of access to another person. Ordinarily or regularly lives or has lived
other person or someone else who is in family relationship with other person or
is or has been in family relation with a child
of other person
4.191 The Tasmanian
Family Violence Act 2004
covers the narrowest
range of relationship—applying only to spouses and unmarried
The legislation does
not cover relations between parents and children, persons and ancestors, or
siblings. Persons in these types
of relationships and other relatives can seek
restraining orders under the
Justices Act 1959
(Tas), but the grounds for
obtaining a restraining order under this Act are more limited than those under
the family violence
legislation.
In addition, the
penalties for breaching restraining orders under the
Justices Act
significantly lower than those that attach to breaches of an order under the
family violence
legislation
effect, this means that certain family relationships are given less protection
from violence by the law than others.
4.192 The 2008
Review of the
Family Violence Act 2004
referred to
criticisms by some stakeholders that the definition was too narrow to
the range of relationships which should attract the protection of the Act; and
that the definition of family relationship should
be sufficiently broad to cover
all intimate personal relationships … people who are ordinarily members of
the household and
family relationships which reflect the extent of kinship
within Indigenous and culturally and linguistically diverse
communities.
4.193 The former South Australian family violence legislation also covered a
narrow range of relationships for the purpose of family
violence. However, the
Intervention Orders (Prevention of Abuse)
includes more
categories of persons under the rubric of ‘domestic abuse’ than its
predecessor—the
Domestic Violence Act 1994
(SA). Categories of
persons not previously recognised but now included are:
(a) persons in some form of intimate personal relationship (other than marriage
or domestic partners) in which their lives are related
and the actions of one
affects the other;
(b) persons who are related according to Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander
kinship rules or are members of some other culturally
recognised family group;
(c) carers within the meaning of the
Carers Recognition Act 2005
(d) those otherwise related by blood, marriage, domestic partnership or
4.194 Most state and territory family violence Acts include relatives within
their ambit—although the class of persons is variously
defined. Six
Indigenous peoples. Three jurisdictions extend
protection to persons within
violent carer relationships (including paid carers) whereas three jurisdictions
expressly provide that
a relationship with a paid carer or a carer acting on
behalf of another person or organisation does not fall within the ambit of
family violence legislation.
4.195 Some jurisdictions recognise violence between persons who merely live
together in the same household (that is, without being
in a relationship) as
family violence.
conventional definitions. In Victoria a family
member can include any person
whom the relevant person regarded as being like a family member having regard to
the circumstances
relationship.
Australia a ‘personal relationship of a domestic nature in which the lives
of the persons are, or were, interrelated
and the actions of one person affects
or affected, the other person’ is within the scope of the
legislation.
4.196 The United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs Division
for the Advancement of Women has recommended that family
violence legislation
should apply at a minimum to:
individuals who are or have been in an intimate relationship, including marital,
non-marital, same sex and non-cohabiting relationships;
individuals with family
relationships to one another; and members of the same
4.197 One issue that was raised with the Commissions in consultation was
whether family violence legislation should distinguish between
intimate partner
violence and other types of family violence given the broad range of persons
covered under some family violence
legislation. The Commissions are interested
in hearing views in this regard.
Commissions’ views
Equality of treatment of family violence victims
4.198 The Commissions have some concern that certain family relationships in
Tasmania—such as between parents and children and
siblings—are afforded less legal protection and redress on breach of a
‘restraint’ order than spouses and
couples. In the
Commissions’ preliminary view, the Tasmanian Government should review the
operation of the
Family Violence Act 2004
Justices Act
with a view to establishing equality of treatment of family
members who are victims of family violence.
4.199 The Commissions are interested in hearing whether this issue arises in
other jurisdictions.
Categories of persons to be protected
4.200 The Commissions note the disparities in relation to persons protected
by family violence legislation and also that protection
orders may be obtained
in each state and territory for persons who are not in a defined family
relationship. The Commissions favour
a modern inclusive approach to the
definition of family, broad enough to capture groups who are particularly
vulnerable to violence.
4.201 The disproportionately high level of family violence suffered by
Indigenous women is a major
Commissions’ view, the persons protected by the family violence
legislation of each state and territory should capture
those who fall within
Indigenous concepts of family, as well as those who are members of some other
culturally recognised family
group. The two jurisdictions that currently do not
take this approach are Western Australia and Tasmania.
4.202 The Commissions note that the 2008 review of the Tasmanian family
violence legislation stated that it had not tested the extent
stakeholder views favouring a broadening of the definition to include Indigenous
and other kin relationships had ‘thought
through’ the implications
of a criminal justice response in this regard. It stated ‘that if a
broader definition were
to be explored by the Tasmanian government, the
implication of a criminal justice response is a critical point to test with
stakeholders’.
4.203 It has been reported that the operating procedures of the family
violence courts in Western Australia adopt the definition of
family violence
Family Law Act 1975
rather than the definition of family
violence found in the 2004 amendments to the
Restraining Orders Act 1997
because it was considered to be ‘more inclusive of the
nature of family violence in Aboriginal
relationships’.
4.204 The Commissions are interested in stakeholder views as to whether
relationships with carers—including those who are paid—should
included in the relationships covered by family violence legislation. The
specific inclusion of carers, for example, would recognise
the particular
vulnerabilities of the elderly and those with disabilities to family violence.
It is anomalous that such a category
is included in some jurisdictions but not
others. However, the Commissions are interested in hearing whether the expansion
definition to include such relationships poses any issues, including
challenges in implementation.
Proposal 4–19
The Tasmanian Government should review the
operation of the
Family Violence Act 2004
(Tas) and the
Justices Act
to establish equality of treatment of family members who
are victims of family violence.
Proposal 4–20
State and territory family violence legislation
should include as protected persons those who fall within Indigenous concepts of
as well as those who are members of some other culturally recognised
family group. In particular, the
Family Violence Act 2004
(Tas) and the
Restraining Orders Act 1997
(WA) should be amended to capture such
Should state and territory family violence legislation include
relationships with carers—including those who are paid—within
category of relationships covered?
[back to top]
provisions reflecting best practice?
4.205 An issue in this Inquiry is the extent to which it is appropriate or
desirable for the Commissions to address key differences
in family violence
legislation across the states and territories—for example, by model
provisions that contain best practice
approaches—even in the absence of
specific interactions between family violence laws and family and criminal
4.206 Not all states and territories have dedicated family violence
legislation—in the sense that some legislation that deals
with family
violence also deals with obtaining protection orders for other forms of personal
violence. The dedicated family violence
legislation across the jurisdictions
varies substantially in its detail and scope. For example, the Victorian and ACT
legislation
comprises 272 and 217 provisions
respectively,
while the South
Australian and Tasmanian legislation comprises only 42 and 44 provisions
respectively.
In addition,
there is variation in family violence legislation as to:
the range of persons who are able to avail themselves of the
protection of such orders, as discussed above;
the extent to which the Acts specify guiding objects and
principles;
the extent to which police are obliged by legislation to take action
where family violence is suspected;
the grounds for making an
whether or not police have the power to issue orders themselves;
the power to make protection orders in criminal proceedings;
the penalties that attach to a breach of an order; and
the availability and types of conditions attached to protection
orders concerning counselling and rehabilitation programs for those
is not feasible to seek consistency on all aspects of family violence
legislation—nor is consistency across the board
on all issues necessarily
desirable. In 1999, the Domestic Violence Legislation Working
Group—comprising Commonwealth, state
and territory
officials—published the Model Domestic Violence Laws Report, which
contained model laws dealing with protection
The model laws
project was not taken up, and was subject to some criticism by Professor
Rosemary Hunter and Professor Julie Stubbs
on the ground that it appeared to
focus simply on resolving
inconsistencies.
also a concern that model laws should not impose standards that are of the
lowest common denominator.
4.208 By way of comparison, the United States has a Model Code on Domestic
and Family Violence, that was not designed to provide a
uniform code that would
create consistency between the
Its purpose was to
provide a model that states could use and consider when contemplating reforms to
their domestic and family violence
laws. The Code is described in its
introduction as a ‘public policy statement’ and a
‘framework’ and the
Code’s drafters note each chapter and
section ‘can be independently assessed and accepted or
instances, alternative solutions are set out.
4.209 While pursuing model family violence laws is beyond the scope of this
Inquiry, the Commissions consider that there are a number
of discrete areas of
family violence laws that ought to be the subject of best practice approaches
across the jurisdictions. Some
of those areas—guiding principles, objects,
and grounds for obtaining a protection order—that are inextricably linked
to the achievement of a common interpretative framework are addressed in this
chapter; while others are addressed in the following
chapters in this part. The
effect of targeting discrete areas is to establish an irreducible core of best
practice in family violence
principles and a human rights framework
4.210 Definitions form only one limb of an interpretative framework.
Principles form another. Definitions serve a useful and specific
function, and
need to be capable of being readily applied and understood in legal proceedings.
It is appropriate for definitions
to be gender-neutral, because the law should
be capable of applying equally to both sexes, and to provide a mechanism for
or redress, regardless of the sex of the victim or of the person
engaging in violence. However, guiding principles can set out a
framework to
guide legislative interpretation. In addition, provisions which set out the
features of family violence provide an opportunity
to address such aspects as
its gendered nature.
4.211 The Model Domestic Violence Laws Discussion Paper was criticised by
Hunter and Stubbs for failing to include a set of guiding
principles.
Most of the
family violence Acts of the states and territories do not contain a section
setting out principles or address the specific
features and dynamics of family
violence. However, there are some notable exceptions, and these are considered
4.212 There is some precedent in family violence legislation—and
criminal legislation—for the articulation of principles
legislative interpretation and to educate those applying or engaging with the
law. As discussed in Chapter 3, the family
violence legislation of Victoria
sets out in its preamble a number of principles, including that:
• non-violence is a fundamental social value that must be promoted;
• family violence is a fundamental violation of human rights and is
unacceptable in any form; and
• family violence is not acceptable in any community or
4.213 The NSW family violence legislation does not expressly state that
family violence is a fundamental violation of human rights,
but it clearly
places itself in a human rights framework by stating that its objects are to
enact provisions consistent with certain
principles underlying the
Declaration on the
Elimination of Violence against Women
, as well as the United Nations
Convention on the Rights of the
(Vic) also contains a number of
principles to guide legislative interpretation in sexual assault cases. These
include the fact that:
sexual offences are significantly underreported;
sexual offenders are commonly known to their victims; and
sexual offences often occur in circumstances where there is unlikely
to be any physical signs of an offence having
Features of family
4.215 As discussed in Chapter 3, the family violence Acts of Victoria, NSW
and South Australia, to varying degrees, also set out a
number of features and
dynamics of family violence, including:
its gendered nature—that is, that it is predominantly
committed by men against women, children and other vulnerable persons;
the detrimental impact it has on children;
the fact that it occurs in all areas of society—irrespective
of location, socio-economic status, age, culture, gender, sexual
ethnicity or religion; and
that it may involve overt or subtle exploitation of power imbalances
and may consist of isolated incidents or patterns of
4.216 Apart
from recognising the damaging effects of violence on children, and the fact that
it occurs in all areas of society, none
of the Acts mentions the fact that
family violence also has a particularly damaging impact on other groups in
society. These include:
Indigenous persons; those from a culturally and
linguistically diverse background; gays, lesbians and transgender persons; older
people; and victims with
disabilities.
4.217 In describing the dynamics of family violence, none of the family
violence Acts distinguishes between the dynamics of intimate
partner violence
and other family violence.
Commissions’ views
4.218 In the Commissions’ preliminary view the family violence
legislation of each state and territory should contain guiding
principles which
include express reference to a human rights framework. The principles contained
in the preamble to the Victorian
family violence legislation provide an
instructive model in this regard—although the principles should also refer
to relevant international conventions.
4.219 The endorsement of a human rights framework is particularly relevant,
for example, for Indigenous peoples and those from culturally
backgrounds, by reinforcing that customary laws or cultural practices do not
override the rights of family members to be
safe and live free from
violence—and indeed, free from fear, a freedom which has been referred to
as the ‘forgotten
4.220 The adoption of guiding principles across family violence legislation
will serve an educative function, as well as promote a
common interpretative
framework, complementing the proposed adoption of a commonly shared
understanding of the meaning of family
4.221 The family violence legislation of each state and territory should also
contain a provision that explains the features and dynamics
violence—including its gendered nature, detrimental impact on children,
and the fact that it can involve exploitation
of power imbalances, and occur in
all sectors of society. Both the NSW and Victorian family violence legislation
provide an instructive
model in this regard.
4.222 In addition, the Commissions consider that, just as the Victorian and
NSW family violence legislation highlight the particularly
damaging effects on
children of exposure to family violence, family violence legislation should also
acknowledge the particularly
damaging impact of family violence on other groups
in society including: Indigenous persons; those from a culturally and
linguistically
diverse background; those from the gay, lesbian, bisexual and
transgender community; older people; and victims with disabilities.
categories are not mutually exclusive, and some persons may suffer the
compounding effect of multiple disadvantages. Persons
from such groups are an
important voice in this Inquiry.
4.223 Highlighting the impact of violence on these groups complements the
Commissions’ proposal that family violence legislation
include examples of
emotional or psychological abuse that would affect diverse groups in the
The Commissions
consider that the combined effect of these proposals may assist in the
challenging task of ensuring that experiences
of family violence of such groups
is properly recognised across the legal system.
4.224 The Commissions have not determined precisely how the legislative
provisions might refer to the impacts of family violence on
diverse groups. It
may well be that the precise formulation could be informed by the processes
recommended by the Family Law Council
to establish a common knowledge base about
family violence. Some preliminary thoughts, by way of illustration, are that
family violence
legislation could refer to the following, possibly in a more
abridged fashion:
the fact that there is a disproportionate level of family violence
among Indigenous communities, and the particular dynamics of Indigenous
violence such as violence within extended kinship
the barriers faced by victims from culturally and linguistically
diverse backgrounds, including communication and language difficulties,
cultural barriers such as beliefs about traditional gender roles and the
importance of the
the features of elder abuse—that it commonly consists of
economic abuse, as well as the withholding of medication, involuntary
isolation, and neglect;
the particular problems faced by victims with disabilities because
of their dependence on others for support, the compounding effect
disability on their lack of power and control in a relationship, and the fact
that their disability is exploited by their
the problems faced by those from the gay, lesbian, bisexual and
transgender community—including the fear of homophobia, transphobia,
fear of being outed and the fear of discrimination from the legal system due to
their gender or sexual
orientation.
The Commissions are interested in hearing views from stakeholders in this
4.226 Finally, in the Commissions’ preliminary view, the
should also include a section detailing the features and nature of
family violence. This would complement the proposed approach of
commonly shared understanding of family violence across the family law and
family violence legislative schemes.
4.227 The Commissions note that this approach is also consistent with an
alternative recommendation made by the Chisholm Review for
the provisions in the
Family Law Act
referring to family violence to be strengthened, including
more detail about the nature and consequences of family
Proposal 4–21
State and territory family violence legislation
should contain guiding principles, which should include express reference to a
rights framework. The preamble to the
Family Violence Protection Act
(Vic) provides an instructive model, although it would be preferable if
the principles also referred expressly to relevant international
conventions
such as the
Declaration on the Elimination of Violence against Women
the United Nations
Convention on the Rights of the Child
Proposal 4–22
State and territory family violence legislation
should contain a provision that explains the nature, features and dynamics of
violence including: its gendered nature; detrimental impact on children;
and the fact that it can involve exploitation of power imbalances;
and occur in
all sectors of society. The preamble to the
Family Violence Protection Act
Crimes (Domestic and Personal Violence)
(NSW) provide instructive models in this regard. In addition,
family violence legislation should refer to the particular impact of
violence on: Indigenous persons; those from a culturally and linguistically
diverse background; those from the gay, lesbian,
bisexual and transgender
community; older persons; and people with disabilities.
Proposal 4–23
Family Law Act 1975
be amended to include a provision that explains the nature, features and
dynamics of family violence.
4.228 Objects clauses setting out the purposes of family violence legislation
are another important limb in achieving a common interpretative
framework across
the states and territories.
4.229 The various purposes of family violence legislation and the extent to
which they are addressed in objects clauses are addressed
in Chapter 3. In
that discussion, it is evident that while most family violence Acts contain
object clauses, the Western Australian
legislation does not, although it has a
provision which sets out certain matters to be considered by the court in
considering whether
to make a protection order, from which certain objects can
be implied.
4.230 Further, of those Acts that do have objects clauses, the degree of
articulation and specificity differs. In particular, while
most state and
territory legislation sets out various purposes of family violence legislation,
the Queensland legislation only sets
out the purpose of ensuring the safety and
protection of persons in particular relationships.
4.231 In addition, the objects clause in the Tasmanian legislation is
comparatively brief, and simply highlights that ‘in the
administration of
[the] Act, the safety, psychological wellbeing and interests of people affected
by family violence are the paramount
considerations’.
Commissions’ views
4.232 An articulation of core common purposes across state and territory
family violence legislation is a critical pillar of a common
interpretative
framework. Objects clauses therefore serve an important role in complementing
proposed provisions setting out guiding
principles and the features and dynamics
of family violence. They also serve an educative function. It is essential that
given some prominence in family violence legislation. The Commissions
are therefore of the preliminary view that the
Restraining Orders Act
(WA) should be amended to include an objects clause.
4.233 Objects clauses in family violence legislation do not need to express
purposes using precisely the same wording, nor is there
a need for every purpose
in one jurisdiction to be replicated in the others. However, there should be a
cluster of core purposes
that are commonly acknowledged and articulated across
each of the states and territories. The Commissions consider that the Queensland
family violence legislation, in particular, should state its other core
purposes. The Commissions also consider that the Tasmanian
family violence
legislation should articulate its purposes more clearly.
4.234 The Commissions tend to the view that core purposes should
include—apart from the main one of ensuring or maximising the
protection of persons who fear or experience family violence—the following
ensuring that persons who use family violence accept responsibility
for their conduct,
promoting the accountability of those who use family violence for their
reducing or preventing family violence and the exposure of children
to the effects of family
The Commissions note that most jurisdictions do not currently include a purpose
aimed at increasing responsibility or accountability
for those who use family
violence. This is a significant omission. In contrast, most
Australia and
Tasmania—do express a purpose of reducing or preventing family violence
and the exposure of children to such
4.236 There should be flexibility for states and territories to articulate
purposes in addition to core ones. So, for example, it
is entirely appropriate
that the South Australian family violence legislation also specify that its
purposes include:
providing special police powers of arrest, detention and search in
connection with issuing, serving and enforcing protection orders;
further protecting persons suffering or witnessing family
violence—in the giving of evidence and the protection of
Commissions are also interested in hearing views from stakeholders about the
need to include other purposes that are not
currently referred to in any of the
state and territory family violence legislation. For example, in the Second
Reading Speech of
Domestic and Family Violence Bill
Attorney-General stated that:
Another central objective of the legislation is to ensure minimal disruption to
the lives of families affected by violence. There
will be a new presumption when
making orders in favour of an applicant with children in their care remaining in
the family home.
4.238 This stated objective does not, however, appear in the objects clause
of the Northern Territory family violence Act—nor
any other family
violence Act in Australia. Courts have power to make exclusion orders in a
number of state and territory
The expression
of such a purpose is linked to the making of exclusion orders. Research
indicates that ‘there is a low utilisation
of exclusion conditions in
protection orders’ and that this may be attributed partly to
‘judicial unease’ in using
them because of concern for the hardship
of those engaging in
4.239 The Commissions seek stakeholder views about whether family violence
legislation should articulate a purpose concerning the
desirability of
minimising disruption to the lives of families affected by violence. The
Commissions are interested in whether giving
this objective some prominence is
likely to encourage judicial officers to make exclusion orders in appropriate
circumstances, and
go some way to addressing the fact that family violence is a
leading cause of homelessness for women and children who flee from
4.240 The Commissions are also interested in hearing whether there are any
other purposes that should be expressly recognised in family
legislation.
Proposal 4–24
Restraining Orders Act 1997
(WA) should
be amended to include an objects clause.
Proposal 4–25
State and territory family violence legislation
should articulate a common set of core purposes which address the following
(a) to ensure or maximise the safety and protection of persons who fear or
experience family violence;
(b) to ensure that persons who use family violence accept
responsibility—or are made accountable—for their conduct; and
(c) to reduce or prevent family violence and the exposure of children to
family violence.
Proposal 4–26
objects clause in the
Domestic and Family Violence
Protection Act 1989
(Qld) should be amended to specify core purposes, other
than the existing main purpose of providing for the safety and protection
persons in particular relationships; and
(b) the objects clause in the
Family Violence Act 2004
(Tas) should be
amended to specify more clearly the core purposes of the Act.
Are there any other ‘core’ purposes that should be
included in the objects clauses in the family violence legislation
the states and territories? For example, should family violence legislation
specify a purpose about ensuring minimal disruption
to the lives of those
affected by family violence?
Grounds for
obtaining a protection order
4.241 There are two broad approaches to setting a threshold for obtaining a
protection order. One approach is to focus on the commission
of past family
violence as well as the likelihood that the person engaging in violence will do
so again. This is the approach taken
Queensland.
4.242 Hunter and Stubbs have criticised the approach of requiring a victim to
prove likelihood of further family violence:
This represents a significant hurdle for complainants, particularly those who,
in order to ensure their safety, have separated from
their violent partner. Some
magistrates have difficulty understanding why women remain fearful after
separation, when as they see
it, the parties are unlikely to have any future
4.243 Tasmania takes a similar approach of focusing both on past and future
conduct, except rather than using the terminology of the
person engaging in
violence being ‘likely to commit’ family violence again, it uses the
terminology that the person ‘may
again commit’ family
on its face, suggests a less stringent test than ‘likely’, implying
possibility rather than probability.
The second reading speeches of the
Tasmanian family violence legislation do not indicate why the terminology of
was preferred to ‘likely’—or indeed if it
was an intentional choice. The Commissions are not aware of any cases
judicially considered this aspect of the provision and are interested in hearing
whether this has been an issue in practice.
4.244 The second broad approach focuses on the effect on the victim. This is
the approach taken in NSW and the Northern Territory
where the grounds focus on
fear. In NSW a person has to have reasonable grounds to fear, and must in fact
fear, the commission of
a personal violence offence. The subjective test of fear
is not however required to be met in certain cases. These include if the
protected person is a child or of below average intelligence. Importantly,
another exception is where the victim has been subjected
to past family violence
by the person against whom the order is sought and there is a likelihood that
the person engaging in violence
will do so again and the court is satisfied that
the making of the order is necessary in the
circumstances.
The Northern
Territory legislation only requires an objective standard of
4.245 The South Australian family violence legislation articulates the test
as reasonable grounds to ‘suspect’—rather
‘fear’—that the relevant person will commit an act of abuse,
and that making an order is appropriate in all
circumstances.
4.246 Western Australia, in effect, adopts both approaches in the
alternative. That is, a court can make a protection order either
because there
has been past violence and there is the likelihood of future violence or because
the victim has reasonable grounds
to fear violence. In each case the court has
to be satisfied that the granting of the order is appropriate in the
circumstances.
The approach
of adopting both tests in the alternative is in accordance with the approach
ultimately recommended by the Domestic
Violence Legislation Working Group in
drafting Model Domestic Violence
4.247 The ACT alone allows for a protection order to be made on the basis
that the person against whom it is sought has used family
the grounds for the order have been met.
4.248 Hunter and Stubbs have expressed the view that a test requiring
reasonable apprehension of fear has some advantages over a test
focusing on past
conduct and likelihood of repetition:
This approach is preferable in that it does not require waiting for a violent
act to occur before an order can be made, and is in
line with the preventive
function of the protection
Commissions’ views
4.249 The Commissions note the conclusion of the AGS in
Domestic Violence
Laws in Australia
that, in terms of its effect, the family violence
legislation
does not appear to be substantially different in respect of crucial matters such
as … the grounds on which protection orders
4.250 Nonetheless, the Commissions consider that there are key differences
which should be addressed. It is unacceptable that victims
suffering similar
experiences of abuse in different jurisdictions may have varying chances of
obtaining a protection order based
on the legislative threshold for the granting
of orders in their jurisdiction. A disparity in the grounds for obtaining a
order across the states and territories is relevant to the issue of
whether family violence laws are capable of interacting with
. Consider the following hypothetical:
Hypothetical
Victim A resides in the ACT. She was physically assaulted by her partner. She
applies for a protection order and has to prove that
her partner assaulted her.
She has photographic evidence of the injuries sustained in the assault, as well
as the corroborating evidence
of a neighbour. The court grants the application.
The order is later made final. Victim A is also involved in family law
proceedings
seeking custody of her children. The Family Court has to consider
the protection order made in her favour.
Victim B resides in Queensland. She also was physically assaulted by her
partner. She applies for a protection order and has to prove
that her partner
assaulted her and that he is likely to do so again. She has photographic
evidence of the injuries sustained in the
assault, as well as the corroborating
evidence of a friend.
She gives evidence that her partner is likely to assault her again, based on
her knowledge that when he is under considerable stress
at work he ‘takes
it out on her’. She leads evidence that similar types of assault occurred
two years before, when her
partner was also under considerable financial and
work stress. Her partner contests the application expressing remorse and
evidence that he has enrolled in an anger management course. The court
does not grant the application. Victim B is also involved
in family law
proceedings seeking custody of her child. Unlike the case of Victim A, there is
no protection order to which the Family
Court must pay regard.
4.251 The Commissions consider that each state and territory should have
similar grounds for triggering the granting of an application
for a protection
order. This complements the Commissions’ proposed approach for a common
interpretative framework. Just as
there should be a common understanding of what
constitutes family violence, so should there be a common understanding of when
law should step in to provide protection.
4.252 The Commissions have some preliminary reservations about an approach
that requires proof of likelihood of repetition, noting
the evidential hurdle
that this may present to victims. The Commissions are also of the preliminary
view that the position in the
ACT—where it is only necessary to prove the
fact that a person has used family violence to obtain a protection
unsatisfactory as it does not attempt to consider whether or not
a person is actually in need of future protection which is the primary
of the legislation. To frame the grounds so widely is to allow, for example, the
indiscriminate granting of protection orders
against victims in cross
applications where a victim may have resisted violently, but where the primary
aggressor does not need protection.
4.253 The Commissions consider that there is some merit in adopting grounds
that focus on fear—that is, an approach that focuses
on the effect on the
victim. In applying for a protection order a victim is, in effect, seeking not
only protection from violence
but also freedom from fear. Chief Justice James
Spigelman, writing extra-curially, notes that the concept of freedom from fear
disappeared from legal discourse:
This is regrettable because the most significant impact on personal freedom
occurs through the mechanism of fear, rather than through
actual direct
interference with such freedom. …
The most effective, indeed the most common, form of interference with freedom
arises from the self-imposed restraint on behaviour
because of the threat of
adverse consequences if the behaviour is engaged in. Furthermore, the restraint
on the behaviour is greater,
indeed almost always much greater, than would occur
on the basis of calculation of the probability of those consequences actually
occurring. …
Once it is accepted that protection of human rights requires not only the
prevention of direct interference, but also a response
to the threat of
interference, then freedom from fear can be seen to inhere in most of the human
rights protected by international
instruments and domestic provisions. Such
freedom is not, itself, a freestanding right. It should, however, be recognised
as a critical
dimension of other
4.254 The Commissions express the preliminary view that it is problematic to
include an objective test of fear in the definition of
family violence in the
Family Law Act
. Different considerations may apply in adapting such a
test for the purpose of meeting a threshold to obtain a protection order.
Commissions are interested in views in this regard.
4.255 The Commissions have not decided, at this stage, how to frame precisely
the standard grounds for obtaining a protection order.
Commissions’ preliminary preference for at least including grounds that
focus on the effect on the victim, and the
exclusion of grounds that rely solely
on proof of likelihood of repetition of violence, there appear to be four
a test similar to that in NSW—which includes an objective test
of fear, and a subjective test with the latter capable of being
excluded in
certain circumstances;
a test similar to that in the Northern Territory, which imposes only
an objective test of fear;
a test similar to that adopted in South Australia, which imposes an
objective test of suspicion that the relevant person will use
violence plus a
requirement that the court is satisfied that making the order is appropriate in
all the circumstances; or
an approach similar to that in Western Australia and advocated in
the Model Domestic Laws—that is, adopting as alternatives
the test that
focuses on past conduct and likelihood of repetition, and the objective test of
4.256 The Commissions are interested in hearing stakeholder
views in this regard.
Proposal 4–27
State and territory family violence legislation
should adopt the same grounds for obtaining a protection order.
Proposal 4–28
The grounds for obtaining a protection order under
state and territory family violence legislation should not require proof of
of repetition of family violence, unless such proof is an alternative
to a ground that focuses on the impact of the violence on the
person seeking
protection.
Which of the following grounds for obtaining a protection order
under state and territory family violence legislation should be adopted:
person has reasonable grounds to fear, and, except in certain cases, in fact
fears family violence, along the lines of the
Crimes (Domestic and Personal
Violence) Act 2007
(b) a person has reasonable grounds to fear family violence;
(c) there are reasonable grounds to suspect that further family violence will
occur and the Court is satisfied that making an order
is appropriate in all the
circumstances, along the lines of the
Intervention Orders (Prevention of
Abuse) Act 2009
(d) either the person seeking protection has reasonable grounds to fear
family violence or the person he or she is seeking protection
from has used
family violence and is likely to do so again.
An explanation of the Commissions’
use of the term ‘family violence’ is set out in Ch 1.
An explanation of the Commissions’
use of the term ‘family violence legislation’ is set out in
Definitions form one limb of
such a framework, complemented, for example, by guiding principles and statutory
Declaration on the
Elimination of Violence against Women
20 December 1993, UN GAOR,
A/RES/48/104, (entered into force generally on 23 February 1994), art 1.
Australian Bureau of Statistics,
Conceptual Framework for Family and Domestic Violence
M Murdoch—Assistant Commissioner
NSW Police,
Prevention and Reduction of Family Violence—An Australasian
Policing Strategy
, The University of Sydney—Sydney Forensic Medicine
& Science Network, 12 September 2009.
Partnerships Against Domestic Violence,
What is Domestic Violence?
(2003) cited in B Fehlberg and J Behrens,
Australian Family
Law—The Contemporary Context
See, eg, National Council to Reduce
Violence against Women and their Children,
Time for Action: The National
Council’s Plan for Australia to Reduce Violence against Women and their
Children, 2009–2021
Access Economics,
Cost of Domestic Violence to the Australian Economy,
Comment on ALRC Family Violence
Online Forum: Women’s Legal Service
Intervention
Orders (Prevention of Abuse) Act 2009
(SA) focuses on both impact and
An explanation of
the Commissions’ use of the phrase ‘culturally and linguistically
diverse’ is set out in Ch
Ch 5 discusses some differences between civil and criminal responses to
family violence, and Ch 6 discusses the interaction between
orders obtained under family violence laws and the criminal law.
Crimes (Domestic and Personal
Violence) Act 2007
Crimes Act 1900
(NSW) ss 61B–E, 665A,
Crimes (Domestic and
Personal Violence) Act 2007
The note to
states, for example, that an indication in the charge for an offence
that a person has committed a domestic violence offence will
be relevant in bail
proceedings. Further, the recording on a person’s criminal record that an
offence is a ‘domestic
violence offence’ is relevant to determining
whether a person’s behaviour amounts to stalking or intimidation as
behaviour constituting ‘domestic violence’ is taken into
‘Intimidation’ is separately defined, and captures, for example,
harassment or molestation.
Violence and Protection Orders Act 2008
(ACT) s 13,
For example,
(Domestic and Personal Violence) Act 2007
does not categorise
the offences of negligent driving and causing bushfires as family violence
offences where those offences are
committed by defined persons, whereas the
Domestic Violence and Protection Orders Act 2008
Family Violence Protection
Restraining Orders Act 1997
As noted below, economic abuse is
family violence in some jurisdictions without being a criminal offence, whereas
in Tasmania it
is a criminal offence.
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
A more detailed
examination of the types of family violence recognised is set out on a
Government Solicitor,
Domestic Violence Laws in Australia
Domestic Violence
Legislation Working Group,
Model Domestic Violence Laws
The Model Domestic Violence Laws project is discussed further
Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of Family Violence Laws: Report
[4.39]–[4.43], Rec 15.
National Council to Reduce Violence against Women and their Children,
for Action: The National Council’s Plan for Australia to Reduce Violence
against Women and their Children, 2009–2021
Family Violence Protection Act
Intervention Orders (Prevention of Abuse) Act
Family Violence Act 2004
Domestic and Family Violence Act 2007
(Domestic and Personal Violence) Act 2007
which provides a
more limited offence of wilfully and without lawful excuse failing to provide a
wife with necessary food, clothing
or lodging so that her life is endangered or
her health seriously injured.
Family Violence Act 2004
The Commissions are not aware
of any prosecution for economic abuse under the Tasmanian provision. This is
noted further in Ch 5.
Violence Protection Act 2008
Intervention Orders
(Prevention of Abuse) Act 2009
Restraining Orders Act
Family Violence Act 2004
Family Violence Act 2004
B Fehlberg and J Behrens,
Australian Family Law—The Contemporary Context
(2008), 206.
Ch 5 discusses the delineation of civil and criminal
Urbis (for the Tasmanian
Government Department of Justice),
Review of the
Family Violence Act 2004
(2008), 12.
Violence Protection Act 2008
Intervention Orders
(Prevention of Abuse) Act 2009
Restraining Orders Act
(WA) s 6(1)(d).
Family Violence Act 2004
Crimes (Domestic and
Personal Violence) Act 2007
Domestic and Family
Violence Protection Act 1989
(Qld) s 11;
Restraining Orders Act 1997
Restraining Orders Act 1997
(WA) s 6 provides that
the definition of intimidation is the same as that in the
Criminal Code
(WA) s 338D.
Domestic and
Family Violence Protection Act 1989
(Qld) s 11;
Domestic Violence
and Protection Orders Act 2008
(ACT) s 13.
Domestic Violence and Protection
Orders Act 2008
(ACT) s 13.
Restraining Orders Act 1997
(WA) s 6(4) picks up the definition of
‘intimidate’ in
Criminal Code
Crimes (Domestic and
Personal Violence) Act 2007
Domestic and Family Violence Act
Criminal Code Act
Compilation 1913
(WA) s 338D picked up by
Restraining Orders Act
(WA) s 6(4).
Code Act Compilation 1913
(WA) s 338D picked up by
Restraining
Orders Act 1997
(WA) s 6(4).
Crimes (Domestic and Personal Violence) Act 2007
Crimes Act 1900
(kidnapping),
abduction);
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
Restraining Orders Act 1997
Family Violence Act 2004
s 7(a)(iii)
Domestic Violence and Protection Orders Act 2008
(ACT) s 13(1)(c) picking up
Crimes Act 1900
(abduction of young person) and
(kidnapping).
Intervention Orders
(Prevention of Abuse) Act 2009
Australian Government
Domestic Violence Laws in Australia
(2009), [3.1.5].
Urbis (for the Tasmanian Government
Department of Justice),
Review of the
Family Violence Act 2004
(2008), 11.
Domestic and Family
Violence Protection Act 1989
s 11(1)(b).
Domestic Violence
Legislation Working Group,
Model Domestic Violence Laws
Domestic and Family Violence
Protection Act 1989
(Qld) s 11;
Restraining Orders Act 1997
Domestic and Family Violence Act 2007
Domestic Violence and
Protection Orders Act 2008
(ACT) s 13(1)(b), (f);
Family Violence Protection
This approach is consistent with that proposed by
the Domestic Violence Legislation Working Group,
Model Domestic Violence
Australian Government Solicitor,
Domestic Violence Laws in Australia
(2009), [3.1.31].
(Domestic and Personal Violence) Act 2007
Violence Act 2004
Domestic Violence and Protection
Orders Act 2008
(ACT) s 13, sch 1;
Domestic and Family Violence
(Domestic and Personal Violence) Act 2007
Violence Act 2004
, linking to
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 192;
Domestic Violence and Protection Orders Act 2008
(ACT) s 13, sch 1, linking to
Crimes Act 1900
See discussion below under
the heading Criminal Law.
Government Solicitor,
Domestic Violence Laws in Australia
[3.1.24]. For example,
Domestic and Family Violence Protection Act 1989
(Qld) s 11(c) gives examples of stalking behaviour to describe intimidation
or harassment. Less explicit is the
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
which generally refer to conduct that is threatening,
tormenting, harassing or intimidating. See P Parkinson, J Cashmore and J
Post-Separation Conflict and The Use of Family Violence Orders
(2009), 19–21 for examples of how parents post-separation used the
language of ‘stalking’.
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
Violence Act
Restraining Orders Act
(WA) s 11B;
Domestic and Family Violence Act 2007
Crimes (Domestic and
Personal Violence) Act 2007
The court has discretion to
vary such an order.
Government Solicitor,
Domestic Violence Laws in Australia
Crimes (Domestic and
Personal Violence) Act 2007
Family Violence Act
Domestic Violence and Protection Orders Act 2008
(ACT) s 13(2).
(Domestic and Personal Violence) Act 2007
Violence Protection Act 2008
ss 5(1)(a)(iv)
and Family Violence Protection Act 1989
(Qld) s 11(1)(e);
Restraining Orders Act 1997
(WA) s 6(1)(f);
Family Violence Act
Domestic Violence and Protection Orders Act
(ACT) s 13(1)(d), (g);
Domestic and Family Violence Act
Intervention Orders (Prevention of Abuse) Act
treats certain threatening behaviour as emotional or
psychological abuse.
Restraining Orders Act 1997
Domestic and
Family Violence Act 2007
Australian Government
Domestic Violence Laws in Australia
Domestic Violence Legislation
Working Group,
Model Domestic Violence Laws
Though the extent to
which such purposes are articulated in objects clauses differ, and this is the
subject of Proposal 4–25
United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs Division for the
Advancement of Women,
Handbook for Legislation on Violence Against Women
1 July 2009, [3.4.2.1].
Victorian Law
Reform Commission,
Review of Family Violence Laws: Report
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
s 5(1)(vi).
See New South Wales
Law Reform Commission,
Apprehended Violence Orders
, Report No 103 (2003),
[4.14]–[4.22].
The invisibility
of sexual assault in family violence cases is discussed in
Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of Family Violence Laws: Report
L McFerran,
The Disappearing
Age: A Discussion Paper on a Strategy to Address Violence Against Older
(2009) Australian Domestic and Family Violence Clearinghouse, 2
(citations omitted).
(citations omitted).
See Proposal
Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of Family Violence Laws: Report
Comment on ALRC Family
Violence Online Forum: Women’s Legal Service
See Question 4–2
Intervention Orders
(Prevention of Abuse) Act 2009
This is, for example,
how property is referred to in the definition of ‘abuse’ in the Ibid
Domestic and Family
Violence Protection Act 1989
Restraining Orders Act
and Family Violence Act 2007
(1)(b)(ii).
The National Council to
Reduce Violence against Women and their Children,
Background Paper to Time
for Action: The National Council’s Plan to Reduce Violence against Women
and their Children,
(2009), 40 (citations
See Proposal 4–22
South Australian
Domestic Violence Laws: Discussion and Options for Reform
Family Violence Protection
Bevan and D Higgins, ‘Is Domestic Violence Learned? The Contribution of
Five Forms of Child Maltreatment to Men’s
Violence and Adjustment’
(2002) 17(3)
Journal of Family Violence
93–006, [94].
(2003) FLC 93–172, [36].
example, the language and philosophy of
Crimes Act 1900
concerning legal liability and failure to provide ‘any wife, apprentice,
or servant or any insane person with necessary food,
clothing, or lodging’
appears somewhat archaic.
Explanatory Statement,
Domestic Violence and Protection Orders Bill 2008
The issue of whether family
violence should be a defence to homicide is discussed in
In each case, the Act
and Bill provide that a number of acts of violence may meet the threshold of the
relevant definition even
though some or all of those acts when viewed in
isolation may appear to be minor or trivial:
Crimes Act 1958
s 9AH(5); Criminal Code (Abusive Domestic Relationship Defence and Another
Matter) Amendment Bill 2009 (Qld)
Crimes Act 1958
(Vic) s 9AC.
These provisions of
family violence only apply to homicide offences, so the common law test as
outlined in
Zecevic v The Queen
[1987] HCA 26
(1987) 162 CLR 645
, 661 continues to
apply to all other offences where self-defence is applicable: P Priest,
Defences to Homicide
(2005) <www.vicbar.com.au/webdata/CLEFiles
/Defences%20to%20Homicide.pdf> at 22 January
Family Violence Protection
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Defences to Homicide: Final Report
(2004), 334–335.
Queensland,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Assembly, 26 November 2009, 3669 (C
Dick—Attorney-General and Minister for Industrial Relations),
Criminal Code (Abusive
Domestic Relationship Defence and Another Matter) Amendment Act 2010
Queensland,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Assembly, 26 November 2009, 3669 (C
Dick—Attorney-General and Minister for Industrial Relations), 3670.
See Proposal
As noted above, in some
cases these legislative schemes share common
See discussion of
of Public Prosecutions v Sherna
[2009] VSC 494
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
Restraining Orders Act
Intervention Orders (Prevention of Abuse) Act 2009
Criminal Law
Consolidation Act 1935
Child protection is
discussed in
Family Law Act 1975
B Fehlberg and J
Australian Family Law—The Contemporary Context
Senate Standing Committee on
Legal and Constitutional Affairs—Parliament of Australia,
Inquiry into
the Provisions of the
Family Law Amendment (Shared Parental Responsibility) Bill
(2006), [3.97].
on ALRC Family Violence Online Forum: Women’s Legal Service
R Chisholm,
Family Courts
Violence Review
(2009), 143.
Family Law Act 1975
Family Court of
Family Violence Strategy
(2004–2005), 3 (citation
R Kaspiew, ‘Family
Violence in Children’s Cases under the
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth): Past
Practice and Future Challenges’ (2008) 14
Journal of Family Studies
Family Law Act
s 43(1)(ca).
In this chapter, subsequent references to the
Family Court of Australia are taken to include courts exercising jurisdiction
Family Law Act
, including the Federal Magistrates Court, unless
the context indicates otherwise.
s 60CC(2)(b).
s 60CC(3)(j).
s 60CC(3)(k).
Regulations 1984
Justices Act
Family Violence
(definition of ‘family
relationship’).
s 60CC(3)(m).
T Altobelli,
‘Family Violence and Parenting: Future Directions in Practice’
(Paper presented at AIJA Family Violence
Conference, Brisbane, 2 October 2009),
Others who have written in this
area include Kathleen Ferraro, Peter Jaffe and Nancy der Steegh. See, eg, N Ver
Steegh and C Dalton,
‘Report from the Wingspread Conference on Domestic
Violence and Family Courts’
Family Court Review
B Fehlberg and J Behrens,
Australian Family Law—The Contemporary Context
M Johnson, ‘Patriarchal
Terrorism and Common Couple Violence: Two Forms of Violence Against Women’
Journal of Marriage and Family
283, 285, cited in B Fehlberg
and J Behrens,
Australian Family Law—The Contemporary Context
(2008), 194.
B Fehlberg and J
Australian Family Law—The Contemporary Context
(2008), 195
(citation omitted).
J Kelly and M
Johnson, ‘Differentiation Among Types of Intimate Partner Violence:
Research Update and Implications for Intervention’
Court Review
T Altobelli,
‘Family Violence and Parenting: Future Directions in Practice’
(Paper presented at AIJA Family Violence
Conference, Brisbane, 2 October 2009),
J Kelly and M Johnson,
‘Differentiation Among Types of Intimate Partner Violence: Research Update
and Implications for Intervention’
Family Court Review
Parkinson, J Cashmore and J Single,
Post-Separation Conflict and The Use of
Family Violence Orders
M Johnson and K Ferraro,
‘Research on Domestic Violence in the 1990s: Making Distinctions’
Journal of Marriage and the Family
, 950 cited in J
Wangmann, ‘“She Said …” “He said …” :
Cross Applications in NSW Apprehended
Domestic Violence Order
Proceedings’,
, University of Sydney, 2009,
T Altobelli, ‘Family
Violence and Parenting: Future Directions in Practice’ (Paper presented at
AIJA Family Violence
Conference, Brisbane, 2 October 2009),
N Ver Steegh and C Dalton,
‘Report from the Wingspread Conference on Domestic Violence and Family
Family Court Review
; cited in T Altobelli,
‘Family Violence and Parenting: Future Directions in Practice’
(Paper presented at AIJA Family
Violence Conference, Brisbane, 2 October 2009),
T Altobelli,
‘Family Violence and Parenting: Future Directions in Practice’
(Paper presented at AIJA Family Violence
Conference, Brisbane, 2 October 2009),
B Fehlberg and J Behrens,
Australian Family Law—The Contemporary Context
(2008), 196.
J Wangmann, ‘“She Said
…” “He said …” : Cross Applications in NSW
Apprehended Domestic
Violence Order Proceedings’,
University of Sydney, 2009, 48.
The relevance of family violence in property disputes under the
is discussed in Ch 9.
Family Law Council,
Improving Responses to Family Violence in the Family Law
System: An Advice on the Intersection of Family Violence and Family Law
This view is expressed in the
context of defining family violence. There may be room for such an approach in
articulating the grounds
for obtaining a protection order. The latter is
discussed below.
R Chisholm,
Family Courts Violence Review
Family Law Council,
Improving Responses to Family Violence in the Family Law System: An Advice on
the Intersection of Family Violence and Family Law Issues
As discussed below, to assist
in the development of a common interpretative framework, the
and each of the family violence Acts of the states and territories
should contain a section setting out the features and dynamics
violence: see discussion under ‘Guiding Principles’
Comment on ALRC Family
Violence Online Forum: Women’s Legal Service Providers
Eddy v Weaver
[2009] FMCAfam 188
, [4], [122],
R Chisholm,
Family Courts
Violence Review
(2009), Rec 4.3. Training and education is addressed
generally in Ch 19.
Victims’ compensation schemes are discussed in detail in
Victims Support and
Rehabilitation Act 1996
Victims of Crime
Assistance Regulations
These are offences in
Migration Regulations
(Cth) reg 1.21(1). The purpose of these regulations is discussed
[2002] MRTA 5231
Malik v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural
(Unreported, FCA, Wilcox J, 19 April 2000); P Easteal,
‘Violence Against Women in the Home: Kaleidoscopes on a Collision
[2003] QUTLawJJl 1
Queensland University of Technology Law and Justice
, 18. Compare
[2001] MRTA 6123
where emotional and
financial deprivation, and manipulation were considered because they caused fear
or apprehension, and not just
The purposes of the
various legislative schemes relevant to family violence are discussed in
Ch 3. As noted above, the Commissions
do not propose to apply this approach
to legislation establishing victims’ compensation
Comment on ALRC Family
Violence Online Forum: Women’s Legal Service
A 2007 study found
that more than half of the cases in the Federal Magistrates Court and the Family
Court involved allegations of
violence: L Moloney and others,
Allegations of
Family Violence and Child Abuse in Family Law Children’s Proceedings: A
Pre-reform Exploratory Study
(2007) Australian Institute of Family Studies,
This scheme is discussed in
Australian Bureau of
Statistics,
Conceptual Framework for Family and Domestic Violence
Family Law Council,
Improving Responses to Family Violence in the Family Law System: An Advice on
the Intersection of Family Violence and Family Law Issues
See discussion below on
grounds for obtaining a protection order. See also the discussion on vexatious
litigants in Ch 10.
Violence Act 2004
, referring to the
Relationship Act
(Tas) s 4. The unmarried couple must be unrelated to each
Justices Act 1959
—for example, economic abuse and emotional abuse are not
Compare Ibid
(10 penalty units, imprisonment for six months) with
Family Violence Act
(tiered penalties depending on number of
offences—up to imprisonment for five
Urbis (for the Tasmanian
Government Department of Justice),
Review of the
Family Violence Act 2004
(2008), 12.
Intervention Orders (Prevention of Abuse) Act 2009
Domestic Violence Act 1994
Crimes (Domestic and
Personal Violence) Act 2007
Domestic and Family Violence
(NT) 9(d). See also
Domestic Violence Act
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
Restraining Orders
(WA) s 4(2).
United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs Division for the
Advancement of Women,
Handbook for Legislation on Violence Against Women
1 July 2009, 26.
The National
Council to Reduce Violence against Women and their Children,
Background Paper
to Time for Action: The National Council’s Plan to Reduce Violence against
Women and their Children,
(2009), 17.
Urbis (for the Tasmanian Government Department of Justice),
Review of the
Family Violence Act 2004
Law Reform Commission of
Western Australia,
Court Intervention Programs
, Consultation Paper
(2008), 233 fn 49.
Violence Protection Act 2008
Domestic Violence and Protection
Orders Act 2008
Intervention Orders (Prevention of Abuse) Act 2009
Violence Act 2004
Objects and principles are discussed in Ch 3 and
Grounds for obtaining an
order are discussed below.
Australian Government Solicitor,
Domestic Violence Laws in Australia
(2009), [2.1.34], ch 3. Police powers to issue orders are discussed in
Ch 5 and the making of protection orders in criminal proceedings,
conditions attached to protection orders are discussed in
Domestic Violence
Legislation Working Group,
Model Domestic Violence Laws
R Hunter and J Stubbs,
‘Model Laws or Missed Opportunity?’
[1999] AltLawJl 3
Alternative Law
Council of Juvenile and Family Court Judges (US),
Family Violence: A Model
State Code—Model Code on Domestic and Family Violence
Ibid, v–vi. Many
states have relied heavily upon the Code when making and amending their family
violence laws—National
Council of Juvenile and Family Court Judges (US),
Family Violence: Legislative Update
(1996); National Council of Juvenile
and Family Court Judges (US),
Family Violence: Legislative Update
The Code, has not however, led to a significantly greater level of harmonisation
R Hunter and J Stubbs,
‘Model Laws or Missed Opportunity?’
[1999] AltLawJl 3
Alternative Law
Violence Protection Act 2008
Crimes (Domestic and
Personal Violence) Act 2007
International conventions are
discussed in Ch 2.
Crimes (Domestic and Personal Violence) Act 2007
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
(Vic) preamble;
Intervention
Orders (Prevention of Abuse) Act 2009
The National Council to Reduce Violence against Women and their Children,
Background Paper to Time for Action: The National Council’s Plan to
Reduce Violence against Women and their Children, 2009–2021
J Spigelman, ‘The
Forgotten Freedom: Freedom From Fear’ (Paper presented at Sydney
University Law School Distinguished
Speakers Program 2009, Sydney, 17 November
See Proposal
P Memmott, R Stacy, C
Chambers and C Keys,
Violence in Indigenous Communities
(2001) Crime
Prevention Branch of the Attorney-General’s Department,
Department for Community
Development (WA),
A Review of Literature Relating to Family and Domestic
Violence in Culturally and Linguistically Diverse Communities in Australia
(2006), 49–50.
D Bagshaw, S
Wendt and L Zannettino,
Preventing the Abuse of Older People by Their Family
(2009) Australian Domestic and Family Violence Clearinghouse,
G Hauge, R Thiara, A Mullender
and P Magowan,
Making the Links: Disabled Women and Domestic Violence Final
(2008) Women’s Aid (UK),
Inner City Legal
Centre—Safe Relationships Project,
January 2010.
R Chisholm,
Courts Violence Review
Restraining Orders
(WA) s 12. Section 12 was amended in 2004 to insert a further
paragraph (ba) ‘the need to ensure that children are not exposed
of family and domestic
Family Violence
Domestic and Family Violence Act 2007
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
Intervention Orders
(Prevention of Abuse) Act 2009
which states that
intervention should be designed to encourage defendants to accept responsibility
and take steps to avoid engaging
in family violence. See also R Hunter and J
Stubbs, ‘Model Laws or Missed Opportunity?’
[1999] AltLawJl 3
Alternative
Law Journal
(Domestic and Personal Violence) Act 2007
Violence Protection Act 2008
Intervention Orders
(Prevention of Abuse) Act 2009
Domestic Violence and
Protection Orders Act 2008
(ACT) s 6(a);
Domestic and Family
Violence Act 2007
Intervention
Orders (Prevention of Abuse) Act 2009
Northern Territory,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Assembly, 17 October 2007, 4846 (S
Stirling—Attorney-General), 4848. A similar intention is expressed in the
Parliamentary Debates
, House of Assembly, 10 September
2009, 3937 (M Atkinson—Attorney-General), 3943 and the
Intervention
Orders (Prevention of Abuse) Act 2009
also expresses
the principle that intervention should be designed to minimise disruption to
protected persons and the children living
Exclusion orders are discussed in
See K Wilcox and L
McFerran, ‘Staying Home, Staying Safe’
and L McFerran,
Taking Back the Castle: How Australia is Making the Home
Safer for Women and Children, Australian Domestic & Family Violence
Clearinghouse
, 1 July 2007.
Wilcox and L McFerran, ‘Staying Home, Staying Safe’
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
The Commissions note that the
consideration of this issue in Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Family Violence Laws: Report
(2006), 112–113, Rec 19 focused
solely on expanding the existing grounds to accommodate the proposed expanded
definition of
family violence.
Domestic and Family Violence Protection Act 1989
R Hunter and J Stubbs,
‘Model Laws or Missed Opportunity?’
[1999] AltLawJl 3
Alternative Law
Violence Act 2004
Crimes (Domestic
and Personal Violence) Act 2007
Domestic and Family
Violence Act 2007
Intervention Orders
(Prevention of Abuse) Act 2009
Restraining Orders Act
(WA) s 11A.
Violence Legislation Working Group,
Model Domestic Violence Laws
Domestic Violence
and Protection Orders Act 2008
R Hunter and J
Stubbs, ‘Model Laws or Missed Opportunity?’
[1999] AltLawJl 3
Alternative
Law Journal
Government Solicitor,
Domestic Violence Laws in Australia
J Spigelman, ‘The
Forgotten Freedom: Freedom From Fear’ (Paper presented at Sydney
University Law School Distinguished
Speakers Program 2009, Sydney, 17 November
2009), 4–6.
ALRC CP1 Family Violence � Improving Legal Frameworks
5. Family Violence Legislation and
the Criminal Law—An Introduction
Introduction
Definitions
Interactions with federal criminal law
Commissions’ views
Civil and criminal proceedings
Choice of proceedings
The boundaries of criminal redress
Interaction with participants in criminal justice system
Police-issued protection orders
The role of police and DPPs in applying to the court for protection orders
Interaction with criminal law procedures
Police powers of entry, search and seizure
Police powers of arrest and detention
5. Family Violence Legislation and
the Criminal Law—An Introduction
[back to top]
Introduction
5.1 The Terms of Reference direct the Commissions to consider the interaction
in practice between family violence laws and the criminal
Commonwealth, states and territories. This and the following two chapters are
dedicated to this issue.
5.2 There are a number of ways that family violence laws interact with the
criminal law, as well as various points in the criminal
law process where such
interactions may occur. Most interactions occur between family violence laws and
state or territory criminal
law, rather than with federal criminal law. One area
canvassed in this chapter is the interaction between family violence laws and
federal criminal law.
5.3 Conduct constituting family violence may give rise to protection order
proceedings under family violence laws, as well as criminal
proceedings. In
practice, decision makers, such as police, may favour pursuit of one remedy over
the other—rather than viewing
them as complementary remedies which serve
different purposes. The Commissions, in this chapter, express interest in
ascertaining
5.4 This chapter considers the interaction between family violence laws and
state and territory criminal procedures. While protection
orders are essentially
a civil remedy, the legislative machinery which supports them relies heavily on
criminal procedures—such
as police powers of entry, search, seizure,
arrest and detention, as well as the imposition of bail by either police or the
This chapter also considers the role of police and, to a lesser extent,
directors of public prosecution (DPPs) in protection order
proceedings under
family violence laws. The police and DPPs are bodies normally associated with
the functions of investigating and
prosecuting crime, respectively.
5.5 Chapter 6 discusses a number of issues arising from the interaction
between protection orders under family violence legislation
and the criminal
law, namely: the making of protection orders in criminal proceedings; the
interaction between protection order conditions
and the criminal law, and issues
arising on breach of protection
5.6 An important question for this Inquiry is ascertaining the proper
boundaries of criminal redress for family violence. This chapter
issue of whether certain non-physical family violence recognised under some
family violence legislation should be criminalised.
Chapter 7 continues this
discussion, and considers whether the criminal law should recognise
‘family violence’ as an
offence, in sentencing, or as a defence to
[back to top]
Definitions
5.7 Chapter 4 discusses the extent to which family violence legislation links
the definition of family violence to offences in the
criminal law, and the
consequences that has for victims. As noted in that chapter, the definition of
family violence in family violence
legislation may determine whether and to what
extent conduct constituting family violence overlaps with criminal law. That
also discusses the interactions which arise between the definitions or
terminology in family violence laws and the criminal law:
in the limited circumstances where the criminal law defines
‘family violence’; and
where each law defines a
constitute family violence.
5.8 Clearly, in some circumstances,
there may be no interaction between family violence laws and criminal laws.
Victims may obtain
civil protection orders in circumstances where the conduct
the subject of the order does not amount to a criminal
The interaction of
definitions in family violence legislation and the criminal law may create the
potentially anomalous—and
unjustifiable—position that in limited
circumstances a victim may not be able to obtain a protection order in
circumstances
where the conduct constituting family violence could be a criminal
[back to top]
Interactions with
federal criminal law
5.9 The Commissions have been asked to consider the interaction between
family violence laws and federal criminal law.
5.10 One area where interaction may occur is where conduct which might give
rise to a protection order also constitutes an offence
under federal criminal
law. For example, conduct such as threatening behaviour or harassment that can
form the basis for a protection
order under family violence legislation can also
fall within the ambit of the following federal offences:
using a carriage service to make a
using a carriage service to menace, harass or cause
using a postal or similar service to make a
using a postal or similar service to menace, harass or cause
Commissions heard in one consultation that, in NSW, such offences are sometimes
prosecuted in tandem with protection order
proceedings and that, in particular,
carriage service offences are sometimes prosecuted where there is conduct
involving the sending
of abusive text
5.12 In addition, it is possible for a person who commits child
abuse—including physical abuse—to be subject to a protection
under family violence legislation, as well as be prosecuted for the federal
offence of using carriage services for child abuse
5.13 Another area where overlap between family violence laws and federal
criminal law may occur is in relation to conduct constituting
economic abuse.
For example, coercing a family member to claim a social security payment is
recognised as economic abuse amounting
to family violence in some
Such behaviour
could also constitute offences under:
social security legislation; and
Criminal Code Act 1995
(Cth) relating to fraudulent
conduct—such as obtaining a financial advantage by deception or making
false or misleading statements
in applications.
5.14 The Commissions
are interested in ascertaining the frequency with which family violence laws
intersect with offences in federal
criminal law. In particular, the Commissions
are interested in any examples where an offence against federal law has formed
for a state or territory protection order under family violence
legislation. The Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions (CDPP)
informed the ALRC that it is unaware of any such
The ALRC also raised
this question in its Family Violence Online Forum, and no participant on that
forum identified any such example.
One possible area where this could arise is
in relation to sexual servitude offences under the
Criminal Code
where the person committing the offence is in a defined family relationship with
the victim.
5.15 The CDPP has advised that while it keeps statistics on the number of
prosecutions it has conducted under various sections of
Commonwealth statutes,
it is unable to identify whether any of those offences have arisen in a family
violence context.
5.16 The Commissions are also interested in hearing how, in practice, matters
are dealt with where they involve:
an overlap between family violence legislation and federal criminal
a joint prosecution of state or territory and federal offences
arising in a family violence
Commissions understand that the CDPP has little involvement in this regard, and
that state and territory prosecutors will
typically have carriage of such
How are matters dealt with in practice that involve:
overlap between state or territory family violence legislation and federal
criminal law; and
(b) a joint prosecution of state or territory and federal
offences arising in a family violence context?
In particular, do state and
territory prosecutors seek the consent of the Commonwealth Director of Public
Prosecutions to prosecute
federal offences arising in a family violence context,
and inform it of the outcomes of any such prosecutions?
Are you aware of any cases where an offence against federal
criminal law has formed the basis for obtaining a protection order under
or territory family violence
legislation?
Commissions’ views
Legislation
5.18 On the basis of the Commissions’ consultations and inquiries so
far, it appears that where family violence laws interact
with criminal laws it
is much more likely to be an interaction with state or territory criminal law
rather than federal criminal
law. Nonetheless, the Commissions consider that it
is important for the definition of family violence in family violence
legislation
to be broad enough to capture conduct the subject of potentially
relevant federal offences that could form the basis for obtaining
a protection
order. As stated above, one area where this could arise is in relation to the
federal offence of sexual servitude.
5.19 To the extent that family violence legislation links the definition of
family violence offences to specific state criminal offences
in the absence of a
broader definition of family violence—as is the case with the family
violence legislation in NSW—there
does not appear to be scope for the
definition to capture conduct potentially falling within the ambit of federal
offences. The Commissions’
preliminary view is that this should be
addressed, although as mentioned earlier, some conduct, such as abusive phone
threats are
captured by the definitions. The Commissions make a number of
proposals about the definition of family violence in Chapter 4—including
proposal that the NSW family violence legislation should include a definition of
‘domestic violence’ in addition to
the current definition of
‘domestic violence
These proposals
should go some way to addressing this issue.
Education and statistics
5.20 There is a lack of centralised statistics about the frequency with which
federal offences are prosecuted in a family violence
context either:
on their own;
in addition to proceedings for the obtaining of a protection order
under state or territory family violence legislation; or
in conjunction with a state or territory prosecution for offences
arising in a family violence context.
5.21 This makes it impossible
to draw any firm conclusions about the extent to which such offences are being
used in a family violence
context, the degree and nature of interaction with
family violence laws, and whether there are any jurisdictional differences in
this regard warranting further investigation.
5.22 In the Commissions’ preliminary view, it is essential to establish
a central database capturing the frequency of prosecutions
of federal offences
in the family violence context. The CDPP is the appropriate entity to establish
and manage such a database, either
by itself or in conjunction with other
relevant bodies. For example, the Commissions note that the federal sentencing
jointly established by the National Judicial College of Australia,
the Judicial Commission of New South Wales and the CDPP. The maintenance
a database would require the cooperation and collaboration of state and
territory prosecutors involved in the prosecution
offences—including police and DPPs—for the purposes of data
collection.
5.23 The maintenance of proper statistics would enable principled policy to
be developed in this area. For example, interrogation
of statistics on the
prosecution of federal offences in the family violence context could reveal
extent of prosecutions of certain offences,
such as the telecommunications offences relating to making threats. This could
a need to investigate whether specific education and training programs
need to be delivered to lawyers in certain jurisdictions or
areas to educate
them about federal laws of potential relevance to family violence.
Proposal 5–1
The definition of family violence in state and
territory family violence legislation should be broad enough to capture conduct
subject of potentially relevant federal offences in the family violence
context—such as sexual servitude.
Proposal 5–2
The Commonwealth Director of Public
Prosecutions—either by itself or in conjunction with other relevant
bodies—should
establish and maintain a centralised database of statistics
that records the number of times any federal offence has been prosecuted
family violence context including when such an offence is prosecuted:
(a) in addition to proceedings for the obtaining of a protection order
under state or territory family violence legislation;
(b) jointly with a state or territory offence in a family violence context;
(c) in the absence of any other criminal or civil proceeding.
Proposal 5–3
In order to facilitate the establishment and
maintenance of the centralised database referred to in Proposal 5–2, state
territory prosecutors—including police and directors of public
prosecution—should provide the Commonwealth Director of
Prosecutions with information about:
(a) federal offences in a family violence context which they prosecute,
including the outcomes of any such prosecutions;
(b) the prosecution of any federal offence in a family violence context
conducted jointly with a prosecution of any state or territory
family-violence
related offence; and
(c) whether the prosecution of the federal offence is in addition to any
protection order proceedings under state or territory family
legislation.
Is there a need for lawyers involved in family violence matters to
receive education and training about the potential role of federal
offences in
protection order proceedings under state and territory family violence
legislation? How is this best
[back to top]
and criminal proceedings
5.24 As noted in Chapter 4, depending on the way in which family violence is
defined in the family violence legislation of a particular
constituting family violence may form the basis of an application for a
protection order, as well as grounds
for a criminal prosecution. The potential
for overlap will arise in cases where conduct constituting family violence is
reference to specific criminal offences—as in the case of the
NSW and ACT family violence legislation. Where family violence
legislation
describes conduct constituting family violence more generally as including
assault, sexual assault, causing injury to
a person or to property—even in
the absence of specific references to offences—there is also clear
potential for overlap
between family violence laws and the criminal law.
5.25 There are, however, key differences in the civil and criminal responses.
Some of these are summarised in the table below:
Civil protection order
Criminal proceedings
(see discussion in Chapter 3)
Protect victim from future violence.
Punish offender for past criminal conduct. Other sentencing purposes
include: deterrence, rehabilitation, incapacitation, denunciation
restoration
Standard of proof
Balance of probabilities.
Beyond reasonable doubt.
Who initiates
Victim, authorised person, police, and possibly—but less
frequently—DPP. In certain cases and in some jurisdictions courts
initiate making of protection order.
Police lay charges and prosecute less serious offences. State/territory
DPPs prosecute more serious offences.
Conditions or restrictions placed on person against whom order is made (eg
not to harass, be of good behaviour, not to approach victim).
On finding of guilt or conviction offender is sentenced.
proceedings
5.26 Issues arising from concurrent civil and criminal proceedings in the
context of family violence are addressed in this and the
following chapter.
There may be legitimate reasons for opting for a protection order instead of a
criminal charge. These include
that: a protection order offers a speedier
response to violence and therefore protection; the offending conduct may not
a criminal offence; and there is a lower standard of proof in civil
protection order proceedings. However, one issue of significance
in this Inquiry
is whether, in practice, relevant decision makers—including
police—are favouring the pursuit of either
a civil or criminal remedy at
the expense of the other in circumstances where both civil and criminal redress
is possible.
5.27 As noted by Amnesty International, the United Nations Special Rapporteur
on Violence Against Women, its Causes and Consequences
has raised concerns about
the use of protection orders under family violence legislation in Australia
instead of, rather than as
well as, a criminal
Amnesty International
has stated that:
Civil protection orders are an essential part of the state’s
responsibility to protect survivors of violence, but should complement,
replace, a criminal response.
5.28 Commentators have noted that, where there is an overlap between criminal
and civil responses,
[t]he balance involved is a delicate one, between providing a legal mechanism
for protecting people who experience domestic violence,
but not downplaying its
significance by applying what is essentially a private law
5.29 In 1990 Dr Jocelynne Scutt argued that family violence laws effectively
‘decriminalise’ family
The emphasis is on treating assault not as criminal, but to be dealt with by a
civil law ‘solution’. The man is not penalised
for assaulting his
wife; he is penalised if at all, for breaking an order of the
5.30 In 2008, Heather Douglas wrote that, in Queensland, family violence
continues to be dealt with mainly through the obtaining of
protection orders
under family violence legislation, rather than as criminal matters.
The development of protection order legislation grew, to some extent, out of
frustration with the failure of the criminal justice
system. Some of the key
obstacles in criminal prosecution and conviction of domestic violence offences
are the high standard of proof
of ‘beyond reasonable doubt’ and the
fact that many of the standard criminal offences fail to encapsulate certain
behaviours … These protection order schemes have been embraced by
both women and by police. As one magistrate has noted, we
have seen a
‘rise and rise’ in the use of protection
5.31 In 2007–2008, the Magistrates Court of Queensland reported that it
made a total of 32,081 protection orders and dismissed
5,376 applications for
such orders.
New South Wales
Criminal Courts Statistics also indicate high usage of the protection order
system. Statistics for 2008 reveal that
22,684 protection orders were granted in
proceedings under the NSW family violence legislation—excluding interim
5.32 The Commissions are interested in hearing whether there are any
for pursuing
either civil or criminal redress to family violence to the exclusion of the
other, in circumstances where both civil
and criminal avenues feasibly could be
pursued. The 2008 review of the family violence legislation of Western Australia
notes a concern
that, despite WA Police policy stating that protection orders
‘are to be seen as an additional safeguard and are not regarded
alternative to the laying of charges’, the introduction of police-issued
protection orders has become, in some instances,
an alternative to a criminal
justice response.
The WA review
The question is whether police are issuing police orders, not only in
appropriate circumstances, but also in circumstances where
they should be
preferring charges …
Responses from the policy survey indicate that, in some instances, issuing a
police order may be preferred to laying charges because
issuing a police order
requires less police time.
5.33 The WA review expressed concern that some police were potentially
trivialising what, to a victim, was a serious
5.34 In contrast, the ALRC heard anecdotally in one consultation with
magistrates in Adelaide that in that jurisdiction police prefer
laying a charge
to taking out a protection order because the latter involves preparation of an
affidavit and is more time-consuming.
5.35 While one concern is that civil redress downplays the significance of
family violence,
concerns have
also been raised that applying the criminal law to family violence may inflict
further harm to women.
has stated that:
It is argued by some that involving the criminal justice system in domestic
violence matters may create distress, disadvantages and
disillusionment for
women that override any hope or protection and safety gained through the
criminal justice process. …
In Australia, there is research available that shows that indigenous women in
some communities may be reluctant to call on police
to protect them from
violence where arrest and prosecution focused strategies are in place. …
5.36 Since the 1970s, some feminist scholars and activists have emphasised
that there are important reasons for treating family violence
as criminal and
not civil or private. Scutt, for example, argued that:
criminal assault [in a family violence context] is effectively decriminalised by
the failure of police and courts to treat it as
criminal, the
‘solution’ is seen as passing legislation to grant women a right to
an … ‘intervention
5.37 Douglas suggested that the
application of criminal law to domestic violence has encouraged both public
condemnation of violence in the intimate sphere and police
accountability for
the protection of women.
5.38 Whether a civil and/or criminal response is pursued may also depend in
practice on the victims’ wishes. Whether victims
choose to pursue a civil
remedy or assist in a criminal prosecution may be influenced by a number of
factors, including their experiences
of the legal system; their access to
support services; and the nature of their relationship with the persons who have
been violent
to them. As Douglas has noted:
Both individual judges and research have also recognised that the cyclical and
complicated nature of family violence relationships
often leads victims to seek
to withdraw charges or understate the harm of particular conduct during periods
of calm in their relationship.
5.39 In cases of family violence involving allegations of sexual assault,
there are parallel levels of attrition at various stages
of the criminal
process, which is considered in Part D of this Consultation Paper.
As a matter of practice, are police or other participants in the
legal system treating the obtaining of protection orders under family
legislation and a criminal justice response to family violence as alternatives
rather than potentially co-existing avenues
of redress? If so, what are the
practices or trends in this regard and how can this best be addressed?
The boundaries of
criminal redress
5.40 Criminal law tends to deal best with incident-focused behaviour rather
than patterns of either physical acts of violence or non-physical
controlling
An issue that arises
in assessing the dividing line between civil and criminal responses to family
violence is the extent to which
traditionally non-criminal behaviour in a family
violence context—typically non-physical forms of violence, such as
and economic abuse—should be
criminalised.
As discussed in
Chapter 4, such forms of non-physical violence are recognised to varying
degrees in state and territory family violence
legislation.
5.41 Tasmania is the only jurisdiction which criminalises economic abuse in
the context of family violence. The relevant provision
requires the offender to
have an intention unreasonably to control or intimidate his or her spouse or
partner (the victim), or cause
mental harm, apprehension or fear in committing
certain acts of economic abuse. These acts include:
coercing the victim to relinquish control over assets or income;
disposing of relevant property without the consent of the victim or
affected child;
preventing the victim from accessing joint assets to meet normal
household expenditure; and
withholding financial support reasonably necessary for the
maintenance of the victim and any affected
provision in the Tasmanian family violence legislation which criminalises
emotional abuse prohibits a person from pursuing
‘a course of conduct that
he or she knows, or ought to know, is likely to have the effect of unreasonably
controlling or intimidating,
or causing mental harm, apprehension or fear in,
his or her spouse or
The maximum
penalty is a fine not exceeding 40 penalty units or imprisonment for a term not
exceeding two years.
5.43 In the Second Reading Speech of the Tasmanian family violence
legislation, the criminalisation of economic and emotional abuse
was explained
as follows:
This [approach] underlines the fact that family violence does not always take on
an overtly physical form and that it can involve
a range of behaviours aimed at
isolating the victim and undermining their capacity to take action …
The creation of offences of economic abuse and emotional abuse are critical if
we are to take a more holistic view of the nature
of family violence and offer
our community the best possible protection against its many
5.44 The Commissions are not aware of any prosecution under the Tasmanian
family violence legislation for either economic or emotional
abuse. The 2008
review of the
Family Violence Act 2004
(Tas) commented that stakeholders
were awaiting the first case resting on the offence of economic
While no charge had been
brought for emotional abuse and intimidation, that ground has been used in
support of applications for protection
Commissions’ views
5.45 In Chapter 4 the Commissions express the preliminary view that
economic abuse should be expressly recognised in the definitions
violence in the family violence legislation of each state and territory. The
Commissions also express the view that state
and territory family violence
legislation, at the least, should share a common understanding that emotional
abuse is a form of family
5.46 The Commissions are interested in stakeholder views about whether it is
necessary or desirable for economic or emotional abuse
to be criminalised in the
context of family violence, particularly in light of the Tasmanian
5.47 The Commissions have some preliminary concerns about the criminalisation
of such conduct. First, the policing of such offences
may be fraught with
difficulties. Secondly, each element of such offences has to be proved beyond
reasonable doubt and there may
be significant evidentiary challenges to meet
this standard. The Commissions note in this regard that there do not appear to
been any prosecutions for emotional and economic abuse under the Tasmanian
family violence legislation.
5.48 There is also an issue about whether a distinct offence of economic
abuse is necessary, given the existence of other offences
which cover conduct
that could constitute economic abuse—such as offences dealing with
obtaining a financial advantage or causing
disadvantage;
obtaining property
belonging to another;
and failure to provide
the necessities of life.
noted above, coercing a family member to claim a social security payment is
recognised as economic abuse amounting to family violence
Such behaviour
could conceivably also fall within the ambit of offences under social security
legislation or the
Criminal Code
(Cth) relating to fraudulent
5.49 Moreover, given that the breach of a protection order amounts to a
criminal offence, any conduct by a person that breached conditions
tailored to
prevent emotional abuse, intimidation or economic abuse (in jurisdictions which
recognise such forms of behaviour as
family violence) would, in any event, be
5.50 Finally, the role of the civil law in addressing economic abuse should
not be underestimated. In addition to victims being able
to stop further
economic abuse through the mechanism of protection orders, it is important for
victims of economic abuse to be able
to reverse economic disadvantage inflicted
upon them. That outcome may also be achievable under the civil law.
5.51 For example, redress under contracts review legislation is available to
void or vary unjust financial contracts—such as
in circumstances where a
victim is coerced by a family member to sign a document transferring
For example, under the
Contracts Review Act 1980
(NSW), in determining whether a contract or a
provision of a contract is unjust in the circumstances relating to the contract
the time it was made, the court is to have regard to the public interest, and
a number of other matters, including whether:
there was any material inequality in the bargaining power between
the parties to the contract; and
it was reasonably practicable for the party seeking relief under the
Act to negotiate for the alteration of or to reject any of the
provisions of the
existence of family violence circumstances could be relevant to establishing
that a victim of such violence was in a materially
unequal bargaining position
and could not reasonably negotiate with the person using violence for an
alteration or rejection of such
a contract.
5.53 While the Commissions have some reservations about creating specific
offences of economic and emotional abuse in the family violence
context, as
discussed in Chapter 7 the Commissions consider that there is a case for
recognising patterns of emotional and economic
abuse—together with other
Are criminal offences for economic and emotional abuse in a family
violence context necessary or
[back to top]
Interaction with
participants in criminal justice system
5.54 While protection orders are a civil remedy they entail the involvement
of police and, potentially, DPPs—entities which
are normally associated
with the criminal processes of investigation and prosecution. This section
briefly outlines the role of police
in issuing civil protection
orders—which may or may not come before a court—as well as in
assisting victims to apply
to courts for protection orders.
Police-issued
protection orders
5.55 In some state and territory jurisdictions, police are able to issue
protection orders or ‘police safety notices’
on persons who have
used family violence.
police issue such notices they are generally able to attach conditions to the
order that a court is empowered to make, including
5.56 The duration of police-issued protection orders varies significantly
across the jurisdictions. In Western Australia, police-issued
protection orders
can either last for 24 hours—without the victim’s consent—or
for 72 hours—with the consent
of the victim, parent, guardian, or child
welfare officer as relevant.
duration of a police-issued protection order cannot be extended or renewed and
another police order cannot be made in relation
to the same
In Tasmania, such orders
may last for 12 months, unless revoked, varied or extended
5.57 The Northern Territory family violence legislation does not specify the
duration of a police-issued protection order. Instead,
it provides that first,
the police must provide the person against whom the order is made with a copy of
the order and secondly,
that this copy serves as a summons to appear before the
court at the first mention date for the application to show cause why the
protection order should not be confirmed by the
The legislation further
requires that ‘the time for the return of the [protection order] must be
as soon as practicable after
5.58 In Victoria, a ‘family violence safety notice’ issued by the
police acts as an application by a police officer for
a protection order in
favour of the victim, as well as a summons for the person against whom it is
issued to appear in court at the
first mention date for the application, which
is to be within 72 hours of the police order being
The ‘family violence safety notice’ ends on the earlier of: the
court refusing to make a protection order; or, if the
court makes a protection
order, when the order is
5.59 In South Australia, the issuing of an interim protection order by a
police officer is taken to be an application for a protection
order to the
court, as well as a summons to the person against whom it is issued to appear in
The person against whom
it is made is required to appear before the court within eight days of the
interim protection order being
issued or, if the court will not be sitting at
the place within that period, within two days after the court next commences
at that place.
effect, this limits the duration of police-issued interim protection orders to
around 10 days.
5.60 The circumstances in which police officers can issue police orders also
vary significantly across the jurisdictions. In Tasmania,
for example, a police
officer is empowered to issue such a notice if satisfied that the person has
committed or is likely to commit
a family violence
Similarly, in South
Australia, a police officer may issue an order if it appears that there are
grounds for doing so and the person
is present before the police
5.61 Other jurisdictions impose more stringent requirements. For example, in
the Northern Territory an authorised police officer can
issue a protection order
only if, among other things, he or she is satisfied that because of urgent
circumstances it is not practicable
to obtain a protection order from the
In Victoria, police may
only apply to another police officer of the rank of Sergeant or higher for
‘family violence safety
notices’ essentially outside court
hours—that is before 9am or after 5pm on a weekday or on the weekend or a
public holiday—if,
among other things, they are satisfied that on
reasonable grounds that, until an application for a protection order can be
by the court, such a notice is necessary to ensure safety, protection or
preservation of property.
5.62 The 2008 review of the Western Australian family violence legislation
found that police orders have been well received by victims
and service
providers and concluded that they should be
Police orders were
thought to increase victim
The WA review
recommended, however, that the requirement for the victim’s or other
relevant person’s consent for 72 hour
orders be removed, thereby replacing
the 24 and 72 hour orders with a single order lasting up to 72
In making this
recommendation, the WA review acknowledged the arguments for and against
removing the consent requirement from the
72 hour order.
5.63 Arguments for removing consent include that victims in a crisis
situation may find it difficult to assess how dangerous a situation
be fearful of giving consent. Arguments in favour of retaining consent include:
that victims should not be stripped of
their ability to make decisions about
their lives; and that orders made without consent increase the likelihood of
consensual breaches
of the order, creating enforcement challenges for the
5.64 In particular, the WA review noted, in relation to its recommendation to
allow for 72 hour police orders without consent of the
victim or other relevant
Submissions from Aboriginal groups in remote and regional areas of the state
clearly do not support this. The specific concern for
these groups is the lack
of appropriate places a perpetrator may stay, away from the primary residence
for this extended period of
time. Where there is no housing alternative there is
a real risk that a breach of the order may occur leading to further contact
the criminal justice system.
5.65 The rationale for the 72 hour police orders with consent of the victim
was explained in the Second Reading Speech of the WA family
violence legislation
in the following way:
The 72 hour orders are an innovation that were sought specifically by Aboriginal
women who were part of the consultation process
for the writing and drafting of
this legislation and also as we consulted the communities to put in place our
domestic violence action
plan. Many women said specifically that they did not
want their men to be incarcerated, although they wanted to be protected from
violent behaviour. Therefore, the 72 hour order allows for a cooling-off period.
It will allow for immediate support for these women
and that can be followed up
with an application for a longer term order if the threatened or actual violence
has not been resolved
or reconciliation has not
5.66 The 2008 review of the Tasmanian family violence legislation (the
Tasmanian Review) noted varying stakeholder perspectives on
police powers under
the legislation. Some stakeholders argued that, in the context of pro-arrest and
pro-prosecution policies, police
powers needed to be limited in order to ensure
a ‘balance’ between victims and those who use violence against
Some argued that police
powers to make protection orders should be restricted to interim orders only,
and that final or further interim
orders should require police to apply to the
The Tasmanian Review
noted that the fact that parties could apply for variation of police orders had
two advantages:
The first is that interim Orders place a burden on the Court with each matter
needing to be reviewed and this is avoided in Tasmania,
and secondly, the avenue
is open to both parties to make application to vary or revoke
5.67 In a 2009 report investigating responses to Indigenous family violence
in Queensland, Professor Chris Cunneen recommended that
the Queensland Police
Service and Department of Communities investigate the extension of police powers
to provide for short-term
emergency family violence orders issued by police. The
recommendation also stated that any change to police powers in this regard
be accompanied by increased services and programs in the community for those who
are violent towards family
Cunneen’s report
states that:
While Indigenous people have higher rates of domestic violence order use than
non-Indigenous people, they are much less likely to
be the person applying for
the order. This raises questions about engagement with and confidence in the
legal process, as well as
the availability of services to assist with private
applications. …
Police indicated that one barrier to the use of domestic
violence protection orders was the reluctance of some police to apply for
because of the paperwork involved in the application.
The possibility of
police-issued domestic violence orders was raised by police as a way of
increasing the number of protection orders
in remote and rural
communities.
5.68 In March 2010, the Queensland Department of Communities asked in its
Consultation Paper on the review of Queensland’s family
legislation whether police in Queensland should have the capacity to issue
protection orders and, if so, under what
circumstances.
It noted, for
example, that police-issued orders could provide immediate protection to
victims, but that their introduction also
brought ‘a risk that a sharp
increase in orders may result, including cross-orders, with the consequential
risk of entry into
the criminal justice
Commissions’ views
5.69 The Commissions are interested in hearing whether police powers to issue
protection orders are in fact increasing victim safety
and protection in those
5.70 The Commissions’ preliminary view is that if police are
given—or are to be given—powers to issue protection
orders, then the
rationale should be to enable them to intervene to deal with an emergency or
crisis situation in circumstances where
it is not reasonably practicable for the
matter to be dealt with at that time by a court. Police-issued protection orders
act as an application by a police officer for a protection order in
favour of the victim, as well as a summons for the person against
issued to appear in court within a specified short period of time—the
model used in Victoria and South Australia.
Restricting the hours during which
police may impose such orders to outside court hours—particularly in
metropolitan areas
where courts are more accessible than in remote and rural
areas—also appears appropriate.
5.71 Restrictions imposed on a person’s liberty through the imposition
of police-issued protection orders should be reviewed
by a judicial officer as
soon as possible. In this regard, the Commissions have serious concerns about
the Tasmanian model which
allows police to impose orders that may last 12
months, and practically places an onus on the person against whom the order is
to apply for a variation or revocation. The ALRC must aim to ensure that
the laws it reviews do not make the rights and liberties
of citizens unduly
dependent on administrative rather than judicial
The Tasmanian
provision providing that police-issued protection orders last for 12 months has
the potential to make the rights and
liberties of citizens unduly dependent on
the decisions of police as opposed to the judiciary and should be repealed.
In practice, where police have powers to issue protection orders
under family violence legislation, has the exercise of such powers
victim safety and protection?
Proposal 5–4
State and territory family violence legislation
which empowers police to issue protection orders should provide that:
(a) police are only able to impose protection orders to intervene in
emergency or crisis situations in circumstances where it is
not reasonably
practicable or possible for the matter to be dealt with at that time by a court;
(b) police-issued protection orders are to act as an application to the
court for a protection order as well as a summons for the
person against whom it
is issued to appear before the court within a short specified time period. In
particular,
Family Violence Act 2004
(Tas)—which
allows police-issued protection orders to last for 12 months—should be
The role of police
and DPPs in applying to the court for protection orders
Role of police
5.72 In some jurisdictions police play an active role in applying for
protection orders on behalf of
In most jurisdictions,
police are empowered to apply for a protection
or to help a victim make
an application.
5.73 There are, however, significant differences across family violence
legislation in respect of the obligations placed on police
to take action where
family violence is suspected.
NSW, Queensland, and Western Australia, family violence legislation places
express obligations on police to investigate family
violence. NSW and Western
Australia have the strongest legislative directions in relation to
pro-protection policing.
5.74 In NSW, a police officer investigating a family violence matter is
obliged to make an application for a protection order under
family violence
legislation if he or she suspects that a family violence offence or child-abuse
related offence has been, or is being
committed, or is likely to be committed,
against the person for whose protection the order would be
The legislation sets out
the circumstances in which a police officer need not apply for an order,
including where the victim intends
to make the application. In such cases, a
police office must make a written record of his or her reasons for not making an
application.
5.75 Similarly, in Western Australia a police officer is required to
investigate whether an act of family violence is being, has been,
or is likely
to be committed if the police officer reasonably suspects that the act is a
criminal offence or has put the safety of
a person at
After such investigation a
police officer is required to make an application for a protection order, or a
police order, or a written
record of why neither of those actions was
5.76 In Queensland, if a police officer reasonably suspects that a person is
one for whose protection a protection order under family
violence legislation
could be made, he or she is required to investigate or cause to be investigated
the complaint or circumstance
on which the reasonable suspicion is based until
the officer is satisfied such suspicion is
Following the
investigation, a police officer is empowered, but not obliged to, apply for a
protection order or take other action
if he or she reasonably believes that the
person needs protection and there is sufficient reason for the officer to take
5.77 In Victoria, the
Code of Practice for the Investigation of Family
, issued by Victoria Police, requires police to apply for a
protection order wherever the safety, welfare or property of a family
appears to be endangered by another or a criminal offence is
5.78 In contrast, for example, in the ACT, police are not obliged to
investigate on the basis of reasonable suspicion or to apply
for protection
ACT police are empowered
to apply for emergency orders,
and are required in certain circumstances to make a written record of reasons
for not applying for emergency
ACT Policing has advised
that it makes little use of emergency orders, but that this is not necessarily a
negative position if there
is a charge to proceed with. ACT Policing’s
pro-arrest policy may mean that there is less reason for an emergency order to
Other reasons are
[Emergency orders] can also be difficult to obtain because the risk has to be
imminent. There is narrow scope allowing for the application
for an [emergency
order]. While the use of [such orders] is low, it may be the fact that the
situations in which police attend [do]
not fit the criteria for an [emergency
5.79 The NSW Law Reform Commission has previously noted that ‘it has
been suggested that the [protection order] process is more
effective when police
lay the complaint as there is a perception that the matter is serious and a
police prosecutor acts for the
applicant’.
5.80 Arguments for and against a more active police role in applying for
protection orders were canvassed by the Victorian Law Reform
Commission (VLRC)
in its report,
Review of Family Violence
One disadvantage
identified in a submission to that review is that Indigenous peoples may be
reluctant to seek assistance for family
violence if most applications are
brought by police.
5.81 The VLRC expressed the view that ‘if the system is going to be
flexible and responsive to victims’ needs, it is essential
that victims
can apply for a [protection order] without involving the
In particular, it
recommended increased Indigenous-specific support services in court to enable
Indigenous people to apply for a
protection order without police
involvement.
5.82 The Model Domestic Violence Laws contain a provision which requires a
police officer to investigate whether an act of family
violence has been, is
being, or is likely to be, committed where that police officer believes or
suspects such circumstances exist.
The provision did not require a police
officer to apply for a protection order following such investigation but
required a written
record of the reasons for not doing
Karen Wilcox has commented
Although tightening of police … responsibilities … was canvassed
during the Model Laws development stage … states
and territories have been
slow to adopt provisions which require ‘pro-protection’ action on
the part of police …
Given the current emphasis on violence prevention in
national and state/territory domestic violence public policy, this oversight
Commissions’ views
5.83 The Commissions are interested in hearing stakeholder views on whether
family violence legislation should impose express duties
on police to
investigate family violence matters and whether, in certain
circumstances—for example, where a person’s
life or safety is at
serious risk—police should be required to apply for protection orders.
5.84 The Commissions tend to the view that, at the least, an approach similar
to that taken in the Model Domestic Violence Laws should
be adopted—that
is, police should be required to investigate family violence where they have
reason to believe or suspect family
violence has been, is being, or is likely to
be committed. Obviously an expansion of the definition of family violence and of
relationships encompassed within the definition of family will have a
flow-on effect on the work of
The Commissions are
interested in hearing whether the obligation to investigate should be limited to
take this into account.
5.85 The Commissions endorse the approach advocated in the Model Domestic
Violence Laws, adopted by a small number of jurisdictions,
that following an
investigation police should be required, in those cases where they did not take
action, to record the reasons why.
5.86 The Commissions also endorse the views expressed by the VLRC that it is
essential that victims can apply for protection orders
without involving the
police, and that there should be increased Indigenous-specific support services
in courts to enable Indigenous
people to apply for protection orders without
police involvement. The Commissions are particularly interested in hearing the
of Indigenous stakeholders in each state and territory on this issue.
Proposal 5–5
State and territory family violence legislation, to
the extent that it does not already do so, should
(a) impose a duty on police to investigate family violence where they have
reason to suspect or believe that family violence has
been, is being or is
likely to be committed; and
(b) following an investigation, require police to make a record of their
reasons not to take any action such as apply for a protection
order, if they
decide not to take action.
In what circumstances, if any, should police be required to apply
for protection orders on behalf of victims? Should such a requirement
by state and territory family violence legislation or by police codes of
Question 5–8
Should all state and territory governments
ensure that there are Indigenous-specific support services in courts to enable
people to apply for protection orders without police
involvement?
Role of DPPs
5.87 Most legislation regulating DPPs is silent on their role in protection
order proceedings under family violence legislation. A
notable exception is the
Director of Public Prosecutions Act 1986
(NSW), which expressly empowers
the NSW DPP to institute and conduct an application for a protection order under
NSW family violence
legislation in the local court, children’s court or
district court. It also empowers the NSW DPP to institute and conduct any
appeals in any court arising from such proceedings on behalf of the
Director of
Public Prosecutions Act
also provides that it applies to any proceedings for
a protection order under NSW family violence legislation as if the proceedings
were a prosecution or proceedings in respect of an
5.88 The NSW DPP’s Prosecution Guidelines contain a Protocol for
Reviewing Domestic Violence Offences, which mentions that prosecutors
institute and conduct on behalf of a victim proceedings for a protection order
or a variation of an existing protection order
where necessary to protect the
5.89 Initial inquiries by the Commissions suggest that the NSW DPP does not
often exercise its power to institute protection order
proceedings under family
violence legislation. The Commissions are interested in hearing the
circumstances in which the NSW DPP has
exercised or would exercise such powers.
5.90 The Commissions are also interested in hearing whether DPPs in other
states and territories take an active role in protection
order proceedings under
family violence legislation. The Commissions heard in consultation that the
Queensland DPP does not deal
with protection orders under family violence
legislation, and that they are normally handled by police
prosecutors.
5.91 As noted in Chapter 6, the Northern Territory family violence
legislation empowers a prosecutor to apply to the court for a protection
when a person pleads guilty or is convicted of an offence that involves family
violence—that is, the power is directed
to the making of protection orders
in criminal proceedings.
Chapter 6, the Commissions ask whether other prosecutors should be empowered
specifically to make application for protection orders
circumstances.
In what circumstances, if any, has the NSW Director of Public
Prosecutions instituted and conducted protection order proceedings under
violence legislation or conducted a related appeal on behalf of a victim? Do
Directors of Public Prosecutions in other states
and territories play a role in
protection order proceedings under family violence
legislation?
[back to top]
Interaction with
criminal law procedures
5.92 Although protection orders are a civil remedy, and the standard of proof
to obtain them is the civil standard of the balance
of probabilities, the
procedures followed are those usually associated with criminal matters.
5.93 There have been numerous investigations into policing practices in the
context of family violence in Australia since 2001, which
have focused on issues
such as police attitudes to family violence; training of police;
evidence-gathering; inter-agency liaison
and communication; pro-arrest and
pro-charging policies; and the role of police in applying for, issuing, and
enforcing protection
5.94 The following section discusses the special police powers that exist in
most jurisdictions in the context of family violence,
including police powers of
entry, search and seizure, arrest and detention.
Police powers of
entry, search and seizure
5.95 At common law, the police may enter a home without a warrant in the
following circumstances: by invitation; in order to carry
out an arrest; if, on
reasonable suspicion, an offence is being committed; or if, on reasonable
suspicion, a breach of the peace
is occurring or is about to
5.96 In addition, in most Australian jurisdictions, the police have specific
legislative powers to enter premises without warrants
in cases of family
violence. These provisions are designed to overcome
[t]he difficulty police face in domestic violence cases, where the need to gain
entry may be of vital importance for the victim’s
safety, … that if
all appears quiet and the only evidence available about possible violence is, eg
a neighbour’s telephone
call, the police are at risk of making an illegal
entry if they enter without permission. They may face a civil action or possibly
disciplinary proceedings.
5.97 The scope of these powers varies between jurisdictions. Such powers may
be conferred by family violence legislation, or by legislation
criminal procedure.
Powers of entry under family violence
legislation
5.98 The family violence Acts of Victoria, Western Australia, Tasmania and
the Northern Territory each confer powers of entry on police.
5.99 In Victoria, a police officer is authorised to enter premises using
reasonable force and without warrant if, for example, the
officer reasonably
believes that a person: has assaulted or threatened to assault a family member;
is on the premises in contravention
of a protection order; or is refusing or
failing to comply with a direction by police to remain in a place, go to and
remain at a
place, or remain in the company of a designated
5.100 In Western Australia, a police officer may enter premises without
warrant if the officer reasonably suspects that a person is
committing an act of
family violence or that such act was committed before the officer’s
arrival. The police officer may remain
on the premises for as long as he or she
considers necessary to investigate the matter; ensure that there is no imminent
family violence being committed on the premises; or give or arrange
for reasonable assistance.
5.101 In Tasmania, a police officer is authorised to enter and remain on
premises without warrant and use such force as is necessary
to prevent family
violence at the request of the person who apparently resides on the premises; or
if the officer reasonably suspects
that family violence is being, has been, or
is likely to be committed on those
5.102 In the Northern Territory, a police officer is authorised to enter
premises if the officer reasonably believes that grounds
exist for making a
protection order, and it is necessary to remove a person from the premises to
prevent an imminent risk of harm
to another person or damage to
5.103 South Australian family violence legislation confers a comparatively
narrower power of entry on police. If a protection order
requires a person to
surrender specified weapons and articles, then police may enter and search any
premises or vehicle where such
a weapon or article is reasonably suspected to
Powers of entry under other
legislation
5.104 In other jurisdictions, powers of entry are conferred on police under
legislation other than family violence legislation. In
NSW, law enforcement
legislation confers a power of entry to investigate or prevent the commission of
family violence offences on
a police officer if the police officer is invited
onto the premises by an apparent resident, or pursuant to a
In Queensland,
legislation setting out police powers and responsibilities confers on police
powers of entry where an officer reasonably
suspects that family violence is
occurring or occurred prior to the officer’s
The Northern
Territory legislation governing police administration also confers on police
express power to enter premises where there
is a reasonable belief that a
contravention of a protection order has occurred, is occurring or is likely to
Crimes Act 1900
(ACT) confers powers of entry where an
officer reasonably believes that: an offence or breach of the peace is being
committed; a person
has suffered physical injury or there is imminent danger of
injury to a person or damage to property and it is necessary to enter
premises immediately for preventative
The relevant
provision does not refer expressly to family violence.
Powers of search and seizure
5.106 In most jurisdictions, family violence legislation or other legislation
governing criminal procedure confers on police powers
person’s possession’ if the officer reasonably suspects
person has any object that may cause injury or damage or may be used to
family violence.
powers of arrest and detention
5.107 Usually, the police only exercise the power of arrest if they intend to
charge the person with an offence. This requires some
evidence and a judgment as
to whether prosecution will be successful. The law of arrest is also framed to
favour requiring a person
to appear in court by way of summons, rather than by
arrest, because of the greater coercive effect of powers of arrest. However,
since in family violence cases arrest ‘provides a measure of
safety’, the law of arrest has been modified in some jurisdictions
provide greater powers of arrest and detention in family violence
These powers may be
conferred either by family violence legislation or by other legislation
governing criminal procedure.
5.108 In Tasmania and the ACT, a police officer may arrest without warrant if
the officer suspects on reasonable grounds that a person
has committed or is
committing a family violence
Tasmanian family
violence legislation specifies that in deciding whether to arrest a person for
family violence, a police officer
is to give priority to the safety, wellbeing
and interests of any affected person or affected
5.109 Three jurisdictions also make specific legislative provision enabling
arrest without warrant upon breach of a protection
without warrant on the basis that an offence
5.110 There are other, less common, special powers of arrest. In NSW, an
authorised officer may issue a warrant for arrest if an application
for a final
protection order has been made, even though the person is not alleged to have
committed an offence.
Victoria, a magistrate or registrar may issue a warrant for arrest on an
application for a protection order on the basis of a
reasonable belief that it
is necessary to achieve certain objects, including: ensuring the safety of the
victim and the protection
of child victims; preserving the property of a victim;
or ensuring a person’s attendance at court for a
5.111 In the majority of Australian jurisdictions, there are powers to enable
police to detain people who have used family violence,
principally but not
exclusively for purposes associated with issuing, serving or applying for
protection orders. The precise form
of these powers differs. In NSW, Victoria,
Western Australia and South Australia, these powers take the form of a power to
or require a person to remain in a designated place, in default of which
the person may be arrested.
5.112 In NSW, for example, if a police officer makes or is about to make an
application for a provisional order, he or she has a power
to direct a person to
remain at the scene of the incident or, in a case where the person has left the
scene, at another place where
the police officer locates the person. If a person
refuses to remain at the specified place, the police officer may arrest and
the person at the scene of the incident or other place, or arrest and
take the person to a police station and detain the person there
provisional protection order is made and
There is no maximum
limit on the time of this detention.
5.113 The Commissions heard in consultation that there are problems in the
practical application of the police power in NSW to direct
a person to remain at
the scene of the incident, particularly in remote areas. Police may need to
travel in excess of an hour to
attend an incident, including those that occur in
remote Indigenous communities. Directing a person who has used violence to
at the scene of the incident when the victim is there is
problematic—especially if the incident is only attended by one police
officer who needs to leave the scene to arrange for a provisional protection
order. If there is more than one police officer attending
the incident, one of
those officers has to remain at the scene while the other goes to arrange the
provisional order.
5.114 In Queensland, the ACT, and the Northern Territory police are empowered
to remove and detain persons who have used family
while in Tasmania a
person may be detained after arrest, for a number of specified
5.115 The maximum time limit of these ‘holding’ powers varies,
with Tasmania providing no
South Australia
limiting the time of detention after arrest at two hours, with an extension
allowing an aggregate of eight hours
Queensland, the ACT
and the Northern Territory allowing four
and Victoria providing
for up to six hours on the authority of the police and a maximum of ten hours by
order of a court.
5.116 The purposes for which detention powers can be exercised also varies.
In Victoria, Queensland, and Tasmania, special provision
is made to enable
detention for the purposes of arranging for victim safety or services once the
purpose of applying for a protection
order has been
In Tasmania, a
person may be detained after arrest to determine which charges should be laid;
carry out a risk screening or safety
audit; implement measures identified by a
safety audit; make a police-issued protection order, or apply to the court for a
Failure to identify primary
5.117 The Commissions also
heard that, apart from any specific issues concerning the exercise of special
police powers, there are
some concerns on the part of advocates in the family
violence sector that police may be failing to identify the primary aggressor
the primary victim when attending incidents, resulting in a significant number
of women being charged with family violence offences
and having protection order
applications taken out against them in inappropriate
5.118 The WA review of family violence legislation also noted concerns about
police issuing orders to both parties, and not always
correctly identifying the
primary aggressor and the primary
The view put forward by the Western Australia Police is that, although
understanding the nature of domestic violence is crucial to
ensuring an
effective response, ultimately members are only able to respond to the
circumstances before them. In ambiguous circumstances,
an understanding of who
is likely to be the primary aggressor will be a useful guide. However, if the
female is the one who clearly
appears to be threatening to commit an act of
family and domestic violence, the police are obliged to respond to the
circumstance
before them. According to police, this means that, just as it is
not the role of police to take into consideration circumstances
that may amount
to a defence when considering whether to arrest for the commission of an
offence, police are obliged to issue an
order against the woman notwithstanding
that she may have been subjected to acts of domestic violence many times in the
5.119 The WA review stated that:
It is evident from the submissions received that Police Officers continue to
have difficulty in responding to family and domestic
violence incidents. Given
the highly charged and emotional atmosphere in these situations that is not
surprising. In the ACT service
providers attend domestic violence incidents with
the police. If the complexity of domestic violence investigation requires the
of skilled counsellors, then such a change to police investigation
procedures in Western Australia needs to be
considered.
5.120 In March 2010, the Queensland Department of Communities in its
Consultation Paper on the review of Queensland’s family
legislation also noted problems in identifying the primary aggressor, and posed
the question whether legislative amendments
should be made to assist in
identifying the primary aggressor or ensuring that the legislation protects the
party at risk.
It noted in
this regard that:
some states in the United States of America have primary aggressor laws which
are designed to reduce the rate of dual arrests by
requiring police officers to
consider a number of factors such as history of domestic violence, the
comparative extent of injuries
(where both parties exhibit injuries) and the
existence of self-defence.
Commissions’ views
Police powers
5.121 The Commissions are interested in hearing stakeholder views about
whether issues arise in practice concerning the availability,
scope and exercise
of police powers of entry, search, seizure, arrest and detention in family
violence cases, and whether any such
issues require legislative redress. In
particular, the Commissions are interested in hearing :
whether limited express legislative powers of entry for family
violence in some jurisdictions—particularly South Australia—are
causing difficulties;
whether there is a concern that police proceed by way of summons
rather than arrest in some family violence cases; and
views about the varied maximum duration of holding powers,
particularly in the context of jurisdictions encompassing remote and rural
5.122 The Commissions note the concerns expressed about the
practical implications of the provision in the NSW family violence legislation
empowering police in certain circumstances to direct a person who has used
violence to remain at the scene of an incident, particularly
where the incident
occurs in a remote area.
There may be serious implications for a victim’s safety and wellbeing if
the victim is in close proximity to the person who
has used violence,
particularly in an emotionally charged atmosphere in the aftermath of violence.
A victim should be able to remain
in the home while the police, if necessary,
remove the person who has used violence from the scene, or direct that person to
the scene and remain in another designated place for the purpose of the
police applying for, issuing or serving a protection order.
The Commissions are
interested in hearing from stakeholders in other jurisdictions where police do
not have such removal powers as
to whether this causes any problems in practice.
5.123 The Commissions are also interested in stakeholder views about whether
there is merit in the approach of those jurisdictions
that empower police to
detain persons who have used violence to detain such persons for a reasonably
short period for the purpose
of making arrangements to secure the safety of
victims and affected children once the purpose of detention associated with
a protection order has been fulfilled.
Failure to identify primary aggressor
5.124 The Commissions note concerns about police potentially failing to
identify primary aggressors and primary victims, resulting
in the inappropriate
charging of victims or the making of applications for protection orders against
primary victims. The Commissions
consider that this is an area appropriately
addressed by improved police education and training about the dynamics of family
Education and training of police officers, and the benefits that may
flow from specialised police officers or police units dealing
with family
violence are discussed in Chapter 20. The Commissions also endorse the
suggestion made by the WA review of family violence
legislation that
consideration should be given to having skilled counsellors attend family
violence incidents together with police.
The Commissions are, however,
interested in views about whether legislative reform is needed in this area,
noting that this question
has been raised in the review of the Queensland family
violence legislation.
Do any issues arise in relation to the availability, scope and
exercise in practice of police powers in connection with family violence
(a) enter premises;
(b) search for and seize firearms or other
articles; and
(c) arrest and detain
Proposal 5–6
State and territory legislation which confers on
police powers to detain persons who have used family violence should empower
to remove such persons from the scene of the family violence or direct
them to leave the scene and remain at another specified place
for the purpose of
the police arranging for a protection order.
Should state and territory legislation which confers on police
power to detain persons who have used family violence empower police
such persons for a reasonably short period for the purpose of making
arrangements to secure the safety of victims and affected
children to the extent
that it does not already do so?
Question 5–12
Is there a need for
legislative amendments to provide guidance in identifying the primary aggressor
in family violence cases?
5.125 Where there are concurrent proceedings under family violence
legislation and criminal proceedings based on conduct the subject
protection order application, there is potential for there to be overlap or
inconsistency between the conditions imposed pursuant
to a protection
and bail conditions.
This section considers such overlaps, after a brief overview of the description
and purpose of bail, and of
bail laws in the context of family violence.
Description and purpose of bail
5.126 Bail is a decision on the liberty or otherwise of the accused, between
the time of arrest and
Bail is, in theory,
‘process-oriented’, aiming to ensure that the accused re-appears in
court to either face charges
A decision to
grant bail is made by either the police or the courts and certain conditions or
requirements may be attached to the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
(ICCPR), to which Australia is a signatory, states that:
it shall not be the general rule that persons awaiting trial shall be detained
in custody, but release may be subject to guarantees
to appear for
5.128 The purpose of refusing bail is to protect the community and to reduce
the likelihood of further
and should not be
used to punish or coerce the accused into a course of
A person who is on
bail before trial has not been convicted of an offence, and this accords with
the principle of the presumption
Criteria for bail determination
5.129 While the criteria for granting bail are generally prescribed by
statute, they have their foundations in the common law. The
primary factor in
determining bail is a consideration of the likelihood of the accused failing to
Other considerations
include the:
seriousness of the offence;
protection of the victim;
protection of the community from further offending;
strength of the prosecution’s case;
severity of the possible sentence;
probability of conviction;
prior criminal history of the accused;
potential interference with witnesses;
court delay;
requirements for preparing a defence; and
view of the police and
prosecution.
in family violence matters
5.130 Once arrested for an offence related to family violence, a person may
be released on bail either by the police or the court.
The release of the person
arrested may be dangerous for the victim of family violence. Special bail laws
have been enacted which
have been described to ‘tend to counteract the
prevalent civil libertarian bias and reverse the onus in general bail
legislation
towards releasing an arrested person on
5.131 For example, the family violence legislation of Tasmania contains a
presumption against bail. A person is not to be granted
bail unless a court,
judge or police officer is satisfied that the release of the person on bail
would not be likely to affect adversely
the safety, wellbeing and interests of
an affected person or affected
The 2008 review of
Tasmanian family violence legislation noted that there were
a number of stakeholders who expressed concern that the Act weighs against the
rights of the accused. In this regard, the most criticism
was levelled at the
bail provision s 12(1), and that the onus of proof to grant bail is
effectively reversed by the operation of
the Act. It should be noted, however,
that there is a presumption against the granting of bail where there is a
history or threat
of domestic violence in most Australian jurisdictions.
[Section] 12 has attracted criticisms in the Supreme Court of Tasmania
[2005] TASSC 89
[2005] TASSC 27
Olsen v Tasmania
[2005] TASSC 40.
The central tenet of these cases is
perhaps illustrated by Justice Underwood in his submission:
It is one thing to take into account the safety, wellbeing and interests of an
affected person or an affected child, it is quite
another to refuse liberty
unless the defendant discharges the onus of proof cast on him (or her but it is
invariably him) by
5.132 The South Australian family violence legislation amends the
to include a presumption against bail for certain
family violence offences involving physical violence or the threat of
5.133 Presumptions in favour of bail are displaced in NSW for family violence
offences and breach of protection orders in circumstances
where the accused has
a history of violence; has previously been violent to the victim of the alleged
offence in the past or has
failed to comply with a protective bail
Presumptions in
favour of bail are also displaced in
and the Northern
in certain family
violence circumstances.
5.134 There are no provisions in the
Bail Act 1980
(Qld)) which cater
specifically for family violence
(WA) contains a provision that restricts the jurisdiction to grant bail
in respect of breaches of protection orders in urban
5.135 Legislative provisions governing bail may also require officers to
consider specified factors in making bail decisions, such
the safety or physical protection of a victim or other person, or a
victim’s concerns about the need for
protection;
the likelihood of contravening a protection
the likelihood of injury being caused to, or threats made against a
any available rehabilitation program
assessment;
the person’s
the availability of suitable accommodation for the victim and any
5.136 Other
provisions enable victims or informants to request review of bail
and require
notification of decisions to grant or refuse bail decisions to victims, and if
bail is granted, notification of the conditions
5.137 A participant in the ALRC’s Family Violence Online Forum
expressed concerns that bail decisions were not, in practice,
communicated.
In [the ACT] the police are not involved in the application for a protection
order so the victim is conducting that proceeding herself.
Often she is not
aware of the status of the bail conditions and whether, for example, they are
different, even contradictory, to
the provisions of the protection order. It is
often up to the victim to contact the police to find out what is happening with
criminal proceedings. She may not be aware that bail conditions have been
changed, for example, or have any information about the
timeline of the criminal
Overlap with protection order
5.138 The conditions of bail may be the same as those imposed pursuant to a
protection order under family violence
legislation.
For example, the
Bail Act 1994
(Tas) expressly provides that bail conditions may include
any condition of a protection order or police-issued ‘family violence
5.139 In other cases, if a person is to be released on bail, conditions may
be imposed which provide the same protection as those
which may be attached to a
protection order. For example, the
Bail Act 1992
(ACT) provides that a
person charged with a family violence offence may be required to observe a
number of specified requirements
while released on bail, including requirements
that the person:
not contact, harass, threaten or intimidate or cause someone else to
engage in such behaviour against a stated person;
not be on premises where a stated person lives or works;
not be within a specified distance of the stated person; and
not enter or remain at home if the person is under the influence of
alcohol or other drug and lives at that home with another
Bail Act 1978
(NSW) provides that an accused person may be required to
enter into an agreement to observe specified requirements as to his or her
conduct while at liberty on
5.141 In practice, bail conditions can be imposed in parallel to conditions
imposed pursuant to a protection order. Alternatively,
a bail condition can be
imposed that requires an accused to comply with the conditions of a protection
order, with the consequence
that a breach of the protection order also amounts
to a breach of bail. Officers of the ALRC observed in one local court sitting
Sydney that a magistrate imposed bail conditions that an accused be of good
behaviour and abide by the conditions of the protection
In another case, bail
was dispensed with on the basis that the interim protection order containing the
mandatory conditions was to
continue in
5.142 Before imposing a protective bail condition for one of the stated
purposes of bail, a judicial officer in WA is required to
consider whether
‘that purpose would be better served’ by the making of a protection
order under family violence
legislation.
The Law Reform
Commission of WA addressed the interaction between bail legislation and family
violence legislation in its 2009 report
on Court Intervention Programs. It noted
It is common for both protective bail conditions and [protection] orders to be
imposed in family violence matters. … In some
ways protective bail
conditions provide greater protection for victims; unlike [protection] orders
bail conditions cannot be withdrawn
by the victim. … However, [protection]
orders have some advantages over protective bail conditions; for example it has
suggested that it is difficult to get the police to act on a breach of
bail—they are more likely to act on a breach of a [protection]
5.143 The Law Reform Commission of WA expressed the view that magistrates
should be able to impose either or both protective bail
conditions and
protection orders when an offender first comes before the court. It therefore
recommended that the
Bail Act 1982
(WA) should be amended to provide
that, on imposing a requirement on the grant of bail for the purpose of ensuring
that an offender
does not commit an offence while on bail, or endanger the
safety, welfare or property of any person, a judicial officer should consider
whether that purpose might be served or assisted by a protection order,
protective bail conditions or
Commissions’ views
Presumption against bail
5.144 The Commissions are interested in hearing views about the operation in
practice of provisions which contain a presumption against
bail or displace
presumptions in favour of bail in the context of family violence offences. The
Commissions are interested in hearing
whether the application of such provisions
in practice strikes the right balance between ensuring the safety and wellbeing
of victims,
as well as safeguarding the rights of accused persons. In
particular, the Commissions note that the presumption against bail in the
Tasmanian family violence legislation is relatively broad in its scope,
especially in its potential application to non-physical violence.
As economic
abuse and emotional abuse are offences in Tasmania, an accused charged with such
offences may be refused bail. The Commissions
are interested in hearing views
Notifying victims of bail conditions
5.145 It is imperative that victims of family violence—including those
who are the subject of a protection order under family
legislation—are informed of decisions to grant or refuse bail. Where an
offender is released on bail, victims should
be informed of the conditions of
bail. The Commissions note concerns expressed to the Inquiry that, in practice,
victims in the ACT
are not being informed of bail outcomes despite a statutory
obligation to do so. The Commissions are interested in hearing whether,
practice, victims of family violence who are involved in protection order
proceedings under family violence legislation are being
informed of bail
conditions imposed on the offender.
5.146 The Commissions note that there is precedent for a legislative
obligation to notify victims of bail decisions in the
Bail Act 1992
and consider that such an obligation should be imposed in other jurisdictions.
However, any legislative obligation to inform
victims of bail decisions must be
supplemented by other measures—including education and training of police
and prosecutors—to
ensure it is implemented. Therefore, a legislative
obligation should be reinforced by practical directions to police and
prosecutors
in, for example, police codes of conduct or operating procedures;
and prosecutorial guidelines or policies.
Overlap between bail and protection orders
5.147 Inconsistent bail and protection order conditions may lead to an
accused inadvertently breaching bail, and being exposed to
potentially being refused bail. The Commissions are interested in hearing
whether, in practice, judicial officers are
imposing inconsistent bail and
protection order conditions and, if so, what measures can be taken to address
this. For example, the
practice of imposing a bail condition on an accused to
abide by the conditions contained in a protection order appears to be one
avoiding inconsistency.
5.148 The Commissions consider that where conduct constituting family
violence gives rise to concurrent protection order and criminal
proceedings,
judicial officers should be able to impose either or both protective bail
conditions and protection orders. The Commissions
endorse the recommendation
made by the Law Reform Commission of WA to amend the
Bail Act 1982
to allow a judicial officer on grant of bail to consider whether specific
purposes of bail might be served or assisted by a
protection order, protective
bail conditions or both.
In practice, does the application of provisions which contain a
presumption against bail, or displace the presumption in favour of
family violence cases, strike the right balance between ensuring the safety and
wellbeing of victims, and safeguarding the
rights of accused
Question 5–14
How often are victims of family violence
involved in protection order proceedings under family violence legislation not
informed about
a decision to release the offender on bail and the conditions of
Proposal 5–7
State and territory legislation, to the extent that
it does not already do so, should impose an obligation on the police and
prosecution
to inform the victim of a family violence offence of: (a) decisions
to grant or refuse bail to the offender; and (b) where bail is
granted, the
conditions of release. The
Bail Act 1992
ACT) provides an instructive
model in this regard. Police codes of practice or operating procedures and
prosecutorial guidelines or
policies as well as appropriate education and
training programs should also address the obligation to inform victims of family
of bail decisions.
How often are inconsistent bail requirements and protection order
conditions imposed on a person accused of committing a family violence
Judicial officers should be allowed, on a grant of bail, to
consider whether the purpose of ensuring that the offender does not commit
offence while on bail or endanger the safety, welfare or property of any person
might be better served or assisted by a protection
order, protective bail
conditions or both, as recommended by the Law Reform Commission WA in relation
Bail Act 1982
In each state and territory jurisdiction,
breach of a protection order is a criminal
As discussed in
This is discussed in Ch 4
and the Commissions make proposals in this regard.
Criminal Code
G Zdenkowski,
Consultation
, Sydney, 6 November
Criminal Code
s 474.22. The offence of using a carriage service for child pornography
material may also be of potential relevance in some
family violence matters:
Violence Protection Act 2008
Office of the Director of
Public Prosecutions (Cth),
Correspondence
, 8 January
Criminal Code
div 270. For example, a person whose conduct causes another person to enter into
or remain in sexual servitude is guilty
of an offence. Sexual servitude is the
condition of a person who provides sexual services and who, because of the use
of force or
threats—including a threat to cause a person’s
deportation—is not free, for example, to cease providing sexual
See generally
[2008] HCA 39
(2008) 237 CLR 1
; B McSherry, ‘Trafficking
in Persons: A Critical Analysis of the New Criminal Code Offences’
Current Issues in Criminal Justice
Office of the Director of
Public Prosecutions (Cth),
Correspondence
, 8 January
The CDPP informed the ALRC that
joint trial arrangements work very well in practice:
Amnesty International,
Setting the Standard: International Good Practice to Inform an Australian
National Plan of Action to Eliminate Violence Against Women
Ibid, 45 (citation
B Fehlberg and J Behrens,
Australian Family Law—The Contemporary Context
Women and The Law
(1990), 451, 457.
Ibid, 459. Issues
that arise on breach of a protection order are discussed in Ch 6.
H Douglas, ‘The Criminal
Law’s Response to Domestic Violence: What’s Going On?’
[2008] SydLawRw 22
Sydney Law Review
Magistrates Court of Queensland,
Annual Report 2007–2008
Appendix 11, Table 9. The figure of 32,081 includes final and interim protection
orders, as well as variation and revocation
of protection orders. The total
number of final protection orders made in the same reporting period was 15,632.
NSW Bureau of Crime Statistics and
New South Wales Criminal Courts Statistics 2008
Western Australia Department of
the Attorney General,
A Review of Part 2 Division 3A of the Restraining
Orders Act 1997
(2008), 22.
In some cases if civil redress
were not available, a victim would be left without any
protection.
H Douglas, ‘The
Criminal Law’s Response to Domestic Violence: What’s Going
[2008] SydLawRw 22
Sydney Law Review
, 439. The purposes of family
violence legislation and the criminal law are discussed in
Ibid, 442–443
(citations omitted).
and The Law
(1990), 451.
Douglas, ‘The Criminal Law’s Response to Domestic Violence:
What’s Going On?’
[2008] SydLawRw 22
Sydney Law Review
(citations omitted).
(citation omitted).
discusses the purposes of the criminal law and of family violence
legislation.
Ch 7 discusses the
issue of whether there should be a general offence of family
Family Violence Act
‘Course of conduct’ is defined to include limiting the
freedom of movement of a person’s spouse or partner by means
of threats or
intimidation.
Parliamentary Debates
, House of Assembly, 18 November 2004, 166 (J
Jackson—Attorney-General),
Urbis (for the
Tasmanian Government Department of Justice),
Review of the
Family Violence
(2008), 11.
In Ch 7, the Commissions also
seek views on whether there should be a general offence of family violence,
noting the difficulties
in conceptualising the exact parameters of such an
offence and, in particular, whether such offence should include non-physical
such as emotional and economic
Crimes Act 1900
See, eg, Ibid
See, eg, Ibid
These offences are
discussed in Ch 13.
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
Contracts Review
On 1 July 2010 police in New
Zealand will be able to issue a safety order directing the person against whom
it is made to surrender
any firearms and vacate any premises occupied by the
person named in the order for whose safety the safety order is made for up to
hours: New Zealand Press Association,
Changes Made in Domestic Violence
(2009) <www.tvnz.co.nz> at 2 March 2010;
Domestic Violence
Amendment Act
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
Family Violence Act 2004
are discussed in Ch 6. Exclusion orders essentially prohibit a person who
has used violence from entering or remaining in a residence shared with the
victim, including where that person has an equitable
or legal interest in the
relevant premises.
Restraining
Orders Act 1997
(WA) ss 30F,
Family Violence Act
At the time of writing a challenge has been mounted to
the validity of the Tasmanian family violence legislation: G Vowles,
Law Faces Challenge
(2010) <www.themercury.com.au> at 15 March
Domestic and Family Violence
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
The period of 72 hours can be extended
where the first mention date would otherwise fall on a public
Intervention Orders
(Prevention of Abuse) Act 2009
Family Violence Act 2004
Intervention Orders
(Prevention of Abuse) Act 2009
Domestic and Family
Violence Act 2007
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
Western Australia
Department of the Attorney General,
A Review of
Division 3A of the
Restraining Orders Act 1997
(2008), 11,
Western Australia,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Assembly, 12 June 1997, 4014 (R
Parker), 4015.
Urbis (for the
Tasmanian Government Department of Justice),
Review of the
Family Violence
(2008), 14.
Alternative and
Improved Responses to Domestic and Family Violence in Queensland Indigenous
Communities
(2009), Rec 1.
Queensland Department of
Communities,
Review of the Domestic and Family Violence Protection Act
1989—Consultation Paper
(2010), Questions 3.3.1,
Australian Law Reform
Commission Act 1996
Police powers in relation
to investigating family violence are discussed separately below. Pro-arrest
policies are explained in
Intervention Orders (Prevention of Abuse) Act 2009
Family Violence Act 2004
Domestic Violence and Protection Orders Act 2008
(ACT) s 18(2);
Domestic and Family Violence Act 2007
s 28(1)(c).
Domestic Violence
and Protection Orders Act 2008
Australian Government
Domestic Violence Laws in Australia
Crimes (Domestic and Personal
Violence) Act 2007
Restraining Orders Act
(WA) s 62A.
Domestic and Family
Violence Protection Act 1989
Victoria Police,
of Practice for the Investigation of Family Violence
(2005), [5.3.2]. The
Code has led to a significant increase in police applications for protection
orders: Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Review of Family Violence Laws:
(2006) 145 (citations omitted). The VLRC has expressed the view that
with effective implementation of the Code, the addition of a
legislative
obligation is not yet appropriate: Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Family Violence Laws: Report
Australian Government Solicitor,
Domestic Violence Laws in Australia
Domestic Violence and
Protection Orders Act 2008
ACT Policing,
Correspondence
, 15 March 2010.
Ibid. The ACT police’s role in the ACT’s Family Violence
Intervention Program—a coordinated criminal justice response
violence—is discussed in
New South Wales Law Reform
Commission,
Apprehended Violence Orders
, Report No 103 (2003),
See Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of Family Violence Laws: Report
[5.80]–[5.93].
Ibid, [5.89]
(citation omitted).
Domestic Violence Legislation
Working Group,
Model Domestic Violence Laws
Innovations in Australian Protection Order Law—A Comparative Discussion
(2010), 12.
See discussion in
Director of Public
Prosecutions Act 1986
Office of the
Director of Public Prosecutions (NSW),
Prosecution Guidelines
E, ODPP Protocol for Reviewing Domestic Violence Offences,
Office of the Director of
Public Prosecutions (Qld),
Consultation
, Brisbane, 30 September
Domestic and Family
Violence Act 2007
R Alexander,
‘Family Violence’ in Springvale Legal Centre (ed)
Practice Manual Victoria
(2009) 208–1,
See, eg, NSW Ombudsman,
Domestic Violence: Improving Police Practice
(2006); Queensland Crime and
Misconduct Commission,
Policing Domestic Violence in Queensland
Commonwealth Ombudsman,
Policing Domestic Violence–Own Initiative
Investigation into the Policing of Domestic Violence in the ACT
, 1 July 2001
for example contained one recommendation directed at police powers of
entry—with the Commonwealth Ombudsman recommending
that the AFP should
include reference to police powers of entry in family violence guidelines, based
on the Woden Patrol Pilot Project:
Rec 1. See also Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of Family Violence Laws: Report
ThomsonReuters,
The Laws of
(2010), vol 17 Family Law, 17.5, [13] (as at 7 January
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
Restraining Orders Act
(WA) s 62B.
Violence Act 2004
Domestic and Family
Violence Act 2007
Intervention Orders
(Prevention of Abuse) Act 2009
A review of South Australian
family violence laws preceding the introduction of the 2009 Act raised the
option of including a new
police power of entry modelled on the Western
Australian provisions: M Pyke,
South Australian Domestic Violence Laws:
Discussion and Options for Reform
Law Enforcement (Powers
and Responsibilities) Act 2002
. A police officer
is also entitled to request a person whose identity is unknown to the officer to
disclose his or her identity if
the officer reasonably suspects that a
protection order has been made against the person:
Police Powers and
Responsibilities Act 2000
Administration Act
s 126(2A)(b).
Family Violence Protection
Police Powers and Responsibilities Act
Restraining Orders Act 1997
Law Enforcement
(Powers and Responsibilities) Act 2002
Violence Protection Act 2008
Restraining Orders Act
(WA) s 62B;
Intervention Orders (Prevention of Abuse) Act
Family Violence Act 2004
Crimes Act 1900
Police Administration Act
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
Law Enforcement
(Powers and Responsibilities) Act 2002
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
Police Powers and Responsibilities Act
Restraining Orders Act 1997
(WA) s 62B(2);
Intervention Orders (Prevention of Abuse) Act 2009
Violence Act 2004
ThomsonReuters,
The Laws of
(2010), vol 17 Family Law, 17.5, [21] (as at 7 January
Crimes Act 1900
Family Violence Act 2004
The definition of a
‘domestic violence offence’ in the
Crimes Act 1900
is linked to the definition of ‘domestic violence’ in the
Domestic Violence and Protection Orders Act 2008
(ACT). See also
Intervention Orders (Prevention of Abuse) Act 2009
which provides a power of arrest in circumstances connected to the service of an
interim protection order.
Violence Act 2004
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
(safety notice), 50 (intervention order);
Police Powers and Responsibilities Act 2000
s 365(1)(j)
Intervention Orders (Prevention of Abuse) Act 2009
Law Enforcement
(Powers and Responsibilities) Act 2002
Crimes (Domestic and
Personal Violence) Act 2007
The officer must issue such a
warrant if it appears that the personal safety of the victim will be put at risk
unless the defendant
is arrested for the purpose of being brought before the
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
Crimes (Domestic and Personal Violence) Act 2007
Violence Protection Act 2008
Restraining
Orders Act 1997
(WA) s 62F;
Intervention Orders (Prevention of
Abuse) Act 2009
, (2). The Victorian Act also allows the police
to direct the person to remain in the company of a designated
Crimes (Domestic and
Personal Violence) Act 2007
Domestic and Family Violence
Protection Act 1989
(Qld) s 69;
Domestic Violence and Protection Orders
(ACT) s 75;
Domestic and Family Violence Act 2007
(removal permitted if necessary to prevent imminent risk of harm to a
person or damage to property).
Family Violence Act 2004
s 10(4)(e).
Intervention Orders (Prevention
of Abuse) Act 2009
Domestic and Family Violence Protection Act 1989
(Qld) s 69;
Violence and Protection Orders Act 2008
(ACT) s 75;
Domestic and Family
Violence Act 2007
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
Domestic and Family Violence Protection Act 1989
(Qld) s 69(3);
Family Violence Act 2004
Family Violence
s 10(4)(e).
Domestic Violence Community Stakeholders Forum
, 9 December
2009. See also National Council to Reduce Violence against Women and their
Time for Action: The National Council’s Plan for Australia to
Reduce Violence against Women and their Children, 2009–2021
114 which raises the issue of ‘dual arrests’ of a victim and an
offender, following police intervention, and
how such action re-victimises
victims of family violence.
Australia Department of the Attorney General,
A Review of
Division 3A
of the Restraining Orders Act 1997
Queensland Department of
Communities,
Review of the Domestic and Family Violence Protection Act
1989—Consultation Paper
(2010), 17–18, Question
Crimes (Domestic and
Personal Violence) Act 2007
The types of conditions
that can be imposed pursuant to a protection order are discussed in
M Findlay, S Odgers and
Australian Criminal Justice
D Chappell and P Wilson,
Australian Crime and Criminal Justice
The bail legislation of the
states and territories specifies what conditions may be attached.
(Cth) s 8 provides that the bail laws of each state and
territory apply to federal offences tried in that particular state or
International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
, 16 December 1966,
[1980] ATS 23
(entered into force generally on 23 March 1976),
D Chappell and P
Australian Crime and Criminal Justice
R v Greenham
[1940] VicLawRp 12
R v Mahoney-Smith
[1967] 2 NSWLR 154
D Chappell and P Wilson,
Australian Crime and Criminal Justice
(2005), 147; M Findlay, S Odgers
Australian Criminal Justice
Re Robinson
23 LJQB 286
R v Appleby
(1966) 83 WN 300
R v Mahoney-Smith
[1967] 2 NSWLR 154
Burton v The Queen
(1974) 3 ACTR 77
See, eg, M Findlay, S Odgers
Australian Criminal Justice
ThomsonReuters,
The Laws of
(2010), vol 17 Family Law, 17.5, [28] (as at 7 January
Family Violence Act
This section also sets out factors which a court must
consider in making a bail decision, including the availability of suitable
accommodation for the victim and any affected
Urbis (for the Tasmanian
Government Department of Justice),
Review of the
Family Violence Act 2004
(2008), 15.
Intervention Orders (Prevention of Abuse) Act 2009
Bail Act 1978
, (ba) (stalking and contraventions of protection
orders involving violence or threats to use
Bail Act 1992
(breach of a protection order);
(authorised person
must not grant bail to person accused of family violence offence of murder). See
(authorised person must not grant bail unless satisfied that
the person poses no danger to a protected person while released on
Bail Act 1982
(breach of a protection order where accused found guilty in
preceding 10 years of specified offences, including serious
ThomsonReuters,
Laws of Australia
(2010), vol 17 Family Law, 17.5, [32] (as at 7 January
Bail Act 1982
See also sch 1,
, cls 3A, 3B (presumption against bail
where serious offence committed while accused on bail for another serious
offence unless exceptional
circumstances; in deciding whether there are
exceptional circumstances in cases of breach of a protection order, there is an
on the judicial officer to give the person for whose protection the
order was made an opportunity to give evidence on matters relating
protection order).
Justices Act 1959
Bail Act 1992
Bail Act 1982
–(6). Prosecutorial guidelines for family violence offences in
NSW also require the prosecutor to put before the bail authority
victim’s need or perceived need for protection: Office of the Director of
Public Prosecutions (NSW),
ODPP Prosecution Guidelines
<www.odpp.nsw.gov.au/guidelines/guidelines.html> at 12 March 2010,
Appendix E.
Bail Act 1985
s 10(1)(b)(iv)
, as amended by
Intervention Orders (Prevention of Abuse)
(SA) sch 1,
Bail Act 1982
(where person arrested for breach of a protection
Family Violence Act
Bail Act 1978
48(1)(a)(iii).
Bail Act 1992
Comment on ALRC Family Violence Online Forum: Women’s Legal Service
The types of
conditions that can be imposed pursuant to a protection order are discussed in
Bail Act 1994
s 25(4)(f).
Bail Act 1978
s 36(2)(a).
Observation: Burwood Local Court: Apprehended Violence Order/All Charges and
Summons/Defended Hearings List
, 18 December
Ibid. As noted in Ch 6,
mandatory conditions for protection orders in NSW are that the person against
whom the order is made must
not assault, molest, harass or otherwise interfere
with, intimidate or stalk the victim or a person with whom the victim has a
relationship:
Crimes (Domestic and Personal Violence) Act 2007
(WA) sch 1,
cl 2(2)(a).
Commission of Western Australia,
Court Intervention Programs: Final Report
Project No 96 (2009), 97 (citations
Ibid, 98, Rec 28. It
also recommended that WA family violence legislation be amended to enable a
judicial officer hearing a bail
application to make an interim protection order.
ALRC CP1 Family Violence � Improving Legal Frameworks
6. Protection Orders and the
Criminal Law
Introduction
Concurrent proceedings under family violence laws and the criminal law
Liability and use of evidence issues
Court-initiated protection orders in criminal proceedings
Discretionary versus mandatory
Timing of order
Commissions’ views
Use of evidence
Making of protection orders
Protection order conditions and the criminal law
Exclusion orders
Rehabilitation and counselling conditions in protection orders
Rehabilitation orders pre-sentencing
Rehabilitation orders on sentencing
Commissions’ views on rehabilitation conditions/orders
Other interactions between protection orders and sentencing
Breach of protection orders
Aid and abet provisions
Consent to breaches
Charging for breach of protection order rather than underlying offence
Penalties and sentencing for breach of protection orders
6. Protection Orders and the
Criminal Law
Introduction
6.1 This chapter considers the interaction between protection orders obtained
under family violence laws and the criminal law. The
first section of this
chapter discusses issues that arise when there are concurrent proceedings under
family violence laws and the
criminal law, including issues concerning liability
and the use of evidence.
particular, the discussion focuses on the powers of courts to make protection
orders under family violence laws in the course
of criminal proceedings.
6.2 The second section of this chapter addresses the potential for conditions
in protection orders to overlap with: general prohibitions
or requirements
imposed by the criminal law; pre-sentencing orders; and orders made on
sentencing. Particular attention is given
to interaction issues that may arise
following the imposition of exclusion orders and rehabilitation orders.
6.3 The final section of this chapter discusses a number of issues relevant
to breach of protection orders. In each state and territory
breach of a protection order is a criminal offence and, as such, can result in
the parties to protection order proceedings
entering into the criminal justice
system—either as accused persons or witnesses.
[back to top]
proceedings under family violence laws and the criminal law
6.4 The family violence legislation of most states and territories expressly
recognises that there can be concurrent criminal and
proceedings.
For example, s 62
Domestic and Family Violence Protection Act 1989
(Qld) provides
that an application can be made and dealt with under the Act notwithstanding
that a person concerned in the application
has been charged with an offence
arising out of the same conduct. The counterpart provisions in the family
violence legislation of
Western Australia and the ACT are broader in their
scope, each recognising the power of a court to make a protection order if a
has been charged with or convicted—and in the case of the ACT found
guilty of—an offence arising out of the same conduct
on which the
application is based.
6.5 The family violence legislation of New South Wales and the Northern
Territory each allow protection orders to be made even if
criminal proceedings
are commenced against an accused arising out of the same conduct relied on to
make the protection order
application.
The Victorian family
violence legislation expressly provides that a protection order can be made at
any time before or after the
commencement of proceedings for the
Liability and use of evidence
6.6 Most state and territory family violence legislation—while
recognising the potential for concurrent civil and criminal
proceedings—does
not address the relationship between the two sets of
proceedings nor the issue of what use can be made in the criminal proceedings
matters raised in the protection order proceedings under family violence
legislation. There are a few exceptions to this. The
first concerns provisions
in the family violence legislation of Western Australia and the Northern
Territory which deal with liability
issues; the second is the provision in the
Queensland family violence legislation which deals with references in criminal
proceedings
to matters arising from proceedings under family violence
legislation. Each of these is addressed below.
6.7 The Northern Territory family violence legislation provides that the
making of a protection order under that Act does not affect
the civil or
criminal liability of the person against whom it is made in relation to the
family violence to which the order
The Western Australian
family violence legislation provides that, except as provided by that Act,
neither making nor varying a protection
order affects the civil or criminal
liability of a person bound by the order in respect of the conduct out of which
the application
for the protection order
6.8 The Queensland family violence legislation has a
which applies where a
person is charged with an offence arising out of conduct on which an application
for a protection order is
based, and:
a court has made or refused to make a protection order;
a court has revoked or refused to revoke a protection order;
a court has varied or refused to vary a protection order; or
proceedings under family violence legislation are current at the
time a person is charged with an offence arising out of conduct
on which an
application is based.
6.9 In such circumstances, Queensland family
violence legislation provides that:
(3) A reference to—
(a) the making, or refusal to make, the order, or a revocation or variation;
(b) the existence of current proceedings mentioned in subsection (2)(d);
(c) the fact that evidence of a particular nature or content was given
(i) the proceedings in which the order, revocation or variation was made or
refused; or
(ii) the current proceedings;
is inadmissible in the trial of the person for an offence arising out of conduct
on which the application for the order, revocation,
or variation, or relevant to
the current proceedings, is based.
(4) To allay any doubt, it is declared that, subject to this section, an
application, proceeding or order under this Act in relation
to the conduct of
the person does not affect any proceeding for an offence against the person
arising out of the same conduct.
(5) A person may be punished for the offence mentioned in subsection (4)
despite any order against him or her under this
6.10 The Commissions are interested to hear whether the above provision in
the Queensland family violence legislation is operating
practice—and whether a provision of this nature should be extended to
other jurisdictions. For example, the Commissions
are particularly interested in
hearing whether it is common for victims in criminal proceedings to be
cross-examined about the evidence
that they gave in support of an application to
obtain a protection order, when the conduct the subject of the criminal
proceedings
and the protection order is substantially the same.
6.11 One stakeholder in Adelaide told the Commissions that sometimes an
affidavit in support of a protection order may contain less
detail than the
statement in criminal proceedings. Some detail may be omitted because the victim
was distressed at the time of taking
the affidavit or, because of time pressures
on police at the time of taking the affidavit. The Commissions also heard that a
may be subjected to cross-examination on the fact that certain material
was not included in the affidavit in support of the protection
order and that
this may impact adversely on the victim.
6.12 The Commissions also heard in consultation that in some jurisdictions,
until criminal proceedings are resolved, magistrates tend
to prefer to make only
interim protection orders,
adjourn the hearing of any protection order
application.
6.13 If a criminal charge related to family violence is proved, then the
standard of proof needed for the evidence for the protection
order application
is exceeded.
In any case, in
such circumstances a protection order will be mandatory in some jurisdictions
for certain offences.
is potentially problematic to use evidence relating to protection order
proceedings in criminal proceedings, the same difficulties
do not arise to the
use of evidence related to criminal proceedings in protection order
proceedings.
Court-initiated
protection orders in criminal proceedings
6.14 Some provisions in family violence or sentencing legislation expressly
permit a court, on its own initiative, to make protection
orders when a person
pleads guilty, is found guilty after a contested hearing, or is convicted of an
offence that involves family
The Northern Territory provision also permits such an order to be made on the
application of the
prosecution.
6.15 These important provisions may circumvent the need for a victim to make
a separate application for a protection order. Three
issues arise in relation to
these types of provisions. One is whether they confer on the court a discretion
to make such an order—or
compel it to do so. Another is the point in time
in the criminal proceedings when these orders can be made. The final issue is
a court in a criminal proceeding is specifically empowered to vary an
existing protection order. Each of these issues is addressed
Discretionary versus mandatory
6.16 There is a significant difference in the level of discretion conferred
on courts to make protection orders under family violence
legislation in
criminal proceedings. Some provisions give courts discretion to make such
orders, while others mandate the court to
do so—particularly in matters
involving serious offences. For example, the Queensland provisions are
discretionary, providing
that if a person is before a Magistrates Court, the
Children’s Court, the District Court or the Supreme Court for an offence
involving family violence, the court
make a protection order if the
person pleads guilty to, or is found guilty of, that
6.17 In contrast, the NSW provision is framed in mandatory terms, requiring a
court to make a protection order if a person pleads
guilty to or is found guilty
of certain offences irrespective of whether an application for such an order has
been made. However,
the provision also provides that the court need not make an
order where satisfied that it is not required, for example, because there
existing order in place.
noted below, another NSW provision mandates the court to make interim protection
orders when a person is charged with a serious
6.18 The Western Australian family violence legislation mandates the court to
make protection orders to protect victims when specified
violent personal
offences—such as attempt to murder, grievous bodily harm and sexual
penetration without consent—are
The exception to this
requirement is if the victim, for whose benefit the court proposes to make the
order, objects to the order
In other cases, the
Western Australian family violence legislation confers a discretion on the court
to make protection orders during
other proceedings. In particular, when
considering a bail application, the court may make a protection order against
the person charged
or any other person who gives evidence in relation to the
6.19 In 1999, the Domestic Violence Legislation Working Group advocated
conferring a discretion on courts to make protection orders
when persons are
found guilty of an offence. It expressed concern that mandating courts to make
protection orders could increase
the likelihood of ‘inappropriate or
unnecessary orders’ being
6.20 The Commissions are interested in ascertaining the extent to which
courts which have the power to make protection orders on their
own initiative
are exercising such power.
Timing of order
6.21 In some jurisdictions courts are only empowered to make protection
orders in criminal proceedings when a person has been convicted,
found guilty or
has pleaded guilty.
proceedings
a person has been convicted or found guilty. For
example, NSW family violence legislation requires courts to make interim
orders on the
of serious offences, which is defined
to include a ‘domestic violence offence’ other than murder or
manslaughter.
In the Second
Reading Speech of the NSW family violence legislation, Tony Kelly MLC
Under the reforms victims will automatically be protected by an apprehended
violence order if their alleged attacker is charged with
certain serious
personal violence offences. The automatic apprehended violence orders will be
extended to all victims in these types
of cases, irrespective of whether they
are involved in a relationship with the person. The defendant will not be
entitled to contest
the order in court until the concurrent criminal charges
have been finalised. This will spare victims of violence the trauma of being
cross-examined at the hearing for the apprehended violence order as well as at
the hearing of the criminal
6.22 There was some support in consultation for provisions mandating judicial
officers to make protection orders on the charging of
a person with a family
violence-related offence.
6.23 Western Australian family violence legislation allows a judicial
officer, on request or on the court’s own initiative,
to make a protection
order when considering a case for
Tasmanian family violence
legislation allows a court to make protection orders in ‘proceedings for a
family violence offence’.
The language is not precise, but the reference to proceedings appears to suggest
that an order could be made while a trial was on
foot—that is, prior to a
6.24 The Domestic Violence Legislation Working Group did not support
provisions enabling courts to make protection orders of their
own volition
against accused persons when criminal proceedings against them were
continuing.
It expressed the
view that the making of orders on the basis of ‘untried facts’ would
amount to a ‘denial of
6.25 Some family violence legislation expressly provides that a court may
vary an existing protection order of its own initiative
on a plea or finding of
guilt in relation to an offence involving family violence. In NSW a court is
empowered to vary a final or
interim order of its own volition where a person
pleads guilty to, or is found guilty of, an offence of stalking or intimidation
with intent to cause physical or mental harm, or of a ‘domestic violence
offence’. The court may make such a variation
for the purpose of providing
greater protection for the person against whom the offence was
committed—irrespective of whether
or not an application has been made to
vary the order.
6.26 In Queensland and the Northern Territory, a court before which a person
pleads guilty to, or is found guilty of, an offence that
involves family
violence must, if a protection order is already in force, consider the order and
whether in the circumstances it
needs to be varied, including for example, by
varying the date the order ends.
In Western Australia, a court convicting a person of a violent personal
offence—including attempted murder, aggravated sexual
penetration without
consent and aggravated sexual coercion—must, where a ‘violence
restraining order is in force for
the protection of a victim of the
offence’, vary that order by extending its
Commissions’
6.27 The Commissions’ preliminary view is that there should be greater
legislative clarity about how the making, variation,
revocation or refusal to
vary or revoke a protection order impacts on the civil or criminal liability of
a person for the conduct
that gave rise to the protection order. State and
territory family violence legislation should make it expressly clear that such
actions concerning protection orders do not affect the civil or criminal
liability of a person subject to the order.
6.28 Western Australian family violence legislation is an instructive model,
in that it expressly provides that the making or the
varying of a protection
order does not affect the civil or criminal liability of a person bound by the
order in respect of the same
conduct the subject of the application for the
protection order. However, the Commissions consider that such provisions should
extend to the revocation and refusal to vary or revoke a protection
Use of evidence
6.29 The Commissions consider that there should be legislative clarity about
the use in criminal proceedings of evidence of the following
based on conduct
that gave rise to proceedings under family violence legislation:
the making, varying, or revocation of a protection order or the
refusal to take any of those actions; and
the fact that evidence of a particular nature was given in
proceedings under family violence legislation.
6.30 There are a
number of factors at play in considering whether evidence concerning protection
orders should be able to be used
in criminal proceedings. These include
balancing the desirability of a victim not being cross-examined about prior
evidence—which
is a factor weighing against using evidence about
protection orders in criminal proceedings—with the desirability of a
not having to give evidence in more than one proceeding—which may
be a factor supporting the use of evidence about protection
orders in criminal
proceedings. The need to avoid prejudicing criminal proceedings is also an
important factor.
Witnesses can
be cross-examined on prior inconsistent statements—both in jurisdictions
in which the uniform Evidence Acts
as well as jurisdictions, such as Queensland, which have their own evidence
legislation.
6.31 The Commissions are interested to hear about how s 62 of the
Domestic and Family Violence Protection Act 1989
(Qld), which limits the
use of evidence about protection orders in criminal proceedings, is operating in
practice. In particular,
how does it interact with
Evidence Act 1977
which provides that ‘proof may be given’ that a
witness made a prior inconsistent statement? The Commissions are also
in hearing stakeholder views about whether a provision based on
be adopted in other jurisdictions. The Commissions tend to the view that
evidence about the making of protection orders should
not be admissible in
criminal proceedings—other than:
for the purposes of considering bail and bail conditions;
in sentencing;
in proceedings for breach of protection orders, where clearly the
making of protection orders is a relevant fact to be established.
6.32 Evidence about whether protection orders were made, varied or
revoked, or applications for such orders were rejected, could improperly
influence juries in their deliberations in matters concerning offence related to
family violence. In contrast, judicial officers
deciding bail conditions and
imposing sentence should be aware of protection orders made under family
violence legislation and the
restrictions which they place on accused persons
and offenders before them.
6.33 An important advantage of this approach is that it enables courts, on
their own initiative, to make protection orders where it
is appropriate to do
so, at any point in time during criminal proceedings without risking prejudice
to the fair conduct of those
proceedings. In other words, the suggested approach
would accommodate the systemic objectives of victim protection and ensuring that
an accused receives a fair trial.
6.34 This proposal aims to achieve legislative clarity about the use of
evidence of protection orders in criminal proceedings. At
this stage, however,
the Commissions do not propose that evidence of such orders should be
inadmissible in criminal proceedings except
in the circumstances outlined above,
because the Commissions would like to hear more about the operation in practice
of the Queensland
provision, which limits the use of such evidence.
Making of protection orders
6.35 The Commissions are of the preliminary view that provisions empowering
courts in criminal matters to make protection orders on
their own initiative are
an extremely important way of alleviating the need for a victim—already
involved in criminal proceedings
as a witness—to initiate an application
for a protection order, and potentially to give further evidence. The
Commissions consider
that the family violence legislation of each state and
territory should contain an express provision empowering courts in this way.
Commissions note that the Victorian family violence legislation does not contain
such a provision.
6.36 The Domestic Violence Legislation Working Group did not support
provisions enabling courts to make protection orders of their
own volition
against accused persons where criminal proceedings against them were continuing.
This was because the making of such
orders on the basis of ‘untried
facts’ would amount to a ‘denial of
Commissions’ preliminary view, however, a court should be able to make
such orders of its own initiative where it considers
it is appropriate to do so
to protect a victim. The legitimate concern about denying justice to an accused
in criminal proceedings
can be alleviated if, as the Commissions are tentatively
considering, family violence legislation makes it clear:
that the making of a protection order does not affect the criminal
or civil liability of a person in respect of conduct the subject
of the order;
that a protection order is inadmissible in criminal
proceedings—other than for the purpose of imposing bail, in sentencing,
in proceedings for breach of protection orders.
6.37 An alternative
approach is to limit courts to make interim protection orders in such
circumstances.
6.38 The Commissions note the disparity between the jurisdictions concerning
whether court-initiated protection orders are mandatory
or discretionary. The
Commissions tend to the view that it would be preferable for there to be
uniformity of approach across the
which courts make protection orders in criminal proceedings. The Domestic
Violence Legislation
Working Group expressed concern that the making of
mandatory orders could lead to inappropriate or unnecessary orders being issued.
The Commissions are therefore interested to hear how the provisions in NSW and
Western Australia, which mandate courts to make protection
orders in certain
circumstances, are working in practice. In particular, the Commissions are
interested in hearing:
whether such provisions have resulted in the issuing of
inappropriate or unnecessary orders;
the types of circumstances that satisfy judicial officers in NSW
that the mandatory making of the protection order is not required;
whether, if provisions mandating courts to make protection orders in
certain circumstances are to remain, such provisions should
contain an express
exception for when a victim objects to the making of the order.
6.39 In relation to the last bullet point above, the Commissions
note that the Western Australian family violence legislation has
exception, whereas the NSW family violence legislation does not. The Domestic
Violence Legislation Working Group recommended
the inclusion of such an
exception in provisions conferring discretion on courts to make protection
6.40 The Commissions are also interested in stakeholder views on whether it
would be beneficial for legislation to empower prosecutors
to seek protection
orders where a person pleads guilty or is found guilty of an offence involving
family violence. In this regard,
they are particularly interested in hearing
applications for
protection orders when a person pleads guilty to, or is found
guilty of, an offence involving family violence.
6.41 In the Commissions’ preliminary view, a court before which a
person pleads guilty or is found guilty of an offence involving
family violence,
should be required to consider:
any existing protection order; and
whether, in the circumstances that protection order needs to be
varied to provide greater protection for the person against whom
the offence was
committed—irrespective of whether or not an application has been made to
vary the order.
6.42 This approach does not require the court to
vary an existing protection order. Its intended impact is to focus a court
criminal jurisdiction on an existing protection order, to ascertain
whether its conditions remain appropriate and sufficient to protect
the affected
Proposal 6–1
State and territory family violence legislation
should be amended, where necessary, to make it clear that the making, variation
revocation of a protection order or the refusal to make, vary or revoke such
an order does not affect the civil or criminal liability
of a person bound by
the order in respect of the family violence the subject of the order.
Is it common for victims in criminal proceedings to be
cross-examined about evidence that they have given in support of an application
to obtain a protection order under family violence legislation when the conduct
the subject of the criminal proceedings and the protection
substantially the same?
Proposal 6–2
State and territory family violence legislation
should be amended to clarify whether, in the trial of an accused for an offence
out of conduct which is the same or substantially similar to that upon
which a protection order is based, references can be made
(a) the making, variation, and revocation of protection orders in
proceedings under family violence legislation;
(b) the refusal of a court to make, vary or revoke a protection order in
proceedings under family violence legislation;
(c) the existence of current proceedings for a protection order under
family violence legislation against the person the subject
of the criminal
proceedings;
(d) the fact that evidence of a particular nature or content was given in
proceedings under family violence legislation.
Such provisions will need to address separately the conduct which constitutes
a breach of a protection order under family violence
legislation.
How is s 62 of the
Domestic and Family Violence Protection
(Qld)—which renders inadmissible in criminal proceedings
certain evidence about protection orders where those proceedings arise
conduct upon which a protection order is based—working in practice? In
particular:
(a) how is it interacting in practice with
Evidence Act 1977
(Qld) which states that ‘proof may be
given’ of a previous inconsistent statement;
(b) does it provide a
model for other states and territories to adopt in their family violence
legislation in order to provide legislative
clarity about the matters raised in
Proposal 6–2 above; and
(c) is there a need to make express exception
for bail, sentencing and breach of protection order proceedings?
In practice, to what extent are courts exercising their powers to
make protection orders in criminal proceedings on their own initiative
discretion to do so is conferred on them?
Question 6–4
current provisions in family violence legislation which mandate courts to make
either interim or final protection orders on: charging;
a finding or plea of
guilt; or in the case of serious offences, working in practice? In
particular:
(a) have such provisions resulted in the issuing of unnecessary
or inappropriate orders; and
(b) in practice, what types of circumstances
satisfy judicial officers in NSW that such orders are not
Question 6–5
If provisions in state and territory
family violence legislation mandating courts to make protection orders in
certain circumstances
remain, is it appropriate for such provisions to contain
an exception for situations where a victim objects to the making of the
Question 6–6
To what extent are prosecutors in the
Northern Territory making applications for protection orders where a person
pleads guilty or
is found guilty of an offence that involves family violence? Is
it desirable for legislation to empower prosecutors in other states
territories to make an application for protection orders where a person pleads
guilty or is found guilty of such an offence?
Proposal 6–3
State and territory family violence legislation
should include an express provision conferring on courts a power to make a
order on their own initiative at any stage of a criminal
proceeding—including prior to a plea or finding of guilt.
Proposal 6–4
State and territory legislation should provide that
a court, before which a person pleads guilty or is found guilty of an offence
involving family violence, must consider any existing protection order obtained
under family violence legislation and whether, in
the circumstances, that
protection order needs to be varied to provide greater protection for the person
against whom the offence
was committed, irrespective of whether an application
has been made to vary the order.
[back to top]
order conditions and the criminal law
6.43 Conditions in protection orders may overlap with:
general prohibitions or requirements imposed by the criminal
pre-sentencing orders; and
orders made on sentencing.
6.44 In addition, protection
orders can impose conditions that restrict behaviour not otherwise prohibited by
the criminal law, as
well as conditions—such as orders excluding a person
from his or her home—which are not typically sentencing
of conditions
6.45 Before considering issues of overlap between conditions in protection
orders obtained under family violence legislation and the
criminal law, and
areas where conditions may operate independently of the criminal law, it is
necessary to consider the types of
conditions available under protection
6.46 The Australian Government Solicitor (AGS) has expressed the view that
family violence legislation does not appear to be substantially
different across
the types of orders that may be made in the domestic violence context and the
kinds of prohibitions, restraints and conditions that
an order may impose on the
person against whom it is made.
6.47 The types of conditions that are authorised by family violence
legislation to be imposed typically include any that the court
considers to:
protect the victim and any child from family
encourage the person
to accept responsibility for the violence committed against the victim, or
change his or her behaviour.
6.48 Conditions can also prohibit (or restrict) the person against whom the
protection order is made from:
committing family violence against the
harassing, threatening or intimidating a
verbally abusing or assaulting a
entering the victim’s residence, workplace or any other
specified premises—including where that person has a legal or
interest in the property;
being anywhere within a specified distance of the victim or a
specified place;
approaching the victim or any specified premises—including
within 12 hours of consuming intoxicating liquor or illicit
telephoning or otherwise contacting the victim—including by
email or by text message, unless in the company of a police officer
or specified
and including attempting
to contact the victim at a refuge either directly or through someone
interfering with or damaging the victim’s
stalking the
locating or attempting to locate the
causing another person to engage in behaviour prohibited by the
protection order;
taking possession of specified personal property reasonably needed
by a victim;
preventing a victim from obtaining and using personal property
reasonably needed by the victim;
possessing firearms, prohibited
or a firearms
6.49 In NSW
and Queensland protection orders include mandatory conditions. In NSW every
protection order is taken to include conditions
which prohibit the person from:
assaulting, molesting, harassing, threatening, stalking and engaging in any
intimidating conduct
towards the victim or anyone with whom the victim has a
domestic relationship.
Queensland, every protection order is taken to include a condition that the
person is to be of good behaviour and not commit family
6.50 In addition to prohibiting or restricting conduct, conditions attached
to a protection order can require the person to undertake
certain actions, such
as: vacate premises—whether or not the person has a legal or equitable
interest in the premises;
surrender firearms and other weapons; return specified personal property
required by the victim;
an assessment to determine an appropriate form of intervention program and
eligibility for such a program;
or attend a rehabilitation
Conditions can also
specify the circumstances in which a person against whom a protection order is
made may be on particular premises
or approach or contact a particular
6.51 In South Australia only, a court making a protection order may make a
problem gambling order providing that the person be subject
to a problem
gambling family protection order under the
Problem Gambling Family Protection
Orders Act 2004
(SA) imposing specified requirements or orders of a kind
that could be imposed by the Independent Gambling Authority under that
Such orders include
requiring the person to attend counselling or rehabilitation; prohibiting the
person from taking part in gambling
activities; and prohibiting the person from
money for gambling
activities.
The ALRC heard in
one consultation with magistrates in Adelaide that problem gambling orders are
not being imposed as part of the
conditions of protection orders.
6.52 Directions not to breach the criminal law may be attached as conditions
to a protection order. For example, conditions which
provide that a person is
not to threaten, assault or stalk another person, or damage another
person’s property, essentially
articulate what is, in any event, conduct
typically prohibited by the criminal law. A condition to be of good behaviour is
also essentially
a condition to abide by the law. Other conditions, however,
prohibit conduct which, but for the prohibition in the protection order,
not infringe the law. For example, persons are usually free to contact,
communicate with, approach and locate family members,
and free to enter and live
in their own residence—conduct which can be proscribed by a protection
order that includes an exclusion
Application of conditions in
6.53 The above summary indicates the wide range of conditions potentially
available to judicial officers to impose in the making of
protection orders
under family violence legislation. Professor Rosemary Hunter’s study of
the handling of family violence protection
order proceedings in magistrates
courts in Victoria found that the median hearing time for protection order
applications, other than
contested final orders, was three
She observed that the
speed with which protection order applications were dealt with resulted in
judicial officers not giving particularised
attention to the conditions attached
to a protection order. She concluded that conditions were not tailored to the
particular allegations
The Commissions are
interested in hearing whether this experience is common to other jurisdictions
and, in particular, the extent
to which protection order conditions are tailored
to the circumstances of particular cases across the jurisdictions.
6.54 The application forms for protection orders in most jurisdictions set
out the conditions that may be attached to the making of
a protection order,
with an option for applicants to tick the conditions which they
However, the application
form for a protection order in Western Australia does not set out the conditions
which may be imposed on
the making of a protection
6.55 The application forms for NSW and Queensland specify the mandatory
conditions which attach to a protection order in those jurisdictions.
addition, the application form for a protection order in Victoria includes a
note informing the applicant that if there is something
that he or she wants the
person who has used violence to do, which is not covered in the list, the
applicant should discuss this
with the Court
Commissions’ views
6.56 The Commissions consider that in making protection orders it is
particularly important that judicial officers are able to impose
which proscribe conduct which is otherwise not criminal. All citizens are, in
any event, under an obligation not to breach
the criminal law. There are, of
course, benefits in attaching conditions to protection orders that are, in
essence, directions not
to breach the criminal law. A breach of a protection
order is a criminal offence, and as discussed later in this chapter, it may
easier to prove a breach than to prove the underlying offence to the requisite
degree of proof.
6.57 In considering the conditions which courts can impose to proscribe
conduct which is otherwise not criminal, the Commissions note
that only the
family violence legislation of Queensland includes express reference to a
prohibition on locating or attempting to
locate the victim. The Commissions
consider that such a condition is of particular importance in the context of
victims fleeing family
violence and attempting to sever ties with those who have
used violence against them. In the Commissions’ preliminary view,
state and territory family violence legislation should include a condition to
this effect—and such a condition should be
specified on all state and
territory application forms for protection orders, thereby allowing victims the
option of electing such
conditions to be considered by the court.
6.58 As a practical matter, it is important that applications for protection
orders clearly set out the full range of conditions that
a court may attach to a
protection order. This acts as a checklist for the court and the victim applying
for the order. The forms
should be drafted in such a way as to enable victims to
indicate the types of conditions they seek. For example, the application
protection order in Western Australia should be amended to set out the range of
conditions that a court may impose in making
a protection order.
6.59 Below the Commissions express views in relation to exclusion orders, and
rehabilitation and counselling conditions.
In practice, are the conditions which judicial officers attach to
protection orders under state and territory family violence legislation
sufficiently tailored to the circumstances of particular
Proposal 6–5
State and territory family violence legislation
should provide expressly that one of the conditions that may be imposed by a
making a protection order is to prohibit the person against whom the order
is made from locating or attempting to locate the victim
of family violence.
Proposal 6–6
Application forms for protection orders in each
state and territory should clearly set out the full range of conditions that a
may attach to a protection order. The forms should be drafted to enable
applicants to indicate the types of conditions that they
would like imposed. In
particular, the application form for a protection order in Western Australia
should be amended in this regard.
6.60 Family violence legislation makes provision for protection order
conditions which allow a court to prohibit a person who has
used violence from
entering and remaining in a residence shared with the victim, including, in some
cases, the power to terminate
an existing tenancy agreement and replace it with
one for the benefit of the victim. In other words, a court can impose a
requiring the person against whom the protection order is made to
vacate premises, notwithstanding any ownership rights in relation
6.61 As stated in Chapter 4, courts have been reluctant to make
exclusion orders. An exclusion order has the potential to cause great
hardship—ultimately homelessness—on the person against whom it is
The making of an exclusion
order may be relevant to the sentencing for a family-violence related offence of
the person against whom
the order was made.
6.62 As noted by the AGS, there is significant variation in:
the factors that a court has to take into account in making
exclusion orders;
whether the safety and accommodation needs of the victim are
prioritised;
whether there is a statutory presumption in favour of exclusion;
the impact of an exclusion order on a residential
of these differences are considered below.
Factors a court has to take into account in
making an exclusion order
6.64 A Victorian court that makes a protection order is required to consider
whether to make an exclusion
In some jurisdictions,
including Victoria, Queensland, and NSW, courts are directed to consider
specific requirements before making
an exclusion order and these requirements
are in addition to those to be considered in making a protection order. These
requirements
the desirability of minimising disruption to the victim and any
child living with the victim and the importance of maintaining social
and support;
the desirability of continuity and stability in the care of any
child living with the
the desirability of allowing any childcare arrangements, education,
training or employment of the victim, or any child living with
the victim, to
continue without interruption or
disturbance;
the effects and consequences on the safety and protection of the
victim and any children living or ordinarily living at the residence
exclusion order is not made;
whether there is a need for a condition allowing the person against
whom the exclusion order is made to remain at or return to the
premises to
recover personal
other jurisdictions the factors that a court is bound to consider in making a
protection order are the same regardless of
whether the protection order
includes an exclusion order.
example, in making a protection order, South Australian courts must consider the
desirability of: minimising disruptions to victims
and any children living with
victims; maintaining social networks and support for victims; ensuring
continuity and stability in the
care of children living with victims; and
allowing child-care arrangements, education, training and employment of victims
children living with victims to continue
uninterrupted.
6.66 As stated above, some jurisdictions—such as Victoria and
NSW—require courts to have specific regard to the needs
of the victim and
any child of the victim in deciding whether to make an
In Victoria, a court is
only required to consider the accommodation needs of a person against whom an
exclusion order is made if
that person is a
Moreover, there are
additional considerations where the person excluded is an Indigenous child.
These considerations are the priority
for that child to live with his or her
extended Indigenous family and relatives, and the need for the child to keep the
culture and identity through contact with the child’s
6.67 Other jurisdictions take a similar approach in deciding whether to make
protection order
in general. For example, in the Northern Territory a
court is directed expressly to consider the accommodation needs of the victim
making a protection order but not those of the person against whom the order is
6.68 Other jurisdictions take a less victim-focused approach in the making of
protection orders—including exclusion orders—by
either allowing or
directing the court to take into account the needs or interests of the person
against whom the order is to be
made. For example, the Queensland family
violence legislation provides that the court may impose any condition it
considers necessary
or desirable in the interests of the victim, any named
person, and the person against whom the protection order is
6.69 The ACT family violence legislation requires that the court must in
making a final protection order consider the accommodation
needs of the victim
and any relevant children, as well as any hardship that may be caused to the
person against whom the order is
Similarly, the Western
Australian legislation requires a court making a protection order to consider
the accommodation needs of the
person against whom the order is made, as well as
the victim, and any hardship that may be caused to the person against whom the
order is made.
6.70 If police in Victoria issue a family violence safety notice that
includes an exclusion order, they are required to consider the
accommodation
needs of the person against whom the order is made and any dependent children of
that person. The police are required
to take reasonable steps to secure such
persons access to temporary
accommodation.
Presumption in favour of
6.71 Only the Northern Territory family violence legislation contains an
express presumption that where a victim, a person who has
used family violence
against the victim, and a child reside together, the protection of the victim
and the child are best achieved
by their living in the home. The presumption
does not act to prevent a protection order including a condition allowing the
against whom the protection order is made from visiting the child at the
Such a presumption acts to
implement a central objective of the legislation referred to in the Second
Reading Speech of the
Domestic and Family Violence Bill 2007
(NT), namely
‘to ensure minimal disruption to the lives of families affected by
6.72 Significantly, the presumption only operates where there is a child
involved. It has no application in the case of family violence
between partners
living in the same residence without a child.
Commissions’ views
6.73 In Chapter 4, the Commissions ask whether a core purpose of family
violence legislation should be to ensure minimal disruption
to the lives of
those affected by family
If such a purpose were
to be included as a core purpose, then it appears to the Commissions that the
provisions concerning the power
to make exclusion orders may need to be
emphasised in family violence legislation. As noted in Chapter 4, research
suggests that
courts are reluctant to make exclusion orders.
6.74 First, the Commissions consider that courts making protection orders
should be required to consider whether to make an exclusion
order—as is
the case in Victoria. Secondly, the Commissions consider that state and
territory family violence legislation should
address separately the factors
which courts are required to take into consideration in making or declining to
make an exclusion order—over
and above the factors that are to be
considered in making a protection order generally. The Victorian and NSW family
violence legislation
are instructive models in this regard. The Commissions
agree with the view expressed by the AGS that ‘the advantage of specifying
particular considerations is that it should ensure courts focus on matters
considered especially important by the legislature and
that the parties are
aware of the particular significance of those
6.75 The combined effect of the two proposals for reform suggested above is
to require courts to consider actively whether to make
an exclusion order and
may increase the likelihood of judicial officers making exclusion orders in
appropriate circumstances.
6.76 Judicial officers should be required to give reasons for not making an
exclusion order where such an order has been sought. The
family violence
legislation of NSW provides an instructive model in this regard.
6.77 Making exclusion orders can impose severe hardship—a person who is
excluded from the home may become homeless. Equally,
not making an exclusion
order in appropriate cases can cause severe hardship—women and children
subjected to severe violence
may need to flee the home. Escaping family violence
has been identified as a leading cause of homelessness for women and
The Commissions
therefore consider that judicial officers should explicitly be required to
consider the effect that making or declining
to make such an order will have on
the accommodation needs of all the parties to the proceedings and on any
children. This approach
is consistent with that recommended by the ALRC in its
1986 Report,
6.78 The Commissions are interested in hearing views about whether police who
make exclusion orders should be required to take reasonable
steps to secure
temporary accommodation for an excluded person—as is the case in
6.79 In addition, the Commissions are interested to hear:
how the presumption in the Northern Territory family violence
legislation—that, where a victim, person who has used family
violence and
child reside together, the protection of the victim and child is best achieved
by their remaining in the home—is
working in practice; and
whether the family violence legislation of other states and
territories should include a similar presumption.
State and territory family violence legislation should require
judicial officers considering the making of protection orders to consider
whether or not to make an exclusion order—that is, an order excluding a
person against whom a protection order is made from
premises shared with the
victim, even if the person has a legal or equitable interest in such
Proposal 6–8
State and territory family violence legislation
should specify the factors that a court is to consider in making an exclusion
is, an order excluding a person against whom a protection order
is made from premises shared with the victim, even if the person
has a legal or
equitable interest in such premises. Judicial officers should be required to
consider the effect that making or declining
to make an exclusion order will
have on the accommodation needs of the parties to the proceedings and on any
children, as recommended
by the ALRC in the Report
Domestic Violence
(ALRC 30) 1986.
If state or territory family violence legislation empowers police
officers to make an order excluding a person who has used family
violence from
premises in which he or she has a legal or equitable interest, should they be
required to take reasonable steps to
secure temporary accommodation for the
excluded person?
Proposal 6–9
State and territory family violence legislation
should require a court to give reasons for declining to make an exclusion
is, an order excluding the person against whom a protection
order is made from premises in which he or she has a legal or equitable
interest—where such order has been sought.
How is the presumption in the family violence legislation of the
Northern Territory—that where a victim, person who uses family
and child reside together, the protection of the victim and child is best
achieved by their remaining in the home—working
in practice? In
particular, has the application of the presumption resulted in the making of
exclusion orders?
Question 6–10
Should state and territory
family violence legislation include an express presumption that the protection
of victims is best served
by their remaining in the home in circumstances where
they share a residence with the persons who have used violence against
Rehabilitation
and counselling conditions in protection orders
6.80 The AGS noted that there are significant differences across the
who has used
family violence and who has had a protection order issued against him or her to
attend counselling or rehabilitation
programs or to refer them to such
6.81 Five jurisdictions address the power of courts to attach conditions to
protection orders involving either rehabilitation or counselling.
differences between the jurisdictions include: whether such orders are mandatory
or voluntary; whether they are available only
on sentencing; and their
6.82 The family violence legislation of the ACT and Western Australia
provides for voluntary counselling orders. In the ACT the Magistrates
recommend that the person against whom the protection order is made, or the
victim, take part in a ‘program of counselling,
training, mediation,
rehabilitation or
assessment’.
Australia, a court or the police, in making a protection order, must explain to
the parties that counselling and support
services may be of assistance and,
where appropriate, refer them to specific
6.83 By comparison, the family violence legislation of Victoria requires the
Family Violence Division, upon the making of a final
protection order, to make
an order subjecting the person against whom the order is made to an eligibility
assessment for attending
counselling. It is an offence for the person to fail to
attend the eligibility interview without reasonable
If a person against
whom a protection order is made is eligible to attend counselling, the Family
Violence Division must order the
person to attend counselling. It is an offence
for the person to fail to attend counselling, without reasonable
6.84 In the Northern Territory, a court may make an order requiring a person
against whom a protection order is made to attend a rehabilitation
program, but
only if the person consents, the court considers the person to be suitable to
take part in the program and there is
place in such
Similarly, under
South Australian family violence legislation, a court may subject a person
against whom a protection order is made
to undergo eligibility assessment for an
intervention program, and if the person is eligible and the services are
available, require
the person to undertake such a
6.85 In NSW and Queensland, family violence legislation allows courts to
impose any conditions that the court considers necessary
and desirable, which
could include counselling or rehabilitation
6.86 Application forms for protection orders, in those jurisdictions where
there are legislative provisions concerning the imposition
of conditions
relating to rehabilitation or counselling, do not generally set out conditions
relating to rehabilitation or counselling.
One exception is the application form
for a protection order in Victoria which allows an applicant to indicate that
she or he would
like the court to encourage the person against whom the order is
sought to contact the Men’s Referral
Rehabilitation
orders pre-sentencing
6.87 In certain jurisdictions, rehabilitation orders may be made as part of
the criminal process in the pre-sentencing phase. In NSW
and South Australia,
for example, courts may defer sentencing for up to 12 months on the date of a
finding of guilt, for the purpose
assessing an offender’s capacity and prospects for
rehabilitation or for participation in an intervention
allowing an offender to demonstrate that rehabilitation has taken
allowing the offender to participate in an intervention
orders may overlap with protection order conditions requiring attendance at a
rehabilitation or intervention program.
Rehabilitation
orders on sentencing
6.89 In some jurisdictions rehabilitation orders can be made on the
sentencing of offenders who have committed family-violence related
Tasmanian family violence legislation does not expressly provide for the making
of rehabilitation or counselling orders
in a protection order—although the
court is empowered to impose any condition it considers necessary or desirable
family violence.
Tasmanian sentencing legislation, however, empowers a court sentencing for a
family violence offence to make a ‘rehabilitation
program order’,
either with or without recording a
conviction.
In determining
the sentence for a family violence offence, a court is required to take into
account the results of any rehabilitation
program assessment undertaken by the
6.90 In the Northern Territory, a court which finds a person guilty of an
offence may order the person to participate in an ‘approved
project’, which means a rehabilitation program or work, or both, approved
by a community work advisory committee under the
Prisons (Correctional
Services) Act
means that in the Northern Territory, a person against whom a protection order
is made can be required to attend a rehabilitation
above—and, if that person is found guilty of an offence related to family
violence, may also be ordered to participate
in a rehabilitation program.
6.91 In the ACT, if an offender is convicted or found guilty of an offence,
the court in sentencing may make a good behaviour order,
which may include a
rehabilitation program
as well as any
other condition that the court considers appropriate, as long as it is not
inconsistent with sentencing and sentencing
administration
legislation.
An example of
such a condition provided by way of example in the legislation is ‘that
the offender attend educational, vocational,
psychological, psychiatric or other
programs for counselling’.
This means that in the ACT,
a person against whom a protection order is made under family violence
legislation may be subject to
a rehabilitation or counselling order, and if that
same person is found guilty of a family-violence related offence, he or she may
also be subject to a good behaviour bond containing a rehabilitation or
counselling order.
6.92 Under South Australian sentencing legislation, a court may
impose—as a condition of such a bond—a condition that
the offender
undertake an intervention
If an offender has
participated in an intervention program, a court has a discretion to treat the
offender’s participation
and achievements in the program as relevant to
sentence. However, the fact that an offender has not participated in, or had the
opportunity
to participate in, or performed badly in such a program is not
relevant to sentence.
6.93 In NSW, a court may impose a good behaviour bond on sentencing, and such
bond may contain a condition requiring the offender
to participate in an
intervention program,
participate in any program for treatment or rehabilitation that is not an
intervention program.
Commissions’
views on rehabilitation conditions/orders
6.94 The Commissions tend to the view that it is important for family
violence legislation to allow expressly for courts making protection
impose conditions requiring persons to attend rehabilitation or counselling
programs, where such persons are suitable and
eligible to participate in such
programs. As stated in Chapter 4, a common purpose of family violence
legislation should be to ensure
that persons who use family violence accept
responsibility or are made accountable for their conduct. One important way of
this objective is to endeavour to rehabilitate the offender and stop
the cycle of violence. Rehabilitation programs are an essential
measure for
treating the causes rather than the symptoms of family
6.95 There is a lack of consensus about the effectiveness of general or
specific counselling and rehabilitation programs currently
operating in
However, because
some persons who use violence can benefit from rehabilitation or counselling
programs, courts should be empowered
to order a person against whom a protection
order is made to attend such programs, where the person is suitable and eligible
to participate.
The fact that imposition of a rehabilitation or counselling
order may be an option on sentencing should not preclude the availability
such options at the point in time that a protection order is imposed. This is
important for two reasons. First, not all conduct
which gives rise to a
protection order is criminal. Secondly, even if the offending conduct which
gives rise to a protection order
is criminal and is prosecuted, if the
prosecution fails, protection order conditions could still be imposed aimed at
rehabilitation.
6.96 Obviously, requiring a person to attend a rehabilitation or counselling
program—whether as part of a protection order condition
or as a sentencing
option—assumes that such programs are available. As one District Court
judge in Western Australia commented:
It is a tragedy of the criminal justice system in Western Australia that alcohol
treatment programs and family violence counselling
programs are not available in
the more remote parts of the State. Judges involved in sentencing family
violence offenders in the
Kimberley, for example, realise that there is almost
nothing in the community to support an offender who may be trying to heal the
relationship and avoid
6.97 The Commissions also tend to the view that there may be some benefit in
application forms for protection orders specifying conditions
relating to
rehabilitation or counselling—or that at least allow a victim to indicate
whether she or he wishes the court to
encourage the person who used family
violence to contact an appropriate referral service. The Commissions are
interested in hearing
stakeholder views in this regard.
6.98 The Commissions are also interested in hearing whether, in practice:
judicial officers in those jurisdictions whose family violence
legislation does not specify expressly the imposition of rehabilitation
counselling programs as potential conditions attaching to a protection order, in
fact, impose such conditions as part of their
general power to impose any orders
that they consider to be necessary or desirable; and
there are overlapping or conflicting obligations placed on persons
as a result of conditions imposed by protection orders requiring
attendance at
rehabilitation or counselling programs and any orders to attend such programs as
part of the sentencing process.
Proposal 6–10
territory family violence legislation should be amended, where necessary, to
allow expressly for courts making protection
orders to impose conditions on
persons against whom protection orders are made requiring them to attend
rehabilitation or counselling
programs, where such persons are suitable and
eligible to participate in such programs.
Proposal 6–11
Application forms for protection orders should
specify conditions relating to rehabilitation or counselling or allow a victim
to indicate
whether she or he wishes the court to encourage the person who has
used violence to contact an appropriate referral service.
Do judicial officers in jurisdictions, such as NSW and
Queensland, in which family violence legislation does not specify expressly
rehabilitation or counselling programs as potential conditions attaching to a
protection order, in fact, impose such conditions as
part of their general power
to impose any orders that they consider to be necessary or
Question 6–12
Are overlapping or conflicting
obligations placed on persons as a result of conditions imposed by protection
orders under family violence
legislation requiring attendance at rehabilitation
or counselling programs and any orders to attend such programs either
pre-sentencing
or as part of the sentencing
interactions between protection orders and sentencing
Non-contact orders
6.99 The Queensland sentencing legislation allows a court on the sentencing
of an offender for a personal offence to make a non-contact
order, which
prohibits the offender, for a specified period, from:
someone who was with the victim when the offence was committed;
going to a stated place or within a stated distance of a specified
6.100 However,
that legislation prohibits such an order from being made if an order can be made
under s 30 of the Queensland family
violence legislation. Section 30
empowers a court to make a protection order on its own initiative when a person
pleads guilty to,
or is found guilty of, an offence that involves family
Place restriction orders
6.101 Place restriction orders are available as a sentencing option in NSW
and Tasmania.
In Tasmania, a
court may make an ‘area restriction order’ if it finds a person
guilty of an offence. An ‘area restriction
order’ is an order that
the offender must not loiter in an area or class of area specified in the order
at any time or during
such periods as specified in the order.
6.102 In NSW, place restriction orders are only available on sentencing for
offences punishable by imprisonment for six months or
more. A place restriction
order prohibits the offender from frequenting or visiting a specified place or
district for a specified
term and can be made by the court if it is satisfied
that it is reasonably necessary to make such an order to ensure that the
does not commit any further
6.103 Place restriction or area restriction orders imposed on sentencing for
a family-violence related offence can overlap with or
conflict with conditions
attached to a protection order prohibiting or restricting a person’s
access to certain premises. The
Commissions are interested in hearing whether
such interactions have arisen in practice.
Taking protection order conditions into
account in sentencing
6.104 Another issue which arises on the sentencing of an offender for a
family-violence related offence is the extent to which courts
take into account
the conditions that have been imposed by a protection order under family
violence legislation. A related issue
is whether courts should take protection
order conditions into account in sentencing.
6.105 The ALRC heard in one consultation that, in NSW, protection orders are
regularly taken into account in sentencing. It is relevant
for the court
imposing sentence to know the length of the protection order and the extent of
the prohibitions placed on the offender
to be sentenced. If an order is very
restrictive and lasts for an extended time it may influence the penalties to be
imposed on sentencing.
In addition, it is relevant for the court to know whether
any rehabilitation was ordered as part of the protection order because
condition to this effect may be appropriate in a good behaviour
6.106 The Commissions have also heard that District Court judges who sentence
offenders for family-violence related offences in Western
Australia have
available to them a pre-sentence report, and that offenders are invariably
represented by counsel. Therefore any existing
protection orders are brought to
the attention of the sentencing
6.107 Some stakeholders have expressed concern about attendance at
rehabilitation programs or willingness to attend such programs
being relied upon
as mitigating factors in sentencing, in the absence of longitudinal evidence
that such programs, in fact, reduce
Commissions’ views
6.108 The Commissions are interested to hear whether, in practice, courts
sentencing offenders for family-violence related offences
are made aware of and
take into account existing protection order conditions that are or have been
imposed on the offender.
6.109 In the Commissions’ view it is appropriate for courts to consider
any protection order conditions to which an offender
to be sentenced for a
family violence offence is subject, where those conditions arise out of the same
or substantially the same
conduct giving rise to the prosecution for the
offence. It is particularly relevant for courts to take into account those
which may have caused significant hardship—such as exclusion
orders. This approach is consistent with the ALRC recommendation,
made in the
ALRC’s 2006 report on the sentencing of federal offenders, that relevant
sentencing factors include any detriment
sanctioned by law to which the offender
has been or will be subject.
6.110 To avoid making overlapping orders concerning rehabilitation or
counselling programs a court sentencing an offender must know
whether the person
has or is attending such a program pursuant to a protection order condition. It
is also relevant, in this regard,
for the court sentencing an offender for a
family-violence related offence to take into account the duration of any
protection order
to which the offender is subject.
6.111 The Commissions note, however, that concern has been expressed about
relying on attendance at rehabilitation programs as a mitigating
sentencing, and are interested in hearing other stakeholder views in this
regard, as well as any suggestions about possible
options for reform.
In practice, are courts sentencing offenders for family-violence
related offences made aware of, and do they take into account, any
order conditions to which the offender to be sentenced is or has been
Question 6–14
Have there been cases where there has been
overlap or conflict between place restriction or area restriction orders imposed
on sentencing
and protection order conditions which prohibit or restrict the
same person’s access to certain
Proposal 6–12
State and territory legislation should provide
that a court sentencing an offender for a family-violence related offence should
into account in sentencing the offender:
(a) any protection order conditions to which the person being sentenced is
subject, where those conditions arise out of the same
or substantially the same
conduct giving rise to the prosecution for the offence; and
(b) the duration of any protection order to which the offender is
[back to top]
of protection orders
6.112 In each state and territory, the breach of a protection order is a
criminal offence and, as such, can result in the parties
to protection order
proceedings under family violence legislation entering into the criminal justice
system, either as accused persons
or witnesses.
6.113 A number of issues arise in relation to breach of protection orders,
including those concerning aiding and abetting of breaches,
consent to breaches,
charging practices, penalties and sentencing practices. Each of these is
addressed below.
and abet provisions
6.114 An issue for this Inquiry is the extent to which police may threaten
to or actually charge a victim with aiding, abetting,
counselling or procuring a
breach of a protection order where they believe the victim consented to the
6.115 The Commissions have heard anecdotally that, for example, victims in
some jurisdictions, including South Australia, are being
charged with aiding and
abetting a breach of a protection order. The WA review of family violence
legislation found that police were
sometimes charging victims who had obtained
protection orders and were deemed complicit in a breach of a protection order
with aiding
and abetting the
As one submission to
the Victorian Law Reform Commission’s (VLRC) review of family violence
laws pointed out:
The threat of being charged with breaching one’s own intervention order is
a technique used by perpetrators of family violence
to stop the protected person
from reporting the breach of the
6.116 Both the NSW Law Reform Commission and the VLRC have recommended
against charging victims for whose benefit a protection order
has been obtained
for aiding and abetting a breach of such an
The VLRC recommended
that if the police believe that a victim has consented to a breach, they should
explain the procedure for varying
or revoking an order. If necessary, police
should apply for a variation or revocation on behalf of the victim with his or
her consent.
The WA review
recommended an amendment to the
Criminal Code
(WA) to preclude victims
for whose benefit a protection order has been made from being charged with
aiding and abetting a breach
It also recommended
that the court should be given power to grant leave to proceed in an application
to vary or cancel a protection
order, of its own motion, at the hearing of an
allegation of a breach, where there is evidence of the person protected being
6.117 NSW family violence legislation provides that a victim for whose
benefit a protection order is obtained cannot be charged with
aiding, abetting,
counselling or procuring the breach of a protection
The Victorian family
violence legislation provides that a ‘protected person’ does not
aid, abet, counsel or procure a
breach because the protected person
‘encourages, permits or authorises conduct by the respondent’ that
contravenes a
That Act provides, for
example, that a protected person is not guilty of aiding or abetting a breach
because she or he ‘invited
the respondent to have access to the
residence’ or ‘allowed the respondent to spend time with the
protected person’
in breach of a protection order. The Victorian Act also
contains a note stating that, if a victim is dissatisfied with the terms
protection order, the victim or the police may apply to have the order varied or
6.118 The family violence legislation of South Australia—yet to
commence—provides that a victim for whose benefit a protection
been made cannot be guilty of aiding and abetting a breach of the order if
the conduct constituting contravention of the intervention order did not
constitute contravention of the order in respect of another
person protected by
the order or of any other intervention order (of which the person was or ought
reasonably to have been aware)
in force against the defendant and protecting
another person.
Commissions’ views
6.119 The capacity to charge victims of family violence for breach of a
protection order undermines the policy intent of family violence
legislation.
Charging victims
of family violence for aiding and abetting breaches of orders exposes them to
further traumatisation, arguably imposing
a further form of abuse. It is
inappropriate to charge a victim with aiding and abetting breaches of protection
orders because it
overshadows the fact that a protection order is made against a
person who uses family violence—not the victim. Relevant state
territory legislation—whether family violence legislation or criminal
legislation—should be amended to provide that
a person protected by a
protection order under family violence legislation cannot be charged with, or
found guilty of, an offence
of aiding, abetting, counselling or procuring the
breach of such an order.
6.120 It may be appropriate, however, for a charge of aiding and abetting a
breach to be laid against persons other than the victim
for whose benefit a
protection order is made. For example, the South Australian family violence
legislation provides that if a protection
order prohibits a ‘defendant
from being on rented premises at which a protected person resides’ and the
landlord had
been notified of the prohibition, the landlord is guilty of an
offence if he or she assists the defendant to access those
6.121 The Commissions consider that there is some merit in allowing a court
hearing an allegation of breach of a protection order
to be empowered to grant
leave to proceed in an application to vary or cancel a protection order of its
own motion, where (a) there
is evidence that the victim for whose benefit the
protection order was made gave free and voluntary consent to the breach; and (b)
the court is satisfied that the victim, in fact, wants to vary or revoke the
protection order.
Proposal 6–13
State and territory legislation should be amended,
where necessary, to provide that a person protected by a protection order under
family violence legislation cannot be charged with or guilty of an offence of
aiding, abetting, counselling or procuring the breach
of a protection order.
Proposal 6–14
State and territory family violence legislation
should empower a court hearing an allegation of breach of a protection order to
leave to proceed in an application to vary or cancel a protection order of
its own motion where:
(a) there is evidence that the victim for whose benefit the protection
order was made gave free and voluntary consent to the breach;
(b) the court is satisfied that the victim wants to vary or revoke the
protection order.
Conspiracy to
pervert the course of justice
6.122 An unfortunate corollary to charging victims of family violence with
aiding and abetting the breach of a protection order is
charging such victims
with conspiracy to pervert the course of justice for conduct engaged in by them
to reduce the culpability of
the offender—such as withdrawing their
statements.
6.123 The crime of conspiracy is committed where two or more people agree to
commit a crime or other unlawful
On a charge of
conspiracy the prosecution must prove the fact of the
originated as an offence to punish persons who entered into agreements to abuse
the criminal process by bringing false
criminal charges against other
Conspiracy is a
common law offence, and the penalty is within the judicial officer’s
discretion. However, statutes set out
some particular conspiracies with specific
6.124 While conspiracy may be unrelated to issues arising from the breach of
a protection order, it is convenient to deal with it
here because of the
similarities in the policy issues applicable to aiding and abetting the breach
of a protection order.
6.125 Below is a case study concerning a victim of severe family violence who
was prosecuted for conspiracy. The case study is based
on a transcript of the
ABC’s 7.30 Report
comments made on the ALRC’s Online Family Violence
At the time of writing
the remarks on sentencing were unavailable.
In March 2010 a victim of family violence, Deanne Bridgland, was found guilty
of conspiracy and attempting to pervert the course of
justice, following a five
week trial. She was sentenced in the County Court of Victoria to a two year
suspended sentence.
Ms Bridgland had been subjected to severe family violence—described by
one psychologist as some of the worst that she had ever
come into contact with.
Her partner—Nicholas Pasinas—had repeatedly bashed her and, on two
occasions, snapped her arms.
He had also repeatedly raped her and locked her in
the garage with her mouth taped shut. Mr Pasinas was remanded in custody for
assault charges, and despite a protection order being made against him,
he called Ms Bridgland up to 12 times a day, and arranged
to have her followed.
The police recorded his phone calls to her in which he persuaded her to
withdraw her statement against him. While in prison he arranged
for a friend of
his—Paul Coralis—to pick her up and take her to the police station
where she provided police with a statement
of ‘non-complaint’
against him, pursuant to his instructions. Evidence was led that she had no
choice but to give the
statement. She also provided a letter supporting his
release on bail. A psychologist commented that Ms Bridgland did what she did
‘in order to survive’. The police officer who laid the charges
reportedly testified that she thought Ms Bridgland would
be killed if she did
not escape the relationship. Ms Bridgland was known to be suffering from
battered woman syndrome and learned
Ms Bridgland was essentially charged with agreeing with her partner to aid
him in either having him released from prison or in reducing
his culpability.
Her lawyers requested the prosecution not to proceed with the charges on the
basis that there was no public interest
in prosecuting her. The prosecution
refused. Mr Pasinas pleaded guilty to the conspiracy charge and helped the
prosecution in its
case against Ms Bridgland, for which he received a discount
on sentence—his sentence was reduced in half to two and a half
imprisonment with a 15 month non-parole period. Mr Coralis was found not
Commissions’ views
6.126 The Commissions have grave concerns about the practice of charging and
prosecuting victims of family violence for conspiracy
or attempting to pervert
the course of justice in relation to conduct engaged in by them to mitigate the
culpability of family violence
offenders. They are interested in hearing of any
circumstances where this has occurred.
6.127 The charging and prosecution of victims of family violence for conduct
seemingly undertaken by them to mitigate the culpability
of offenders ignores
the nature of family violence—particularly the features of coercion and
control, and the damaging psychological
impact that this has on victims, as well
as the fear which it instils. It also overlooks the cyclical and complicated
nature of family
violence relationships, ‘which often lead victims to
withdraw charges or understate the harm of particular conduct during periods
calm in their
relationship’.
6.128 The legal system—including police, prosecutors and
courts—should not be used to traumatise already traumatised victims
family violence. The focus of the criminal justice response to family violence
should be to make offenders accountable. It is
difficult to conceive what public
interest is served by the prosecution of victims of family violence for offences
arising out of
their conduct in seemingly agreeing to mitigate the culpability
of offenders. This is particularly so when the nature of such
‘agreement’
in a family violence context is clouded by issues
concerning duress, coercion, and learned helplessness.
6.129 Above the Commissions propose legislative amendment to ensure that
victims of family violence cannot be guilty of aiding and
abetting the breach of
a protection order—or cannot be charged with such offences. It is a
logical extension of that policy
stance also to propose legislative amendment to
ensure that victims of family violence cannot be charged with or be guilty of
offences—such
as conspiracy or attempt to pervert the course of
justice—where the conduct alleged to constitute the elements of those
is essentially conduct engaged in by a victim to reduce or mitigate the
culpability of the offender.
6.130 It is imperative that any legislative change in this area is
accompanied by cultural change. This will necessitate education
and training of
police and prosecutors. The proposed legislative amendment should be reinforced
by guidelines governing police and
prosecutors—for example appropriate
directions could be incorporated in police codes of practice or operating
procedures and
prosecutorial policies or guidelines.
Proposal 6–15
State and territory criminal legislation should be
amended to ensure that victims of family violence cannot be charged with, or be
found guilty of, offences—such as conspiracy or attempt to pervert the
course of justice—where the conduct alleged to
constitute such offences is
essentially conduct engaged in by a victim to reduce or mitigate the culpability
of the offender. Legislative
reform in this area should be reinforced by
appropriate directions in police codes of practice, or operating procedures and
prosecutorial
guidelines or policies.
6.131 There is no defence of consent to breach of a protection order in any
Australian state or territory. In 1999, the Domestic Violence
Legislation
Working Group noted in its Report on Model Domestic Violence Laws that
stakeholders expressed concern that ‘consent’
to a breach may often
have been a response to fear or a
The Western
Australian family violence legislation was amended in 2004 to remove the defence
of consent to a breach. It was thought
that the removal would
reduce the potential for parties to abuse the restraining order process by
giving, and then withdrawing consent, or by asserting
consent as a reason for
breach of the order.
Removal of consent as a defence also sought to signal to the community that a
protection order is an order of the court and not an
agreement between the
6.132 A related issue that arises on breach of a protection order is whether
it is inappropriate to allow a person who has used violence
to rely on the
consent of the victim to the breach of the order as a mitigating factor in
sentencing. The WA review of family violence
legislation found that although
consent could no longer be relied upon as a defence to a breach, consent was
still being raised by
way of a plea of mitigation and accepted by courts.
Police prosecutors have reported that part of the problem is that on a plea of
guilty to breach of a restraining order the respondent
can plead in mitigation
that the protected person invited the breach. The prosecutor, in the context of
a busy court list, has no
notation to that effect on his brief and, rather than
set it down for a defended hearing, may feel pressured to allow sentencing
proceed on that basis. This is compounded when many magistrates take a very dim
view of the respondent being charged at all in
the circumstances and have
demanded to know of the police whether the person protected by the restraining
order has been charged.
6.133 The WA review recommended that consent be removed as a mitigating
factor in sentencing on conviction for breach of a protection
Commissions’ views
6.134 The Commissions are interested in ascertaining whether, as a matter of
practice, consent to breach of a protection order is
being raised and accepted
as a mitigating factor in sentencing proceedings. The Commissions are also
interested in stakeholder views
on whether there should be a legislative
prohibition on considering consent as a factor in sentencing for breach—or
such prohibition would infringe on the discretion of judicial officers
to take into account relevant circumstances surrounding the
commission of an
In practice: (a) are persons who breach protection orders raising
consent of the victim to the breach as a mitigating factor in sentencing;
(b) are courts treating consent of a victim to a breach of a protection order as
a mitigating factor in sentencing?
Question 6–16
Should state and
territory family violence or sentencing legislation prohibit a court from
considering the consent of a victim to
breach of a protection order as a
mitigating factor in sentencing?
for breach of protection order rather than underlying offence
6.135 There will be cases where a person breaches a protection order and the
only charge available to police is breach of that order
because no underlying
offence has been committed—for example, if a person breaches a condition
of an order not to contact the
victim within a certain period of time of being
intoxicated. However, where the breach of a protection order also amounts to a
offence, one issue for this Inquiry is the extent to which police, in
practice, are charging persons with breach of a protection
offence under family violence legislation—as opposed to any potential
offence under state or territory criminal
law—such as assault.
6.136 Heather Douglas asserts that where family violence matters are charged,
‘it is overwhelmingly’ as a charge of breaching
a protection order
rather than one of the established criminal offences such as
Based on her study
of 645 court files related to prosecutions for breach of protection orders under
family violence legislation and
held at three Magistrates Courts in Queensland,
she concluded that:
It is likely that many of the matters charged as breaches of protection orders
examined in this study could have been charged as
crimes of criminal assault or
criminal damage among other matters … Although the criminal charge of
breach of a protection
order was initially developed to provide an alternative
offence for those situations where it may be difficult to identify the elements
and satisfy the burden of proof in relation to a more serious criminal offence,
it would appear from the data in this study that
the breach charge is the
standard response to matters arising in the domestic violence context when an
order is in place.
6.137 As Douglas states, various ideological and practical ramifications are
associated with charging a person for breach of a protection
order as opposed to
an underlying criminal offence. These include that:
such a preference may be interpreted as trivialising or minimising
the offending conduct;
penalties for breach of a protection order are typically less than
those associated with criminal offences such as assault, stalking
or criminal
the charge for breach may often fail to reflect the seriousness of
the offending conduct; and
there may be less particularisation in an accused’s criminal
record resulting from the recording of an offence for breach as
compared with
another criminal offence, such as
is difficult to determine from published court statistics whether there is a
trend for offences for breach of protection
orders to be more typically
prosecuted than applicable substantive underlying offences. To the extent that
courts have published
statistics in their annual reports of the number of proven
offences or criminal matters lodged:
no distinction is made as to whether such offences or matters
occurred in a family violence context or not; and
there is no indication of whether the alleged or proven criminal
offence occurred in the context of a breach of an existing protection
6.139 For example, the Tasmanian Magistrates Court Annual
Report of 2006–2007
indicates that there were 778 matters lodged concerning ‘breach of
domestic violence’ orders in
That Report
also indicates, for example, that there were 2,780 matters lodged concerning
‘acts intended to cause injury’
and 188 matters concerning
‘sexual assault and related offences’, but it is unclear how many of
these matters—if
any—arose in a family violence
6.140 Similarly, the Magistrates’ Court of Victoria Annual Report for
2007–2008 indicates that there were 4,059 proven
offences for
‘breach intervention order’ in 2007–2008. That Report also
indicates that there were 4,205 proven
offences for ‘unlawful
assault’ for example, but it is not clear how many of these assault
matters arose in the context
of family-violence.
6.141 Where a person is charged and convicted for both breach of a protection
order and any underlying offence, the Commissions have
heard that any custodial
sentences imposed are often concurrent—or partially
concurrent—rather than consecutive. The
Commissions also heard that where
two offences are charged—such as breach of the protection order and the
underlying offence—the
court has flexibility to set different types of
sentencing options tailored to meet the circumstances of the
Commissions’ views
6.142 The Commissions are interested in ascertaining the extent to which
charges for breach of protection orders are being laid as
an alternative to
charges for any applicable underlying offence, in circumstances where it would
be possible for the police to lay
both charges. If this is an issue in practice,
the Commissions are interested to hear suggestions for reforms. Is this an area
appropriately
targeted by non-legal measures such as police training, police
codes of practice, and prosecutorial guidelines, or is there also
legislative redress? For example, to address the concern that there is usually
less particularisation in an accused’s
criminal record resulting from the
recording of an offence for breach of a protection order compared with another
criminal offence—such
as assault—would it be useful for legislation
to address the specificity of information that should be captured on a criminal
record in relation to an offence of breaching a protection order?
6.143 Proper data capture is essential to the formulation and development of
policy. This complements the key strategy of building
the evidence base
recommended in
The Commissions
consider that it would be beneficial for state and territory courts to capture
separately statistical data about
criminal matters lodged or criminal offences
proven in their jurisdictions that arise in a family-violence related context.
In practice, where breach of a protection order also amounts to
another criminal offence to what extent are police in each state and
charging persons with breach of a protection order, as opposed to any applicable
offence under state or territory criminal
Question 6–18
there is a practice of police preferring to lay charges for breach of a
protection order, as opposed to any applicable underlying
criminal offence, how
can this practice best be addressed to ensure victims’ experiences of
family violence are not underrated?
Proposal 6–16
State and territory courts, in recording and
maintaining statistics about criminal matters lodged or criminal offences proven
criminal matters or offences that occur in a family-violence related
and sentencing for breach of protection orders
6.144 The maximum penalties for breach of a protection order vary
significantly across state and territory
below sets out the maximum penalties in each jurisdiction.
Maximum Penalty
Imprisonment for two years or 50 penalty units ($50,000) or both (s 14
of NSW Act)
Imprisonment for two years or 240 penalty units ($27,220.80) or both
(ss 123 and 27 of Victorian Act)
Imprisonment for one year or 40 penalty units ($40,000) for first offence,
and imprisonment for two years for third and subsequent
offences within a period
of three years ( s 80 of Qld Act)
Imprisonment for two years and fine of $6,000 or both (s 61 WA
Imprisonment for two years—but if breach of ‘intervention
order’ under s 13 (order to undertake intervention
program)—maximum
penalty is $1,250 (s 31 of SA Act)
Tiered penalties: imprisonment for one year or fine of 20 penalty units
($2,400) for first offence to imprisonment for five years
for fourth or
subsequent offence (s 35 of Tas Act)
Imprisonment for 5 years or 500 penalty units ($50,000)or both (s 90
of ACT Act)
Northern Territory
Imprisonment for 2 years or 400 penalty units( $44,000) or both
(ss 121, 122 of NT Act)
6.145 As stated by the AGS, there are, however, some difficulties in making
straightforward comparisons concerning the different maximum
penalties because
of reasons including the following:
—while the applicable fine in one jurisdiction may be lower than in
others, the maximum term of imprisonment in that jurisdiction
may be higher than
in some others; …
—some, but not all, jurisdictions have a tiered penalty system for first
and subsequent breaches.
6.146 Under the Model Domestic Violence Laws, breach of a protection order
was made a summary offence which attracted a maximum penalty
$24,000 or imprisonment for one year for a first offence; and
imprisonment for two years for a second
2008 the Victorian Sentencing Advisory Council recommended that imprisonment for
two years should be the maximum penalty
for a breach of protection
orders—as well as breach of police-issued family violence safety notices
and stalking intervention
6.148 Whatever the maximum penalty for breach of protection orders, a key
issue is how such breaches are treated in sentencing. For
example, the WA review
of family violence legislation noted a concern that breaches of protection
orders are being treated
It noted that
despite legislative amendments to increase penalties for breaches, in some cases
actual penalties imposed are low and
do not reflect the gravity of the breach
and its consequences:
Offenders are being charged more by the Police however court sentencing is very
lenient with offenders usually given small fines
as can be seen by our tracking
and monitoring of court outcomes at our local court.
Some of the penalties
given to respondents for breaching were so insignificant that they did not act
as a deterrent and made women
feel like the order or the seriousness of the
situation had been trivialised. ie. $100 fine—‘a speeding ticket
6.149 Similarly, in respect of sentencing for breach of protection orders in
Queensland, Douglas has stated that ‘penalties
are often inappropriate and
generally very low for breach
In 40 per cent of cases no conviction was recorded. … The study showed
that 42 per cent of matters resulted in fines. In most
of the matters where
fines were ordered, the fines were less than $500. … Fines are
inappropriate in the context of breach
matters as there are potential problems
associated with this form of penalty in the context of domestic violence.
Considering the
frequently ongoing connections between the victim and the
defendant in the domestic violence context there is a risk that it will
be the victim of the breach who will pay the fine from the family income.
Alternatively, there is a risk that the fine will
be paid from money that should
be paid as child
6.150 The NSW family violence legislation provides that a person who breaches
a protection order must be sentenced to a term of imprisonment
constituting the offence was an act of violence against a person, unless the
court orders otherwise.
the court determines not to impose a sentence of imprisonment it must give its
reasons for doing so.
6.151 The Northern Territory family violence legislation contains a number of
provisions regulating the sentencing of protection orders
which are said to
apply despite the
Sentencing Act
Those provisions
include that where an adult breaches a protection order the court must record a
conviction and sentence the person
to imprisonment for at least seven days if
the person has previously been found guilty of contravening a protection order.
this requirement does not apply if:
the offence does not result in harm being caused to a protected
person; and
the court is satisfied it is not appropriate to record a conviction
and sentence the person under the subsection in the particular
circumstances of
the offence.
6.152 The Northern Territory family violence
legislation also provides that if the person sentenced to serve a term of
imprisonment
for breaching a protection order is already serving another term of
imprisonment for another offence, the court must direct the term
of imprisonment
to start from the end of the other term of
imprisonment.
6.153 The Victorian sentencing legislation makes it clear that the sentencing
option of home detention is not available where an offender
has breached a
protection order—whether that order was made in Victoria or in another
state or territory.
Commissions’ views
6.154 The Commissions are interested in hearing stakeholder views about
the lack of consistency of maximum penalties for breach of
protection orders across the jurisdictions is problematic in practice;
it is desirable that there be consistent maximum penalties across
the jurisdictions for breach of protection orders, and if so, what
the maximum
penalty should be;
in practice, there are concerns about the sentences that courts
impose on offenders for breaching protection orders—in terms
of both the
level of penalty and the type of sanction imposed; and
it is desirable for jurisdictions to adopt provisions which direct
courts to adopt a particular approach on the sentencing for breach
protection order—for example such as the provision in NSW—which
requires a court to sentence offenders to imprisonment
for breach of protection
orders involving acts of violence.
6.155 In Chapter 7 the
Commissions make a proposal directed to the provision of guidance to judicial
officers when sentencing offenders
for offences related to family
For example, there
appears to be merit in providing courts with guidelines about the particular
repercussions of imposing fines on
offenders for family-violence related
offences. As noted in Chapter 7, there are particular issues which arise on
sentencing for
breach of protection orders which could be addressed in a model
Bench Book.
6.156 The Commissions are also interested in hearing stakeholder views about
what type of non-financial sanctions are appropriate
to impose on offenders for
breach of protection orders where the breach does not involve violence or
involves comparatively low levels
of violence. The Commissions have heard that a
typical non-violent breach may involve a husband—prohibited by a
order from going within 100 metres of the victim’s
residence—turning up, drunk, on the doorstep, asking to see his child.
Would it be appropriate in such circumstances, for example, to impose a bond
which mandated an intervention program such as an alcohol
Should there be consistency of maximum penalties for breach of
protection orders across the jurisdictions? If so, why, and what should
maximum penalty be?
Question 6–20
In practice, what issues or
concerns arise about the sentences actually imposed on offenders for breach of
protection orders?
Question 6–21
Should state and territory
family violence legislation contain provisions which direct courts to adopt a
particular approach on sentencing
for breach of a protection order—for
example, a provision such as that in
Crimes (Domestic and
Personal Violence) Act 2007
(NSW), which requires courts to sentence
offenders to imprisonment for breach of protection orders involving violence,
unless they
otherwise order and give their reasons for doing so?
What types of non-financial sanctions are appropriate to be
imposed for breach of protection orders where the breach does not involve
violence or involves comparatively low levels of
The interaction of bail and protection
orders under family violence laws is discussed in
However, the
Intervention
Orders (Prevention of Abuse) Act 2009
(SA), for example, does not contain an
express provision in this regard. The handling of concurrent civil and criminal
proceedings
by specialist family violence courts is discussed in
Restraining Orders Act
(WA) s 63C(1);
Domestic Violence and Protection Orders Act
(ACT) s 113.
(Domestic and Personal Violence) Act 2007
Domestic and
Family Violence Act 2007
Family Violence Protection
Domestic and Family Violence Act 2007
Restraining Orders Act
(WA) s 63C(2).
and Family Violence Protection Act 1989
Legal Aid Commissions,
Consultation
, Sydney, 10 September
G Zdenkowski,
Consultation
, Sydney, 6 November 2009.
See discussion
Domestic and Family
Violence Protection Act 1989
(Qld) ss 16, 30 (power to make order
triggered by guilty plea or finding of guilt);
Criminal Law (Sentencing) Act
(SA) s 19A (power to make order triggered by finding of guilt or
on sentencing for an offence);
Domestic and Family Violence Act 2007
(power to make order triggered by guilty plea or finding of
Domestic and Family
Violence Act 2007
Criminal Code Act 1899
(Qld) sch 1 s 359F, which allows the prosecution or an interested
person to apply to the court to constitute itself to consider whether
‘restraining order’ should be made against a person on a hearing of
charge against that person for unlawful stalking.
The court may also act on its
initiative in this regard. The Commissions understand that, in practice,
prosecutors in Queensland
make applications for orders under this section:
Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions (Qld),
Consultation
Brisbane, 30 September 2009.
Domestic and Family Violence Protection Act 1989
(Qld) ss 16, 30.
Criminal Code Act 1899
(Qld) sch 1, s 359F (on hearing
of charge for unlawful stalking judicial officer may constitute the court to
consider whether a restraining
order should be made against the person). The
South Australian provision also confers a discretion on courts to make
protection orders
on a finding of guilt, or on sentencing:
Criminal Law
(Sentencing) Act 1988
Crimes (Domestic and
Personal Violence) Act 2007
Restraining Orders Act 1997
(WA) s 63A.
Ibid s 63A. See
Crimes (Domestic and Personal Violence) Act 2007
(quasi-mandatory language in relation to interim ADVOs for serious
Restraining Orders Act
(WA) s 63. This section also allows a court hearing proceedings
Family Court Act 1997
Family Law Act 1975
or protection proceedings under the
Children and Community Services Act
(WA) to make a protection order against a party to the proceedings or
any other person who gives evidence in the
proceedings.
Domestic Violence
Legislation Working Group,
Model Domestic Violence Laws
For example,
Domestic and
Family Violence Protection Act 1989
(Qld) s 30 and
Domestic and Family
Violence Act 2007
In South Australia protection orders can be
made on a finding of guilt or on sentencing:
Intervention Orders (Prevention
of Abuse) Act 2009
Crimes (Domestic and Personal Violence) Act 2007
New South Wales,
Parliamentary
, Legislative Council, 29 November 2007, 4652 (T Kelly—Minister
for Lands, Minister for Rural Affairs, Minister for Regional
Development, and
Vice-President of the Executive
Australian Domestic &
Family Violence Clearinghouse,
Consultation
, Sydney, 27 January
Restraining Orders Act
(WA) s 63(1).
Violence Act 2004
Justices Act 1959
Domestic Violence Legislation
Working Group,
Model Domestic Violence Laws
(1999), 67. The views
expressed by the Working Group in this regard did not expressly distinguish
between final and interim protection
Crimes (Domestic and Personal
Violence) Act 2007
Domestic and Family Violence Protection Act 1989
(Qld) s 30(2);
Domestic and Family Violence Act 2007
Restraining Orders
(WA) s 63A(1)(b).
See Ch 2 which discusses the
International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights
, 16 December 1966,
[1980] ATS 23
, (entered into force
generally on 23 March 1976).
Evidence Acts, s 43.
Evidence Act 1977
The overlap between
sentencing and protection orders is discussed below. Other issues relevant to
sentencing are discussed in Ch
Domestic Violence Legislation Working Group,
Model Domestic Violence
(1999), 67. How protection orders interact with family law proceedings
concerned with the making of parenting orders is discussed
in Chs 8 and 10.
In particular, abuse of process issues, including the use of vexatious
applications for protection orders to gain
a tactical advantage in family law
proceedings to determine parenting orders are discussed in Ch 10.
As noted below, a limited number of
Australian Government
Domestic Violence Laws in Australia
For example,
Crimes (Domestic
and Personal Violence) Act 2007
For example,
and Family Violence Act 2007
s 21(1)(b).
For example,
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
and Sentences Act 1992
For example,
Intervention Orders (Prevention of Abuse) Act 2009
Domestic Violence and Protection Orders Act 2008
s 48(2)(f).
Family Violence
Domestic and Family Violence Act 2007
s 21(1)(a).
For example,
Crimes (Domestic and Personal Violence) Act 2007
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
ss 81(2)(b)
Intervention Orders (Prevention of Abuse) Act 2009
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
Penalties and Sentences Act 1992
Restraining
Orders Act 1997
s 13(2)(c).
Crimes (Domestic
and Personal Violence) Act 2007
Family Violence Protection Act
s 81(2)(d).
Restraining Orders Act 1997
s 13(2)(d) prohibits communicating or attempting to communicate with the
Penalties and Sentences Act
s 25(3)(d).
Crimes (Domestic and Personal Violence) Act 2007
Intervention Orders (Prevention of Abuse) Act 2009
s 12(1)(f).
For example,
Crimes (Domestic and Personal Violence) Act 2007
Penalties and Sentences
s 25(3)(e).
This section does not prohibit the person
against whom the order is made from asking his or her lawyer to contact the
For example,
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
Restraining
Orders Act 1997
(WA) s 13(2)(f);
Intervention Orders (Prevention of
Abuse) Act 2009
s 12(1)(h).
Intervention
Orders (Prevention of Abuse) Act 2009
s 12(1)(g).
Restraining Orders
(WA) s 13(2)(e).
Crimes (Domestic and Personal Violence) Act 2007
Family Violence Act 2004
s 16(3)(b).
legislation frames this in terms of revoking, suspending or cancelling weapons
approval or firearms authority, eg,
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
,(h) or requiring the person to surrender specified weapons
or articles that could be used to commit violence against the victim:
Intervention Orders (Prevention of Abuse) Act 2009
s 12(1)(k).
Restraining Orders
(Domestic and Personal Violence) Act 2007
Penalties and Sentences
Family Violence Act 2004
Domestic and Family
Violence Act 2007
For example,
Intervention Orders (Prevention of Abuse) Act 2009
s 12(1)(j).
Personal property directions—dealing with the return of
personal property to a victim, or allowing a victim or the person against
protection order is made to collect personal property following the making of an
exclusion order—are discussed in
Domestic and Family
Violence Act 2007
Domestic Violence and Protection Orders Act 2008
s 48(2)(j).
Intervention
Orders (Prevention of Abuse) Act 2009
Problem Gambling Family Protection
Orders Act 2004
Exclusion orders are discussed below.
Rosemary Hunter,
Domestic Violence Law Reform and Women’s Experience
(2008), 81. A great number of protection orders are made by
consent, and the making of consent orders is discussed in
In South Australia, this information
is set out in the Magistrates Court of South Australia,
Affidavit to Support
Application for Domestic Violence Restraining Order
<www.courts.sa.gov.au> at 8 March 2010. Local courts in NSW have a pro
forma bench sheet attached to the court file which allows
the court to tick the
relevant orders.
Magistrates Court of
Western Australia,
Violence Restraining Order Application
<www.magistratescourt.wa.gov.au/content/restraining.aspx> at 9 April
Magistrates’ Court of
Information for Application for an Intervention Order
<www.magistratescourt.vic.gov.au> at 2 February 2010. As noted below,
however, certain conditions concerning rehabilitation
and counselling are not
generally included on application
Family Violence Act
below, for a court to not make an exclusion order can also have negative
repercussions for a victim and
Australian Government
Domestic Violence Laws in Australia
(2009), 146. Some family
violence legislation allows courts to alter tenancy agreements in favour of
victims during protection order
determinations: see K Wilcox,
Innovations in Australian Protection Order Law—A Comparative Discussion
(2010), 11–12. The interaction of family violence laws and state and
territory residential tenancy laws is beyond the scope
of the Terms of
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
Special considerations apply where an exclusion order is to be made against a
Crimes (Domestic and
Personal Violence) Act 2007
s 17(2)(a).
Penalties and
Sentences Act 1992
(Qld) s 25A(3). Personal property directions are
discussed in more detail in Ch 9.
Australian Government Solicitor,
Domestic Violence Laws in Australia
(2009), 146.
Intervention
Orders (Prevention of Abuse) Act 2009
Crimes (Domestic and
Personal Violence) Act 2007
requires the court to have
regard to the ‘accommodation needs of all relevant parties, in particular
the protected person and
any children’. The court is also required to give
reasons for not making an exclusion order in circumstances where one is sought:
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
In such cases the court must be
satisfied that the child has appropriate alternative accommodation, care and
supervision.
Domestic and Family
Violence Act 2007
s 19(2)(b).
Penalties and
Sentences Act 1992
Domestic Violence and
Protection Orders Act 2008
s 47(1)(c),(d).
Restraining
Orders Act 1997
s 12(1)(d),(e).
Violence Protection Act 2008
Domestic and Family
Violence Act 2007
Northern Territory,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Assembly, 17
October 2007, 4846 (S Stirling—Attorney-General),
Australian Government
Domestic Violence Laws in Australia
K Wilcox and L McFerran,
‘Staying Home, Staying Safe’
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Domestic Violence
, ALRC 30 (1986), [100],
Australian Government
Domestic Violence Laws in Australia
Domestic Violence and
Protection Orders Act 2008
Restraining Orders
(WA) ss 8(1)(i),
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
Domestic and Family
Violence Act 2007
Intervention Orders
(Prevention of Abuse) Act 2009
Crimes (Domestic and
Personal Violence) Act 2007
Domestic and Family Violence
Protection Act 1989
Magistrates’ Court
of Victoria,
Information for Application for an Intervention Order
<www.magistratescourt.vic.gov.au> at 2 February
In South Australia
‘intervention program’ means a program that provides supervised:
treatment, rehabilitation, behaviour
management, access to support services; or
a combination of the above:
Criminal Law (Sentencing) Act 1988
Crimes (Sentencing
Procedure) Act 1999
Criminal Law (Sentencing) Act
(SA) s 19B (the latter Act allows the court discretion to adjourn
proceedings for a period exceeding the usual maximum of 12
Family Violence Act
Sentencing Act 1997
‘Rehabilitation program
order’ means an order to attend and participate in a rehabilitation
program and in doing so comply
with the reasonable directions of a person
employed or engaged to conduct such a program:
Family Violence Act
Sentencing Act 1995
Domestic and Family Violence
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
s 13(3)(c).
s 13(3)(g).
Criminal Law
(Sentencing) Act 1988
s 42(1)(da).
Crimes (Sentencing
Procedure) Act 1999
(NSW) s 95A. Intervention programs are defined in
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
Crimes (Sentencing
Procedure) Act 1999
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Domestic Violence
, ALRC 30 (1986),
Australian Government
Domestic Violence Laws in Australia
(2009), 161. See also L
Responding to Men Who Perpetrate Domestic Violence: Controversies,
Interventions and Challenges
(2002) Australian Domestic & Family
Violence Clearinghouse, Issues Paper 7; K Wilcox,
Recent Innovations in
Australian Protection Order Law—A Comparative Discussion
(citations omitted).
Correspondence
, 23 December
Penalties and Sentences
This provision is noted above in
the section on making protection orders in criminal proceedings. Non-association
orders are available
in NSW as a sentencing option for any offence punishable by
imprisonment for six months or more:
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act
Sentencing Act 1997
Crimes (Sentencing
Procedure) Act 1999
G Zdenkowski,
Consultation
, Sydney, 6 November
Correspondence
, 23 December
Australian Domestic &
Family Violence Clearinghouse,
Consultation
, Sydney, 27 January 2010.
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Same Crime, Same Time: Sentencing of Federal Offenders
, ALRC 103 (2006),
192–196, Rec 6–1.
Western Australia Department of the Attorney General,
A Review of
Division 3A of the Restraining Orders Act 1997
Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of Family Violence Laws: Report
New South Wales Law Reform
Commission,
Apprehended Violence Orders
, Report No 103 (2003),
Rec 45, Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Review of Family Violence Laws:
(2006), Rec 33.
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Review of Family Violence Laws: Report
(2006), Rec 33.
Australia Department of the Attorney General,
A Review of Part 2 Division 3A
of the Restraining Orders Act 1997
Crimes (Domestic and
Personal Violence) Act 2007
Family Violence Protection Act
Intervention
Orders (Prevention of Abuse) Act 2009
The purpose of family
violence legislation is discussed in
Intervention Orders
(Prevention of Abuse) Act 2009
D Brown and others,
Brown, Farrier, Neal and Weisbrot’s Criminal Laws—Material and
Commentary on Criminal Law and Process in New South Wales
(4th ed, 2006),
Ibid, 1088.
For example the
sets out various penalties for conspiracy to commit
an offence, depending on the
The 7.30 Report,
Changes to Domestic Violence Laws ‘Don’t Go Far Enough’
(2010) ABC Television <www.abc.net.au/7.30/content/2010/s2841222.htm> at 9
March 2010.
Comment on ALRC
Family Violence Online Forum: Women’s Legal Service
‘The Criminal Law’s Response to Domestic Violence: What’s
[2008] SydLawRw 22
Sydney Law Review
, 454 (citation
Domestic Violence
Legislation Working Group,
Model Domestic Violence Laws
(1999) 215.
Explanatory Memorandum,
Amendment (Domestic Violence) Bill 2004
(WA), cl 41.
Western Australia Department of
the Attorney General,
A Review of
Division 3A of the Restraining
Orders Act 1997
(2008), 25.
Ibid, Rec 4.
The Commissions further discuss
sentencing factors in Ch 7.
Douglas, ‘The Criminal Law’s Response to Domestic Violence:
What’s Going On?’
[2008] SydLawRw 22
Sydney Law Review
Although, as noted below, in
some jurisdictions, including NSW, there is a presumption of imprisonment for
breach of protection
orders involving violence:
Crimes (Domestic and Personal
Violence) Act 2007
H Douglas, ‘The
Criminal Law’s Response to Domestic Violence: What’s Going
[2008] SydLawRw 22
Sydney Law Review
This is the most
recent annual report available on the website of the Magistrates Court of
Tasmania at <www.magistratescourt.tas.gov.au/publications/annual_reports>
at 19 February 2010.
Magistrates
Court Tasmania,
Annual Report 2006–2007
G Zdenkowski,
Consultation
, Sydney, 6 November 2009.
National Council to Reduce
Violence against Women and their Children,
Time for Action: The National
Council’s Plan for Australia to Reduce Violence against Women and their
Children, 2009–2021
(2009), [1.5], [2.4], [3.4], [4.5], [5.4],
The Australian Government
Solicitor highlighted maximum penalties on breach of a protection order as one
of the areas of family
violence legislation in respect of which there is
significant variation across the jurisdictions: Australian Government Solicitor,
Domestic Violence Laws in Australia
Domestic Violence Legislation
Working Group,
Model Domestic Violence Laws
Sentencing Advisory
Council (Victoria),
Breaching Intervention Orders Report
(2008), Rec
Western Australia Department of
the Attorney General,
A Review of
Division 3A of the Restraining
Orders Act 1997
(2008), 23.
Ibid, 26 (citations omitted).
Douglas, ‘The Criminal Law’s Response to Domestic Violence:
What’s Going On?’
[2008] SydLawRw 22
Sydney Law Review
Ibid, 464 (citations
This directive does not
apply if the person convicted was under 18 years of age at the time of the
alleged offence.
(Domestic and Personal Violence) Act 2007
Domestic and Family
Violence Act 2007
Sentencing Act 1991
(Vic) s 18ZV.
See Proposal
ALRC CP1 Family Violence � Improving Legal Frameworks
7. Recognising Family Violence in
Criminal Law
Introduction
Family violence as an offence
Commissions’ views
Aggravated offences occurring in a family violence context
Commissions’ views
Course of conduct
Family violence as an aggravating factor?
Sentencing guidance
Family violence as a defence
Self-defence and excessive self-defence
Provocation
Separate defence of family violence
Commissions’ views
7. Recognising Family Violence in
Criminal Law
Introduction
7.1 One theme that has
emerged in this Inquiry is the lack of recognition of family violence in the
criminal law. While some state
and territory family violence laws have in recent
years extended the definition of family violence and the family members who may
avail themselves of the protection order regime, there is an issue about whether
the boundaries of criminal redress can also be expanded,
and whether such
expansion is desirable.
7.2 This chapter elaborates on the discussion in Chapter 5 concerning
the proper boundaries of criminal redress for family violence.
It considers
whether there should be an expanded role for the criminal law in recognising
family violence as an offence, in sentencing,
or as a defence to homicide.
7.3 The Commissions consider these issues in light of the direction in the
Terms of Reference to consider what, if any, improvements
can be made to the
current criminal law framework to protect victims of family violence. As noted
in Chapter 4, this Inquiry presents
the Commissions with a unique opportunity to
explore ways in which legal frameworks can be improved in order to better assist
of family violence—even where no issues may arise from the
practical interaction of family violence laws with the criminal
law. In the
Commissions’ views, a broad interpretation of the Terms of Reference calls
for an assessment of how well the criminal
justice system deals with family
7.4 However, as noted in Chapter 1, there is a more general issue about
whether escalating a penal response to family violence is
the best or only way
for society to mark its condemnation of what is clearly abhorrent behaviour. The
Commissions have heard that
sometimes a blunt penal response can escalate
violent behaviour. The discussion in this chapter is to be read within a context
acknowledges the limited range of criminal justice responses to the endemic
problem of family violence, and therefore the benefits
of promoting a
multi-pronged and integrated response, which focuses on prevention, as well as
punishment.
[back to top]
violence as an offence
‘Some of the women I have assisted have experienced years of
violence, including rapes, which have been reduced to one charge
assault. There is no way a just sentence for her suffering and trauma, and the
harm done to society by his actions, can
be applied to a single charge of common
assault no matter how sensitive and insightful the magistrate is’.
One woman experienced a full year of social isolation, food deprivation,
constant sexual assault and severe physical violence. The
police pressed one
charge of common assault and one charge of actual bodily harm in respect of
injuries they were able to photograph.
At court the police prosecutor accepted a
plea bargain and dropped one of the charges without consulting the woman who was
in court ready to appear and give evidence. The offender admitted to a
third party that he had been assaulting his wife but the evidence
was not used
because it did not relate to a specific incident of assault. The offender
received a good behaviour bond.
7.5 The above case study is set out by way of background for a discussion
law. This includes:
the arguments for and against introducing a specific offence of family violence;
separate aggravated offences—such
as assault—occurring within a
family violence context; as well as the treatment of family violence in
sentencing.
7.6 Lawyers representing victims of family violence informed the Commissions
ongoing and repeated
assaults are only able to prove one or two of those assaults to the required
standard of proof. There may be
evidence of other assaults and violence, which
may be inadmissible or otherwise problematic—for example:
a victim is able to describe incidents, but without times and dates;
injuries observed by third parties that are explained away at the
time by a frightened victim;
things heard through the wall by neighbours;
hearsay evidence of conversations the victim had with friends and
counsellors throughout the relationship; and
evidence of child
theme that emerged is the need for reliable and admissible evidence of ongoing
and repeated assaults—and other patterns
of family violence—to be
introduced into court to reflect the criminality of the violence suffered by a
victim. One way of
doing this is to lay representative charges, and rely on a
course of conduct in sentencing—an option that is discussed separately
7.8 Criminal law deals best with incident-focused behaviour rather than
patterns of controlling non-physical behaviour. The relative
absence of a
concept of ‘family violence’ in criminal law means that the criminal
law—unlike the civil law—typically
responds only to parts of the
overall pattern of family violence. This may limit the role the criminal law can
play in addressing
family violence, and may distort the handling of family
violence within the criminal system.
7.9 Commentators have argued that the limited focus of the criminal law means
that it fails to recognise in family violence cases
both ‘the patterns of
power and control’ and the ‘full measure of injury that these
patterns inflict’.
number of consequences. In particular, it means that the criminal law does not
adequately punish the harm done. This may
be attributed to a number of reasons,
including the fact that family violence may occur over a long period of time; is
under-reported and under-enforced, and may occur in non-physical
forms. As a result, it may be difficult to prove each particular
incident of
family violence. This effect flows on to other legal frameworks that depend on
the criminal law, such as victims’
compensation, with the effect that
family violence victims are also typically
under-compensated.
7.10 Commentators argue that this distorts the ways in which the criminal law
handles family violence. For example, by considering
discrete incidents, the
investigation and prosecution will focus on the incidents that form the basis of
charges, rendering other
evidence irrelevant and omitting the context that is
necessary to understand those
7.11 The absence of a concept of family violence in the criminal law may also
fail to label correctly the distinctive nature and magnitude
For example, Dr Victor
Tadros has argued that family violence is a particular moral wrong, in that it
erodes a ‘distinctive
kind of freedom that individuals ought to
—namely, their
freedom not to have their options, and their capacity to assess options,
arbitrarily restricted by the control
In his view, the
distinctive nature of this wrong is not currently captured by the criminal
7.12 Tadros also argues that the historical and social context of family
violence—in particular, the treatment of family violence
serious’ than other crimes—may additionally justify a distinct
conception of family violence in the criminal
law. In his view, such a distinct
conception may encourage judicial officers to treat family violence at least as
seriously as other
crimes; send out a message that such behaviour is ‘to
be taken seriously and the proper subject of public condemnation’;
might be a way for the state to recognise previous failings to address family
violence appropriately.
7.13 Commentators, including Tadros, have suggested that one way of
overcoming these constraints is to create a specific offence of
Professor Deborah
Tuerkheimer advocates legislation that would require proof of a ‘course of
conduct’ that the defendant
‘knows or reasonably should know …
is likely to result in substantial power or control’ over the
Professor Alafair Burke
has suggested, instead, that the offence should require that the defendant
engaged in the pattern of family
violence with the intention of gaining power or
control over the victim.
7.14 In most jurisdictions with common law systems, such as Canada and New
Zealand, family violence is not a specific offence. The
UK Government
considered, but rejected, the introduction of a specific offence of family
violence in 2003:
The Government believes that a separate offence of domestic violence would not
necessarily help victims. There is a full range of
charging options already. To
reduce that range—common assault through to grievous bodily harm, and
rape—diminishes the
7.15 A number of European jurisdictions do, however, have a specific offence
in relation to family violence. A Council of Europe report
indicates that the
following countries had specific offences: Andorra, Croatia, the Czech Republic,
Hungary, Iceland, Montenegro,
Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Serbia,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, and
Sweden explained the
introduction of its specific offence as follows:
Its purpose is to deal with repeated male violence towards women with whom they
have a close relationship. The introduction of the
new offence will make it
possible for the courts to substantially increase the penal value for the acts
committed against the woman,
when the acts are part of a process which
constitutes a violation of integrity. Thus it will be possible, in a much better
with existing legislation, to take the entire situation of the abused
woman into account. The new crime does not exclude that the
perpetrator at the
same time can be prosecuted, for instance, for rape or other gross
7.16 An offence of ‘cruelty’ to women was introduced in the
Indian Penal Code in 1983.
2005, a research study conducted on the operation of this section concluded
that, of 30 cases it had studied, no woman had succeeded
on the basis of that
section alone. Although many in the legal system were of the view that the
section was being misused, the study
concluded that victims thought the section
required strengthening and non-governmental organisations considered it the only
mechanism of redress for victims of family
Commissions’ views
7.17 The Commissions acknowledge that the creation of an umbrella offence of
‘family violence’ may be fraught with difficulties—not
that associated with conceptualising the exact parameters of the offence and, in
particular, whether such offence should be
framed to include conduct of a
non-physical nature that is captured by the definition of ‘family
violence’ in family
violence laws—such as emotional and economic
This raises the
fundamental issue discussed in Chapter 5 of ascertaining the proper delineation
of civil and criminal redress.
7.18 Criminal law is incident-oriented. Each element of an offence has to be
proved beyond reasonable doubt, and there may be significant
evidentiary
barriers for the prosecution to overcome in proving the elements of an umbrella
offence of family violence. The Commissions
are, however, interested in
stakeholder views about whether it is necessary and feasible to create an
umbrella offence of family
violence and how such an offence could be framed. For
example, would it be feasible to create a two-tiered offence which captures
coercive conduct and physical violence in a family violence context?
7.19 In the Commissions’ preliminary view, there may be alternative
ways for the criminal law to deal better with cases of family
violence, short of
creating an offence of family violence but nonetheless responding to the
seriousness of the conduct. These include
options exercisable at the point of
charging a person for an offence, as well options which emphasise family
violence on sentencing.
These options are discussed below.
Is it necessary or feasible for state and territory criminal laws
to introduce a specific offence of committing family violence? If
so, how should
such an offence be conceptualised? For example, would it be feasible to create a
two-tiered offence which captures
both coercive conduct and physical violence in
a family violence context?
[back to top]
offences occurring in a family violence context
7.20 An alternative to formulating an umbrella offence of family violence is
to create aggravated offences that occur in a family
violence context. This is
the case in some jurisdictions. For example, South Australia’s criminal
legislation provides that
it is an aggravated offence if the offender committed
the offence knowing that the victim was:
a spouse, former spouse, domestic partner or former domestic partner
of the offender; or
a child in the custody of, or who normally resides with: the
offender, a spouse, former spouse, domestic partner or former domestic
of the offender.
7.21 That legislation also provides that the creation of aggravated
offences does not prevent a court from taking into account, in
the usual way,
the circumstances of and surrounding the commission of an offence for the
purpose of determining sentence. It sets
out the following example to illustrate
this point:
A person is charged with a basic offence and the court finds that the offence
was committed in circumstances that would have justified
a charge of the offence
in its aggravated form. In this case, the court may, in sentencing, take into
account the circumstances of
the aggravation for the purpose of determining
penalty but must (of course) fix a penalty within the limits appropriate to the
7.22 In Western Australia, offences against the person are treated as
aggravated if, among other things, the offender is in a ‘family
domestic relationship with the victim’,
a child was present at the time
of the offence, or the conduct of the offender constituted a breach of a
protection order.
The criminal
legislation sets out higher penalties for a number of offences, including
assault and causing grievous bodily harm where
those offences are committed in
aggravating circumstances.
7.23 There is also some precedent for aggravated offences in a family
violence context in European countries. For example, art 172
Criminal Code
of Bosnia and Herzegovina provides that:
Aggravated Bodily Injury
(1) Whoever inflicts a serious bodily injury upon another person or severely
impairs his health, shall be punished by imprisonment
for a term between six
months and five years.
(2) Whoever perpetrates the criminal offence referred to in paragraph 1 of this
Article against his spouse, common-law partner,
or to the parent of his child
with whom he does not share a household, shall be punished by imprisonment for a
term between one and
five years.
Commissions’ views
7.24 In the Commissions’ preliminary view, the creation of aggravated
offences within a family violence context is a more feasible
and practical
option for the criminal law to recognise family violence than the creation of an
umbrella offence of family violence—although
it would not preclude the
creation of such an offence.
7.25 However, the Commissions have some concerns about the approach taken in
South Australia and Western Australia to offences of
a violent nature committed
against certain family members. The creation of a two-tiered maximum penalty
scheme—depending solely
on whether the victim is a family member of the
offender—signals that victims of family violence suffer inherently more
victims of stranger violence. It is not without controversy to suggest that
an attack by an intimate partner is more deserving of
censure than an attack by
a stranger.
7.26 If aggravated offences in a family violence context are to be created,
the Commissions are of the preliminary view that, in order
to make the offence
aggravated, there needs to be more than the mere fact that an alleged offender
was in a particular family relationship
with the victim. To require police to
charge persons with an aggravated offence and prosecutors to prosecute such
offences only because
the offender was in a particular family relationship with
the victim would mean that such a course of action would conceivably apply
circumstances where it may not always be just and appropriate to charge the
offender with an aggravated offence, such as in the
any person with a mental illness who commits an act of violence
against a family member;
a child with substance abuse issues who commits an act of violence
against a sibling; or
a woman who uses violence against her partner in a defensive
option for the creation of an aggravated offence carrying a higher maximum
penalty is to require not only the fact of a particular
family relationship
between offender and victim, but also evidence that the offence was committed as
part of a pattern of controlling,
coercive or dominating
Evidence of the
latter provides justification for treating an offence as aggravating due, in
part, to the inability of a victim to
extract herself or himself from future
7.28 An alternative approach would be to create separate offences—which
may not necessarily carry higher penalties—but
which emphasise the fact
that an offence—such as assault or sexual assault—was committed by
one family member against
another family member. Creating separate offences
could arguably serve as an educative measure in increasing the visibility and
of crimes committed in a family context. However, the creation of
additional offences—especially if they do not attract higher
penalties than their existing counterparts—may also unnecessarily clutter
state and territory criminal statutory schemes.
7.29 The Commissions are interested in hearing stakeholder views in relation
to these two alternative options for reform. In relation
to each option, the
Commissions are also interested in hearing views about the types of family
relationships that should be included.
Which, if either, of the following options for reform should be
(a) state and territory criminal legislation should provide that an
offence is aggravated—and therefore a higher maximum penalty
applies—if an offender is in a family relationship with the victim and the
offence committed formed part of a pattern of controlling,
coercive or
dominating behaviour; or
(b) state and territory criminal legislation
should be amended to include specific offences—such as assault and sexual
assault—which
are committed by an offender who is in a family relationship
with the victim, but which do not attract a higher maximum
Question 7–3
What kind of family relationships should be
included for the purposes of the offences referred to in Question
Question 7–4
Should federal criminal legislation be
amended to include specific offences committed by an offender who is in a family
relationship
with the victim? If so, which offences should be included and
should they carry a higher maximum
[back to top]
7.30 One stakeholder in this Inquiry has commented that:
Perhaps there is space for evidence of a pattern of domestic violence to be a
factor in sentencing. By this I mean that the standard
assault charges be laid,
but when it comes to sentencing, evidence that establishes a pattern of domestic
violence would result in
a premium being added to whatever sentence is assigned
to the proved assault. This way there is no diminishing of the seriousness
the assault charge by putting it in a special category of ‘domestic
violence’ but the fact that it is not a simple
one-off assault is also
7.31 This raises the following issues:
the stage at which such a pattern is proved, the manner of proof and
the standard of proof;
the extent to which a course of conduct constituting family violence
is taken into account in sentencing for specific offences, such
as assault or
sexual assault; and
whether any such course of conduct is limited to proven acts of a
criminal nature in themselves—as opposed to unproven criminal
acts or acts
which are not generally criminal such as emotional or economic
state and territory sentencing legislation does not expressly refer to a course
of conduct as an express sentencing factor.
One exception is the sentencing
legislation of the ACT, which provides that a court sentencing an offender must
take into account,
where relevant and known :
if the offence forms part of a course of conduct consisting of a series of
criminal acts of the same or a similar character—the
7.33 There is also reference to course of conduct in the sentencing
legislation of South Australia. Under that legislation, in order
to assist a
court to determine the sentence for an offence, a prosecutor is required to
furnish the court with particulars of injury,
loss or damage resulting from
a course of conduct consisting of a series of criminal acts of the same or a
similar character of which the offence for which sentence
is to be imposed forms
7.34 There is an issue about whether a court, in sentencing, can take into
account conduct in respect of which an offender has not
been charged. The ACT
provision referred to above is expressed in the same terms as the
s 16A(2)(c).
This is relevant because there has been case law in respect of the latter which
reveals judicial disagreement about the meaning and
s 16A(2)(c).
Weininger v The Queen
Kirby J stated that the section did not allow
‘uncharged criminal acts’ to be taken into account in sentencing and
the view that the section was an attempt to express the totality
Callinan J, however,
expressed the view that the section allowed a court to consider relevant
albeit that it might involve criminal acts which in turn might not have resulted
in charged and established (by verdict or plea)
facts constituting other
7.35 Submissions and consultations in the course of the ALRC’s inquiry
into the sentencing of federal offenders expressed confusion
and operation of
s 16A(2)(c)
, and the ALRC recommended that the section be
redrafted to provide greater
7.36 A provision allowing a course of conduct to be taken into account is
also relevant where representative charges are used—that
is, where a court
sentences an offender for a limited or representative number of offences on the
basis that those offences are part
of a wider course of conduct. Representative
charges are used in relation to sexual assault cases. In
Doyle CJ of the South Australian Court of Criminal Appeal said that the
term ‘representative charges’ described an approach
the court sentences an offender in respect of a relatively small number of
offences, but does so on the basis that those offences
were not isolated
offences, but part of a course of conduct involving similar behaviour. On that
basis, the scope for extending leniency
is reduced. The uncharged offences that
are part of the course of conduct cannot be used to increase the potential
maximum punishment,
which maximum remains the accumulation of the maxima
attracted by the charged offences. The only way in which the uncharged offences
can be used is to rely upon them to refuse to extend the leniency that might be
extended if the offences for which the offender is
convicted were isolated
7.37 This approach has also been adopted by the New South Wales Court of
Criminal Appeal. For example, in
, a case dealing with sexual
abuse, the offender made an admission that the offences with which he was
charged were representative
of the general nature of his relationship with his
daughter. Spigelman CJ said:
I do not, however, conclude that the admission extended to any, let alone each,
of the specific allegations contained in [the daughter’s
admission of this general character is appropriate to be taken into account for
purposes of rejecting any claim to mitigation and
attendant reduction of an
otherwise appropriate sentence. It is not, however, in my opinion, appropriate
to be taken into account
as a circumstance of aggravation, if that be
permissible at
Commissions’ views
7.38 The Commissions consider that, to the maximum extent possible in
criminal matters involving a course of conduct of family violence,
prosecutors should be encouraged to pursue the option of using representative
charges as a way of presenting a course
of conduct to the court. The court
should also, at the least, consider:
whether the offence forms part of a series of proved or admitted
criminal offences of the same or similar character; and
where an offender has pleaded guilty to charges and has acknowledged
that they are representative of criminality comprising uncharged
conduct as well
as the charged offences—the course of conduct comprising that criminality.
7.39 This approach to what a court is to consider is consistent
with that taken in the ALRC’s report on the sentencing of federal
offenders (ALRC 103).
7.40 The Commissions consider that there is also merit in the specific
context of sentencing for family-violence related offences
for a court to
consider evidence that an offender engaged in a pattern of family violence
against a victim—even if this includes
violence of a non-physical nature
against the victim—such as emotional or economic abuse, which is
typically, not of itself,
Such evidence should
be able to be taken into account for the purpose of rejecting any claim to
mitigation. The Commissions are interested
in hearing stakeholder views on this.
7.41 Further, the Commissions are interested in hearing whether:
representative charges in family-violence related offences are
under-utilised as a matter of practice;
the extent to which guilty pleas entered to a family-violence
related charge are accompanied by an acknowledgement that they are
representative of criminality comprising uncharged conduct as well as the
charged conduct;
courts are sentencing family-violence related offences taking course
of conduct issues into account, and if so, the parameters of
any course of
conduct considered by the court; and
whether the sentencing legislation of states and territories needs
to be amended to allow expressly for courses of conduct to be
taken into account
in sentencing. Such an amendment may have repercussions beyond the sentencing of
offenders for family-violence
related incidents.
7.42 The answers to
several of the questions posed above will be affected by the exercise of
prosecutorial decisions. In difficult
to prove cases prosecutors may be tempted
to accept a plea to a single incident assault. Therefore, the Commissions
consider that
appropriate prosecutorial guidelines will need to be developed, in
addition to training and education in order to encourage more
frequent and
appropriate use of representative charges in family violence prosecutions.
In practice, are representative charges in family-violence related
offences under-utilised? If so, why, and how can this best be
Question 7–6
In practice, are courts imposing
sentences for family-violence related offences taking into account, where
applicable, the fact that
the offence formed part of a course of conduct of
family violence? If so, are courts taking into account (a) uncharged criminal
or (b) non-criminal family violence? Should they do so?
In practice, to what extent are guilty pleas entered to a
family-violence related charge accompanied by an acknowledgement that they
representative of criminality, comprising uncharged conduct as well as charged
Commonwealth, state and territory governments, and Commonwealth,
state and territory directors of public prosecution respectively,
should ensure
that police and prosecutors are encouraged by appropriate prosecutorial
guidelines, and training and education programs,
to use representative charges
to the maximum extent possible in family-violence related criminal matters where
the charged conduct
forms part of a course of conduct.
Should the sentencing legislation of states and territories be
amended to allow expressly for a course of conduct to be taken into
sentencing, to the extent that it does not already do
violence as an aggravating factor?
7.43 Aggravating factors increase the culpability of an offender and act to
increase the penalty to be imposed on sentencing—but
never beyond the
maximum penalty for an offence. Mitigating factors decrease the culpability of
an offender and act to decrease the
extent to which the offender should be
7.44 A more limited way of recognising family violence in sentencing is
either to treat the fact that a crime was committed in the
context of a family
relationship as an aggravating factor in sentencing, or prevent it from being
considered a mitigating factor
in sentencing.
7.45 Not all sentencing legislation of the states and territories sets out
aggravating or mitigating factors. Some sentencing legislation
states that a
court must have regard to the presence of any mitigating or aggravating factor
concerning the offender,
have regard to any mitigating or aggravating factor in determining the
seriousness of an offence
without listing examples of such
The sentencing
legislation of NSW, by comparison, sets out a list of aggravating and mitigating
factors that a court must take into
7.46 In NSW it is not an aggravating factor that the victim to an offence is
a spouse, intimate partner or related to the offender.
However, the sentencing
legislation of NSW specifies some aggravating factors that may be relevant to
the sentencing of offenders
who are found guilty of crimes committed in
circumstances of family violence. These include that: the crime was committed in
offender had a record of previous convictions, particularly
those for serious
personal violence offences as defined in the
Crimes (Domestic and Personal
Violence) Act 2007
(NSW); or the offender abused a position of trust or
authority in relation to the
7.47 Case law in NSW supports the proposition that the fact that an offence
is committed in the context of a family relationship is
not a mitigating factor.
Raczkowski v The Queen
, for example,
the NSW Court of Criminal
Appeal stated:
The Court was invited to consider that the offences occurred in the context of a
(broken down) domestic relationship … That
a violent and pre-planned
attack occurred in what might be classified as a domestic setting is not a
matter of mitigation.
7.48 Case law in NSW also indicates that the fact that an offence is
committed while an offender is subject to the conditions of a
protection order
to protect the victim of the offence, may be treated as an aggravating
7.49 The Tasmanian family violence legislation specifies some aggravating
factors that may be relevant to the sentencing of offenders
who are found guilty
of crimes committed in circumstances of family violence in addition to
circumstances not involving family violence.
These include the fact that the
offender knew or was reckless as to whether a child was present at the time of
the offence or knew
that the affected person was
The latter factor has
particular relevance in family violence circumstances because studies have shown
that pregnancy increases a
woman’s vulnerability to family violence.
The 1996 [Australian Bureau of Statistics]
Safety Survey
and the 2005
Safety Survey
found that pregnancy is a time when women may be vulnerable to
abuse. Of those women who experienced violence by a previous partner,
had been pregnant at some time during their relationship. While 42 per cent of
these women experienced violence during the
pregnancy (292,100), 20 per cent
experienced domestic violence for the first time while they were pregnant. In
Safety Survey
, 59 per cent (667,900) of women who experienced violence by a
previous partner were pregnant at some time during the relationship;
36 per cent (239,800) reported that violence occurred during a pregnancy and 17
per cent (112,000) experienced violence
for the first time when they were
In 2004 Deborah Walsh and Wendy Weeks published ‘What a smile can hide: a
report on the study of violence against women during
pregnancy’. This
survey of pregnant women at the Royal Women’s Hospital in Melbourne found
that 20 per cent of women
experienced violence during their pregnancy. The
report includes international and Australian prevalence studies and research,
a literature review.
7.50 The South Australian sentencing legislation specifies the following as a
relevant factor, without classifying it as an aggravating
(or mitigating)
if the offence was committed by an adult in circumstances where the offending
conduct was seen or heard by a child (other than the
victim (if any) of the
offence or another offender)—those
circumstances.
7.51 In other jurisdictions case law indicates that family violence may be
treated as an aggravating factor. For example, in
stated, with respect to the offence being committed in a ‘domestic’
Moreover, I think it can be seen to be aggravating both as to its potential
consequences and also inasmuch as a husband (or a wife)
is in a privileged
position in relation to a spouse. They each know the everyday movements, the
habits, the likes and dislikes, the
fears and pleasures of their spouse, which
might enable them not only to effect an attack more easily on their victim but
devise the kinds of attack which could more seriously affect their
spouse, not merely physically, but so as to cause mental anguish
matter need not be examined any further, for in truth the advantages that he
had, including that of surprise, justified
the judge in holding that it was
proper to view more seriously this attack occurring in the domestic context of
this family.
7.52 Some overseas jurisdictions treat the fact that the crime occurred in
the context of a family relationship as an aggravating
factor in sentencing. In
Canada, the
Criminal Code
was amended in 1996 to provide that it is an
aggravating factor if there is evidence that the offender, in committing the
abused the offender’s spouse or common-law
On 3 April 2006, the
Parliament of Iceland passed an amendment to art 70 of the General Penal
Code with regard to family violence,
as follows:
In the event that an infraction was directed against a man, woman or child
closely related to the perpetrator and their family connection
is believed to
have aggravated the violence of the act, this should generally be taken into
account to increase the severity of the
punishment.
7.53 The New Zealand sentencing legislation lists as an aggravating factor
the fact that the case involved violence against, or neglect
of, a child under
the age of 14 years.
ALRC’s previous consideration of
aggravating factors
7.54 In the context of discussing the range of sentencing factors relevant to
the sentencing of federal offenders, ALRC 103 expressed
the view that
federal sentencing legislation should not distinguish between sentencing factors
that aggravate a sentence, and those
that mitigate a sentence. Professors
Richard Fox and Arie Freiberg have expressed the view that it is
artificial, misleading and possibly an error in principle to isolate certain
factors and label them as always either aggravating
or mitigating the
circumstances of the offence and, consequently, its
7.55 The relationship between mitigating and aggravating factors is
complicated by the fact that the opposite of a mitigating factor
necessarily an aggravating factor, and vice versa.
For example, a plea of guilty could be a mitigating factor, but it is improper
to treat a plea of not guilty as an aggravating factor.
Similarly, while youth
or old age may be a mitigating factor, the fact that an offender’s age
does not fall into either extreme
is not an aggravating factor. Some factors may
be either aggravating or mitigating depending on the circumstances. Other
may serve neither to increase nor to decrease the severity of a
sentence, but may guide the court in selecting an appropriate sentencing
or in specifying certain conditions tailored to the needs and circumstances of
the offender. Factors that could fall into
this category include the cultural
background, age, and physical and mental condition of an
7.56 Rather than distinguishing between aggravating and mitigating factors,
ALRC 103 took the approach of recommending factors that
should not be
treated as either aggravating or mitigating. For example, it stated that because
an offender’s consent is integral
to effective participation in a
restorative justice process or initiative, it would be improper to treat the
absence of consent to
participate as an aggravating factor.
Commissions’ views
7.57 The Commissions consider that, in some cases, it will be appropriate for
a court to consider that the fact that an offender was
in a relationship with,
or the parent of the victim, as an aggravating factor in sentencing. However,
the Commissions have some preliminary
concerns about introducing a legislative
requirement that would take away a judicial officer’s discretion in this
regard. For
example, if courts were always mandated to treat as aggravating the
fact that an offence was committed in the context of a family
relationship, this
would conceivably apply in circumstances where it may not always be just and
appropriate, such as in the case
children who commit acts of violence against their parents, siblings
or other family members;
mothers suffering post-natal depression who commit acts of violence
against their children; or
any person with a mental illness who commits an act of violence
against a family member.
7.58 The Commissions are therefore
interested in hearing stakeholder views on the appropriateness or otherwise of
treating as aggravating
the fact that an offence was committed in the context of
a family relationship. For example, would it be appropriate to adapt the
approach taken in Iceland which makes a specific link between a family
relationship and an escalation of violence? If such an approach
were considered
appropriate, the Commissions are also interested in hearing how ‘family
relationship’ should be construed
for such purposes and, in particular,
whether the definition of ‘family’ in family violence legislation
should be adopted.
7.59 The Commissions are of the preliminary view that it would, however, be
appropriate for sentencing legislation to specify expressly
that the fact that
an offence has been committed in the context of a family or domestic
relationship should not be treated as a mitigating
factor. The Commissions heard
in consultation that courts have treated a family relationship as a mitigating
factor on sentencing
in circumstances where domestic partners or spouses have
reconciled.
To treat such a
factor as mitigating can be seen to trivialise violence committed in a domestic
Should the fact that an offence was committed in the context of a
family relationship be an aggravating factor in sentencing? If so,
family relationships should this apply? Is making a specific link between a
family relationship and the escalation of violence
an appropriate
Proposal 7–2
State and territory sentencing legislation should
provide that the fact that an offence was committed in the context of a family
relationship
should not be considered a mitigating factor in sentencing.
7.60 Another option for reform is the use of specific guidance on sentencing
in the context of family violence. For example, the Sentencing
Council in the UK has published a guideline on sentencing in the context of
family violence.
This guideline
must be considered by courts pursuant to s 172 of the
Criminal Justice
makes clear that offences committed in a domestic context should be regarded as
being no less serious than offences committed in
a non-domestic context. Indeed,
because an offence has been committed in a domestic context, there are likely to
be aggravating factors
present that make it more
7.61 These aggravating factors include: an abuse of trust and power; the
particular vulnerability of the victim; exposure of children
to violence; where
history of violence or threats by an
offender in a domestic setting; a history
of disobedience to court orders; and if the victim is forced to leave
7.62 The guideline also provides guidance on the application of mitigating
and other factors in the family violence context. For example,
in relation to
the factor of good character, it states that:
one of the factors that can allow domestic violence to continue unnoticed for
lengthy periods is the ability of the perpetrator to
have two personae. In
respect of an offence of violence in a domestic context, an offender’s
good character in relation to
conduct outside the home should generally be of no
relevance where there is a proven pattern of
7.63 The guideline also cautions against taking the expressed wishes of the
victim into account in sentencing in the context of family
violence. Reasons for
this include:
• it is undesirable that a victim should feel responsibility for the
sentence imposed;
• there is a risk that the plea for mercy made by a victim will be
induced by threats made by, or by a fear of, the offender;
• the risk of such threats will be increased if it is generally
believed that the severity of the sentence may be affected by
the wishes of the
7.64 Guidance on sentencing is provided in a number of ways in Australian
states and territories. For example, the Judicial Commission
of NSW and the
Judicial College of Victoria each produce sentencing bench
A bench book outlines
what judicial officers ‘may need to know, understand and do on a
day-to-day basis’, in the form
of a practice
Bench books are not
intended to lay down or develop the
Bench books have an
important role to play as part of a national judicial education and support
7.65 The National Council to
Reduce Violence against Women and their Children (the National Council)
recommended the production of
a model bench book, in consultation with
judicial officers
on family violence. This bench book would ‘provide a
social context analysis and case law to complement existing resources
enhance the application of the
7.66 Another form of guidance is through the use of ‘guideline
judgments’ by criminal courts of appeal, as provided for
in NSW, Victoria,
Western Australia and South
As the ALRC stated in
its inquiry on the sentencing of federal offenders, guideline judgments are
generally delivered by an appellate
court in the context of a particular case,
but go further than the points raised on appeal to suggest a sentencing scale
category of crime before the court. They may indicate how particular
aggravating or mitigating factors should be reflected in a sentence
how sentences are to be determined for a category of offences or type of
7.67 The advantages of guideline judgments are said to be that they foster
consistency while retaining judicial discretion; accommodate
exceptional cases while serving the aims of rehabilitation, denunciation and
deterrence; allow a judge to respond to all
the circumstances of a case; result
in fewer appeals by the prosecution; and lower pressure on the executive arm of
government to
respond to media
On the other hand,
the potential disadvantages of guideline judgments include erosion of judicial
discretion, and the possibility
of greater use of imprisonment due to a new
emphasis on establishing exceptional circumstances to justify departure from a
7.68 Regardless of the merits of guideline judgments, it is clear that in
federal criminal matters a court cannot give a guideline
judgment in the nature
of an advisory opinion.
Wong v The Queen
appears to have cast doubt on the constitutional validity of
guideline judgments at the federal level in some other circumstances.
has created a climate of uncertainty around guideline judgments, which does
not provide a firm foundation for law reform in this
7.69 While guideline judgements at the federal level are constitutionally
problematic, they remain an option at the state and territory
level. Such
judgements do not have to specify penalty levels. However, guideline judgements
do not appear to have been used outside
and no such judgment has
been made in relation to family violence in
Research suggests that
guideline judgments are now less frequently used in NSW because of the
introduction of standard minimum
sentencing.
Commissions’ views
7.70 Australian case law provides some guidance in sentencing in the context
of family violence. It would be useful to have this guidance
consolidated in an
accessible format for the use of judicial officers who sentence family violence
offenders. Such guidance would
promote consistency in interpretation and
application of sentencing legislation in the family violence context.
7.71 Guideline judgments present a limited solution. Other options for reform
include the development of bench books in each jurisdiction
which address
sentencing in family violence matters. Alternatively, the Commissions endorse
the recommendation of the National Council
for the production of a model bench
book, in consultation with jurisdictions, and as part of a national professional
development
program for judicial officers on family violence. This bench book
would ‘provide a social context analysis and case law to
existing resources and enhance the application of the
A model bench book
could play a significant role in guiding judicial officers in sentencing in
family violence matters, by drawing
attention to the particular features and
dynamics of family violence of which judicial officers should be aware in
sentencing offenders,
as well as promoting national and intra-state
consistency.
7.72 There are particular issues which arise for sentencing for breach of
protection orders, which could be addressed in a model bench
book. As noted in
Chapter 6, there appears to be merit in providing courts with guidance
of imposing fines on offenders for
family-violence related offences, as well as guidance on appropriate types of
non-financial sanctions
to impose for breach of protection orders where the
breach does not involve violence.
The Australian Government—in conjunction with state and
territory governments, the National Judicial College of Australia, the
Commission of NSW, and the Judicial College of Victoria—should develop,
and maintain the currency of, a model bench
book on family violence, which
incorporates a section on sentencing in family violence matters.
[back to top]
violence as a defence
7.73 In Chapter 4, the Commissions expressed the preliminary view that where
a state or territory’s criminal legislation recognises
family violence as
relevant to a defence to homicide—either in its own right or as part of a
broader concept of self-defence—family
violence should be defined broadly
to include both physical and non-physical acts of violence, in the same way that
it should be
defined under family violence legislation. The Commissions
expressed the view that the different policy objectives of the criminal
family violence legislation are not compromised by the adoption of a common
understanding of what constitutes family violence
in the context of recognising
family violence as relevant to a defence to homicide.
7.74 The legislation of two Australian jurisdictions specifically addresses
family violence in the context of defences to homicide—Victoria
context of an expanded defence of self-defence, and Queensland recognises family
violence as a separate defence.
7.75 This chapter considers the extent to which the criminal law should
recognise family violence as a concept relevant to a defence
for homicide, in
circumstances where a victim of family violence kills the family member who was
violent towards him or her. This
raises the related issue of whether current
defences to homicide for victims in violent family relationships are
7.76 Each state and territory has different laws in relation to the offences
of murder and manslaughter as well as different defences
The most relevant
defences in homicides committed in a family violence context are provocation,
self-defence, and excessive self-defence.
Provocation and excessive self-defence
are partial defences to murder, reducing it from an offence of murder to
manslaughter. Self-defence
is a complete defence to criminal liability.
7.77 Numerous reports and reviews in the last few decades—both in
Australia and overseas—address or touch on the issue
of defences to
homicide in cases involving family
Such reviews have
generally acknowledged the gendered nature of the defences of self-defence and
provocation, and how these might
work against victims of family violence.
7.78 For example, the 1981 New South Wales Task Force on Domestic Violence
recommended ‘that the definitions of unlawful homicide
and defences
… be amended so as to give full and proper recognition [to] the situation
of the battered woman who kills her
tormentor’.
concluded that the law of homicide in NSW ‘did not satisfactorily deal
with those situations where a woman who has
for many years been the victim of
domestic abuse kills the person who has abused
and that the
defences of self-defence and provocation related to stereotyped male models of
behaviour, without allowing adequately
for typical patterns of female behaviour.
The report provided the example of a woman who shoots her husband in his sleep,
after enduring
years of domestic assault, not being able to claim self-defence
or provocation and suggested that arguably another defence of
‘desperation’
is required for these kinds of
circumstances.
7.79 Some laws have been reformed as a result of the above-mentioned reviews,
but with the exception of the Queensland legislation
discussed below, most
reforms have not introduced a separate defence to accommodate victims of family
7.80 The discussion below briefly outlines jurisdictional approaches to the
defences to homicide.
Self-defence and
excessive self-defence
7.81 The common law has long recognised that a person is justified in using
some force in legitimate self-defence. It is lawful to
act in self-defence, and
therefore it acts as a complete defence to criminal liability, with the onus on
the prosecution to negative
self-defence.
The common law
doctrine of self-defence limits the use of force to situations where it is
necessary for the accused to use force,
and the degree of force is not excessive
in the circumstances.
7.82 The common law position on excessive self-defence, stated by the High
v The Queen
is that self-defence which was necessary
but involved the use of excessive force involving death, should lead to a
verdict of either
manslaughter or murder—depending on whether the accused
believed that the force the accused used was reasonably proportionate
danger which the accused believed he or she
In other words, excessive
self-defence can, in certain circumstances, act as a partial defence.
Model Criminal Code
7.83 In 1992, the Standing Committee of Attorneys-General (SCAG) Criminal Law
Officers Committee published the
Model Criminal Code—Chapter
2, General Principles of Criminal Responsibility Report
. That report
recommended the following legislative definition for self-defence:
313. Self-defence
A person is not criminally responsible for an offence if the conduct
constituting the offence was carried out by him or her in self-defence.
313.1 Conduct is carried out by a person in self-defence if
• the person believed that the conduct was necessary
- to defend himself or herself or another person; or
- to prevent or terminate the unlawful imprisonment of himself or herself or
another person; or
- to protect property from unlawful appropriation, destruction, damage or
interference; or
- to prevent criminal trespass to any land or premises; or
- to remove from any land or premises a person who is committing criminal
trespass; and
• his or her conduct was a reasonable response in the circumstances as
perceived by him or her.
313.2 This section does not apply if force involving the intentional infliction
of death or really serious injury is used in protection
of property or in the
prevention of criminal trespass or in the removal of such a trespasser.
313.3 This section does not apply if the conduct to which the person responded
was lawful and that person knew that it was lawful.
313.3.1 Conduct is not lawful for the purposes of section 313.3 merely because
the person carrying it out is not criminally responsible
7.84 This definition of self-defence imports two tests. The test as to
necessity of the conduct is subjective, but the test as to
the proportionality
of the conduct purportedly carried out in self-defence is objective. It requires
the response of the accused
to be objectively proportionate to the situation
that the accused subjectively believed she or he faced.
7.85 The SCAG Model Criminal Code Officers Committee (MCCOC) also discussed
excessive self-defence in its 1998 discussion paper and
recommended that a
partial defence of this nature not be re-introduced:
On balance, the Committee is not in favour of re-introducing excessive
self-defence, particularly in the context of abolishing provocation.
concept, excessive self-defence is inherently vague. This aspect has to date
resulted in no satisfactory test being
promulgated.
States and territories
7.86 In 2002, NSW introduced new laws in relation to self-defence and
reintroduced the defence of excessive
self-defence.
The Attorney
General stated in the Second Reading Speech of the
Crimes Amendment
(Self-Defence) Bill 2001
(NSW), that:
The Bill follows the general concept of self-defence laid down by the Model
Criminal Code, so that a defendant who actually believed
it was necessary to do
what he did to repel an attack, even if he was wrong about that perception, may
seek to rely on self-defence,
so long as it was a reasonable response in the
circumstances as perceived by the defendant. However, the bill contains two
from the Model Criminal Code. The first departure is the
re-introduction of the law of excessive self-defence ... This was the common
position as previously stated by the High Court in
… The second difference to the Model Criminal Code relates to self-defence
in the context of defence of property ... The Model
Criminal Code limits the
defence of property and criminal trespass by not permitting death or really
serious harm to be occasioned.
This limit has been modified under the Bill. Obviously, it is not desirable to
encourage persons to defend their property with excessive
force. The Model
Criminal Code emphasised the need to consider the value of human life by
indicating that really serious injury or
death could never enliven a
self-defence issue in defence of property or to prevent criminal trespass.
There can be no circumstances where it is appropriate to intentionally or
recklessly take a human life in the protection of property
or to prevent
criminal trespass, although it may be permissible to do serious bodily harm in
certain circumstances if necessary and
reasonable.
7.87 Legislative provisions govern self defence in
Queensland,
and the Northern
7.88 In introducing amendments to self-defence in Western Australia, Suzanne
Ellery, the Minister for Child Protection stated in the
Second Reading Speech of
Criminal Law Amendment (Homicide) Bill 2008
Another important change contained in this bill is that the harmful act that the
person believes it is necessary to act against in
self-defence will not have to
be imminent. By providing that the threat need not be imminent, the defence will
more readily apply
to women who are the victims of domestic violence in the so
called ‘battered spouse’ situation. It will still be necessary
persons to show that there are reasonable grounds for the person’s belief
that the act of self-defence was necessary and
that the force used must be
objectively reasonable in the circumstances the person believed to exist. It is
not expected that this
provision will apply to situations in which it would be
reasonable for the person to take other steps, such as going to the police
escaping from the harmful
7.89 In South Australia, it is also a partial defence to a charge for
murder—thereby reducing the offence to manslaughter—if
the accused
genuinely believed the conduct to which the charge relates to be necessary and
reasonable for a defensive purpose; but
the conduct was not reasonably
proportionate to the threat the accused genuinely believed to
As foreshadowed above, a
provision to similar effect is contained in the crimes legislation of
—as well as that of
Western Australia.
Expanded self-defence to take into account
family violence
7.90 As noted in Chapter 4, where family violence is alleged, s 9AH
Crimes Act 1958
(Vic) allows evidence of family
to be adduced in
cases of murder,
manslaughter.
It does not
operate as a separate defence in itself, but allows considerations of family
violence to be relevant to
self-defence.
s 9AH, where family violence is alleged, self-defence is available even if
an accused person is responding to harm that is
not immediate; or his or her
response uses disproportionate force.
7.91 Types of evidence that can be adduced include:
evidence about the history of the relationship between the accused
person and a family member;
the general nature and dynamics of relationships affected by family
the cumulative effect, including psychological effect, on the person
or a family member of family violence; and
social, cultural or economic factors that impact on the person or a
family member who has been affected by family violence.
Victorian model has been criticised by one lawyer as a ‘breathtaking
extension’ of the law of self-defence:
Taken to their logical (or, perhaps, illogical) conclusion, these new provisions
suggest that a number of acts of trivial ‘harassment’
(whatever that
term might embrace) by a family member, which do not involve actual or
threatened abuse, might permit a person to
use disproportionate force to kill
that family member even where ‘harm’ is not
‘immediate’.
7.93 The first case in which s 9AH was applied was
DPP v Anthony
In that case,
Sherna—the accused—strangled his de facto wife and led evidence of
family violence, including economic
and psychological abuse, inflicted upon him
over a period of 18 years.
Justice Beach rejected an application by the prosecution to take the issue of
self-defence and defence of another away from the jury,
even if such pleas may
have been ‘weak’ and
was found guilty of manslaughter and sentenced to 14 years’ imprisonment
with a non-parole period of 10 years.
Provocation
Model Criminal Code
7.94 In 1998, the MCCOC recommended that the partial defence of provocation
should be abolished, and that:
Those considerations which currently provide a basis for the partial defence
should be considered for their relevance to the determination
of an appropriate
sentence after conviction.
7.95 In considering whether or not provocation should be abolished, the MCCOC
noted that:
The balance of opinion sees provocation to operate in practice in a gender
biased fashion. Although the courts have tinkered with
the legal principles,
formulations of the doctrine which reduce the suddenness requirement are
artificial and contrary to its historical
foundation. The theory underlying
battered woman syndrome does not comfortably co-exist with that of
provocation.
The real issue in deciding whether the partial defence of provocation should be
retained is one of culpability —whether the
defendant should be culpable
for murder, or for the lesser crime of manslaughter ... [W]hile provocation in
its modern setting is
designed to afford a middle ground to better reflect
criminal culpability, it falls significantly short of that goal by reason of
limited focus which inescapably gears the partial defence towards male patterns
of aggression and loss of self-control (its origin)
at the expense of the
sanctity of human life.
States and territories
Abolition of defence
7.96 Provocation has been abolished in Western
7.97 The Law Reform Commission of WA recommended that the defence be
abolished, but only if the mandatory penalty of life imprisonment
for murder was
replaced with a presumptive sentence of life
imprisonment.
It expressed
the view that there was no clear justification for retaining the defence of
provocation except the continued existence
of mandatory life imprisonment for
7.98 The Tasmanian Attorney-General in the Second Reading Speech of the
Criminal Code Amendment (Abolition of Defence of Provocation)
Bill 2003 also
stated that provocation was an anachronism ‘now that the death penalty and
mandatory life imprisonment have
statement was made by the Victorian Attorney-General in the Second Reading
Speech of the
Crimes (Homicide) Bill 2005
The courts developed the partial defence of provocation at a time when murder
carried a mandatory death penalty. The partial defence
is outdated now that
provocation can simply be taken into account, if relevant, alongside a range of
other factors in the sentencing
7.99 A number of other reasons were advanced for the abolition of the defence
by the Law Reform Commission of WA, the Victorian Law
Reform Commission and the
Tasmanian Attorney-General.
These included the following:
The jury must take into account the personal characteristics and
background of the accused when assessing the gravity of the provocation
the jury is expected to disregard these factors for the second stage of the test
in assessing the power of self-control
of an ordinary
The ‘correct
balance between subjective and objective factors is difficult to
The defence of provocation creates two categories of intentional
killing when the distinction ought to be between intentional killing
unintentional killing.
The moral basis of provocation is incompatible with contemporary
community values and views on what is excusable behaviour:
The continued existence of provocation as a separate partial defence to murder
partly legitimates killings committed in anger. It
suggests there are
circumstances in which we, as a community, do not expect a person to control
their impulses to kill or to seriously
injure a person. This is of particular
concern when this behaviour is in response to a person who is exercising his or
her personal
rights, for instance to leave a relationship or to start a new
relationship with another
Retaining a partial defence of provocation also sends a message that
the homicide victim must bear some of the blame for, his or
her own death. This
can be deeply distressing for friends and family of homicide
Provocation is and can be adequately considered as a factor during
sentencing.
The defence of provocation is gender biased and unjust. The defence
fails to recognise that men kill women in very different circumstances
where women kill men. Men are motivated to kill their partners out of jealousy,
and a need for control based on threats
to leave and issues of infidelity whilst
women kill their partners because of a history of family
The ‘suddenness element of the defence is more reflective of male patterns
of aggressive behaviour. The defence was not designed
for women and it is argued
that it is not an appropriate defence for those who fall into the
‘battered women
The defence of provocation can be subject to
7.100 Provocation remains a defence in NSW, the ACT, the Northern Territory
and Queensland.
7.101 In NSW, provocation is available as a partial defence to
In 1997, the NSWLRC
recommended that the defence of provocation be
It expressed the
view that there are circumstances in which a person’s mental state is
impaired by a loss of self control,
thereby reducing the culpability of a person
who kills; and not warranting that person being labelled a
‘murderer’:
A conviction of manslaughter ensures a greater likelihood that the community
will understand and accept a reduced sentence which
reflects a lesser degree of
culpability.
7.102 The NSWLRC considered the application of the defence of provocation in
family violence circumstances. It acknowledged that concern
is sometimes
expressed that the defence of provocation is used inappropriately to excuse
offenders who kill their partners because
of sexual jealousy or possessiveness:
[T]here may be a risk that a particular accused will seek to rely on the defence
of provocation to excuse an act of violence which
was in fact premeditated and
was committed in the context of a history of violence and domestic abuse.
However, that risk hardly
justifies abolishing the defence. To do so would
exclude other, deserving cases from the reduction of murder to manslaughter by
of the defence of provocation and, in effect, would be to throw the baby out
with the bathwater.
7.103 The NSWLRC made a number of recommendations to reform the defence of
provocation, none of which has been adopted. In particular,
it recommended the
abolition of the ‘ordinary person’ test with the result that:
women whose power to exercise self-control has been impaired by reason of a long
history of abuse are not excluded from the defence
through the imposition of
some objective standard which does not take that factor into account in
determining “ordinary”
powers of self-control. Under our
reformulation, all factors which may affect a woman’s power of
self-control, including a
long history of being abused, are to be considered by
the jury in arriving at their
7.104 The NSWLRC also recommended that legislative amendments make it clear
that the defence of provocation may apply to provocative
conduct occurring
outside the accused’s
It noted that this
approach ensures
that the defence of provocation is not automatically excluded from cases where a
woman kills her partner following incidents of abuse
by that partner which are
not witnessed personally by the woman, such as sexual and physical assaults on
her children.
7.105 Provocation is a partial defence in the
and the Northern
and in each case
the conduct of the deceased provoking the offender may have occurred immediately
before the act or omission causing
death or at any previous time.
7.106 In 2000, the Law
Reform Committee of the Northern Territory recommended that the defence of
provocation should be amended to
abolish the requirement for the accused to have
‘acted on the sudden and before there was time for his passion to
In 2006, the
Northern Territory introduced a new provision dealing with the defence of
provocation.
The revised
provision, currently in force, imposes an objective test as to whether the
provocation was sufficient to have induced
an ordinary person to have so far
lost self control as to have formed an intent to kill or cause serious harm to
the deceased.
person’s gender, cultural background or ethnicity is not relevant to
applying this test of assessing the power of self-control
of a person. In the
Second Reading Speech of the
Criminal Reform Amendment Bill (No 2) 2006
Attorney-General noted that the revised defence would address family violence
The revised provision also removes the requirement for the defendant to have
acted ‘on the sudden and before there was a time
for his passion to
cool’. This requirement has to date made the defence unavailable in cases
where there has been a history
of serious abuse inflicted on the defendant,
which ultimately leads them into attacking their abuser. This is the situation
is commonly referred to as ‘battered women’ cases.
The bill also clarifies that the defence is available in circumstances where the
provocation is directed at someone other than the
accused, for example towards
children of the defendant. The government considers that this revised provision
will reflect the best
law on this
7.107 In Queensland, the defence of provocation is limited to circumstances
in which the accused kills ‘in the heat of passion
caused by sudden
provocation, and before there is time for the person’s passion to
7.108 On 8 December 2009 the defence of provocation was repealed in New
Zealand. This followed two reports of the New Zealand Law
Commission (NZLC)
which recommended abolition of the partial defence—one published in
and the other published
In the latter
report, the NZLC specifically considered the effect of the defence of
provocation on battered defendants. It concluded
For the majority of battered defendants, self defence will tactically offer a
preferable alternative to provocation, because it results
in an acquittal.
… [P]rovocation is not benefiting battered defendants sufficiently to
warrant its retention, and our review
of case law confirms
7.109 In contrast, the defence of provocation is available in England and
In 2006, the Law
Commission reviewed the defence of provocation and recommended that there be
legislative reform to include circumstances
in which the defendant acted in
response to ‘fear of serious violence towards the defendant or
Commission considered that this reform would be sufficient to meet the
criticisms that the defence of provocation ‘makes
no provision for fear of
serious violence to reduce murder to
manslaughter’
it permits the reduction of the offence from murder to manslaughter in cases
‘where the provoked murder may have been
little more than a reflection of
the continuing cultural acceptability of men’s use of violence in
Separate defence of
family violence
7.110 As discussed in Chapter 4, the
Criminal Code (Abusive Domestic
Relationship Defence and Another Matter) Amendment Act 2010
(Qld) amends the
Criminal Code
(Qld) to insert a new s 304B which introduces a
new partial defence to murder of ‘killing in an abusive domestic
relationship’.
The defence will only apply where the person killed had
committed ‘serious domestic violence’ against the accused. In
Second Reading Speech the Attorney-General Cameron Dick stated:
The defence will be the first of its kind in the country and will operate to
provide legal protection for victims in this category
7.111 Significantly, the Act provides that references to ‘an act of
domestic violence in a domestic relationship’ are
to be interpreted in the
same way as that state’s family violence legislation—the
and Family Violence Protection Act 1989
Therefore, in
Queensland ‘domestic violence’ has the same meaning under civil and
criminal legislation. The distinguishing
factor in the criminal legislation is
the requirement for family violence to be ‘serious’ in order for the
be applicable. The Attorney-General stated in the Second Reading
Speech that:
The use of the term ‘serious’ within the provision in relation to
the level of domestic violence is used as a matter
of emphasis to place the
nature of the domestic violence in the Supreme Court murder trial in context.
… All domestic violence
must be condemned not only by government but in
all our communities and in our homes. However, the use of the term
in the bill acts to create an appropriate threshold for
the application of this partial defence to a charge of
7.112 Section 304B provides that murder will be reduced to manslaughter
if the deceased has committed acts of serious domestic violence
against the
person in the course of an abusive domestic relationship, and the accused
reasonably believes that it is necessary to
do the act or make the omission
causing death, in order to preserve the accused from death or grievous bodily
harm. This defence
only applies to murder, and applies only to the victim of
family violence and not other family
7.113 The Explanatory Notes to the Criminal Code (Abusive Domestic
Relationship Defence and Another Matter) Amendment Bill 2009 (Qld)
Contemporary research on the actions of victims of abuse who kill their abusers
… demonstrates they are usually motivated by
fear, desperation and a
belief that there is no other viable way of escaping the danger. The option of
leaving the relationship is
often seen as an unrealistic option; research
indicates that persons who suffer violence may perceive a lack of alternatives.
history of abuse in the relationship can allow a person who has suffered
violence to read cues and note changes in the abuser’s
behaviour which
signal the onset of escalating violence.
Decisive action for self-preservation can then be taken before the abuser is in
a position to physically overpower them; that action
carried out with no loss of
self-control and without a deficiency in cognitive processes.
The use of violence against the abuser may be reasonable under the circumstances
as the person who has suffered prolonged abuse perceives
them to be, but to an
ordinary person may be judged as unnecessary or excessive. Even though there may
be a history of extensive
abuse, because the immediate threat may be modest
(viewed in isolation) the hyper vigilance typical of a battered person may
in a killing that is not proportionate to the threat.
The research suggests in some cases the effectiveness of existing defences such
as provocation or self-defence are limited for people
in this category of
offending because of the way in which it has been identified that they kill. It
is these limitations that section
304B intends to
7.114 The change to the law was made following an independent report
commissioned by the Queensland
recommendation made by the Queensland Law Reform Commission that:
Consideration should be given, as a matter of priority, to the development of a
separate defence for battered persons which reflects
the best current knowledge
ensuring that the defence
is available to an adult or a child and is not
gender-specific.
7.115 The independent report noted that it did not define
‘serious’ for the purpose of ‘serious violence’,
stated that:
Seriousness is a matter of degree and we believe that such matters are
ordinarily best [left] to the judgment of juries. We do, however,
suggest the
inclusion of a provision making it clear that seriousness is to be assessed by
reference to the pattern of violence rather
than to the nature of any particular
acts making up the pattern.
7.116 The independent report recommended that the defence should be available
not only to the victims of seriously abusive relationships
but also to family
members of the victim who are or have been parties to the domestic relationship
in which the abuse has occurred
and who act in defence of the
This recommendation
was not adopted in the Act.
Western Australia
7.117 Relevantly, the Law Reform Commission of Western Australia in its 2007
Review of the Law of Homicide
, concluded that,
rather than
introduce a separate defence for victims of family violence, ‘it is
preferable to amend the law so that it better
accommodates the experiences of
victims of domestic violence who
New Zealand
7.118 The NZLC, in its 2001 report,
Some Criminal Defences with Particular
Reference to Battered Defendants
, did not support the introduction of a
specific defence for victims of family violence who kill or assault their
abusers, because
it was of the view that the availability of self-defence was
adequate. The NZLC recognised that there may be some difficulties for
persons demonstrating that their conduct was in self-defence, but was of the
view that these could be addressed by reforming
the provisions relating to
self-defence.
Commissions’
7.119 Many Australian jurisdictions have given substantial consideration to
recognising family violence in the context of defences
to homicide. A number of
important statutory reforms have resulted from this, with a view to better
accommodating the experiences
of family violence victims who kill. These reforms
reforms to the defence of self-defence—including removal of
the requirement for the threat to be imminent (Western Australia);
reforms to the defence of provocation—including the removal
for the requirement for the defendant to have ‘acted on the
before there was a time for his passion to cool’ (Northern Territory), and
removal of the requirement for the provocative
conduct of the deceased to have
occurred immediately prior to the act or omission causing death (for example,
abolition of the defence of provocation in part because of its
unsuitability for female victims of family violence (Victoria, Western
Australia, Tasmania);
expanding self-defence to take family violence into account,
including express provision for the leading of evidence about family
(Victoria); and
creating a new defence of family violence
(Queensland).
7.120 The Commissions are interested in stakeholder
views on whether current defences to homicide for victims in violent family
relationships
are adequate in each Australian state and territory jurisdiction.
7.121 In the Commissions’ preliminary view it is essential for the
criminal law to recognise family violence as relevant to
a defence to homicide,
and that provisions—along the lines of s 9AH of the
(Vic)—should allow defendants to lead evidence of family violence
in the context of a defence to homicide.
7.122 The Commissions support the development of a consistent or harmonious
approach by the states and territories to the recognition
of family violence as
a defence to homicide but do not propose a prescriptive approach as to how each
the recognition of family violence as a defence to
homicide. State and territory criminal legislation should provide defences to
homicide which accommodate the experiences of family violence victims who kill,
recognising the dynamics and features of family violence.
This can be achieved
by introducing a separate defence of family violence—the Queensland
model—or by expanding self-defence
to take family violence into account
expressly, or by ensuring that any existing defences of provocation and
self-defence are otherwise
reformed in a way which accommodate the experiences
of family violence victims who kill. The Commissions are interested in
stakeholder
views on how the criminal law can best recognise family violence as
relevant to a defence to homicide, and whether there are any
problems with
current models.
7.123 The Commissions note, for example, that the recommendations of the
NSWLRC in 1997 concerning provocation, which would have assisted
family violence from availing themselves of this defence, have not been
implemented. This is of some concern given that
NSW, unlike Victoria, does not
give explicit recognition to family violence in the context of self-defence; nor
does it have a separate
defence of family violence. These matters are relevant
factors to be considered in ensuring that defences to homicide in NSW
accommodate
the experiences of family violence victims who kill.
Are current defences to homicide for victims in violent family
relationships adequate in each Australian state and
Proposal 7–4
State and territory criminal legislation should
provide defences to homicide which accommodate the experiences of family
victims who kill, recognising the dynamics and features of family
Proposal 7–5
State and territory criminal legislation should
expressly allow defendants to lead evidence about family violence in the context
a defence to homicide. Section 9AH of the
Crimes Act 1958
is an instructive model in this regard.
How can the criminal law best recognise family violence as
relevant to a defence to homicide? For example, should family violence
expressly accommodated within an expanded concept of self-defence or should
violence? What problems or
issues arise from current models which recognise family violence as relevant to
a defence to homicide?
Comment on ALRC Family Violence Online
Forum: Women’s Legal Service
The interaction of
protection orders and sentencing, and sentencing for breach of protection orders
are discussed in Ch 6.
ALRC Family Violence Online Forum: Women’s Legal Service
D Tuerkheimer,
‘Recognizing and Remedying the Harm to Battering: A Call to Criminalize
Domestic Violence’
Journal of Criminal Law & Criminology
See, eg, C Forster,
‘The Failure of Criminal Injuries Compensation Schemes for Victims of
Intra-Familial Abuse: The Example
of Queensland’
; I Barrett Meyering,
Victim Compensation and Domestic
Violence: A National Overview
(2010) Australian Domestic and Family Violence
Clearinghouse.
D Tuerkheimer,
‘Recognizing and Remedying the Harm to Battering: A Call to Criminalize
Domestic Violence’
Journal of Criminal Law & Criminology
‘The Distinctiveness of Domestic Abuse: A Freedom Based Account’
Louisiana Law Review
D Tuerkheimer,
‘Recognizing and Remedying the Harm to Battering: A Call to Criminalize
Domestic Violence’
Journal of Criminal Law & Criminology
, 1019–1020.
‘Domestic Violence as a Crime of Pattern and Intent: An Alternative
Reconceptualization’
George Washington Law Review
Crime Reduction Centre
Information Team,
Safety and Justice: The Government’s Proposals on
Domestic Violence
(2003) Home Office,
Directorate General of Human
Rights—Council of Europe,
Legislation in the Member States of the
Council of Europe in the Field of Violence Against Women
‘Statement by Ms Ingegerd
Sahlström, State Secretary for Equality Affairs’ (Press Release, 3
March 1998).
Indian Penal Code
s 498A, introduced by
Criminal Law (Second Amendment)
(India). This provision prohibits husbands, or relatives of
husbands, to subject a woman to ‘cruelty’, with a maximum
of three years. ‘Cruelty’ is defined to include any wilful conduct
likely to drive the woman to commit suicide,
or to cause grave injury or danger
to life, limb or health (whether mental or physical) of the woman; or harassment
of the woman,
with a view to coercing her or a related person to meet unlawful
demands for property or security, or as a consequence of a failure
to meet such
Centre for Social Research,
A Research Study on the Use and Misuse of Section 498A of the Indian Penal
In Ch 5, the
Commissions express reservations about creating specific offences of economic
and emotional abuse in the family violence
Criminal Law Consolidation
s 5AA(1)(g).
‘Family and
domestic relationship’ in s 221 has the same meaning that it has in
section 4 of the
Restraining Orders Act 1997
Criminal Code Act
Compilation 1913
Criminal Code Act
Compilation 1913
(WA) s 221.
Ibid s 297, eg, sets out a maximum penalty of imprisonment for 10 years
for grievous bodily harm, and imprisonment for 14 years
where grievous bodily
harm is committed in circumstances of
aggravation.
See Directorate General
of Human Rights—Council of Europe,
Legislation in the Member States of
the Council of Europe in the Field of Violence Against Women
Family violence as an aggravated
factor in sentencing is discussed
Consideration of course of
conduct on sentencing is discussed below. See also Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of Family Violence Laws: Report
(2006), Rec 14
(in the context of the definition of family violence in the civil
Comment on ALRC Family
Violence Online Forum: Women’s Legal Service
Emotional and economic
abuse are criminal offences in Tasmania only: see
Family Violence Act
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
Criminal Law
(Sentencing) Act 1988
s 7(1)(b)(ii).
sets out factors a court must take into account in the
sentencing of federal offenders.
Weininger v The Queen
(2003) 212 CLR 629
, 647. The totality principle is
relevant to the sentencing of offenders for multiple offences. It ensures that
an offender who is
sentenced for multiple offences receives an appropriate
sentence overall and not a ‘crushing sentence’. See Australian
Reform Commission,
Same Crime, Same Time: Sentencing of Federal
, ALRC 103 (2006),
[5.12]–[5.15].
Weininger v
(2003) 212 CLR 629
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Same Crime, Same Time: Sentencing of
Federal Offenders
, ALRC 103 (2006), [6.61], [6.65]–[6.66],
[1997] SASC 6350
(1997) 69 SASR 413
[2000] NSWCCA 209
(2000) 112 A Crim R 466
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Same Crime, Same Time: Sentencing of Federal Offenders
103 (2006), [6.61], [6.65]–[6.66],
As noted in
Ch 5, such abuses in the context of family violence amount to criminal
offences in Tasmania.
For example,
Sentencing Act 1991
Penalties and Sentences Act
Sentencing Act 1995
Although Ibid
that a plea of guilty, and facilitation by the offender of criminal property
confiscation in certain cases are mitigating
Crimes (Sentencing
Procedure) Act 1999
s 21A(2)(d)
(ea), (eb), (k).
Raczkowski v The
[2008] NSWCCA 152
Kennedy v The Queen
[2008] NSWCCA 21
(2008) 181 A Crim R 185
Family Violence Act 2004
Parliament of
Australia—Parliamentary Library,
Domestic Violence in
Australia—An Overview of the Issues
(2003, updated
Criminal Law (Sentencing)
(SA) s 10(1)(ed).
[2001] VSCA 96
Criminal Code
RSC c C–46 (Canada) s 718.2(a)(ii).
It is also an aggravating factor if the person abused a position of trust or
authority in
relation to the victim: s 718.2(a)(iii).
Sentencing Act 2002
s 9A. Section 9 lists general aggravating factors, some of which may be
relevant to family violence, such as an abuse of power
R Fox and A Freiberg,
Sentencing: State and Federal Law in Victoria
(2nd ed, 1999),
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Same Crime, Same Time: Sentencing of Federal Offenders
103 (2006), [6.153], [6.157], [6.159].
Australian Domestic & Family Violence Clearinghouse,
Consultation
Sydney, 27 January 2010.
Guidelines Council,
Overarching Principles: Domestic Violence
Judicial Commission of New South
Sentencing Bench Book
<www.judcom.nsw.gov.au/publications/benchbks/sentencing/index.html> at 21
February 2010; Judicial College of Victoria,
Victorian Sentencing Manual
(2009). For a brief overview of bench books—including those that deal
with ethnic, gender and cultural issues, such as the
Aboriginal Bench Book
for Western Australian Courts
: see Australian Law Reform Commission,
Crime, Same Time: Sentencing of Federal Offenders
, ALRC 103 (2006),
L Armytage,
‘Developing Bench Books for Tribunals: Some Guidelines’ (Paper
presented at Sixth Annual Australasian Institute
of Judicial Administration
Conference, Sydney, 5 June 2003), 2.
[2005] NSWCCA 337
Judicial education
and use of bench books is further discussed in
National Council to Reduce
Violence against Women and their Children,
Time for Action: The National
Council’s Plan for Australia to Reduce Violence against Women and their
Children, 2009–2021
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure)
Sentencing Act 1991
Criminal Law (Sentencing) Act 1988
ss 29A–29C.
Australian Law
Reform Commission,
Same Crime, Same Time: Sentencing of Federal
, ALRC 103 (2006),
Sentencing Law: A Review of Developments in 1998–2001
NSW Parliament, 25–26.
‘Guideline Sentencing: A Defence Perspective’ (1999) 11
Officers’ Bulletin
Huddart, Parker & Co Pty Ltd v
[1909] HCA 36
(1909) 8 CLR 330
Wong v The Queen
[2001] HCA 64
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Same Crime, Same Time: Sentencing of Federal Offenders
103 (2006), [21.37]; see also
[21.28]–[21.35].
The Full Court
of the South Australian Supreme Court has considered, and rejected, one
application for such a judgment:
[2004] SASC 160.
The Western
Australian Supreme Court has also rejected applications for such a judgment:
Yates v Western Australia
[2008] WASCA 144
Herbert v The Queen
[2003] WASCA 61
Alan Jones v The Queen
[1998] WASCA
Supreme Court of New South Wales,
Guideline Judgments
<www.lawlink.nsw.gov.au/lawlink/
supreme_court/ll_sc.nsf/pages/SCO_guidelinejudg> at 1 April
J Anderson, ‘Guideline
Judgments and Standard Minimum Sentencing—An Uneasy Alliance in the Way of
the Future’
(Paper presented at Sentencing: Principles, Perspectives and
Possibilities, Canberra, 10 February
National Council to Reduce
Violence against Women and their Children,
Time for Action: The National
Council’s Plan for Australia to Reduce Violence against Women and their
Children, 2009–2021
(2009), 121, Rec
Sentencing options for persons
convicted of murder or manslaughter also differ across states and territories.
Most jurisdictions
have abolished mandatory life sentences for murder
convictions but they remain in place in Queensland, South Australia and the
Criminal Code
(Qld) s 315;
Criminal Law
Consolidation Act 1935
Criminal Code
(NT) ss 157, 161.
See, eg, Law Reform Commission of
Western Australia,
Review of the Law of Homicide
, Project No 94 (2007);
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Defences to Homicide: Final Report
(2004), see especially ch 2–4; New Zealand Law Commission,
Criminal Defences with Particular Reference to Battered Defendants
[13]; Northern Territory Law Reform Committee,
Self Defence and Provocation
(2000), iii, 43–45; Model Criminal Code Officers
Committee—Standing Committee of Attorneys-General,
Model Criminal
Code—Chapter 5, Fatal Offences Against the Person: Discussion Paper
(1998); New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Partial Defences to Murder:
Provocation and Infanticide
(1997); Australian Law Reform Commission,
Equality Before the Law: Justice for Women (Part 1)
, ALRC 69 (1994),
[12.3]–[12.6]; Criminal Law Officers Committee,
Model Criminal
Code—Chapter 2, General Principles of Criminal Responsibility: Final
(1992); New South Wales Task Force on Domestic Violence,
New South Wales Task Force on Domestic Violence to Honourable NK Wran QC, MP
Premier of New South Wales
New South Wales Task Force on Domestic Violence,
Report of New South Wales
Task Force on Domestic Violence to Honourable NK Wran QC, MP Premier of New
South Wales
Ibid, 68–69. The
(Homicide) Amendment Act 1982
(NSW) sch 12 amended the provision dealing
with provocation in
Crimes Act 1900
to recognise conduct
of the deceased as provocative irrespective of whether it occurred immediately
before the act or omissions causing
death or at any previous time. More recent
views about the gendered nature of provocation are touched on
D Brown and others,
Farrier, Neal and Weisbrot’s Criminal Laws—Material and Commentary
on Criminal Law and Process in New South Wales
(4th ed, 2006),
Viro v The Queen
Law Officers Committee,
Model Criminal Code—Chapter 2, General
Principles of Criminal Responsibility: Final Report
Model Criminal Code Officers
Committee—Standing Committee of Attorneys-General,
Model Criminal
Code—Chapter 5, Fatal Offences Against the Person: Discussion Paper
(1998), 113.
Crimes Amendment
(Self-Defence) Act 2001
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Assembly, 19093 (B
Debus–Attorney General).
Crimes Act 1900
Crimes Act 1958
ss 9AC, 9AE. A new offence of defensive homicide is contained in
(Vic) s 9AD, that is, where an accused kills believing
the conduct to be necessary to defend himself or herself or another from the
infliction of death or serious injury but where he or she did not have
reasonable grounds for that belief. This offence arose from
the recommendation
of the VLRC to re-introduce the defence of excessive self-defence: Victorian Law
Reform Commission,
Defences to Homicide: Final Report
Criminal Code Act
(Qld) ss 271, 272.
Criminal Code Act Compilation 1913
(WA) s 248(4). These provisions
follow the example of the Model Criminal Code: Western Australia,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Council, 15 May 2008, 3123
(S Ellery–Minister for Child
Protection).
Criminal Law
Consolidation Act 1935
Criminal Code Act
(Tas) s 46.
(ACT) s 42.
(NT) s 43BD. The Northern Territory provision largely adopts the
self-defence provisions from the Model Criminal Code, following the
recommendation in Northern Territory Law Reform Committee,
Self Defence and
Provocation
(2000), 3–4.
Western Australia,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Council, 15 May
2008, 3123 (S Ellery–Minister for Child
Protection).
Criminal Law
Consolidation Act 1935
Crimes Act 1900
Criminal Code
Act Compilation 1913
(WA) s 248(3). The partial defence of excessive
self-defence was introduced by the
Criminal Law Amendment (Homicide) Act
discusses the definition of family violence used in
Crimes Act 1958
(Vic), as compared with that used in the
Family Violence Protection Act
(Vic), and makes a proposal in this
Crimes Act 1958
(Vic) s 9AC.
These provisions of
family violence only apply to homicide offences, so the common law test as
outlined in
Zecevic v The Queen
[1987] HCA 26
(1987) 162 CLR 645
, 661 continues to
apply to all other offences where self-defence is applicable: P Priest,
Defences to Homicide
(2005) <www.vicbar.com.au/
webdata/CLEFiles/Defences%20to%20Homicide.pdf> at 22 January
Defences to
(2005) <www.vicbar.com.au/webdata/CLEFiles/
Defences%20to%20Homicide.pdf> at 22 January 2010,
Director of Public
Prosecutions v Sherna
A forensic psychologist
testified that Sherna showed signs of ‘battered woman syndrome’
including chronic depression,
low and decreasing self-esteem and learnt
, 20 November
Director of Public
Prosecutions v Sherna
Model Criminal Code Officers
Committee—Standing Committee of Attorneys-General,
Model Criminal
Code—Chapter 5, Fatal Offences Against the Person: Discussion Paper
(1998), 107.
Criminal Law Amendment
(Homicide) Act 2008
Crimes (Homicide) Act
Criminal Code
Amendment (Abolition of Defence of Provocation) Act 2003
Law Reform Commission of
Western Australia,
Review of the Law of Homicide
, Project No 94 (2007),
In Western Australia,
a person who is guilty of murder must be sentenced to life imprisonment unless
that sentence would be clearly
unjust given the circumstances of the offence and
the person; and the person is unlikely to be a threat to the safety of the
when released from imprisonment in which case the person is liable to
imprisonment for 20 years:
Criminal Code Act Compilation 1913
Parliamentary Debates
, House of Assembly, 20 March 2003, 60 (J
Jackson—Attorney-General and Minister for Justice and Industrial
Relations).
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Assembly, 6 October 2005, 1349 (R
Hulls—Attorney-General).
also Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions (Tas),
Annual Report
, 6 in which the DPP also raised concerns about the defence
of provocation.
Commission of Western Australia,
Review of the Law of Homicide
No 94 (2007), 207.
Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Defences to Homicide: Final Report
Parliamentary
, House of Assembly, 20 March 2003, 60 (J
Jackson—Attorney-General and Minister for Justice and Industrial
Relations).
Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Defences to Homicide: Final Report
Parliamentary
, House of Assembly, 20 March 2003, 60 (J
Jackson—Attorney-General and Minister for Justice and Industrial
Relations). See also
Law Reform Commission of Western Australia,
the Law of Homicide
, Project No 94 (2007), 214, 216 which refer to
provocation being based on male behaviour and the gender inequality in the
application
of the defence to women who kill long term abusive
Parliamentary Debates
, House of Assembly, 20 March 2003, 60 (J
Jackson—Attorney-General and Minister for Justice and Industrial
Relations).
Crimes Act 1900
New South Wales
Law Reform Commission,
Partial Defences to Murder: Provocation and
Infanticide
(1997), Rec 1.
Ibid, [2.24].
Ibid, [2.144] (citation
Crimes Act 1900
In the ACT, a person who is guilty of committing murder is
liable to imprisonment for life but a court may impose a sentence for
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
Criminal Code
(NT) s 158. In the Northern Territory, a person who
is guilty of murder is liable to a mandatory term of imprisonment for life:
157. A person who is guilty of manslaughter is liable to imprisonment for
life but this penalty is not mandatory:
Northern Territory Law
Reform Committee,
Self Defence and Provocation
(2000), 47.
Criminal Reform Amendment Act
(No 2) 2006
(NT) ss 8, 17.
Criminal Code
Northern Territory,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Assembly, 31 August 2006, 3021
(P Toyne—Minister for Justice and
Attorney-General).
Criminal Code
(Qld) s 304. A person who kills in these circumstances is
guilty of manslaughter only.
Zealand Law Commission,
Some Criminal Defences with Particular Reference to
Battered Defendants
Zealand Law Commission,
The Partial Defence of Provocation
, Report 98
(2007). This report identified a number of fundamental flaws with the defence of
provocation including that it was a defence
biased in favour of heterosexual
men: 48–49.
Homicide Act
Commission,
Murder, Manslaughter and Infanticide
, Report No 304 (2006),
Ibid. The defence of
provocation is also available in Ireland, and in 2009, the Law Reform Commission
of Ireland accepted that the
defence was unsatisfactory and made a number of
recommendations concerning its reform: Law Reform Commission (Ireland),
Defences in Criminal Law
[7.23]–[7.35].
Queensland,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Assembly, 26 November 2009, 3669 (C
Dick—Attorney-General and Minister for Industrial Relations),
Criminal Code (Abusive
Domestic Relationship Defence and Another Matter) Amendment Act 2010
Queensland,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Assembly, 26 November 2009, 3669 (C
Dick—Attorney-General and Minister for Industrial Relations), 3670.
As noted above, in Queensland, a
mandatory life sentence applies if a person is convicted of murder, unlike in
several other jurisdictions
where there is discretion in sentencing for
Explanatory Notes, Criminal
Code (Abusive Domestic Relationship Defence and Another Matter) Amendment Bill
(Qld) 2009, 2.
G Mackenzie and E
Homicide in Abusive Relationships: A Report on Defences, prepared for
the Attorney-General and Minister for Industrial Relations
(2009), which
recommended that the defence should be framed as a separate defence, applicable
only where homicide occurs in the context
of an abusive relationship, rather
than as general amendment to the law of self-defence:
Queensland Law Reform
Commission,
A Review of the Excuse of Accident and the Defence of Provocation
Report No 64 (2008),
G Mackenzie
and E Colvin,
Homicide in Abusive Relationships: A Report on Defences,
prepared for the Attorney-General and Minister for Industrial Relations
(2009), [4.18].
Law Reform Commission of
Western Australia,
Review of the Law of Homicide
, Project No 94 (2007),
New Zealand Law Commission,
Some Criminal Defences with Particular Reference to Battered Defendants
(2001), 29–30.
ALRC CP1 Family Violence � Improving Legal Frameworks
8. Family Violence Legislation and
Parenting Orders
Introduction
The federal family courts
Family Court of Australia
Federal Magistrates Court
Cooperation between the federal family courts
Parenting orders, protection orders and family violence
Family violence and protection orders as relevant considerations
Limited practical impact of family violence allegations
The inconsistency problem
Awareness of pre-existing orders
Parenting proceedings under the
Family Law Act
Protection order proceedings under family violence laws
Consideration of pre-existing orders
Parenting proceedings under the
Family Law Act
Additional issues with family law interim proceedings and consent orders
Protection order proceedings under family violence laws
Resolving inconsistencies
Division 11 of the
Family Law Act
State and territory family violence legislation
Options for fostering use of div 11
Relevant considerations in modifying or revoking a parenting order
A power for state and territory courts to make parenting orders?
Interim protection orders
Cooperative responses
A gap in protection?
Subjecting protection orders to parenting orders
No existing protection order
No existing parenting order
8. Family Violence Legislation and
Parenting Orders
[back to top]
Introduction
8.1 Dealing with family
violence is increasingly being recognised as a part of the ‘core
business’ of the federal family
An evaluation of the 2006
family law reforms by the Australian Institute of Family Studies (AIFS) reported
on a longitudinal study
of separated parents, in which nearly two-thirds of the
mothers and just over half the fathers indicated that their partner had either
emotionally or physically abused them. Half of all clients participating in the
survey had experienced controlling behaviour on the
part of the other party. The
majority of parents who reported having experienced physical hurt before or
during separation, indicated
that their children had seen or heard some of the
violence or abuse.
8.2 The Terms of Reference for this Inquiry direct the Commissions to
consider the interaction in practice of state and territory
family violence laws
Family Law Act 1975
A key area where this
interaction occurs is in the making of parenting orders that include conditions
for contact (broadly referred
to in this chapter as parenting orders), which is
the focus of this chapter. In particular, interacting laws and practices
enhance or impede courts’ awareness and consideration of
relevant orders made in another jurisdiction;
result in courts making conflicting orders; and
lead to a gap in protection for victims of violence, where neither
court takes on responsibility for ensuring that protective conditions
and enforced.
8.3 In canvassing options for reform, the Commissions
draw on major reviews of the operation of div 11 of the
by Kearney McKenzie & Associates (the Kearney McKenzie
and the letter of advice
from the Family Law Council to the Attorney-General dated
16 November 2004 (the 2004 Family Law Council
8.4 The effectiveness of
Family Law Act
proceedings in dealing with
allegations of family violence—beyond specific issues arising in the
context of interaction with
state and territory proceedings relating to family
violence—is outside the scope of this Inquiry. There is particular
controversy
relation to a parent’s facilitation and encouragement of
a close and
continuing relationship between the child and the other parent—the
so-called ‘friendly parent’ requirement—in
s 60CC of the
Act. Also contentious is the obligation in s 117AB for courts to make a
costs order against a party who knowingly makes
a false allegation in the
proceedings, including an allegation of family violence. These issues were
considered in two 2009 reviews
of the federal family law system: Professor
Richard Chisholm’s review of the practices and procedures of the federal
courts in cases where family violence is alleged (the Chisholm Review)
and the 2009 Family Law Council’s advice on the intersection
violence and family law issues (the 2009 Family Law Council advice), the
findings of which are discussed later in this
8.5 Effective interaction between family law proceedings and family violence
protection orders also depends on the quality of evidence
of family violence
provided in proceedings for protection orders. This issue is considered in
Chapter 10.
[back to top]
The federal family
8.6 The interaction between orders made by the federal family courts and
those made under state and territory family violence legislation
is the focus of
the following three chapters of this Consultation
To inform this discussion,
it is useful to set out some of the key features of the Family Court of
Australia (Family Court) and the
Federal Magistrates Court, including relevant
practices and procedures in relation to allegations of family violence. An
discussion of these matters is included in the Chisholm
Family Court of
8.7 The Family Court was established as a superior court of record by the
Family Law Act
. Procedural arrangements are principally set out in the
Family Law Rules
8.8 Before commencing proceedings in the Family Court, parties must obtain a
certificate under
Family Law Act
from a family dispute
resolution (FDR) practitioner, or come within one of the exceptions to the FDR
requirement. There is an exception
if the Court is satisfied that there are
reasonable grounds to believe there has been, or is, a risk of child abuse or
family violence.
Where parties rely on this exception, they must satisfy the
Court that they have received information from a family counsellor or
practitioner about services and options available in cases of abuse and
violence. Family violence also operates as an exception
to the requirement in
Family Law Act
that parties seeking parenting orders must attend
family counselling to discuss the issues in
8.9 A Family Court proceeding is begun by filing an Initiating Application
(Family Law) and, where relevant, a Notice of Child Abuse
or Family Violence
(Form 4). A parenting case is listed before a Registrar for a procedural
hearing attended by all parties. The
Registrar assesses the case and makes
recommendations about its future conduct, including whether the parties should
be referred
to the Child Responsive Program. This program is described in detail
in the Chisholm Review.
principal aim of the program is to direct parents to focus on the needs of their
children when determining parenting arrangements.
A family consultant—a
social scientist or psychologist appointed under the Act—is assigned to a
case for its duration.
of the family consultant is to screen for family violence. Where significant
concerns are identified, the consultant may
take protective action including,
where the violence relates to children, notifying relevant child protection
authorities. The consultant
prepares a written report of the main issues
affecting the family, which is made available to the parents and their legal
representatives.
A copy is also placed on the court file. Parties to parenting
proceedings must also complete a parenting questionnaire, which includes
questions about family violence and child abuse, alcohol and drug use and
current parenting arrangements.
8.10 An independent children’s lawyer may be appointed to represent the
best interests of the children to the proceedings on
the application of any of
the parties, an organisation concerned with the child’s welfare, or on the
initiative of the Court.
Family Law Rules
set out requirements for judicial officers
hearing parenting proceedings designed to facilitate a ‘less
adversarial’
judicial officer is required to be an active participant in hearings for
parenting proceedings, including determining the evidence
that may be adduced,
the witnesses that may be called and subpoenas that may be
At any point in the
trial, the court may refer parties to FDR or family counselling. On the first
day of the hearing, the judge may
order the preparation of a family report.
Where allegations of family violence have been raised this may include an
assessment of
the harm that may occur if orders are made or not made, and
whether the safety of the child and the parent alleging the family violence
abuse can be secured if there is contact with the person against whom
allegations have been made.
8.12 Family Court orders may be made on an interim basis prior to hearings
for final orders. In some circumstances, this may be done
without notice to the
other parties to the proceedings, including where there are family violence and
child abuse concerns.
hearings must not be longer than two hours in duration, and parties and
witnesses can submit only one
8.13 Parties may also apply for consent orders at various stages of the
Family Court proceedings. This may take place before or during
proceedings.
Federal Magistrates
8.14 The Federal Magistrates Court was established under the
Magistrates Act 1999
(Cth) with the objective of encouraging the quicker
and more informal resolution of
Family law decisions
made by Federal Magistrates can be appealed to the Family Court. The Federal
Magistrates Court now deals with
the majority of family law
8.15 A key aim of the Federal Magistrates Court is to operate without undue
formality. The
Federal Magistrates Court Rules 2001
(Cth) are designed to
enable the Court to operate as informally as possible, using streamlined
processes and encouraging the use
of dispute resolution
procedures.
Magistrates Court Rules
adopt some of the rules in the
The Federal
Magistrates Court also has the discretion to apply the
Family Law Rules
to fill any gap that might be left in the
Federal Magistrates Court
8.16 In addition to the Initiating Application (Family Law), parties in
Federal Magistrates Court proceedings are required to file
an affidavit stating
the facts on which their application
The FDR requirements
that operate in the Family Court also apply to parties commencing proceedings in
the Federal Magistrates Court.
At the time a party files an Initiating
Application, he or she also must file a s 60I certificate, unless an
exception applies. A
Registrar is responsible for assessing a claim for an
exception. As with Family Court proceedings, an independent children’s
lawyer may be appointed to represent the best interests of children in the
proceedings.
8.17 The Federal Magistrates Court does not have an equivalent of the Family
Court’s ‘less adversarial trial’ and
Child Responsive Program.
In the Federal Magistrates Court, meetings with court-appointed family
consultants take the form of Child
Conferences.
The Rules do not
provide further direction about the process of referral or the form that
meetings may take. The Federal Magistrates
Court may also appoint family
consultants, including for the purpose of preparing a Family Report for
proceedings. Under the
Federal Magistrates Court Rules
, a party may only
apply for a Family Report once he or she has applied for final
In determining whether
to order a Family Report, the Court may take into account allegations of family
violence or child abuse.
8.18 Consent orders are also available in Federal Magistrates Court
proceedings. The Rules do not distinguish between consent orders
sought before
or during proceedings.
Cooperation between
the federal family courts
8.19 There are a number of aspects of cooperation between the Family Court
and the Federal Magistrates Court. The courts operate a
single registry, in
which all proceedings before the two courts are commenced. Further, the
Initiating Application provides for parties
to elect the court in which the
application is filed.
8.20 On 29 January 2010, the Chief Justice of the Family Court and
the Chief Federal Magistrate published a protocol on the division
between the courts. Under that protocol, if there are serious allegations of
child sexual or physical abuse, or ‘serious
controlling family violence
warranting the attention of a superior court’, an application for final
orders should ordinarily
be filed in the Family
8.21 In May 2009, the Australian Government announced that the Family Court
and the Federal Magistrates Court should be merged into
one Family Court of
as recommended in a
report in 2008.
[back to top]
Parenting orders,
protection orders and family violence
8.22 Under pt VII of the
Family Law Act
, federal family courts
are empowered to make orders dealing with the treatment of children in
proceedings. This includes making parenting orders.
8.23 A parenting order is an order made by a family court that deals with any
aspect of parental responsibility for a child. This
may include matters such as
the persons with whom a child is to live, the time a child is to spend with
other persons, the allocation
of parental responsibility for a child, the
communication a child is to have with another person or other persons, and other
of the care, welfare or development of the child. Family courts may also
make orders relating to the financial maintenance of a child.
Of particular
relevance in this chapter are orders dealing with the time that a child is to
spend with a person, or with the communication
that a child is to have with a
person, which collectively may be termed orders for ‘contact’ with a
Family violence and
protection orders as relevant considerations
Family Law Act
sets out detailed considerations to which a
family court must have regard in deciding whether to make a particular parenting
The ‘paramount consideration’ in this regard is ‘the
best interests of the
Pursuant to
, the primary considerations for determining what is in a
child’s best interests are:
(a) the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of
the child’s parents; and
(b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being
subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family
Section 60CC
also sets out a lengthy list of ‘additional
considerations’. These include, for example, any views expressed by the
the nature of the relationship between relevant persons and the child;
the willingness and ability of each of the child’s parents
to facilitate
and encourage a close and continuing relationship between the child and the
other parent (referred to as the ‘friendly
parent’ provision); and,
if the child is Indigenous, the child’s right to enjoy his or her
Indigenous culture.
8.26 Two of the additional considerations have particular relevance in the
context of allegations of family
any family violence involving the child or a member of the
child’s family;
any family violence order that applies to the child or a member of
the child’s family, provided the order is a final order
or its making was
Family Law Act
includes a presumption that it is in the best interests of
a child for the child’s parents to have equal shared parental
responsibility
for the child.
interim proceedings, the presumption applies unless the court considers that it
would not be appropriate in the
circumstances.
The presumption
may be rebutted by evidence that it would not be in the best interests of the
child for the child’s parents
to have equal shared parental responsibility
for the child.
The presumption
does not apply if there are reasonable grounds for believing that a parent has
engaged in child abuse or family violence.
Where the presumption applies, the
court must then consider whether the child spending equal time with each of the
parents would
be reasonably practicable and in the best interests of the child.
If so, the court must consider making an order to provide for the
child to spend
equal time with each of the
Limited practical
impact of family violence allegations
8.28 Questions have been raised, however, about the impact, if any, of
allegations of family violence on the ultimate conditions of
parenting orders.
In a 2007 report, Lawrie Moloney and colleagues at AIFS reported that
allegations of spousal violence or parental
child abuse did appear to influence
court orders where they were accompanied by evidence of a strong probative
weight. Without such
evidence, however, allegations did not seem to have much
effect on outcomes in the family
The report also
indicated that there was often very little supporting detail about allegations
of family violence or corroborative
evidence, with the consequence that courts
were dealing with issues of family violence ‘in the context of widespread
uncertainty’.
8.29 A 2009 AIFS report confirmed the limited influence of family violence
concerns on the conditions of parenting orders. It reported,
for example, that
families where violence had occurred were no less likely to have shared
care-time arrangements than those where
violence had not occurred. Similarly,
families where safety concerns were reported were no less likely to have shared
care-time arrangements
than families without safety concerns. Approximately 18%
of fathers and 16% of mothers who reported equal-time arrangements had concerns
These arrangements were
reached by a variety of means, with or without court involvement.
8.30 A number of reasons have been advanced for the limited impact of family
violence concerns on the terms of parenting orders. For
example, a party may
choose not to raise issues of family violence in family court proceedings for
fear of further angering the party
to whom the allegation relates or making the
situation worse for themselves or their children. Parties may also be
discouraged from
raising allegations of family violence because of concerns that
this will make them ‘unfriendly parents’ or lead to an
adverse costs
In other situations, a
party may report a history of family violence but still want the child to spend
unsupervised time with the
other partner.
8.31 Secondly, there may be little supportive evidence to prove allegations
of family violence that are brought before the federal
family courts. The fact
that a protection order has been made may be of limited evidentiary value, given
that a parent may consent
to the making of orders without admissions and that,
even in contested cases, the brevity of family violence proceedings may not
allow for a comprehensive evaluation of the allegations. Evidentiary issues
relating to family violence in
Family Law Act
proceedings are considered
in Chapter 10.
8.32 Finally, judicial officers in family courts may be reluctant to
terminate parental contact in all but the most extreme situations.
Dickey QC has noted that there is currently a strong assumption that
If a court believes that a
child may be harmed in some way by having contact with a parent, it will usually
impose conditions or
restrictions on the exercise of contact (such as
appropriate supervision) rather than to deny contact
altogether.
As stated by the
Full Family Court in
, the ‘termination of a worthwhile
relationship between the parent and child ought in most cases be the course of
last resort’.
The inconsistency
8.33 Protection orders and parenting orders may contain inconsistent
conditions where a federal family court was not made aware of,
or failed to
consider, state and territory protection orders. Even where a protection order
is considered, a court may issue inconsistent
parenting orders because it does
not accept the order as evidence of violence, or places a higher priority on a
child’s interest
in having contact with both parents. The Kearney McKenzie
Report termed the situation of conflicting orders the ‘inconsistency
Inconsistency
can also arise where a state or territory court making a protection order is
unaware of a pre-existing parenting order.
8.34 Sometimes orders will be directly inconsistent. For example, a
protection order may prohibit a man from coming within a specified
distance of a
woman’s home, while a parenting order provides for him to collect and drop
off the children from the home. At
other times, orders will be inconsistent in
practice—while they are not directly contradictory, it is difficult or
in practice to comply fully with both. For example, a parenting order
may allow a parent to have contact with a child but a protection
order prohibits
that parent from contacting the person with whom the child lives, making it
difficult to arrange contact.
The potential for inconsistency may be heightened by the increasing inclusion of
children as the subject of protection
8.35 In 1995,
div 11 of the
Family Law Act
was introduced
to deal with inconsistent conditions in orders. The division generally provides
that conditions permitting contact
under parenting orders prevail over
non-contact requirements under state and territory family violence legislation
and makes provision
for family courts to issue a declaration of
inconsistency.
It also sets out
procedures that family courts must comply with when issuing parenting orders
that are inconsistent with pre-existing
protection orders, and mechanisms for
state and territory courts to vary or revoke such parenting orders. The division
was substantially
amended in the 2006 reforms to the
Family Law Act
deal with concerns raised in the Kearney McKenzie Report and in a 2004 letter of
advice from the Family Law
Division 11 is
discussed in detail below.
8.36 In practice, inconsistency is often avoided through standard conditions
in protection orders issued under state and territory
family violence
legislation excluding court-ordered contact from the scope of prohibited
[back to top]
Awareness of
pre-existing orders
8.37 The following discussion considers legislative and procedural strategies
to make courts aware of potentially inconsistent orders
that have been issued by
another court. First, the avenues through which family courts hearing
proceedings for parenting orders are
made aware of relevant family violence
protection orders are considered. Secondly, the avenues through which state and
courts hearing proceedings for protection orders are made aware of
relevant parenting orders are discussed. Both sections focus on:
the obligations
on parties to inform the courts of any such orders; whether there should be an
obligation on courts to ask for such
information; and information sought in
application forms.
proceedings under the
Family Law Act
Legislative framework
Family Law Act
, if a party to
parenting proceedings is aware that a family violence order applies to the
child, or a member of the child’s
family, that party must inform the court
of that order. Further, a person who is not a party to the proceedings but is
family violence order that applies to the child or a member of the
child’s family may inform the court of the
Failure to inform the
court of the orders does not invalidate any order.
Family Law Rules
specifies that a party
must file a copy of any family violence order when a case starts or as soon as
practicable after the order
This accommodates
situations where parenting proceedings before the Family Court and protection
order proceedings before a state
or territory court are running concurrently, as
well as where protection order proceedings have been finalised before Family
proceedings begin. If a copy of the protection order is not available, the
party must file a written notice containing an undertaking
to file the order
within a specified time as well as details of the order. Pursuant to sch 3,
Federal Magistrates Court Rules
apply r 2.05 of the
to proceedings in the Federal Magistrates Court.
8.40 Legislative provisions also set up pathways for federal family courts to
be informed about family violence, whether or not a
protection order is in
place. These include a certificate by a FDR practitioner under
Family Law Act
that the matter is unsuitable for dispute resolution on
the basis of family violence. An allegation of family violence also may be
raised by the filing of a Notice of Child Abuse or Family Violence
(Form 4). Pursuant to s 60K of the Act, once this form has been
the court is required to undertake certain action, including dealing with the
application promptly and considering the need
for any interim or procedural
8.41 However, other provisions of the
Family Law Act
may impede the
extent to which the court is informed about any history or risk of family
violence. In particular, concerns have been
raised about:
s 60CC(3)(c)
—the ‘friendly parent’ provision;
s 117AB—which requires a court to make costs orders
against a party who knowingly makes false allegations or statements in
proceedings.
8.42 The dilemmas that these provisions
potentially create for victims of family violence are illustrated where family
violence proceedings
are operating concurrently with child protection matters
and parenting disputes. One participant in the ALRC’s Family Violence
Online Forum provided an illustration of this dilemma:
For instance, the [child protection department] get contacted in relation to the
safety of a child due to family violence allegations
etc. They advise the mother
to take out an intervention order excluding the father from the home or they
will have no choice but
to remove the child from her care. The mother then takes
out an intervention order excluding the father. The department then make
assessment that their involvement is not warranted in the case as they deem the
mother to be acting protectively.
The problem … arises when an application is made in the family court
At the Family or Federal Magistrates Court, the mother explains why she is
seeking that the father have no contact or supervised
She says she was advised by [the child protection department] to restrict
department] however have not provided any written
evidence of this advice, except to advise the court that they have no reason to
be involved where the mother is acting protectively.
The mother is then left in court by herself, without [the child protection
department] providing support to the mother’s position.
The mother then
has to explain why she is acting as an ‘unfriendly parent’ (as per
Family Law Act
) by not facilitating contact.
… In one jurisdiction—the Magistrates Court—she is doing the
right thing acting protectively while in the Family
Court jurisdiction it can
sometimes be used against her as ‘not facilitating contact’ by the
other party unless the department
makes a representation in that matter which is
not always the case.
8.43 The Chisholm Review and the 2009 Family Law Council advice both
recommended changes to the manner in which the federal family
courts deal with
allegations of family violence, including reform of the ‘friendly
parent’ provision and the requirement
for costs orders.
8.44 The Chisholm Review expressed the view that the ‘friendly
parent’ provision may have the consequence of discouraging
some parents
from disclosing violence to the court and, consequently, that the
should recognise that there are some circumstances where parents need to
take action to protect their children. This may require
making serious
allegations of violence.
Chisholm Review further recommended that the costs order provision in
s 117AB of the
Family Law Act
should be repealed. The Review
suggested that consideration should instead be given to amending the general
costs provision in s
117 of the Act to direct a court to have regard to
whether any person knowingly gave false evidence in the
proceedings.
8.45 The 2009 Family Law Council advice recommended that the Australian
Government Attorney-General should consider clarifying the
parent’ provision, either through legislative amendment or targeted public
education. The Council raised particular
concerns that the public perception of
this provision could impede the disclosure of family violence in cases where a
parent’s allegations of family violence are not able to be
corroborated by reliable
The Family Law Council
made a similar recommendation in relation to the s 117AB costs order
provision—that is, that the Attorney-General
should clarify the intention
of the provision. The Council noted that ‘there is no evidence that the
section has achieved its
purpose in relation to false allegations of family
Application forms
8.46 Court application forms will generally be the first place for a party to
raise allegations of family violence and give information
protection orders. The Initiating Application for proceedings in the Family
Court, Federal Magistrates Court and
Family Court of Western Australia requests
information about ‘any existing orders, agreements, parenting plans or
undertakings
to this or any other court’ about ‘family law, child
support, family violence or child welfare issues’ concerning
parties or children listed in the
application.
The form also
requires details of any ongoing cases of such a nature. This would include
relevant protection orders obtained under
state or territory family violence
8.47 As noted above, a related document is the Notice of Child Abuse or
Family Violence (Form 4), which may be filed by parties raising
allegations
of family violence, or a risk of family violence, in proceedings in the family
courts. Section 60K of the
Family Law Act
establishes Form 4 as
the principal means of triggering procedural obligations on family courts to
accommodate allegations of family
violence and child
The form includes the
definition of ‘family violence’, as set out in
Family Law Act
, and space for a party to describe acts or omissions that
are alleged to comprise family violence, or any risk of family violence.
this section is a space to identify the family court proceedings to which the
allegations are relevant.
However, there is no designated space on the form for a party to list any
relevant protection orders which have been obtained.
8.48 The 2009 Family Law Council advice recommended that the federal family
courts consider revising Form 4, including making it more
user-friendly.
In comparison,
the Chisholm Review recommended that the form should be replaced by a completely
new approach to raising allegations
of family violence in federal family
courts—namely, through a targeted identification and risk assessment
Information-sharing protocols and
8.49 The family courts do not have any formal or defined access to the orders
or files of proceedings in courts exercising state
As noted in a 2007
review of the South Australian family violence laws undertaken by Maurine Pyke
QC (the Pyke Review), ‘the
potential for confusion, lack of certainty and
detrimental impact upon appropriate interventions including Police intervention
readily apparent’.
8.50 One example where a family court may not be made aware of protection
orders is where a person against whom an order was made
has misunderstood the
nature of the order. This may be especially likely where a party is
unrepresented, or the order is made
. A party may also
deliberately omit reference to such an order in the belief it might prejudice
his or her application.
8.51 The Kearney McKenzie Report recommended that consideration should be
given to establishing a central database of parenting orders
made by the Family
Court and protection orders made by state and territory courts. The Report
recommended that this information should
be accessible to judges and registrars
of the Family Court, magistrates and registrars of local courts and to
A similar option for
reform was set out in the Pyke Review, which suggested that a database of the
state courts could:
• provide ready and immediate access to orders made by the Family Court
inconsistent with family violence orders; and registered
pursuant to
Family Law Act
• ensure that orders made in each of the State Courts, Supreme Court,
District Court, Magistrates Court and Youth Court in family
violence matters and
child protection proceedings are immediately available on the database of each
Court and immediately available
8.52 The Australian Government has committed to working with the states and
territories to establish a national scheme for the registration
of protection
Details have not yet
been released about how such a national scheme would operate, including whether
it would include a central database
of protection and parenting orders.
Commissions’ views
8.53 Legislative framework
. The main concerns that have been
raised in the context of informing federal family courts about allegations of
family violence relate
to the ‘friendly parent’ provision and the
requirement for costs orders in the event of false allegations or statements.
noted above, extensive reforms to these provisions have been recommended in two
reviews of the federal family courts which are
under consideration by the
Australian Government.
The Commissions endorse the
recommendations for reform of the ‘friendly parent’ provision and
costs orders requirement
set out in these reports.
8.54 However, in the event that the recommendations of the Chisholm Review
and the Family Law Council are not taken up by the Australian
Government, then
consideration should be given to other practices that may ensure that parents
who have sought protection orders
are not disadvantaged in family law
proceedings. For example, state and territory child protection laws should be
amended to impose
a requirement on child protection agencies that advise parents
to seek a protection order for child welfare purposes to provide written
to this effect to ensure that a family court does not construe the
parent’s action as ‘unfriendly’.
8.55 Application forms
. In the Commissions’ view, the
forms filed by parties for parenting proceedings in family courts should inform
the court of
any existing protection orders or pending proceedings for such
orders. This is particularly important in interim proceedings for
orders where the court has a limited opportunity to obtain additional evidence
from the parties.
8.56 The Commissions are concerned about the lack of prominence given to
protection orders, and pending proceedings for protection
orders, in the
Initiating Application in the family courts. This form uses the one question to
deal with court orders in relation
to family law, child support, family violence
or child welfare. In comparison, some state and territory protection order
application
forms ask separately for details about, for example,
children’s court orders, intra- and inter-state protection orders, and
family court orders. In the Commissions’ view, it would be beneficial for
the matters currently listed in Part F of the Initiating
Application to be
separated out into discrete questions. Such an approach may highlight more
clearly to parties the need to include
information about relevant protection
orders. This may, however, make the application form lengthier and more
cumbersome.
8.57 The Notice of Child Abuse or Family Violence (Form 4) does not
include a designated space for parties to note existing protection
the event that Form 4 is retained by the federal family courts, this could
be included. However, if a separate question
seeking information about
protection orders were included in the Initiating Application, another question
in Form 4 would involve unnecessary duplication.
The Commissions do not, therefore, propose any change to Form 4 in this
8.58 Information-sharing protocols and procedures
Australian Government has committed to the development of a national scheme for
the registration of domestic and family violence
orders, which may encompass a
central protection order database. In the Commissions’ view, this
initiative has the potential
to improve significantly courts’ awareness of
potentially inconsistent orders. For this outcome to be achieved, it will be
important to consider the information that should be included on the database
(that is, whether all state and territory protection
parenting orders are to be included) and the entities that should have
access to the information. The national protection order database
is discussed
in Chapter 10, including the entities which should have access to
information on the database.
Proposal 8–1
State and territory child protection laws should be
amended to require a child protection agency that advises a parent to seek a
order under state or territory family violence legislation for the
purpose of protecting the child to provide written advice to this
ensure that a federal family court does not construe the parent’s action
as a failure to ‘facilitate, and encourage,
a close and continuing
relationship between the child and the other parent’ pursuant to
s 60CC(3)(c)
Family Law Act 1975
Proposal 8–2
Application forms for initiating proceedings in the
federal family courts and the Family Court of Western Australia should clearly
seek information about existing protection orders obtained under state and
territory family violence legislation or pending proceedings
Protection order
proceedings under family violence laws
Legislative framework
8.59 With the exception of the ACT, the family violence legislation in each
of the states and territories includes provisions for
the court to gain access
to information about parenting
However, the legislation
differs in relation to the procedure by which the information is obtained. Most
commonly, the legislation
imposes obligations on persons who apply for, or for a
variation of, a protection order, to inform the court of any relevant parenting
order, or any pending application for a parenting order, of which the person is
In comparison, the
Victorian family violence legislation places an obligation on a court that
decides to make a protection order
to enquire as to whether a parenting order or
a child protection order is in force in relation to any child of the protected
Domestic Violence and Protection Orders Act 2008
not directly require an applicant for a protection order or any other person to
inform the court about a family contact
order. A note to s 18—which
deals with who may apply for certain non-emergency orders—states that if a
form is approved
Court Procedures Act 2004
(ACT) for an
application under this section, the form must be
8.61 A separate issue relates to police-issued protection
Under the Northern
Territory family violence legislation, a police officer who is considering
making a police ‘domestic violence
order’ must make
‘reasonable enquiries’ about the existence or otherwise of any
relevant parenting orders in force,
or pending applications for such
If asked by an officer,
a person must inform the officer of any such parenting orders or applications.
Domestic Violence and Protection Orders Act
specifies that, in
applications for emergency orders, a police officer must tell the judicial
officer about any relevant parenting
order, or any pending application for such
an order, of which the police officer is
The Act does not specify
mechanisms for making police officers aware of any such orders. In the context
of police applications for
protection orders, the Kearney McKenzie Report
commented on the reluctance of police to take into account family law issues.
consultants noted that often police ‘have not been informed of the
provisions, still less trained to use them, and would not
regard applying for a
variation as part of their
These concerns are
equally relevant in the context of police-issued protection orders.
Application forms
8.62 The application forms for protection orders in most states and
territories ask whether a child is the subject of a current order
Family Law Act
, or whether there are pending proceedings for such an
However, some
forms—for example that of the ACT—ask about pending or finalised
proceedings without specifically asking
whether there are existing family court
orders. The application form for a protection order in the Magistrates Court of
South Australia
does not seek any information about family court orders or
pending proceedings for such orders. This information is sought, however,
Affidavit to Support an Application for a Domestic Violence Restraining Order.
In addition, few application forms for variation
of protection orders request
information about relevant family law
Commissions’ views
Legislative framework
8.63 Legislation governing proceedings for the making of protection orders
should provide mechanisms for ensuring that state and territory
courts are made
aware of existing family law orders. This information is central to ensuring
that proceedings for protection orders
are conducted on an informed basis. In
particular, the Commissions are concerned that in the ACT, parties are not
expressly required
to provide information about family law orders under the
Domestic Violence and Protection Orders Act
, nor is such information
expressly sought in the application for a ‘domestic violence’
8.64 The most common approach in state and territory family violence
legislation is to impose a legally enforceable obligation on
parties to inform
the court about pre-existing orders. However, there may be situations where
relying on representations of parties
to the proceedings is inadequate—for
example, where a person against whom an order has been made has misunderstood
of the order. This may be especially problematic where a party is
unrepresented, or where an order was made
. Particular
difficulties may also be encountered by applicants from culturally and
linguistically diverse backgrounds and other vulnerable
groups, such as persons
with a disability.
8.65 Accordingly, the Commissions are interested in stakeholder views on
extending the Victorian model to other states and territories—that
placing an obligation on the court to ask for the required information. This
could either replace, or operate in addition to,
any obligation on parties to
inform the court about any protection orders of which they are aware.
8.66 In Chapter 5, the Commissions raise concerns about the operative
period of some police-issued protection orders, and propose
that these should
only apply for a limited period of
If this proposal proceeds
to a recommendation, and is implemented, the short duration of such an order
would largely dispel the need
for police issuing the order to ascertain whether
any parenting orders are in existence, or whether proceedings for such orders
pending. However, if state and territory governments retain police-issued
protection orders that operate for significantly long time
periods, then there
should be ways to obtain information about parenting orders. The Commissions are
interested in further information
practice. For example, what steps must a police officer take in order to make
‘reasonable
enquiries’ about the existence or otherwise of relevant
parenting orders, pursuant to the NT family violence laws? Is this
model to apply more broadly to police-issued protection orders?
Application forms
8.67 Application forms for protection orders should ask—clearly and
specifically—about the existence of parenting orders
proceedings for such orders.
instructive model may be Queensland’s Protection Order Application, which
asks whether a court has made any other orders
involving the victim and the
person who has allegedly used violence, or if there are other proceedings that
are yet to be decided
in another court involving these people. Individual check
boxes are then set out for current and non-current: children’s court
orders; Queensland ‘domestic violence’ orders; interstate or New
Zealand domestic violence orders; and family court orders.
Proposal 8–3
State and territory family violence legislation
should provide mechanisms for courts exercising jurisdiction under such
legislation
to be informed about existing parenting orders or pending
proceedings for such orders. This could be achieved by:
(a) imposing a legally enforceable obligation on parties to proceedings for
a protection order to inform the court about any such
parenting orders or
proceedings;
(b) requiring courts making protection orders to inquire as to any such
parenting orders or proceedings; or
(c) both of the above.
In practice, what steps does a police officer who issues a
protection order have to take in order to make ‘reasonable
order’, pursuant to the
Domestic and Family Violence Act 2007
Should this requirement apply to police who issue protection orders in other
states and territories?
Proposal 8–4
Application forms for protection orders in all
states and territories, including applications for variation of protection
should clearly seek information about existing parenting orders or
pending proceedings for such orders.
[back to top]
Consideration of
pre-existing orders
proceedings under the
Family Law Act
Legislative framework
8.68 This section considers the legislative framework that guides a federal
family court’s decision making about parenting orders.
Issues about the
use in family law proceedings of protection orders and evidence given in
protection order proceedings are discussed
in Chapter 10.
8.69 As noted above, one of the primary considerations in determining what is
in a child’s best interests—the paramount
consideration in making
parenting orders—is ‘the need to protect the child from physical or
psychological harm from being
subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or
family violence’.
Additional considerations in making this determination include: any family
violence involving the child or a member of the child’s
and any family violence
order that applies to the child or a member of the child’s
However, as noted above,
under the last of these considerations, a court is only permitted to consider a
final or contested order.
8.70 The Explanatory Memorandum for the 2006 amendments to the
explained the intention of limiting what ‘family violence
orders’ a court can consider in determining a child’s
best interests
as follows:
Paragraph 60CC(3)(k) modifies the existing paragraph 68F(2)(j) which
directs a court to consider any family violence order that applies
to the child
or a member of the child’s family. New paragraph 60CC(3)(k) provides
that this only includes a final or contested
family violence order. The
intention of this subsection is to ensure that the court does not take account
of uncontested or interim
family violence orders. This should address a
perception that violence allegations are taken into account without proven
in some family law
proceedings.
8.71 Family violence and protection orders are also listed as independent
factors that courts must consider when making orders under
including parenting orders:
60CG Court to consider risk of family violence
(1) In considering what order to make, the court must, to the extent that it is
possible to do so consistently with the child’s
best interests being the
paramount consideration, ensure that the order:
(a) is consistent with any family violence order; and
(b) does not expose a person to an unacceptable risk of family violence.
(2) For the purposes of paragraph (1)(b), the court may include in the order any
safeguards that it considers necessary for the safety
of those affected by the
Best Practice Principles for Use in Parenting Disputes When
Family Violence or Abuse is Alleged
(Best Practice Principles), issued by
the Family Court, gives guidance to judicial officers in federal family courts
in the drafting
of parenting orders. The Best Practice Principles direct
judicial officers to a number of factors relevant to the effect of exposure
family violence on children and the circumstances in which a child should have
no contact with a parent who has used, or exposed
the child to, family violence.
These factors include, for example:
the effect of the family violence or abuse, or the unacceptable risk
of family violence or abuse, on the child and on the parent
with whom the child
whether or not the motivation of the parent seeking a parenting
order is a desire to promote the best interests of the child or a
continuing a process of family violence against, or intimidation or harassment
of, the other parent;
whether a parent seeking an order to spend time with a child who has
been found to have used family violence acknowledges and accepts
responsibility
for that violence, and is participating in any program to address the
contributing factors towards his or her use
of family violence; and
the potential detriment to the child arising from the court ordering
that the child have limited or no contact with the parent against
whom findings
8.73 Where a
family court accepts that a parent has used family violence or abuse, or that
there is an unacceptable risk of that parent
using family violence or abuse, it
may still make orders for a child to spend time with that parent. In this
situation, the Best
Practice Principles suggest consideration of the following
whether there is a need for supervision and, if so, the conditions
of such supervision;
any conditions, such as seeking advice or treatment, with which the
parent should comply;
whether the court should exercise its
powers to make or
extend a protective injunction in favour of the child or the parent with whom
the child lives; and
whether any parenting order or injunction is inconsistent with a
family violence order and the extent of any
inconsistency.
Chisholm Review recommended extensive revisions to the manner in which federal
family courts consider allegations of family
violence. The Review considered the
current test for the best interests of a child to be problematic. It raised
particular concerns
the benefits of parental involvement and the protection of children against
violence and abuse in s 60CC of the Act. Instead, the Review recommended
that family courts should consider a range of factors, similar
presently included in
Family Law Act
. This was on
the basis that parents, advisers and courts should be encouraged to consider the
arrangements which would be best for
a child in each case, rather than starting
with an assumption that a particular outcome is likely to be best in a
particular category
8.75 Notably, the factors proposed by the Chisholm Review do not expressly
include family violence or protection orders. Instead,
family violence is
encompassed within a broader requirement for the court to consider a
child’s safety and wellbeing, which
would also cover other matters that
might threaten a child’s safety, such as mental illness or substance
abuse. The factors
recommended by the Chisholm Review for consideration also
include no express mention of family violence orders. The Review justified
exclusion of family violence orders on the basis that
the law should do everything possible to enable the court to know about current
family violence orders, so it can avoid making orders
that inadvertently clash
with them. Otherwise, what is important is that the court should learn about the
factual circumstances
that might suggest a risk to the child or other
person, regardless of what was the basis of a previous family violence
Commissions’ views
8.76 An ongoing challenge in the interaction between family violence
protection orders and conditions for contact under parenting
orders is the
evidentiary weight which protection orders—as distinct from family
—should be accorded in parenting proceedings. The
Family Law Act
currently involves a compromise position, whereby all
protection orders must be notified to family courts, but only final and
orders are independently taken into account in determining what
parenting orders would be in a child’s best interest. The distinction
fails to recognise the many reasons why orders may be made with consent that are
not associated with a lack of evidence to support
the protection order—for
example, so as not to prejudice criminal proceedings. For reasons more fully
discussed in Chapter
10, the Commissions consider that the distinction between
considering final and contested protection orders on the one hand, and
and uncontested orders on the other, is arbitrary and unnecessary.
8.77 The Commissions have considered two options for reform in this area.
First, that consideration of protection orders should be
removed altogether and,
instead, reliance placed on a general criterion of family violence or, as
recommended in the Chisholm Review,
a child’s safety and wellbeing. In
determining such a criterion, a family court would be permitted—but not
required—to
consider any protection order (including interim and consent
orders) and the allegations of family violence that substantiated the
evidentiary weight to be accorded to the order would be determined on a
case-by-case basis. A potential disadvantage of
this first option, however, may
be to decrease the visibility of family violence as a factor in making parenting
8.78 An alternative approach involves including as a criterion for
determining a child’s best interests, ‘any family violence,
including evidence of such violence in any protection order proceeding’.
This would remove the distinction between final and
contested orders, and
interim and consent orders. While maintaining a similar policy approach, such a
criterion may highlight more
clearly the probative weight that courts making
parenting orders can draw from evidence of violence adduced in protection order
proceedings.
8.79 In Chapter 10, the Commissions raise a number of questions and
options for reform directed to improving the quality of evidence
protection orders and the manner in which such evidence is given.
Proposal 8–5
The ‘additional consideration’ in
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth), which directs a court to
consider only final or contested protection orders when determining the best
interests of a child
in making a parenting order, should be:
(a) repealed, and reliance placed instead on the general criterion of
family violence contained in
s 60CC(3)(j)
(b) amended to provide that any family violence, including evidence of such
violence given in any protection order proceeding—including
proceedings in
which final or interim protection orders are made either by consent or after a
contested hearing—is an additional
consideration when determining the best
interests of a child.
Additional issues
with family law interim proceedings and consent orders
8.80 Additional issues are raised when interim proceedings for parenting
orders are brought in the federal family courts or where
parenting orders are
made with the consent of the parties.
Interim proceedings
Section 64B(1)
Family Law Act
empowers a court to
make interim parenting orders.
It is a question for the court in each case to determine whether it is
appropriate to make an interim or final
8.82 The Kearney McKenzie Report noted particular difficulties for family
courts in exploring the nature of family violence that led
to a protection order
in proceedings for an interim order. Due to the speed with which the competing
interests of a woman’s
safety and a child’s need for contact are
balanced, the court may not receive adequate information about the violence that
has led to the making of the protection order. Consequently, the Report
suggested, such information may be disbelieved or
Consent orders
8.83 A parenting order inconsistent with a protection order may be made by a
family court on the basis of the consent of the parties.
Community lawyers and
family violence workers have previously reported instances where women felt
pressured into agreeing to contact
orders that exposed them to the risk of
The potential for
consent orders to pressure women into making contact arrangements that are
unsafe for them or for their children
has also been raised in academic
literature and in consultations in this
8.84 Family courts have some options available to them when presented with
proposed consent orders. First, the court may sanction
the orders. Secondly, the
court may refuse to make the orders, for example, where it is not satisfied that
the orders would not be
consistent with the child’s best
Pursuant to
r 10.17 of the
Family Law Rules
, in proceedings before the Family
Court (and the Family Court of Western Australia, which has adopted the federal
Family Law Rules
), parties must satisfy the court as to the reasons why
the proposed orders should be
However, there is always
the risk that the parties will put the arrangements in place in the absence of
court orders. Finally, where
the court has fears that a child may be at risk, it
may refer the papers to the police, or a state or territory child protection
department.
8.85 The Family Court’s Best Practice Principles outline eight
questions for the court to consider where consent orders are
proposed which
provide for a child to spend time with a person against whom family violence
allegations have been made:
• How serious are the allegations?
• Has there ever been involvement of the child or children (direct or
indirect) in the family violence or a threat against the
• Are there indicators of pathological jealousy, marked possessiveness
or stalking?
• Is there any reason to believe that the parent seeking to spend time
with a child or children is doing so as a way of continuing
to control or
maintain contact with the parent with whom the child lives?
• Is the driving motive for the parent in wanting to spend time with
his or her child related more to his or her feelings about
the parent with whom
the child or children principally live than about the child or children?
• Are there any indicators of significant mental illness or suicidal
ideation in the parent with whom a child or children would
be spending time?
• Is it clear that the parent with whom the child or children will
principally live has agreed to the order without pressure
from others and having
had an open discussion with his or her lawyer about the arguments for and
against the child spending time
with a parent?
• Where appointed, does the Independent Children’s Lawyer support
the consent orders and, if not, how should the concerns
of the Independent
Children’s Lawyer be
8.86 The Best Practice Principles suggest steps that the court may take if it
has concerns about the proposed consent orders, including
ordering the
preparation of a family report; ordering the appointment of an independent
children’s lawyer; requesting an interview
by a family consultant; hearing
further evidence; or referring one or both parents to an appropriate service and
adjourning the proceedings.
Rule 10.15A
Family Law Rules
imposes particular
requirements on parties seeking to make consent orders in the Family Court where
there are allegations of child
Pursuant to the rule,
in any application for consent orders a party, or the party’s lawyer, must
advise the court whether there
has been any allegation of child abuse, or risk
of abuse, that has been raised in the proceedings. If so, the lawyer must
to the court how the order attempts to deal with the allegations. There
is no requirement for parties to satisfy the court that family
allegations have not been made, or that the orders are appropriate
notwithstanding any such allegations. The Chisholm Review
has suggested that
consideration should be given to extending r 10.15A to the context of
family violence allegations. It further
suggested that the rule be adopted in
the Federal Magistrates
Rule 10.15A
does not apply where parties apply for consent orders
without having commenced parenting proceedings in the Family Court. The Family
Court has published an
Application for Consent Orders Kit
, which notes
that, if the proposed consent orders are inconsistent with an existing
protection order, the Family Court cannot make
the orders unless parenting
proceedings are instituted. The Kit also advises parties to seek legal advice in
this situation.
8.89 Unlike the
Family Court Rules
Federal Magistrates Court
do not distinguish between consent orders before proceedings from
those sought during proceedings. The Chisholm Review reported anecdotal
that, in practice, officers of the Federal Magistrates Court direct parties to
apply for consent orders in the Family Court
where the parties seek to make
consent orders without instituting parenting
proceedings.
The Commissions
have been informed that there is no procedure in the Federal Magistrates Court
which would accommodate the court
making consent orders without initiating
proceedings.
Commissions’ views
8.90 The Commissions are concerned about the potential for parties in family
court proceedings to consent to parenting orders that
are inconsistent with
existing protection orders, and which consequently expose them or their children
to violence or to a risk of
violence. This is especially troubling where
‘consent’ is obtained under pressure—for example, where it is
accompanied
by a history of coercive controlling violence. In the context of
child welfare, r 10.15A of the
Family Law Rules
requires that cases
involving allegations of child abuse are brought to the attention of the Family
Court, which has options for
rectifying the situation. An analogous power would
be valuable in the context of family violence. It would be beneficial for such
rule to also apply in the Federal Magistrates Court.
8.91 The Commissions support the policy expressed in the Family Court
Application for Consent Orders Kit
that, if proposed consent orders are
inconsistent with an existing protection order, parenting proceedings must be
instituted. The
Commissions are interested in stakeholder views on whether
additional measures are necessary to deal with the situation where parties
the Family Court propose consent orders that are inconsistent with a current
protection order without instituting parenting proceedings—for
should this policy be formalised in the relevant court rules? The Commissions
understand that the procedures for seeking
consent orders in the Federal
Magistrates Court do not support parties obtaining a consent order without
initiating proceedings.
However, the Commissions are interested in stakeholder
experiences that may indicate a need for reform in this context.
8.92 The above strategies only apply in the context of consent orders and,
accordingly, will not address the concerns identified by
the Kearney McKenzie
Report in relation to interim proceedings. The Commissions are interested in
hearing whether any additional
measures are necessary to ensure that allegations
of family violence are given adequate consideration in the context of interim
proceedings.
Proposal 8–6
Rule 10.15A
Family Law Rules
(Cth) should apply to allegations of family violence in addition to
allegations of child abuse. A substantially equivalent rule should
proceedings in the Federal Magistrates Court.
How often do federal family courts make consent orders that are
inconsistent with current protection orders without requiring parties
institute parenting proceedings? Are additional measures needed to prevent
this—for example, by including a requirement
Family Law Rules
(Cth) for parenting proceedings to be initiated where parties propose
consent orders that are inconsistent with current protection
Question 8–3
Are additional measures necessary to ensure
that allegations of family violence in federal family courts are given adequate
consideration
in interim parenting proceedings? If so, what measures would be
beneficial?
Protection order
proceedings under family violence laws
8.93 With the exception of Victoria and South Australia, state and territory
family violence legislation provides for the court to
take relevant parenting
orders into account in making or varying final or interim protection
Notably, Victoria and
South Australia are the two jurisdictions that specifically provide for judicial
officers to make use of their
powers under
to vary or revoke parenting
8.94 The Kearney McKenzie Report considered state and territory legislation
enabling judicial officers to consider any relevant parenting
proceedings for a protection order. Most submissions to the review agreed that
imposing a clear duty on parties to inform
the court of a parenting order was
useful. However, some concerns were raised that requiring the magistrate to
consider parenting
orders could be used to justify not making a protection
order. The consultants expressed the view that:
it is important to remember that State and Territory family violence proceedings
are not about ensuring children have contact with
both parents; they are about
protecting women and children who are at risk of violence at the hands of the
respondent.
Commissions’ views
8.95 The Commissions acknowledge concerns expressed in previous reviews about
the potential for the consideration of parenting order
conditions by state and
territory courts to detract from the protective role of proceedings under family
violence legislation. The
Commissions are interested in stakeholder views on
whether this continues to arise.
8.96 In the Commissions’ view,
consideration
of parenting order
conditions should be encouraged to the extent that it promotes consistency
between protection and parenting orders.
However, judicial officers should not
feel obliged to defer to pre-existing parenting orders, as this has the
potential to jeopardise
the safety of victims of family violence.
8.97 The Commissions consider that courts should not significantly lower the
standard of protection afforded by a protection order
for the purpose of
facilitating consistency with a parenting order. This could be set out in
legislation. A similar outcome could
be achieved by including such a requirement
in bench books. The operation of such a reform can be illustrated by the
following hypothetical
case study.
Hypothetical
A woman brings proceedings for a protection order against her former partner,
with whom she has one child. Generally, the magistrate
would include a condition
that the father must not frequent the shopping centre close to the
mother’s house, on the basis of
evidence that he has been harassing her in
this place. However, the court is also informed of a current parenting order
for the father to have supervised contact with the child one afternoon
every second weekend. The handover point for contact is situated
within this
shopping centre.
Before the magistrate could make a protection order permitting the father to
enter the shopping centre for the purpose of such handover,
he or she must
consider whether such a condition would significantly detract from the standard
of protection that would otherwise
apply. If so, the appropriate course of
action would be to amend the parenting order in accordance with
div 11 of the
Family Law Act
8.98 Another option for mitigating the danger to a victim’s safety,
where a state or territory court considers a parenting order
in the course of
protection order proceedings, is a provision such as
Violence Protection Act 2008
(Vic). This provision requires a Victorian
court making a ‘family violence intervention order’ to revive, vary,
or suspend an inconsistent parenting order to the extent of any
inconsistency. This provision, and an accompanying question, is discussed
further below.
Proposal 8–7
State and territory courts hearing protection order
proceedings should not significantly lower the standard of protection afforded
by a protection order for the purpose of facilitating consistency with a current
parenting order. This could be achieved by:
(a) a prohibition to this effect in state and territory family violence
legislation; or
(b) guidance in relevant state and territory bench books.
[back to top]
inconsistencies
8.99 The previous section of this chapter considered strategies to reduce the
likelihood of courts issuing inconsistent parenting
orders and protection
orders. In the following section, consideration is given to mechanisms for
resolving inconsistency in situations
where conflicting orders come into
existence—in particular, through the operation of
Family Law Act
8.100 In practice, inconsistencies are frequently avoided, not through
div 11, but by standard conditions in state and territory protection
excepting court-ordered contact from the scope of prohibited conduct.
Family Law Act
8.101 The principal legislative mechanism for dealing with inconsistent
orders is set out in
div 11 of the
Family Law Act
substantially identical scheme to
div 11 of the
is set out in
div 10 of the
Family Court Act 1997
8.102 The purpose of
div 11 of the
Family Law Act
stated as being:
(a) to resolve inconsistencies between:
(i) family violence orders; and
(ii) certain orders, injunctions and arrangements made under this Act that
provide for a child to spend time with a person or require
or authorise a person
to spend time with a child; and
(aa) to ensure that orders, injunctions and arrangements of the kind referred to
in subparagraph (a)(ii) do not expose people to
family violence; and
(b) to achieve the objects and principles in section
8.103 ‘Family violence orders’ are defined in the
as meaning ‘an order (including an interim order) made under a
prescribed law of a State or Territory to protect a person from
prescribed under the
Family Law Regulations 1984
(Cth) correspond to
those state and territory laws defined as ‘family violence laws’ for
the purpose of this Inquiry.
This does not include, for example, protective bail conditions issued under
state and territory criminal
8.104 In 2006, extensive amendments to the
Family Law Act
enacted, including a complete redrafting of div 11. The amendments sought
to make div 11 ‘clearer, more concise and easier
to understand by the
people who use and implement it, in particular, for State and Territory
Magistrates making family violence
explanatory memorandum noted that the amendments implement recommendations to
simplify and improve the operation of the provisions
in div 11 made by the
Family Law Council.
Obligations on federal family courts to
specify and explain any inconsistency
Section 68P
Family Law Act
applies if a parenting
order, recovery order or injunction made under that Act requires or authorises a
person to spend time with
a child and the order is inconsistent with an existing
protection order. In accordance with this section, the court must specify
order that it is inconsistent with an existing protection order; and explain to
the parties affected the effect and consequences
of the order, and the
court’s reasons for making an inconsistent order. As soon as practicable,
and no later than 14 days after
making the order, the court must provide a
copy to the parties affected, the registrar or other appropriate officer of the
that last made or varied the protection order, and the Commissioner for
Police and the relevant child protection officer. Failure
to comply with the
requirement, however, does not affect the validity of the court’s
8.106 In any event, if the terms of an order providing for a child to spend
time with a person are inconsistent with the terms of
an existing protection
order, the protection order is, to that extent, invalid. A court exercising
Family Law Act
declaration concerning the extent of any such
inconsistency.
8.107 The Kearney McKenzie Report commented on the obligation placed on
judicial officers to explain certain matters to parties, including
how the contact will take place. As noted in that report, these provisions do
not eliminate or reduce the incidence of
inconsistent orders made by a federal
family court. Rather, they provide procedures to be followed when the court
makes an inconsistent
The question therefore is: do the procedures eliminate or at least substantially
reduce the risk that the inconsistent order the
Court has made will expose
someone to violence?
8.108 Although the Kearney McKenzie Report stated that it was ‘clearly
desirable’ for people who are affected by a court
order to be given the
information required in accordance with this section, it went on to note
This information does not, however, reduce the risk that a woman who is losing
the protection of her family violence order will be
exposed to violence.
Information about the circumstances in which she can apply to have the contact
order changed or revoked may
effective requirement in [the provisions requiring federal family courts to give
information]
is the requirement that the judge or registrar include details of
how the contact should take place. … In cases where there
is violence
between the parties, detailed contact orders reduce the opportunities for
harassment of one party by another, for example,
by constant telephone calls to
make arrangements for
Powers of state and territory courts to
resolve inconsistency
8.109 Under
Family Law Act
, state and territory
courts making or varying protection orders may revive, vary, discharge or
suspend a parenting order, recovery
order or injunction made under the
that expressly or impliedly requires or authorises a person to spend
time with a child, or an undertaking or registered parenting
recognisance which has similar effect. However, this power is subject to
limitations. The court must also make or vary a
protection order (whether or not
by interim order). If the court proposes to revive, vary, discharge or suspend
an order or injunction,
the court must have material before it that was not
before the court that made the order or
injunction.
Section 68R(5)
sets out the ‘relevant considerations’
to which a state or territory court must have regard in reviving, varying,
discharging
or suspending a parenting order under the
Family Law Act
These include: the purposes of the division; whether contact with both parents
is in the best interests of the child concerned;
and—if varying,
discharging or suspending an order or injunction that, when made or granted, was
inconsistent with a protection
order—whether the court is satisfied that
it is appropriate to do so because a person has been exposed, or is likely to be
exposed, to family violence as a result of the operation of that order or
injunction. These considerations differ from
(situated in the
subdivision dealing with the best interests of the child), which impose
obligations on courts considering what orders
to make under
Act—that is, to achieve consistency with family violence orders and avoid
exposing people to the risk of family violence.
Regulation 12CC
Family Law Regulations
state or territory court to register a copy of the court’s decision to
revive, vary, discharge or suspend an order,
injunction or arrangement. Failure
to comply with the requirement does not affect the validity of the court’s
8.112 Prior to amendment of the
Family Law Act
in 2006, state and
territory magistrates were also empowered to
parenting orders in the
context of family violence proceedings. Reviews by the Family Law Council and
Kearney McKenzie & Associates
recommended that this power be
The Kearney McKenzie
Report commented on the importance of limiting the scope of the power to what is
necessary for resolving inconsistencies
between protection orders and existing
‘contact orders’:
It should not be possible for either party to use family violence proceedings to
get a contact order. This has happened. In Queensland,
for example, there were
several cases in the early days of [div 11]. In family violence proceedings
the focus should be on protecting
the woman and her children. Magistrates have
the power in any case to make contact orders by consent in the exercise of
Interim protection orders
8.113 Additional provisions in the
Family Law Act
relate to variations
of parenting orders in proceedings for interim protection orders or variations
of interim protection orders.
In such proceedings, any revival, variation or
suspension of a parenting order, recovery order or injunction ceases to have
when the interim order expires or 21 days after the interim order
was made, whichever is the
8.114 The power to revive, vary, discharge or suspend a parenting order,
recovery order or injunction under
Family Law Act
only be exercised by those courts that have been conferred jurisdiction under
Sections 69H
of that Act confer jurisdiction on the Family Court of
Australia; each Family Court of a state; the Supreme Court of the Northern
Territory; the Federal Magistrates Court; and, subject to certain conditions,
courts of summary jurisdiction of each state and territory.
Section 69N
limits the power of courts of summary jurisdiction to hear defended proceedings
for parenting orders, other than child
maintenance orders, without the consent
of all of the parties. If the parties do not consent, the court must transfer
the proceedings
to the Family Court of Australia or Western Australia, the
Supreme Court of the Northern Territory, or the Federal Magistrates Court.
8.115 The jurisdiction to revive, vary, discharge or suspend a parenting
order in Western Australia differs depending on whether the
order was made under
Family Law Act
Family Court Act 1997
8.116 Jurisdiction in relation to parenting orders made under the
is limited by the
(Children) Proclamation 2006
(Cth), issued in accordance with
Family Law Act
The Proclamation provides that proceedings within the Perth metropolitan area in
relation to matters arising under
Family Law Act
only be instituted in, or transferred to, the Magistrates Court of Western
Australia constituted by a Family Law Magistrate
of Western Australia
(Magistrates Court of Western Australia). The Proclamation does not apply to
proceedings under
Family Law Act
provisions relating to proceedings to make an interim (or interim variation of)
a family violence order’.
8.117 Principal Registrar Monaghan of the Family Court of Western Australia
has queried the effect of this Proclamation on Western
Australian magistrates
seeking to adjust parenting orders made under the
Family Law Act
Monaghan advised that the Proclamation could be interpreted to support three
potential outcomes. First, it may mean that all magistrates
sitting in the Perth
metropolitan region retain power under
Secondly, it may mean that
magistrates sitting in the Perth metropolitan region other than at the
Magistrates Court of Western Australia
retain power under
making an interim protection order. Thirdly, it may mean that magistrates
sitting in the Perth metropolitan region other
than at the Magistrates Court of
Western Australia have no power under
8.118 Monaghan noted that, prior to amendments to div 11 in 2006,
Family Law Act
set out provisions substantially
equivalent to those currently in
The pre-2006 version of the
excluded from its scope the power to adjust parenting orders under
Accordingly, Monaghan commented that:
It is quite possible that the Proclamation in 2006, although intending to remain
consistent with the previous Proclamation, did not
so do, by simply referring to
the same section, which had been
8.119 In comparison, magistrates—whether within or outside the Perth
metropolitan region—may adjust a parenting order
made under the
when hearing protection order proceedings.
Family Court Act
provides that if, under another written law, a court has
revive, vary, discharge or suspend a parenting order. This requirement is
satisfied by s 63(2) of the
Restraining Orders Act 1997
empowers a court hearing proceedings under the
Family Court
Family Law Act
to make a protection order against a party to
the proceedings or any other person who gives evidence in the proceedings.
8.120 This jurisdictional issue is made more confusing by s 65 of the
Restraining Orders Act
, which specifies that a court which does not have
conflicts with that parenting order.
State and territory
family violence legislation
8.121 Division 11 of the
Family Law Act
is supplemented by
relevant provisions in some state and territory family violence laws. The family
violence legislation in Victoria
and South Australia expressly refers to the
power of a magistrate to vary or suspend a parenting order when making or
varying a protection
Section 16(1)
Intervention Orders
(Prevention of Abuse) Act 2009
(SA) states:
An intervention order is invalid to the extent of any inconsistency with a
Family Law Act
order of a kind referred to in
section 68R
of the Commonwealth (but the Court may resolve the inconsistency by
exercising its power to revive, vary, discharge or suspend the
Family Law Act
order under that section).
8.122 This provision serves to bring the Commonwealth law to the attention of
judicial officers but it does not change the effect
of that law. Victorian
legislation goes further, by requiring, where a protection order will be
inconsistent with an existing
Family Law Act
order, that:
The court must, to the extent of its powers under
section 68R
, revive, vary, discharge or suspend the
Family Law Act
to the extent that it is inconsistent with the family violence intervention
8.123 In comparison, in Tasmania, the
Family Violence Act 2004
states only that final and interim protection orders ‘operate subject to
any Family Court
Options for
fostering use of div 11
8.124 The mechanisms for resolving inconsistencies between parenting orders
and protection orders in
div 11 of the
Family Law Act
have been the subject of previous reports and reviews, including by Kearney
McKenzie & Associates and the Family Law
Many of the
recommendations of these reviews were implemented through the 2006 amendments to
Family Law Act
. However, the operation of the division still appears
to favour the preservation of contact conditions set out in
parenting orders, notwithstanding that victims have sought protection
orders. In particular, the Commissions consider there is a
need to foster a
greater use of the
powers by state and territory courts.
Use in family courts
8.125 In consultations, the Commissions have heard concerns about the amount
of detail that family courts are required to provide
Family Law Act
. The detail required includes the extent of inconsistency
between a parenting order being issued by a court and an existing protection
order; the effect and consequences of the order; and the court’s reasons
for making an inconsistent order. This raises the
question whether the
requirement under
should be streamlined. The provision was strongly
endorsed, however, in the Kearney McKenzie
8.126 Another possible target for reform is the power under
court that has jurisdiction under
to issue a declaration of
inconsistency. These declarations are potentially valuable in providing clarity
and certainty when inconsistent
orders are made.
Use in state and territory
8.127 Previous reports have commented on how rarely state and territory
courts exercise their power to modify or revoke a parenting
order under the
Family Law Act
to give effect to a protection order made in family
violence proceedings. The Kearney McKenzie Report, for example, advised in 1998
that in some states no one, including experienced practitioners, had ever heard
of the power being used.
Possible reasons put forward included: lack of knowledge about the powers; lack
of awareness of the existence of a parenting order;
and reluctance to vary
orders made by a superior court. Consultations in this Inquiry, including
through the ALRC’s Family
Violence Online Forum, also suggested that many
state and territory magistrates courts remain reluctant to use their
The Commissions have
heard anecdotally, however, that Victorian magistrates are making greater use of
these powers.
8.128 One reform that could increase the visibility of the power of
magistrates to vary or suspend a parenting order is to repeat
that power in
state and territory family violence legislation. This approach has been taken,
for example, in
Intervention Orders (Prevention of Abuse)
(SA). A similar approach was recommended in an exploratory NSW
study on family violence and child contact
arrangements.
Alternatively,
family violence legislation could
the use of the s 68R
powers, as is the case in Victoria under
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
8.129 Judicial officers must both be aware of their powers to vary or revoke
inconsistent parenting orders and confident in using
those powers. The Kearney
McKenzie Report commented that:
Magistrates are wary of varying an order made by a superior court and do not
want to take responsibility for varying orders. They
may be suspicious of the
motives of the applicant and fear opening a can of worms. In any case,
applications for family violence
orders are processed very quickly and
magistrates have neither the time or the resources to consider children’s
the context of an application for a family violence
8.130 Legal practitioners may also be reluctant to advocate the use of the
powers under s 68R. The Kearney McKenzie Report noted that
practitioners were concerned that seeking a variation could feed into the
suspicions of some magistrates that women use protection
orders as a means of
frustrating contact.
consultations in this Inquiry, the Commissions have heard that legal
practitioners may be unwilling to invest time in seeking
a variation of
parenting orders because it is likely that the variation will be overridden in a
federal family court. Further, where
a variation is sought in proceedings for an
interim protection order, any variation will expire after 21 days.
8.131 Further, the powers under s 68R may be underused when applicants
are self-represented. Without legal representation or court
support, applicants
for a protection order are likely to be unaware of the possibility of applying
for a parenting order to be varied.
Even with this knowledge, an applicant may
be reluctant to do this for fear of angering the person against whom the order
made. The Kearney McKenzie Report recommended that states and
territories should produce a standard form for making an application
variation under
8.132 One approach that could be emulated in this regard is the
Information for Application for an Intervention Order
, published by the
Magistrates’ Court of
The form provides
applicants with a number of options about the conditions that they are seeking
in a family violence ‘intervention
order’, including a box to check
if they would like a
Family Law Act
order to be revived, varied or
8.133 The Family Law Council has recommended that the Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department should develop an
information sheet about
the interaction of protection orders and family law orders, which would be
provided with all family violence
8.134 In Western Australia, the uncertain application of the
of Courts of Summary Jurisdiction (Children) Proclamation
may be limiting
the use of powers under 68R. As noted above, this Proclamation does not
make clear whether magistrates courts in
metropolitan Perth other than the
Magistrates Court of Western Australia have the power to adjust parenting orders
made under the
Family Law Act
Commissions’ views
Practice in family courts
8.135 The Commissions are interested in stakeholder views about the
operation, in practice, of the requirement in
for family courts to provide information about the extent of
inconsistency between a parenting order and a pre-existing protection
the effect and consequences of making the inconsistent order. In particular, are
these requirements overly burdensome
on family courts or overly complex for
persons affected by inconsistent orders? The Commissions also seek information
on how frequently
regime for seeking declarations of
inconsistency between parenting orders and protection orders is being used.
Practice in state and territory courts
8.136 The Commissions have heard anecdotal evidence about the reluctance of
state and territory courts to use their power under
to modify or revoke a parenting order in order to give effect to an
inconsistent protection order. On the other hand, it has been
that—at least in Victoria—this power is now being used quite widely.
The Commissions are seeking further views
on whether state and territory courts
remain hesitant to use this power and, if so, what factors are contributing to
this reluctance.
8.137 Express reference to the powers under
in state and territory
family violence laws is likely to be a key means of highlighting the powers to
judicial officers hearing protection
order applications. At this stage, the
Commissions are of the view that the approach adopted in the South Australian
legislation—whereby
the provisions dealing with protection order
applications cross-refer to the
powers—are adequate to achieve
the desired result. However, the Commissions remain interested in views on
whether courts should
to make use of the full extent of their
powers to revive, vary, discharge or suspend the
Family Law Act
is the case in Victoria.
8.138 Legislative amendment alone may be insufficient to achieve significant
change. In particular, the Commissions consider that
there is an ongoing need to
provide additional tools and resources to judicial officers and others about the
capacity to revive,
vary, discharge or suspend
Family Law Act
First, the Australian Government—in conjunction with state and territory
governments, the National Judicial College
of Australia, the Judicial Commission
of NSW and the Judicial College of Victoria—should provide judicial
officers who are
responsible for hearing proceedings for protection orders with
training on the use of their div 11 powers. Training could include,
example, the relevant considerations to which courts should have regard when
hearing an application for variation or revocation
of a parenting
Secondly, training and
development programs should be supplemented by the development and publication
of a clear and accurate information
sheet about the use of
recommended in the Kearney McKenzie Report.
8.139 The Commissions are interested in whether there is a need for any
systemic changes to enable div 11 to operate effectively.
In particular,
would it be desirable for matters involving inconsistent orders to be referred
to a specialist court? For example,
the Family Violence Court Division
specialist court pilot at Heidelberg and Ballarat Magistrates Court hear matters
including parenting
and protection orders. The use of specialist courts could
overcome some of the current concerns about the unwillingness of state
territory judicial officers to intervene in family law issues on the basis of a
real or perceived lack of expertise. However,
potential disadvantages may
include, for example, delays in the system as applicants wait for proceedings to
commence in specialist
courts. Specialist courts are discussed further in
Chapter 20.
8.140 Support should also be provided to other persons involved in seeking
protection orders under state and territory family violence
legislation—that is, victims of violence and legal practitioners. As
regards victims, a clear option should be included in
application forms for
protection orders allowing an applicant to request that the court vary, suspend,
or discharge a parenting order.
The Commissions anticipate that such a reform
would be especially useful for self-represented parties, who may otherwise not
that such an option is available to them.
8.141 A more complex question is the support, if any, which should be
provided to legal practitioners. The Commissions are seeking
further information
to form the basis for any recommendations for reform in this regard. First, do
participants in the system encounter
reluctance on the part of lawyers to seek
applications for varying or revoking parenting orders? If so, is this because of
that such applications will be used against a client in future
parenting proceedings through the operation of the ‘friendly
provision? In that case, the recommendations in the Chisholm Review to amend the
friendly parent provisions in the
Family Law Act
may adequately deal with
the issue. Alternatively, reluctance may stem from an unwillingness to invest
time and resources, for example,
where a variation is being sought in interim
protection order proceedings which will expire after 21 days. The
Commissions are interested
in suggestions for reforms that could overcome any
such concerns.
8.142 In Western Australia, the
may be discouraging magistrates from
using their
powers in protection order proceedings. The intended
operation of the Proclamation is unclear. Accordingly, in the Commissions’
Proclamation
should be reviewed with a view to clarifying its intended
application to magistrates courts in Western Australia seeking to exercise
div 11 powers.
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth), which
requires a family court to specify any inconsistency between a family law order
and a family violence protection order,
working in practice? Are any reforms
necessary to improve the section’s operation?
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth), which
permits certain persons to apply for a declaration of inconsistency between a
family law order and a family violence
protection order, working in practice?
How frequently is this provision used?
Question 8–6
Do state and
territory courts exercise their power under
Family Law Act
(Cth) to revive, vary, discharge or suspend a parenting order to give
effect to a family violence protection
Proposal 8–8
Family violence legislation should refer to the
powers under
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) to revive, vary,
discharge or suspend a parenting order to give effect to a family violence
protection order by:
(a) referring to the powers—the South Australian model; or
(b) requiring the court to revive, vary, discharge or suspend an
inconsistent parenting order to the extent that it is inconsistent
with a family
violence protection order—the Victorian model.
Should proceedings for a protection order under family violence
legislation, where there is an inconsistent parenting order, be referred
specialist state and territory court?
Proposal 8–9
Application forms for protection orders under state
and territory family violence legislation should include a clear option for an
applicant to request a variation, suspension, or discharge of a current
parenting order.
Are legal practitioners reluctant to seek variation of parenting
orders in state and territory courts? If so, what factors contribute
reluctance?
Proposal 8–10
(Cth) should be reviewed to
clarify its intended application to magistrates courts in Western Australia
seeking to exercise their
powers under div 11 of the
Family Law Act
considerations in modifying or revoking a parenting order
8.143 Previous reviews have identified the potential for confusion about the
purposes of div 11 and the principles governing use of
Section 60CG
imposes an obligation on family courts
making parenting orders to achieve consistency with family violence orders and
avoid exposing
people to the risk of family violence. No such objective is
included in div 11.
8.144 The Kearney McKenzie Report expressed the view that this objective is
‘critical to achieving the purposes of Division
recommended it be repeated in that
The Family Law
Council did not agree, advising that this objective applies to courts making
parenting orders, where the paramount
consideration is the best interests of the
child. In contrast:
Division 11 deals with situations in which contact orders are being
considered in circumstances in which family violence orders are
in existence or
are about to be made. … [I]n such situations, while the court must have
regard to the best interests of a child,
such interests are
not the paramount
consideration
. The case for not applying the paramountcy principle in such
cases is that a child’s best interests must give way to the right
family members to be protected from violence or the threat of
8.145 Instead, the Family Law Council recommended that the considerations to
which a court must have regard in varying a parenting
order should be amended to
include the following:
In exercising its powers under this section, a court must have regard to the
need to protect all family members from family violence
and the threat of family
violence and, subject to that, to the child’s right to contact with both
parents, provided such contact
is not contrary to the best interests of the
8.146 Neither suggestion was taken up in the 2006 redraft of div 11.
However, a note to
was inserted cross-referring to the principles
for determining a child’s best
Commissions’ views
8.147 The Commissions are interested in stakeholder views on whether any
further reforms are necessary or desirable to the considerations
court must have regard in varying a parenting order. In particular, should the
Family Law Act
be amended to direct state and territory courts varying
parenting orders to give priority to the protection of family members against
violence and the threat of family violence over a child’s interest in
having contact with both parents?
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) be amended to direct
state and territory courts varying parenting orders to give priority to the
protection of family members
against violence and the threat of family violence
over a child’s interest in having contact with both
A power for state
and territory courts to make parenting orders?
8.148 The 2006 amendments to the
Family Law Act
repealed the power of
state and territory judicial officers to
parenting orders, on the
basis of recommendations of the Kearney McKenzie Report and the Family Law
Council. Consequently, new parenting
orders can only be issued in state and
territory protection order proceedings with consent and on an interim basis. In
this Inquiry,
some stakeholders have expressed the view that this power should
be reinstated, on the basis that it enables state and territory
courts to deal
comprehensively with protection order proceedings involving children. The
Commissions are interested in further stakeholder
views on this issue.
Family Law Act 1975
amended to empower state and territory courts to make parenting orders in those
circumstances in which they can revive,
vary, discharge or suspend such
Interim protection
8.149 Under
Family Law Act
, if, in proceedings to
make an interim family violence protection order, the court revives, varies or
suspends an order, injunction
or arrangement under
, that revival,
variation or suspension ceases to have effect at the earlier of: the time that
the interim order stops being in force;
and the end of the period of
21 days starting when the interim order was made. The Kearney McKenzie
Report recommended that this
period be extended to 90 days on the basis
that 21 days is insufficient time in which to obtain new orders from a
court exercising
family law jurisdiction:
When a magistrate varies etc a contact order in proceedings for an interim
family violence order, the maximum period the variation
etc can have effect is
21 days. In most States and Territories, an interim family violence order
may last considerably longer than
this. The power to make a variation etc from
which no appeal lies is the one power
gives to magistrates that they
do not already have. It is very important. In the circumstances where it is
likely to be used, where
by one parent against another, it can be used to provide a circuit breaker
the violence. It gives the victim a breathing space from the violence. It does
not have to be used to deny contact altogether;
in appropriate cases, the
variation might be new pick up and delivery arrangements. What it should do, but
does not, is give the
parties time to go to the Family Court to get new orders.
How long this takes varies from jurisdiction to jurisdiction, but is in
range of two to three months. The consultants acknowledge that three months is a
long time to bind someone by an order that cannot
be appealed from.
Nevertheless, the magistrate should have the power to make the variation for a
period that is long enough to enable
the parties to go to the Family
8.150 The Family Law Council did not agree with this recommendation on the
basis that a 90 day period during which no contact would
occur, and which
is not subject to appeal or scrutiny by a court exercising family law
Council further suggested
that—in circumstances where a magistrates court has varied or suspended a
an interim protection order—a court would be
unlikely to make a finding that a parenting order has been breached if a parent
withheld contact beyond the 21 day period while an application to vary or
discharge is awaiting
Commissions’ views
8.151 The Commissions are interested whether, as a matter of practice,
21 days is insufficient time for an applicant for an interim
violence protection order to seek new orders in a family court. If so, then the
Commissions are of the preliminary view that
variations to, or suspensions of,
parenting orders sought in interim protection order proceedings should remain in
force for the
minimum practical timeframe within which new family court orders
can be obtained.
8.152 A possible option for reform would be to set out in legislation the
policy position set out in the Family Law Council’s
advice—that is,
it should be a defence to breach of a parenting order where a parent withholds
a variation or suspension of a parenting order
made by a state or territory court is awaiting hearing in a family court.
Do applicants for interim protection orders who seek variation of
a parenting order have practical difficulties in obtaining new orders
court exercising family law jurisdiction within 21 days? If so, what would
be a realistic time within which such orders could
be obtained?
Should there be a defence to a breach of a parenting order where
a parent withholds contact beyond 21 days due to family violence
while a variation or suspension of a parenting order made by a state or
territory court is awaiting hearing in a federal
family court or the Family
Court of Western Australia?
Cooperative
8.153 Cooperative responses may provide another avenue for resolution of
inconsistent protection orders and parenting orders. This
is illustrated by a
protocol adopted in Tasmania in response to police concerns about victim safety
where protection orders operate
alongside family court orders. A protocol was
negotiated between the police, the Magistrates Court of Tasmania and the
Registry of the Family Court. Under the protocol, if a family court
violence, the
police prosecutor alerts the magistrate to this concern. The magistrate can
suspend the order for a period of days
and make a protection order. The
Magistrates Court file with the grounds for suspension is transferred to the
Family Court for review
of the contact order within the period of suspension. A
review of the
Family Violence Act 2004
(Tas) by Urbis recommended that
the effectiveness of this protocol be evaluated over
No such evaluation
appears to have taken place.
Commissions’ views
8.154 The protocol adopted in Tasmania has the potential to improve
significantly the safety of victims of violence and their children.
particularly pertinent in a jurisdiction such as Tasmania, where police-issued
protection orders remain in force for a lengthy
period of time
(12 months).
this model may indicate the potential for cooperative responses to play a
broader role where there are coexisting family
violence protection orders and
parenting orders. A necessary first step is an evaluation of the effectiveness
of the protocol in
Tasmania. If this evaluation is positive, other states and
territories should whether similar cooperative responses could contribute
their framework for issuing protection orders. The practicality of translating
the Tasmanian model may depend, among other factors,
on the size of the
still may be feasible, for example,
where they are implemented within discrete
geographic areas.
Proposal 8–11
The Tasmanian Government should undertake an
evaluation of the protocol negotiated between the Magistrates Court of Tasmania
Tasmanian Registry of the Family Court in relation to coexisting family
violence protection orders and parenting orders. On the basis
evaluation, other states and territories should consider whether adopting
cooperative models would be an effective strategy
to deal with coexisting
[back to top]
protection?
8.155 The previous section of this chapter considered strategies for
minimising and resolving inconsistency between parenting and
protection orders,
including through the provisions of div 11 of the
Family Law Act
However, consistency is not an end in and of itself. Orders may be consistent
but still expose parents and their children to violence
at the time of contact.
This has been recognised as a particular problem in the context of standard
exceptions to the prohibitions
in protection orders for court ordered contact.
As discussed below, interaction issues may also arise where no existing
order is in place at the time of parenting proceedings under the
Family Law Act
, and where protection orders are sought in state and
territory courts in the absence of a parenting order.
protection orders to parenting orders
8.156 As a matter of practice, many state and territory judicial officers
avoid inconsistency between parenting orders and state and
territory protection
orders by making protection orders subject to any contact ordered by a court. As
stated by the Family Law Council:
On a practical level, inconsistency between family violence orders and contact
orders is most often avoided, not through the operation
of Division 11, but
through the practice of making any contact ordered under the
an exception to prohibitions contained in a family violence
8.157 Where court-ordered contact with children is a standard exception,
unless the applicant crosses it out (and the magistrate agrees),
the exception
will apply as a matter of course. The Kearney McKenzie Report noted the gap that
this leaves in the framework for protecting
women and their children from family
Local courts may quite properly avoid making contact orders in the context of an
application for a family violence order; instead
they ‘refer the
issue’ to the Family Court by excepting contact ordered by the Family
Court from the prohibitions in
the family violence order. In effect, local
courts hand over the responsibility for ensuring contact does not expose women
and children
[to violence] to the Family Court. However, as any subsequent
Family Court contact order cannot be inconsistent with a family violence
that includes the exception, the protection offered by Division 11 …
[does] not apply. This leaves a gap in
protection.
8.158 The Report accepted that transferring responsibility for deciding on
how contact should take place to family courts may be an
appropriate response,
commenting that:
It was almost universally agreed in consultations that the Family Court is the
appropriate court to deal with issues involving children.
The Family Court has
the expertise and the resources to do this. However, if the Family Court is
satisfied that whatever order it
makes is not going to be inconsistent with the
family violence order and does not consider the violence issue, the outcome may
be that woman and children are left unprotected. This is particularly so at
the interim stage because the Court does not have a lot
of information. It is
not enough merely to eliminate inconsistency; contact orders must not expose
people to violence.
Options for reform
8.159 Commentators have suggested several approaches for dealing with the
potential gap in protection identified above. The Kearney
McKenzie Report
recommended that, in such cases, the court exercising family law jurisdiction
should look comprehensively at the
issue of violence, whether or not a parenting
order would be inconsistent with the protection
The 2004 Family Law
Council advice endorsed this recommendation. The Council suggested that a court
exercising jurisdiction under
Family Law Act
is already required to
consider the risk of violence in determining a child’s best interests.
Reform may simply require a greater
awareness of this
responsibility.
8.160 More radically, Miranda Kaye and colleagues have suggested that
consideration be given to changing the
Family Law Act
to include a
presumption that, once the court has made a finding of violence, it should not
make an order giving residence or unsupervised
violence against a child of the family or the other party to the proceedings
unless it is positively
satisfied that the child will be
This would be
consistent with the New Zealand approach—that is, once a court is
satisfied that a party to the proceedings has
used violence against the child or
the other party to the proceedings, then it must not make an order allowing the
violent party
the child’s safety.
Commissions’ views
8.161 Previous sections of this chapter have discussed strategies to improve
the manner in which family courts consider allegations
of violence and existing
family violence orders. Improving judicial consideration of family violence in
family law proceedings has
also been the subject of 2009 reports by Professor
Chisholm and the Family Law Council, the recommendations of which have been
the family law system on the basis of these reports should assist in addressing
concerns about inadequate protection for
victims of family violence in
circumstances where protection orders include an exception for court-ordered
these reforms, if implemented, will ensure that a family
court that makes a contact order involving a victim of family violence must
satisfy itself that the victim and any children will not be exposed to an
unacceptable risk of violence.
8.162 Another reform that may be beneficial would be a clear option for
applicants for protection orders to indicate their preference
court-ordered contact exception should not apply. Several applications for
protection orders already provide this option.
For example, the Tasmanian
application form for a protection order provides for applicants to ask the court
to impose a condition
prohibiting respondents from approaching them. Applicants
can choose whether to include an exception ‘for the purpose of contact
with the children named above as agreed or as ordered by a court of competent
Victoria, applicants can tick a box requesting that a
Family Law Act
order be revived, varied or
A federal family
court would still be able to issue a parenting order that is inconsistent with
the protection order, but this would
trigger the process set out in
8.163 Another option would involve the removal of court-ordered contact as a
standard exception from the scope of conduct prohibited
in a protection order.
The Commissions are interested in stakeholder views on any such policy,
including whether there are situations
that have not been considered by the
Commissions where an exception for court-ordered contact is necessary or
Proposal 8–12
Application forms for family violence protection
orders should include an option for applicants to indicate their preference that
there should be no exception in the protection order for contact required or
authorised by a parenting order.
Should contact required or authorised by a parenting order be
removed from the standard exceptions to prohibited conduct under state
territory protection orders?
No existing
protection order
8.164 Concerns have been raised about the potential for existing parenting
orders under the
Family Law Act
to limit an applicant’s capacity to
commence proceedings for a family violence protection order in a state or
territory court.
For example, in their study on family violence and child
participant who applied for a protection order for herself and her children:
The Local Court decided not to deal with the matter because [the victim’s]
ex-partner had started proceedings in the Family
Court. The magistrate commented
that the ‘Family Court was looking into it now’ and that her interim
Family Court orders
for supervised contact ‘covered the situation’.
… The magistrate went on to comment that, in any event, he
overrule the Family
8.165 Similar practices were reported by some members of the ALRC Family
Violence Online Forum, with one participant stating:
In some cases, we find that magistrates are unwilling to act in relation to
[protection orders] where there is an overlapping family
law matter, possibly
because there is a perception that everything will be dealt with under the
family law jurisdiction. This results
in a mechanism specifically designed to
protect the safety of women being made unavailable to women at a time when they
increased risk of family
Commissions’ views
8.166 The Commissions are concerned about the possibility that victims of
violence are being denied protection under state and territory
family violence
laws because of existing
Family Law Act
parenting orders, or the fact
that family law proceedings are on foot.
8.167 There is no legislative basis for a state or territory court to decline
to make a protection order simply because proceedings
have commenced for
parenting orders in a family court. As such, the most effective initiative is
likely to involve judicial education
and training. The Commissions propose that
the Australian Government—in conjunction with state and territory
governments, the
National Judicial College of Australia, the Judicial Commission
of NSW and the Judicial College of Victoria—should provide
training to
judicial officers in state and territory courts about the interaction between
their powers and responsibilities under
family violence legislation and the
Family Law Act
. This should include guidance on handling proceedings for
protection orders in the case of ongoing or pending
Family Law Act
proceedings.
No existing
parenting order
Imposition of parenting orders by state and
territory magistrates
8.168 Issues may arise where a party seeks to obtain a protection order under
state and territory family violence legislation where
children are involved but
no parenting order is in place. In particular, stakeholders have told the
Commissions about situations
where judicial officers require an applicant to
negotiate parenting plans as part of the process of making orders, often in
circumstances
where an applicant’s legal advisers are ill-prepared or
inexperienced in family law.
8.169 A participant in the
ALRC’s Family Violence Online Forum summarised the problems as follows:
1. There is usually not enough time (as we are assisting a number of clients at
the same time) to get proper instructions and give
complete advice to clients
who are usually distraught. It is not the right forum to take instructions.
2. Clients feel pressured to agree to something, leading to highly
inappropriate and/unsafe orders and plans being agreed to. …
happen with clients who may be unrepresented in regional courts.
3. Clients usually come to our service a few days after someone else has
prepared a parenting plan at the Magistrates Court to seek
to have those
parenting plans amended.
8.170 However, other applicants for protection orders may want a state or
territory court to make parenting orders at the same time,
considering this to
be a timely and cost-effective alternative to seeking orders in the family
Other possible inconsistencies
8.171 The conditions of protection orders may conflict with responsibilities
Family Law Act
other than those pursuant to ‘an order,
injunction or undertaking’ (which would enliven div 11). A key
example is an
obligation to exercise parental responsibility.
8.172 Parental responsibility is defined by
to mean ‘all the
duties, powers, responsibilities and authority which, by law, parents have in
relation to children’.
Each parent of a child who is under 18 has parental
responsibility for the child.
This position may be changed expressly in a parenting order made by the court,
or to the extent that it is necessary to give effect
to such an order. The
definition of ‘court’ in this section extends only to federal family
courts—there is no legislative
provision for parental responsibility to be
displaced by a protection order in a state or territory court.
8.173 Under
, when making a parenting order, federal family courts
must apply a presumption that it is in the best interests of the child for
or her parents to have ‘equal shared parental responsibility’. This
presumption does not apply if there are reasonable
grounds to believe that a
parent of the child has engaged in family violence or child
8.174 The potential for conflict between the obligation of parental
responsibility and family violence protection orders was considered
District Court of Queensland in
In that case,
McGill DCJ considered whether the former husband had breached a condition
to be ‘of good behaviour’ under
a temporary protection order by
going to the home of his former spouse and four children of their relationship.
This was at the time
that he would normally see the children, and the reason for
his visit was to collect two of the children who had refused on that
him. There were no existing court orders under the
Family Law Act
8.175 At first instance, the magistrate held that the mere fact of the
husband’s attendance at that address amounted to a failure
to be of good
behaviour towards the wife. McGill DCJ rejected that notion and
There was no order depriving him of parental responsibility in relation to those
children, and on the face of it he was entitled
to exercise it under the
authority of the
Family Law Act
. How he went about that of course might
be modified by the requirements of a protection order, but the mere fact that he
sought some
8.176 A significant factor in McGill DCJ’s ruling was the fact
that the protection order in place did not expressly prohibit
the husband from
going to the wife’s house. However, had there been a direct inconsistency
between a requirement for exercising
parental responsibility and the conditions
of a protection order, parental responsibility may still have taken precedence.
DCJ noted that, in the event of conflict between the operation of
parental responsibility under the
Family Law Act
and the making of a
protection order under the
Domestic and Family Violence Protection Act
(Qld), ‘the Commonwealth legislation of course has
8.177 Accordingly, a party who has sought a protection order in the absence
of a parenting order could be in a more difficult position
than that which
applies if parenting orders were in place:
If there had been parenting orders in place which altered, or limited the
parental responsibility of the parties in these matters
the District Court judge
may have still reached the same conclusions in relation to the domestic violence
(unless there were parenting
orders which completely removed or seriously
limited the parental responsibility of the appellants in each case), however the
in each case may have had more scope to take the matter back to a court
exercising jurisdiction under the
Family Law Act 1975
for a breach of the
8.178 A related question arises where protective conditions are set out in
laws other than state and territory family violence laws—for
example, as a
protective condition of bail. This issue was raised in
The respondent in this
case had successfully appealed against a finding in the Court of Petty Sessions
for breach of a restraining
order and breach of a bail undertaking not to
initiate contact with his wife. On appeal to the Supreme Court of Western
Malcolm CJ noted that the provisions of the
Bail Act 1982
(WA) dealing with protective bail conditions had not been prescribed for the
purposes of reg 12BB of the
Family Law Regulations
and, accordingly,
were not encompassed by
div 11 of the
Family Law Act
Under s 109 of the
Constitution
, a state law or court
order will be overridden, to the extent of any proper exercise of the
is inconsistent with the state law or
court order. However, Malcolm CJ noted the statement in
A law of the Commonwealth conferring jurisdiction upon a federal court in
general terms will, in the absence of a clear legislative
intent to the
contrary, ordinarily be construed as not intended to confer jurisdiction to make
an order authorising or requiring
the doing of an act which is specifically
prohibited and rendered criminal by the ordinary criminal law of the State or
in which the act would be
8.179 Malcolm CJ expressed the view that there is nothing in
Family Law Act
to indicate that the powers to confer a parenting
order are to be exercised other than in conformity with the general law of the
state, including the
Commissions’ views
Imposition of parenting orders by state and territory
magistrates
8.180 Reforms to
Family Law Act
in 2006 included
removal of the power for state and territory courts to make new parenting orders
in the course of protection order
proceedings. Accordingly, pursuant to
of that Act, courts of summary jurisdiction can only make parenting
orders with the consent of the parties. A key reason for repeal
of the power of
state and territory courts to make new parenting orders was the limited time and
expertise of magistrates courts
to perform this role. These barriers are
compounded where a party’s legal representative is ill-prepared to make
8.181 One option for reform would be to completely remove the power for
magistrates courts to make parenting orders, regardless of
the consent of the
parties. However, the Commissions are not convinced that such a step is
necessary or desirable. Participants in
the ALRC’s Family Violence Online
Forum noted that orders for contact can sometimes be a useful stopgap at the
time that a
state or territory court issues a protection order. In the
Commissions’ view, more effective change would result from a better
understanding by state and territory judicial officers of the extent and
limitations of their
Family Law Act
powers. In particular, the
Commissions propose a role for further training and development programs in this
Other possible inconsistencies
8.182 The Commissions are interested in hearing further views on the
potential for inconsistencies between rights and responsibilities
Family Law Act
and state and territory family violence laws other than
those covered by
div 11 of the
Family Law Act
particular, is there a need to expand the division’s operation to
encompass a broader range of potential inconsistencies?
As the law currently
stands, there is the potential for victims of violence to be in a worse position
where, for example, a party’s
by reference to obligations of parental responsibility in
Family Law Act
8.183 Division 11 could also be expanded to cover inconsistencies
between protective bail conditions and parenting orders under the
. A potential advantage of extending the operation of div 11 to
protective bail conditions could be, for example, enlivening the requirements
for courts to make declarations of inconsistency. Division 11
could also clarify in legislative form which requirements should take
where protective bail conditions conflict with parenting orders.
Proposal 8–13
The Australian Government—in conjunction
with state and territory governments, the National Judicial College of
Australia, the
Judicial Commission of NSW and the Judicial College of
Victoria—should provide ongoing training and development for judicial
officers in state and territory courts who hear proceedings for protection
orders on the exercise of their powers under the
Family Law Act 1975
Should the provisions for resolving inconsistent orders under
div 11 of the
Family Law Act
expanded to include inconsistencies resulting
(a) a party’s
rights or responsibilities under the
Family Law Act
other than those
pursuant to an order, injunction or undertaking, such as those deriving from the
concept of parental responsibility;
(b) laws other than family
violence laws prescribed in reg 12BB of the
Family Law Regulations
(Cth), such as protective bail
conditions?
‘Federal family courts’ is
used to refer to the Family Court of Australia (Family Court) and the Federal
Magistrates
Court. ‘Family courts’ also includes the Family Court of
Western Australia.
Australian Institute
of Family Studies,
Evaluation of the 2006 Family Law Reforms
The Terms of Reference are set out at
the front of this Consultation Paper.
Kearney McKenzie & Associates,
Review of Division 11
Family Law Council,
Division 11—Family Violence
R Chisholm,
Family Courts
Violence Review
(2009); Family Law Council,
Improving Responses to Family
Violence in the Family Law System: An Advice on the Intersection of Family
Violence and Family Law Issues
considers the interaction between the federal family courts and
child protection laws.
R Chisholm,
Family Courts Violence Review
(2009), apps 3,
Family Law Act 1975
R Chisholm,
Courts Violence Review
Family Law Act
definition of ‘parenting proceedings’ is set out in the following
section of this chapter.
(Cth) ch 16.
Magistrates Act 1999
R Chisholm,
Family Courts
Violence Review
(2009), 53.
Federal Magistrates Court Rules 2001
See R Chisholm,
Courts Violence Review
(2009), 261.
Magistrates Court Rules 2001
r 23.01A(2).
See R Chisholm,
Family Courts Violence Review
(2009), 270.
Family Court of
Protocol for the Division of Work between the Family Court of
Australia and the Federal Magistrates Court as at 29/01/2010
<www.familycourt.gov.au> at 22 February
R McClelland (Attorney-General),
Rudd Government to Reform Federal Courts
<www.attorneygeneral.gov.au> at 22 February
D Semple and Australian
Government Attorney-General’s Department,
Future Governance Options for
Federal Family Law Courts in Australia—Striking the Right Balance
See, eg, A Dickey,
(5th ed, 2007).
Family Law Act 1975
The definition of
‘family violence’ in the
Family Law Act
is discussed in
Family Law Act 1975
s 60CC(3)(j).
s 60CC(3)(k).
L Moloney and others,
Allegations of Family Violence and Child Abuse in Family Law Children’s
Proceedings: A Pre-reform Exploratory Study
(2007) Australian Institute of
Family Studies.
Australian Institute
of Family Studies,
Evaluation of the 2006 Family Law Reforms
(2009), 166.
Family Law Act
ss 60CC(3)(c)
respectively.
(5th ed, 2007), 335.
93–130, [19].
McKenzie & Associates,
Review of Division 11
See Australian Government
Domestic Violence Laws in Australia
(2009), [6.2.2].
For example,
Crimes (Domestic and Personal Violence) Act
(NSW), a court that makes a protection order must include as a
protected person in the order any child with whom that person has
relationship.
Family Law Act
Section 109 of the
Constitution
provides for Commonwealth legislation to take precedence over
inconsistent legislation in a state or territory when the Commonwealth
and territory legislation purport to cover the same field. The constitutional
framework is discussed in Ch 2.
Family Law Council,
Review of Division 11—Family Violence
Family Law Act 1975
Law Rules 2004
(Cth) apply to the Family Court pursuant to s 38 of the
Family Law Act 1975
Questions have been raised, however, about how often these forms are filed in
practice: see, eg, R Chisholm,
Family Courts Violence Review
Comment on ALRC Family Violence
Online Forum: Women’s Legal Service Providers
. Specific issues
relating to the interaction between child protection laws and the
are dealt with in Ch 14.
R Chisholm,
Family Courts Violence Review
(2009), [3.2],
Ibid, [3.4],
Family Law Council,
Improving Responses to Family Violence in the Family Law System: An Advice on
the Intersection of Family Violence and Family Law Issues
(2009), [10.1], Rec 13.
Ibid, [8.2.3], Rec 11.
Court of Australia,
Initiating Application (Family Law)
<www.familycourt.gov.au/> at 9 February
Strategies for informing
family courts about allegations of child abuse are discussed in
Family Court of Australia,
Form 4—Notice of Child Abuse or Family Violence
<www.familylawcourts.
gov.au> at 9 February 2010, pts G,
Family Law Council,
Responses to Family Violence in the Family Law System: An Advice on the
Intersection of Family Violence and Family Law Issues
R Chisholm,
Courts Violence Review
(2009), Recs 2.3,
South Australian
Domestic Violence Laws: Discussion and Options for Reform
(2007), 137.
Kearney McKenzie &
Associates,
Review of Division 11
(1998), 29. The Kearney McKenzie Report
predates the establishment of the Federal Magistrates Court, so contact orders
made by this
court are not listed as orders which should be included in the
South Australian
Domestic Violence Laws: Discussion and Options for Reform
(2007), 137.
Government,
The National Plan to Reduce Violence against
Women—Immediate Government Actions
R Chisholm,
Family Courts
Violence Review
(2009), [3.2], [3.4]; Family Law Council,
Responses to Family Violence in the Family Law System: An Advice on the
Intersection of Family Violence and Family Law Issues
(2009), Recs 11,
Domestic Violence and
Protection Orders Act 2008
(ACT) s 31, does include a requirement for
courts to consider any relevant family law contact order of which they are
Crimes (Domestic and
Personal Violence) Act 2007
Domestic and Family Violence
Protection Act 1989
(Qld) s 46B;
Restraining Orders Act 1997
Intervention Orders (Prevention of Abuse) Act 2009
Family Violence Act 2004
Domestic and
Family Violence Act 2007
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
As noted below, however,
the application for a ‘domestic violence’ order in the Magistrates
Court of the ACT does not
request information about existing family court
orders. The application only seeks information about pending and finalised
proceedings.
Domestic and Family
Violence Act 2007
s 90(2)(a)(i)
Domestic Violence and
Protection Orders Act 2008
Kearney McKenzie &
Associates,
Review of Division 11
(1998), 20.
This is the case, eg,
in NSW, Victoria, Queensland, WA and
Exceptions include the
applications for variation of protection orders in Victoria and
Proposal 5–4. For
example, police-issued protection orders in Tasmania operate for a 12-month
Similarly, application forms
should elicit information about any criminal proceedings or child protection
proceedings. The interaction
between the
Family Law Act
and criminal law
is not within the Terms of Reference for this
Family Law Act 1975
s 60CC(3)(j).
s 60CC(3)(k).
Explanatory
Memorandum,
Family Law Amendment (Shared Parental Responsibility) Bill 2005
(Cth), [67].
Family Court of
Best Practice Principles for Use in Parenting Disputes When Family
Violence or Abuse is Alleged
R Chisholm,
Courts Violence Review
(2009), 131–132.
(emphasis in original).
The definition
of ‘parenting order’ in this subsection includes ‘an order
until further order’.
and G Monahan,
Family Law in Australia
2009), [7.107].
Kearney McKenzie
& Associates,
Review of Division 11
(1998), [3.7].
See, eg, M Kaye, J
Stubbs and J Tolmie, ‘Domestic Violence and Child Contact
Arrangements’
Australian Journal of Family Law
(2003) FLC 93–172.
equivalent note is included in div 13.2 of the
Federal Magistrates Court
(Cth). At the time of writing, the Family Court of Western
Australia had not adopted the changes to the
Family Court Rules
March 2009.
R Chisholm,
Courts Violence Review
(2009), 86.
Family Court of Australia,
Best Practice Principles for Use in Parenting
Disputes When Family Violence or Abuse is Alleged
(2009), 12.
This rule does not apply
to proceedings in the Federal Magistrates
R Chisholm,
Family Courts
Violence Review
(2009), 88–89. The Review did not make a specific
recommendation to this effect on the basis of insufficient
information.
Family Court of
Application for Consent Orders Kit
<www.familycourt.gov.au> at 22 February 2010, ‘Important
R Chisholm,
Family Courts Violence Review
(2009), 270.
P Parkinson,
Correspondence
Crimes (Domestic and
Personal Violence) Act 2007
Domestic and Family
Violence Protection Act 1989
(Qld) s 46C;
Restraining Orders Act
(WA) s 12(1);
Family Violence Act 2004
Domestic Violence and Protection Orders Act 2008
ss 31(1), 47(1)(f), 71(1);
Domestic and Family Violence Act 2007
Violence Protection Act 2008
Intervention Orders
(Prevention of Abuse) Act 2009
Kearney McKenzie
& Associates,
Review of Division 11
(1998), [2.15].
See discussion in Chs 5 and 6 concerning protection
Family Law Regulations
(Cth) reg 12BB,
For a case where this
issue arose, see
[2004] WASCA
Explanatory Memorandum,
Law Amendment (Shared Parental Responsibility) Bill 2005
(Cth), 149.
Family Law Act
McKenzie & Associates,
Review of Division 11
Family Law Act
Family Law Council,
Review of Division 11—Family Violence
(2004), Rec 4; Kearney
McKenzie & Associates,
Review of Division 11
Kearney McKenzie &
Associates,
Review of Division 11
(1998), [4.9].
Family Law Act
provides for the Governor-General
to issue a proclamation to prevent proceedings under
Family Law Act
from being instituted in, or transferred to, a court of
summary jurisdiction in a state or
D Monaghan,
‘Restraining Orders v Existing Parenting Orders’ (Paper presented at
Western Australian Magistrates Conference,
Perth, November
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
Family Violence Act
McKenzie & Associates,
Review of Division 11
(1998); Family Law
Review of Division 11—Family Violence
Kearney McKenzie &
Associates,
Review of Division 11
(1998), [4.9].
Comment on ALRC
Family Violence Online Forum: Women’s Legal Service Providers
issue was also noted by the Australian Government Solicitor in its 2008 report
on domestic violence laws: Australian Government
Domestic Violence
Laws in Australia
[6.2.40]–[6.2.42].
Stubbs and J Tolmie, ‘Domestic Violence and Child Contact
Arrangements’
Australian Journal of Family Law
Kearney McKenzie
& Associates,
Review of Division 11
(1998), 19.
Magistrates’
Court of Victoria,
Information for Application for an Intervention Order
(2009) <www.magistratescourt.vic.gov.au> at 2 February
Family Law Council,
Improving Responses to Family Violence in the Family Law System: An Advice on
the Intersection of Family Violence and Family Law Issues
Kearney McKenzie & Associates,
Review of Division 11
(1998), 23.
Review of Division 11—Family Violence
(emphasis in original).
Kearney McKenzie &
Associates,
Review of Division 11
(1998), 24.
Review of Division 11—Family Violence
(2004), [41]–[45].
(for the Tasmanian Government Department of Justice),
Review of the
Violence Act 2004
(2008), [3.5].
Police-issued
protection orders are discussed in Ch 5 where the Commissions propose that
the period of operation of such orders
Family Law Council,
Review of Division 11—Family Violence
Kearney McKenzie
& Associates,
Review of Division 11
(1998), 21–22. The Family
Law Council agreed with this conclusion: Family Law Council,
Division 11—Family Violence
Kearney McKenzie
& Associates,
Review of Division 11
(1998), 16.
Family Law Council,
Review of Division 11—Family Violence
M Kaye, J Stubbs and J
Tolmie, ‘Domestic Violence and Child Contact Arrangements’
Australian Journal of Family Law
Care of Children Act
Family Courts Violence Review
(2009); Family Law Council,
Improving Responses to Family Violence in the Family Law System: An Advice on
the Intersection of Family Violence and Family Law Issues
Magistrates Court of
Application for a Family Violence Order
<www.magistratescourt.t
as.gov.au/divisions/family_violence/forms> at 29 March
Magistrates’ Court of
Information for Application for an Intervention Order
<www.magistratescourt.vic.gov.au> at 2 February
M Kaye, J Stubbs and J
Tolmie, ‘Domestic Violence and Child Contact Arrangements’
Australian Journal of Family Law
, 98. See also Kearney McKenzie
& Associates,
Review of Division 11
(1998), 15.
Comment on ALRC
Family Violence Online Forum: Women’s Legal Service
Proposal 8–13.
Comment on ALRC Family Violence Online Forum: Women’s Legal Service
Ibid. As noted
above, these orders can only be made on an interim basis and with consent of the
Family Law Act 1975
[2004] QDC 477.
Ibid, [15].
Ibid, [14].
‘Interaction and Conflict between
Family Law Act 1975
and Domestic and
Family Violence Protection Act 1989 (Qld), in Light of D v G and Bottoms v
Queensland Lawyer
[2004] WASCA 239.
[1994] HCA 20
(1994) 181 CLR 583
ALRC CP1 Family Violence � Improving Legal Frameworks
9. Family Violence Legislation and
the Family Law Act: Other Family Law Act Orders
Introduction
Protection orders and injunctive relief
Injunctions available under the
Family Law Act
Family Law Act
injunctions in practice
Interaction with protection orders
Injunctions to relieve a party to a marriage from rendering conjugal rights
Financial proceedings under the
Family Law Act
Family violence as a factor in property disputes
Property conditions in protection orders
Relocation and recovery orders
Relocation orders
Recovery orders
9. Family Violence Legislation and
Family Law Act:
Family Law Act
[back to top]
Introduction
9.1 In Chapter 8, the Commissions consider the interaction between protection
orders under state and territory family violence legislation
and parenting
orders made under the
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth). This chapter considers a
number of different issues that arise from the interaction between protection
orders and orders that
may be made under the
Family Law Act
parenting orders.
9.2 First, this chapter examines the sections of the
Family Law Act
that allow a family court to grant an injunction for the personal protection
of a victim of family violence, and considers how such
injunctions interact with
the similar jurisdiction of state and territory courts to make protection
orders. Secondly, the chapter
considers ways in which family violence is
relevant to financial proceedings under the
Family Law Act
proceedings relating to property and spousal maintenance—and how
conditions in protection orders regarding the use of
property relate to final
property settlements by a family court. Finally, the Commissions consider the
relationship between protection
orders under state and territory family violence
legislation and family law disputes about the relocation of a family member or
recovery of a child.
[back to top]
Protection orders and
injunctive relief
9.3 This section examines the interaction between protection orders made
under state and territory family violence legislation and
injunctions granted
Family Law Act
. The section considers three particular
the general preference of victims of family violence to seek
protection orders under state and territory family violence legislation
Family Law Act
injunctions, and ways in which
Family Law Act
injunctions may be reformed to promote their use;
the potential for inconsistencies between protection orders under
state and territory family violence legislation and
Family Law Act
injunctions; and
the appropriateness of the injunction to relieve a party to a
marriage from ‘any obligation to perform marital services or
conjugal rights’ currently available under the
Injunctions
available under the
Family Law Act
9.4 An injunction is a kind of order made by a court that requires a person
to do, or refrain from doing, a particular act. Courts
exercising jurisdiction
Family Law Act
that is, the Family Court, Federal
Magistrates Court and local state and territory magistrates
—can grant injunctions
for a variety of purposes. The power to grant injunctions is contained in two
separate sections of the
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth)—one in relation
to the courts’ child welfare jurisdiction, and the other in the
courts’ jurisdiction in relation
to matrimonial causes.
Injunctions to protect the welfare of a
Section 68B
Family Law Act
permits a court to grant an
injunction to protect the welfare of a child. The injunction may be:
for the personal protection of the child, the child’s parent,
a person with a parenting order in respect of the child, or a
person who has
parental responsibility for the
to restrain a person from entering or remaining in the place of
residence, employment or education or other specified area of the
child’s parent, a person with a parenting order in respect of the child,
or a person who has parental responsibility
9.6 If, during
an application under
Family Law Act
, there is an allegation
of child abuse or family violence, or the risk of such conduct, the court must
consider whether a
injunction should be
Injunctions to protect a party to a marriage
Section 114
Family Law Act
permits a court to grant an
injunction in circumstances arising out of the marital relationship, either in
separate proceedings or
in family law proceedings already before the
An injunction may be
for the personal protection of a party to the marriage;
to restrain a party to the marriage from entering or remaining in
the matrimonial home or the other party’s residence or place
for the protection of the marital relationship;
in relation to the property of a party to the marriage; or
in relation to the use or occupancy of the matrimonial
9.8 A victim of
family violence is most likely to seek an injunction for personal protection.
Family Law Act
does not define ‘personal protection’, but
courts have interpreted the term to include protection from physical harm
well as protection of a person’s wellbeing and freedom from interference
and harassment.
A victim of family
violence may also seek an order to exclude a person from particular places.
9.9 In addition,
permits a court to make an order
‘relieving a party to a marriage from any obligation to perform marital
services or render
conjugal rights’.
9.10 In relation to both
injunctions, the court has a
broad discretion to grant an injunction ‘in any case in which it appears
to the court to be just
or convenient to do so’ and upon such terms and
conditions as the court considers
appropriate.
Family Law Act
injunctions protect a limited range of people.
Section 114
injunctions are only available to protect people who are, or
have been, married. A
injunction can protect a child, the
child’s parent, a person with parental responsibility for the child or a
person with a
parenting order in respect of the child. Because the
constitutional foundation of the
Family Law Act
lies in the
Commonwealth’s power with respect to marriage, divorce and matrimonial
Family Law Act
injunctions are not available to protect childless
unmarried couples, childless same sex couples, siblings or other family
Enforcement
Family Law Act
injunction is breached, it is up to the
person protected by the injunction to file an application to seek an order from
regarding the
contravention.
The application
must be accompanied by an affidavit setting out the facts, and a filing fee
A similar process is
required regarding allegations of
Sections 68C
provide an automatic power of arrest where a
person breaches an injunction for personal protection. A police officer may
person if the officer believes on reasonable grounds that the person
has breached the injunction by causing, or threatening to cause,
bodily harm to
the person protected by the injunction, or has harassed, molested or stalked
that person.
There is no power
of arrest in relation to injunctions for matters other than personal
protection.
9.14 Once arrested, the person must be brought before the court that granted
the injunction, or another court having jurisdiction
under the Act, by close of
business of the day following the arrest (as long as it is not a weekend or
public holiday). The police
officer making the arrest must take all reasonable
steps to ensure that the person who obtained the injunction is aware of both the
arrest and the court hearing in relation to the breach of the
injunction.
9.15 If a person makes an application to seek an order from the court
regarding the contravention, the court will hear the application
strict time period. However, if an application is not made in time, the person
arrested must be released.
Consequences of contravention
Family Law Act
attaches different consequences to a failure
to comply with an injunction that affects a child, and one that does not.
Contravention of an injunction that affects a child
9.17 Division 13A of
Family Law Act
applies when a
person fails to comply with a
injunction, or a
in so far as it is for the protection of a
9.18 Where a person contravenes an order affecting a child without reasonable
the court may make a
variety of orders depending on the seriousness of the contravention,
a new parenting order, compensation order or order requiring the
person to attend a post-separation parenting program, for less serious
contraventions;
a bond, compensation, community service order, fine or a sentence of
imprisonment for a maximum term of 12 months for more serious
contraventions.
Contravention of an injunction that is not for the protection
9.19 A court may impose a range of sanctions on a person who, without
reasonable excuse,
contravenes a
injunction that is not for the protection of a child, including the
imposition of a bond, fine or term of
imprisonment.
imprisonment may only be imposed if the contravention was intentional or
and is limited to a
maximum of 12 months.
Alternative sentencing options, such as a community service order, are also
9.20 Where a contempt of court does not constitute a contravention of an
order, or does constitute a contravention and ‘involves
challenge to the authority of the court’, the court may punish the
contempt by imposing a sentence of imprisonment
or a fine or
Family Law Act
injunctions in practice
9.21 Many more victims of family violence seek protection orders under state
and territory family violence legislation than seek
Family Law Act
injunctions.
Alexander has noted that since the introduction of state and territory
legislation aimed specifically at family violence,
the number of family violence
injunctions sought in the Family Court has fallen
dramatically.
9.22 Associate Professor Lisa Young and Federal Magistrate Geoff Monahan have
identified two reasons why victims of family violence
generally seek protection
orders rather than
Family Law Act
injunctions—first, the cost and
complexity of the application proceedings, and secondly, the inadequacy of
enforcement mechanisms
9.23 Participants in the ALRC Family Violence Online Forum suggested similar
reasons why victims of family violence generally preferred
to seek a protection
order under state and territory family violence legislation. One participant
stated that:
I would generally advise clients to seek the protection of an AVO [Apprehended
Violence Order] over and above family law restraining
orders. In NSW they come
with the threat of a criminal charge for contravening an AVO and this often has
the desired effect in reducing
or stopping the offending behaviour. The process
of going to the Family Court for contravention of orders is longer and more
and does not have the implications for the person breaching that an
9.24 A principal point of difference is that breach of a protection order
under state or territory family violence legislation is
a criminal offence. This
point was made by another participant, who considered that the injunctions
available under the
Family Law Act
were not backed up by adequate
enforcement:
In our practice we do not really seek protection within the family law
teeth in that
enforcement mechanisms are quite weak or difficult to
Cost and complexity of
proceedings
9.25 The processes for seeking a protection order under state and territory
family violence legislation are generally quicker and
cheaper than an
application for an injunction under the
Family Law Act
9.26 For example, in Victoria, a person seeking a protection order under the
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
(Vic) will usually complete an
Information Form for Application for Intervention Order
, setting out the
background and the orders
The form is then given
to a registrar who prepares an application and warrant (for urgent matters where
there is immediate concern
for the person’s safety, or a criminal offence
is involved) or application and summons (if the matter is not urgent) and lists
the hearing before a magistrate. There is no filing fee for the
application.
9.27 It is also possible for the Victorian police to apply for a protection
order for a victim of family violence. The
Code of Practice for the
Investigation of Family Violence
, issued by Victoria Police, requires police
to make an application for a protection order wherever the safety, welfare or
of a family member appears to be endangered by
9.28 In contrast, the process to obtain a
Family Law Act
injunction is
more complex and time consuming. To apply for an injunction under the
an applicant must file an Initiating Application either in the
Family Court, the Federal Magistrates Court or a state or territory
magistrates
court. Where an application for an injunction is urgent, interim or
interlocutory orders—rather than final orders—are
usually sought. In
such cases, the application must be accompanied by an affidavit setting out the
details of the marriage or relationship,
any children and the facts relied on
for the injunction.
applicant must pay a filing fee, unless the fee is waived by the court in
specific circumstances. The applicant may also need
to file a Notice of Child
Abuse or Family Violence (Form 4) setting out the alleged family violence
or risk of family violence.
9.29 The respondent must be given notice of the hearing by being served a
copy of the application and affidavit. Police do not assist
in serving documents
in relation to
Family Law Act
injunctions because they are classified as
a civil matter. Accordingly, the applicant will generally need to use a
commercial process
server to effect
In contrast, state and
territory family violence legislation permits or requires police to serve
applications for a protection order
on a respondent in certain circumstances, or
protocols are in place to ensure that police can serve
applications.
Enforcement
9.30 Breach of a protection order under state or territory family violence
legislation is a criminal offence, attracting a police
response and invoking the
criminal justice system.
contrast, breach of a
Family Law Act
injunction must be followed up by
the person protected by the injunction as a private matter under the
9.31 While injunctions for personal protection attach an automatic power of
arrest and allow for police involvement, it has been suggested
that state and
territory police are reluctant to exercise their power of arrest under the
Family Law Act
or do not always understand their role in this
9.32 In the report,
Equality Before the Law
(ALRC 69), the ALRC
reiterated a recommendation it made in an earlier inquiry into contempt that a
wilful breach of an order for
personal protection should be a criminal
The ALRC considered
that making breach a criminal offence had several advantages:
It helps to reinforce the message that the violence is not merely a civil matter
between the parties; it brings police into the matter;
and it relieves the woman
from having to instigate proceedings against the man, a matter which may be both
financially and emotionally
costly. It also brings the Family Court proceedings
in line with State and Territory restraining order proceedings which police may
Other differences
9.33 Other advantages of state and territory protection orders over
injunctions include:
protection orders can protect a wider range of family members, such
as siblings, extended family and other members of a household;
a wider range of people can initiate proceedings for a protection
order, including the police;
state and territory family violence Acts specify a wide range of
conditions or prohibitions that can be included in a protection
police are more familiar with procedures under state and territory
family violence
legislation.
injunction under the
Family Law Act
may be the preferred option where
there are other family law proceedings on foot, or where the applicant for the
injunction also
seeks a parenting
Family Law Act
injunctions also have the advantage of being enforceable throughout Australia,
rather than just in a particular state or territory.
In contrast, before a
protection order made in one jurisdiction will be enforced in another state or
territory, state and territory
family violence legislation will generally
require that the order is registered and recognised in that state or
Commissions’ views
9.35 The Commissions recognise that one reason why
Family Law Act
injunctions are not sought as often as protection orders under state and
territory family violence legislation is the limited jurisdiction
family courts—not every victim of family violence is married, or has a
child. In contrast, a victim of family violence
with standing to seek an
injunction for personal protection under the
Family Law Act
would almost
certainly also be able to seek a protection order under state or territory
family violence legislation.
9.36 Despite this, the Commissions consider that
Family Law Act
injunctions perform an important role in the
Family Law Act
, and should
continue to be available to provide protection to victims of family violence who
fall within the jurisdiction of the
family courts, particularly where other
family law proceedings are anticipated or on foot. It is desirable that victims
violence are able to resolve their personal protection, parenting and
property issues in the one court, thereby minimising victims’
exposure to
multiple proceedings in different jurisdictions, and avoiding personal and
financial costs associated with reiterating
the same facts before different
courts. Therefore, the Commissions consider that reforms should make
injunctions more accessible and effective.
9.37 The Commissions consider that there are two areas in which the operation
Family Law Act
injunctions may be improved.
Procedural issues
9.38 Some benefits of the procedures for seeking a protection order under
state or territory family violence legislation—as
opposed to a
injunction—are the assistance of the police and court
registries in bringing and making the application. However, the involvement
the police may not be appropriate in all family law matters, for example, where
an application is brought for an injunction for
personal protection as well as
in relation to the property of a party to the marriage or the use of the
matrimonial home.
9.39 The Commissions are interested in hearing about ways in which the
procedures for obtaining a
Family Law Act
injunction may be improved so
that they are less complex and more effective. This may include removing filing
fees, or permitting
an application for an injunction for personal protection
without an affidavit.
9.40 The Commissions are aware that
injunctions may be sought for
purposes other than the personal protection of a victim of family violence. The
Commissions are therefore
interested in whether there should be different
procedures depending on whether a person is seeking an injunction for personal
from family violence or an injunction that does not relate to family
violence, for example, regarding the use of property.
Enforcement
9.41 The Commissions’ preliminary view is that the contravention of a
Family Law Act
injunction for personal protection should be a criminal
offence, consistent with the position regarding breach of protection orders
under state or territory legislation. Importantly, this would clearly remove the
onus from the victim of the violence to bring the
application for contravention
of the injunction. It would relieve the victim of having to undertake costly
family law proceedings
to enforce the injunction and reinforce the message that
family violence is not a private matter, but a criminal offence of public
9.42 Concerns have been expressed that police are currently reluctant to
exercise the power of arrest attached to
Family Law Act
injunctions for
personal protection, in part because family law matters are characterised as
private, civil proceedings. Making breach
Family Law Act
for personal protection a criminal offence will provide a clear basis for the
police to act in the face of actual or threatened
violence or harassment.
In order to improve the accessibility of injunctions for personal
protection under the
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) to victims of family
violence, should the
Family Law Act
provide separate procedures in
relation to injunctions for personal protection and other family law injunctions
available under s
114 of the Act? If so, what procedures would be
appropriate?
Proposal 9–1
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) should be
amended to provide that a wilful breach of an injunction for personal protection
is a criminal offence, as recommended by the ALRC in
Equality Before the Law
Interaction
with protection orders
9.43 Injunctions granted under
may operate alongside protection orders made under state and territory
family violence legislation. This gives rise to the potential
inconsistencies between orders. This section outlines the rules contained in the
Family Law Act
to avoid and address such inconsistencies.
Section 114AB
Family Law Act
provides that, if a person
has sought, or is seeking, a protection order under prescribed state or
territory family violence laws,
he or she is not entitled to seek, in addition, an injunction under the
Family Law Act
, unless the protection order proceedings have lapsed, been
discontinued or dismissed, or the orders are no longer in
9.45 Conversely, there is no bar to a person who is seeking, or has obtained,
Family Law Act
injunction to apply for a protection order under state
or territory family violence legislation. Neither is there a formal prohibition
on one party seeking a
Family Law Act
injunction even though a related
party has already obtained a protection order under state or territory family
violence legislation.
The effect is that ‘the prohibition under
only extends to the same party using both procedures and then only
when the State or Territory procedure has been used
9.46 Orders obtained in different jurisdictions may be inconsistent. As a
general principle of constitutional law, orders made under
the federal
prevail over an inconsistent order made under a state or territory
Family Law Act
contains specific provisions to deal with such inconsistencies, discussed
below, which differ depending on whether the injunction
expressly or impliedly
requires or authorises a person to spend time with a child, or does not involve
Injunctions that relate to a
Making a protection order that is inconsistent with a current
9.47 A person who is seeking, or who has obtained, a
Family Law Act
injunction may also seek a protection order under state or territory family
violence legislation. The
Family Law Act
provides that a protection order
made under state or territory family violence legislation that is inconsistent
Family Law Act
injunction that expressly or impliedly requires or
authorises a person to spend time with a child, is invalid to the extent of the
inconsistency.
9.48 Pursuant to
Family Law Act
a court with
Family Law Act
may revive, vary,
discharge or suspend an injunction made under
to the extent
that that it expressly or impliedly requires or authorises a person to spend
time with a child.
A court may
only do so if it also makes or varies a protection order under state or
territory family violence legislation and there
is material before the court
that was not before the court that made that original
Family Law Act
injunction.
If, when the
injunction was granted, it was inconsistent with an
existing protection order, the court must be satisfied that it is appropriate
revive, vary, discharge or suspend the injunction because the person has been
exposed, or is likely to be exposed, to family violence
as a result of the
operation of that
injunction.
9.49 Some state and territory family violence legislation directs a court,
when making a protection order, to consider the terms of
injunctions in relation to the
proceedings.
Family Law Act
injunction that is inconsistent with a current
protection order
Family Law Act
does not prohibit a party to a marriage
seeking an injunction under the
Family Law Act
even though the other
party to the marriage has already obtained a protection order under state or
territory legislation.
9.51 Where a court grants a
Family Law Act
injunction that expressly
or impliedly requires or authorises a person to spend time with a child, that is
inconsistent with a protection
order made under state or territory family
violence legislation, it must specify that the injunction is inconsistent with
the protection
order and explain why. The court must also explain the terms of
the injunction and consequences of breaching it to the applicant,
the persons
protected by the injunction and the persons to whom the injunction is
Within 14 days of
granting the injunction, the court must distribute copies to relevant bodies,
including the state or territory
court that issued the protection order, and the
head of the police force and a child welfare officer in the relevant state or
Injunctions that do not relate to a
Family Law Act
does not expressly deal with inconsistency
injunction that does not relate to a child and a protection
order under state or territory family violence legislation. The Australian
Government Solicitor notes that:
There is potential for such an order to conflict with a State/Territory
protection order. An example might be an injunction granted
the personal protection of a party to a marriage, where there are no children.
Such an injunction might prevent one party from
entering the marital home, when
that person is allowed to do so under the terms of a State/Territory protection
order. Neither order
expressly or impliedly authorises or requires a person to
have contact with a child, so
does not apply; nevertheless, the two
orders are clearly inconsistent.
Section 114AB
provides that the injunctions available under
Family Law Act
are ‘not intended to exclude or limit
the operation’ of prescribed state or territory family violence
legislation.
If an injunction
is capable of operating concurrently with the
protection order, both orders can operate together. However, where orders cannot
concurrently, principles of constitutional law require that an order
made pursuant to the
Family Law Act
, as Commonwealth legislation,
prevails over an order made under a state or territory law, to the extent that
the orders are inconsistent.
Practical issues
9.54 In her book,
Domestic Violence in Australia: The Legal Response,
Alexander noted some problems arising from the interaction between the
protection order and
Family Law Act
injunction regimes. In one case, the
Family Court refused to deal with an application for interim custody, a
restraining order and
a sole use and occupancy order following a violent
incident because the applicant had already obtained a protection order. In
case, a victim of family violence had to arrange to have a state
protection order withdrawn in order to obtain a
Family Law Act
injunction. In the time between withdrawing the protection order and obtaining
the injunction, the victim was not protected and her
husband threatened
9.55 As noted in Chapter 8, the Commissions have heard during the course
of this Inquiry that some state and territory magistrates
courts are reluctant
to use their powers under
Family Law Act
vary, discharge or suspend parenting orders made by a family court. It may be
that magistrates courts are similarly reluctant
vary, discharge or suspend a
Family Law Act
injunction.
Commissions’ views
9.56 The Commissions note that victims of family violence tend to seek
protection orders under state and territory family violence
legislation
in preference to
Family Law Act
injunctions, primarily because
protection orders can be obtained quickly and can be enforced by the police.
9.57 Improving the effectiveness of
Family Law Act
injunctions in
protecting victims of family violence may lead, however, to more use of the
injunction provisions and increase the
potential for inconsistency between state
and territory protection orders and
Family Law Act
injunctions.
9.58 Therefore, in the Commissions’ view, there is a need to assess how
Family Law Act
injunctions and protection orders under state and
territory family violence legislation operate in practice and consider whether
reforms are necessary to complement the protective elements of the
The Commissions seek stakeholder views on these issues.
Section 114AB
9.59 A person who has sought or obtained a protection order under state or
territory legislation is not prohibited from seeking a
Family Law Act
injunction in relation to family law matters not able to be dealt with by a
protection order. This is because
Family Law Act
prohibits applications for an injunction ‘in respect of a matter’
for which a protection order has been sought or
9.60 While some protection orders under state and territory family violence
legislation may affect property
protection orders can only
deal with property as it relates to protecting a person from family violence.
The Commissions note that
injunctions are available to address family
law issues unrelated to family violence—such as an injunction to prevent a
to a marriage from disposing of certain property pending final orders
relating to a property settlement.
9.61 In the preceding section, the Commissions ask whether the
should provide for separate procedures relating to injunctions for
personal protection and other family law injunctions available
under s 114
of the Act.
Such separation may
clarify, if such clarification is required, that the fact that a person has
sought a protection order under state
or territory family violence legislation
should not preclude them from also seeking other
Family Law Act
injunctions, for example in relation to the sale of property.
9.62 There is no prohibition on a person who has, or is seeking, a
injunction for personal protection (as opposed to other family law
matters, for example, an injunction relating to the use of property)
seeking a protection order from a state or territory court. This appears to be
anomalous, and has the potential to result
in the same matter being brought
before two different courts and the making of inconsistent orders.
9.63 However, as protection orders under state and territory family violence
legislation cover a broader range of people, and may
be directed to family
members whose experience of family violence arises outside of a marital
relationship, this arrangement may
be necessary to adequately protect victims of
family violence. State and territory family violence legislation also lists a
of specific conditions that can form part of a protection order,
including prohibiting a person from attempting to locate the victim,
another person to engage in behaviour prohibited by the protection order, or
possessing firearms or a prohibited
9.64 In order to determine whether inconsistent orders arise in practice, the
Commissions are interested in comment on whether there
are any cases in which a
person, who has obtained a
Family Law Act
injunction for personal
protection, also needed to seek additional protection under state or territory
family violence legislation.
9.65 The Commissions also note that precluding a person from bringing
proceedings for a protection order if he or she has already
injunction, or vice versa, does not eliminate the potential for
inconsistency between orders. This is because a respondent, or other
affected by the order, would still be able to seek an injunction or protection
order in the alternative jurisdiction to which
the initial order was made.
In practice, how often does a person who has obtained an
injunction under the
Family Law Act
(Cth) subsequently need
to seek additional protection under state or territory family violence
legislation?
Question 9–3
Should a person who has sought or
obtained an injunction for personal protection under the
Family Law Act
(Cth) also be able to seek a protection order under state or
territory family violence
legislation?
Inconsistencies between
Family Law Act
injunctions and protection
9.66 Consultations with stakeholders revealed far more concern about the
potential for, and effect of, inconsistencies between parenting
protection orders under state and territory family violence legislation, than
Family Law Act
injunctions and protection
orders. The Commissions are interested to hear whether the complexity of the
provisions in the
Family Law Act
regarding the interaction between
Family Law Act
injunctions and protection orders has resulted in
practical problems for courts or victims of family violence.
9.67 In Chapter 8, the Commissions consider a number of legislative and
procedural strategies to address problems arising from the
interaction between
parenting orders and protection orders under state and territory family violence
legislation, including proposals
to increase courts’ awareness of existing
family violence orders issued by other courts and the use of
Family Law Act
to resolve inconsistencies between parenting orders and
protection orders.
Because both
parenting orders and
injunctions are made under
Family Law Act
many of these proposals would also be applicable to
address any potential problems arising from the interaction between
injunctions and protection orders.
9.68 The Commissions consider that the mechanism in
Family Law Act
is a useful way for courts to address inconsistencies with
orders under the
Family Law Act
when making a protection order under
state or territory legislation. However,
currently only applies to
injunctions that expressly or impliedly require or authorise a person to spend
time with a child. In the
Commissions’ preliminary view, there might be
merit in enacting a provision similar to
to allow state and territory
courts making or varying a protection order, to revive, vary, discharge or
Family Law Act
injunction for the personal protection of a
party to a marriage or other
As with the current
, such power should only be exercised when there is material before
the court that was not before the court that made that original
injunction.
9.69 Without such a provision,
Family Law Act
injunctions will prevail
over a protection order made under state or territory family violence
legislation to the extent of any inconsistency.
Allowing a state or territory
court to amend a
Family Law Act
injunction when making a protection order
would address such inconsistencies and remove the need for a person to return to
family court to revoke an injunction before applying for a protection
order under state or territory legislation.
In practice, do problems arise from the provisions dealing with
inconsistencies between injunctions granted under
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) and protection orders made under state and
territory family violence
legislation?
Proposal 9–2
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) should be
amended to provide that in proceedings to make or vary a protection order, a
state or territory court with jurisdiction
may revive, vary, discharge or
Family Law Act
injunction for the personal protection of a
party to a marriage or other person.
Injunctions
to relieve a party to a marriage from rendering conjugal rights
Section 114(2)
Family Law Act
provides a further
power to grant an injunction in the context of a marriage. It permits the court
to ‘make an order relieving
a party to a marriage from any obligation to
perform marital services or render conjugal rights’.
9.71 Orders under
are rare—the only reported case of such
an order made by the Family Court was in
Dr Anthony Dickey QC notes
that the section is ‘curious’ in that it revives forms of judicial
separation and separation
order, which were otherwise abolished by
s 3(2)(c)(iv)
and (vii) of the
State and territory
family violence legislation does not expressly include comparable conditions
that can be imposed in relation
to protection orders.
9.72 It is strongly arguable that this section should be repealed on the
basis that parties to a marriage are under no legal obligation
to ‘perform
marital services or render conjugal rights’. As such, there is no need for
the court to have a particular
power to relieve a person from performing
‘duties’ where those duties do not exist.
9.73 While the
Family Law Act
does not define ‘marital
services’ and ‘conjugal rights’, they are generally taken to
include the right of
married persons to cohabit and have sexual intercourse with
their spouse. Under the
Matrimonial Causes Act 1959
(Cth), the court had
the power to make a ‘decree of restitution of conjugal rights’ to
enforce the marital duty of a
husband and wife to live together. This remedy has
been abolished.
9.74 In addition, there has historically been a view that, at common law, it
was not possible for a husband to rape his wife because
a wife impliedly and
irrevocably consented to all acts of sexual intercourse with her husband by
entering into the marriage.
1991, the High Court held that there is no rule in Australia that a husband
cannot be guilty of raping his wife. The majority
decision of Mason CJ, Deane
and Toohey JJ stated that such a notion is ‘out of keeping with the view
society now takes of the
relationship between the parties to a
Their Honours
held that ‘if it was ever the common law that by marriage a wife gave
irrevocable consent to sexual intercourse
by her husband, it is no longer the
common law’.
9.75 At the time that s 114(2) was enacted, three Australian
states—Queensland, Western Australia and Tasmania—defined
way that excluded non-consensual sexual intercourse between a man and his
Changes to the criminal
law by statute now make it clear that the fact that a person is married to the
person whom they sexually
assault is no
Commissions’ views
9.76 Section 114(2) implies that there is a continuing obligation to render
conjugal rights and provide marital services—obligations
that no longer
exist in law and which should not be assumed to form part of a marriage as a
social or legal institution. The section
implies a view of marriage, and
particularly the role of women in marriage, that is out of keeping with modern
standards of equality
and autonomy in the marriage relationship.
9.77 Section 114(2) gives the court power to relieve a person from performing
certain perceived obligations within a marriage. In
the Commissions’ view,
this purpose is adequately served by s 114(1) alone. The need to protect a
party to the marriage from
unwanted sexual intercourse, or to require that a
married couple not live together, can be achieved using injunctions under
for the personal protection of a party to the marriage, or to
restrain a party to the marriage from entering or remaining in the
matrimonial
where it is just or convenient to do
so, and upon such terms and conditions as
the court considers appropriate, allows the court to tailor an injunction to the
needs of the parties.
9.78 The Commissions therefore consider that the power to make an order
relieving a party to a marriage from any obligation to perform
marital services
or render conjugal rights is unnecessary and inconsistent with current
principles of family and criminal law, and,
as such, should be repealed.
Proposal 9–3
Section 114(2)
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth), which permits a court to make an order relieving a party to a marriage
from any obligations to perform marital services or
render conjugal rights,
should be repealed.
[back to top]
proceedings under the
Family Law Act
Family violence as a
factor in property disputes
Family Law Act
deals with property and
spousal maintenance orders, providing a mechanism for parties to alter property
rights that would otherwise
apply under common law and equity. Under
a federal family court may make a declaration of the title or rights that each
party to a marriage has with respect to property.
provides the
court discretion to alter property rights to effect a just distribution between
the parties. In practice, most parties
on breakdown of a marriage invoke the
wider powers of
9.80 Determination of applications brought pursuant to
involve four
interrelated steps:
identifying the property, liabilities and financial resources at the
date of the hearing;
identifying and assessing the
contributions
of the parties
pursuant to the factors set out in
—including, for example,
financial and non-financial contributions that a party has made to the property
of the parties to the
marriage, and contributions to the welfare of the family,
including in the capacity of homemaker or parent;
identifying and assessing the
of a party in accordance
with any relevant matters set out in
—including, for example,
a party’s age and state of health, mental and physical capacity for
gainful employment, and any
childcare responsibilities; and
resolving what order is just and equitable in all the
circumstances.
‘no fault’ philosophy
9.81 Notably absent from any of the factors set out in
is the notion of fault. This can be traced back to a driving factor for the
introduction of the 1975 Act, being the removal of
fault as the basis for
ALRC 69 noted:
A major aim of the [
Family Law Act
] was to remove fault as the basis of
divorce. The various grounds for divorce, including adultery, desertion and
cruelty, were replaced
with a single ‘morally neutral’ ground of
irretrievable breakdown of marriage, evidenced by one year’s separation.
The decision to eliminate fault from the ground of divorce did not necessarily
require the total removal of considerations of the
conduct of the partner from
ancillary matters—custody, maintenance and property. However, the
‘no fault’ philosophy
has permeated the Family Court’s broader
decision-making under the Act. The Court soon determined that since the conduct
not expressly mentioned in the new Act, it should be discounted unless it
related directly to other provisions of the Act. This applied
not only to old
issues of matrimonial fault such as adultery, cruelty or desertion but to other
forms of behaviour.
9.82 As an application of this principle, early decisions of the federal
family courts only considered conduct in property proceedings
where it related
directly to the financial contributions of a party, or to the creation of future
As explained by
Murray J, writing extra-judicially in 1995:
The court must look at the existence of the contributions and needs of each
party, and, not how they were caused. If a wife’s
loss of economic
capacity is caused by being knocked over by a bus or from being beaten by her
husband, her needs are assessed in
the same way. The cause of the injury is by
itself not an issue. Furthermore, according to these dicta, a husband is not to
be punished
for his conduct.
9.83 Conduct has sometimes been factored into property proceedings in the
context of ‘negative contributions’, where a
party has embarked on a
course of conduct designed to reduce or minimise the value or worth of
matrimonial assets; or acted recklessly,
negligently or wantonly with the
assets, thereby reducing their
Conduct that has
sustained a negative contribution finding—that is, a
a party’s contribution to the marriage—includes gambling, alcohol
abuse and marijuana abuse.
9.84 The ‘no fault’ philosophy has been criticised, including on
the grounds that it discounts the relevance of family
violence to property
claims. In 1994, the ALRC expressed the view that:
It is clear that twenty years after the introduction of the
when the elimination of matrimonial fault from divorce is no longer
controversial in the community, a more reasoned approach to issues
of conduct in
other parts of the
Family Law Act
should be possible. The Commission does
not suggest that fault be reintroduced into divorce proceedings. Its concern is
that where it is relevant in ancillary proceedings, violence is not
overlooked. The court should consider the relevance and indeed
significance of
violence in determining the welfare of children and issues concerning
contributions to property and financial need
9.85 Shortly after these remarks, judgments of the Family Court recognised
family violence as a relevant factor in determining property
disputes under the
Family Law Act
. The definitive test in this regard is set out in the 1997
judgment of the Full Court of the Family Court in the case
In the Marriage
In the Marriage of Kennon
9.86 By overruling earlier cases,
provided clear authority that
family violence is a relevant factor in determining a party’s contribution
Family Law Act
. As set out by Fogarty and
Lindenmayer JJ (with Baker J concurring):
where there is a course of violent conduct by one party towards the other during
the marriage which is demonstrated to have had a
significant adverse impact upon
that party’s contributions to the marriage, or, put the other way, to have
made his or her
contributions significantly more arduous than they ought to have
been, that is a fact which a trial judge is entitled to take into
assessing the parties’ respective contributions within
9.87 Fogarty and Lindenmayer JJ acknowledged concerns about the
potential for the principles to open the ‘floodgates’
‘used inappropriately as tactical weapons or for personal attacks’.
Accordingly, the application of the principles
was limited to ‘exceptional
To be relevant, it would be necessary to show that the conduct occurred during
the course of the marriage and had a discernible impact
upon the contributions
of the other party. It is not directed to conduct which does not have that
effect and of necessity it does
not encompass (as in
related to the breakdown of the marriage (basically because it would not have
had a sufficient duration for this impact
to be relevant to contributions).
9.88 In summary, to satisfy the
criteria, a party must prove,
on the balance of probabilities that he or she was subject to a violent
‘course of conduct’
during the marriage, which had a
‘significant adverse impact’ upon the party’s contributions
or, in the alternative,
which made those contributions ‘significantly more
9.89 Kennon
has been applied by family courts in a considerable number
of property disputes, predominantly on the basis that family violence
party’s contributions ‘significantly more arduous’ than they
otherwise would have been.
9.90 Existing or previous protection orders under state and territory family
violence laws do not appear to have been accorded specific
weight under
or subsequent case law. Comments on the ALRC’s Family
Violence Online Forum suggest that parties and courts rarely take family
violence or protection orders into account in property settlements. As one
participant stated:
I am not aware of any matters that have been dealt with by my [legal] service
… where specific provision has been made in favour
of a victim of domestic
violence in either a negotiated case or a court ordered determination. I often
find it difficult to advise
clients in relation to the benefit of them
incorporating references to domestic violence in their evidence, as often the
to weigh up the emotional stress in having to revisit the past
incidents and trauma (which may include getting psychological assessments
reports) versus the potential for an increase (often small and unquantifiable)
in their entitlement of the asset pool, which
in small pools may be negligible.
I also find that raising the issue of domestic violence can often hamper
negotiations as the perpetrator
of the violence will often deny that it has
occurred and the victim, in the interests of resolving the matter more
expediently (or
because they are financially constrained), will concede the
A need for reform?
9.91 Commentators, law reform bodies and others have raised strong arguments
Family Law Act
should be amended to recognise family violence
expressly as a relevant factor in property disputes. As discussed below,
legislative
recognition may have a number of advantages over continued reliance
9.92 First, including an express consideration in the legislation may
highlight to parties and their legal representatives the relevance
of any family
violence—and, potentially, protection orders—in determining property
disputes. Since only a small proportion
of financial matters are brought before
the federal family courts, the impact of this amendment may be especially
pertinent for negotiated
settlements.
9.93 Secondly,
may set too high a threshold for recognition of
family violence, as parties alleging family violence must prove, on the balance
probabilities, that the violence had a ‘discernible impact’ on
their capacity to contribute to the marriage, or the arduousness
of making such
contributions. The scope for judicial officers to draw inferences about such an
impact is uncertain.
criteria, family violence can only be taken into account where a
party used it as a part of a course of conduct. Commentators have
questioned why
this is deserving of recognition but not, for example, a husband who through a
single act of violence causes his wife
and children to flee and terminate the
relationship.
9.94 Thirdly,
focuses on the relevance of family violence to a
party’s contribution to the marriage. This overlooks the potential
of family violence to the needs assessment under
Family Law Act
. The ALRC and the Family Law Council have previously
recommended that family violence be expressly included as a relevant factor
assessment.
9.95 Finally,
is not directed towards providing compensation to
victims of violence. Altobelli FM, in the 2009 matter of
Kozovska and
, drew attention to the artificiality of a
adjustment:
Having regard to the nature of the violence suffered by the wife during a long
marriage it is clear that neither 10 percent or any
other figure could
possibly be characterised as compensatory because no amount could compensate her
for what she experienced at the
hands of the husband. On a property pool of
offends one’s
sense of justice and equity having regard to the findings I
have made. But clearly the adjustment that the Full Court contemplated
decision in
was not meant to be compensatory, but more in the
nature of perhaps symbolic recognition of the extraordinary efforts of one
in persisting with contribution in the face of enormous and unjustified
adversity. One cannot help but think that much greater thought
needs to be given
to the very rationale of a
-type adjustment, and whether there
might be a better, more transparent, and fairer method for dealing with issues
of conduct in the
course of financial matters in the Family Law
9.96 In ALRC 69, the ALRC recommended that the division of property
Family Law Act
should take into account the impact of family
violence on past contributions and on future
In 2001, the Family Law
Council recommended to the Attorney-General that
should be amended to
refer expressly to the relevance of family violence. An early draft of the
Family Law Amendment Bill 2002 (Cth)
adopted this recommendation. However, this
was not retained in the final version of the
Commissions’ views
9.97 The Terms of Reference for this Inquiry provide a limited lens through
which the Commissions can propose reforms—that is,
to resolve issues
arising from the practical interaction between state and territory family
violence laws and the
In the context of
financial proceedings under the
Family Law Act
, the principal issues of
interaction arise in relation to the determination of property disputes, where
one spouse has obtained a
protection order against the other. This situation has
received limited attention in the case law and literature. Engagement with
stakeholders to date suggests that protection orders are not being considered by
parties, their lawyers and the courts in financial
proceedings. The Commissions
seek further stakeholder feedback on whether, in practice, protection order
proceedings are considered
in the context of property disputes—for
example, whether evidence of family violence introduced in protection order
proceedings
is being used for the purpose of
adjustments.
9.98 The broader issue of how family violence
recognised in property disputes is beyond the parameters of this Inquiry.
However, the Commissions express their support
of the ALRC’s
recommendation in ALRC 69 that the provisions of the
Family Law Act
dealing with the division of property should be amended to refer expressly to
the impact of violence on past contributions and on
future needs. A genuine
commitment to reducing family violence must confront family violence at every
turn—including in financial
proceedings. Legislative recognition will
provide greater confidence for victims of violence and their legal
representatives who
seek to raise family violence allegations in property
disputes, in particular, in out-of-court settlements. It also provides an
opportunity
to reconsider the thresholds set by
and subsequent
case law, such as the requirement that family violence be connected to a
‘course of conduct’.
9.99 Formulating legal amendments will involve complex considerations. Beyond
the matters discussed above, issues will also arise,
for example, in relation to
the definition of ‘family violence’ that should be used in this
context. Under
Family Law Act
, family violence can be
directed towards
member of the person’s family. For the purpose
, an argument can be made that the violence should be limited to
conduct which is directed towards the other
The relationship between
a legislative requirement to take account of family violence in
property proceedings and other schemes—for example, victims’
compensation—may also need to be
considered.
9.100 The relevance of family violence to financial proceedings under the
Family Law Act
was not considered in the 2009 reviews of family violence
in the federal family courts by Professor Chisholm and the Family Law
The Commissions’
preliminary view is that the Australian Government should undertake a separate
inquiry into the manner in
which federal family courts deal with allegations of
family violence in property proceedings, with a view to proposing models for
legislative reform. Such an inquiry will provide an opportunity for detailed
consideration of the above matters.
Is evidence of violence given in protection order proceedings
being considered in the context of property proceedings under
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth)? If so,
Proposal 9–4
The provisions of the
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) dealing with the distribution of property should refer expressly to
the impact of violence on past contributions and on future
needs, as recommended
by the ALRC in
Equality Before the Law
Proposal 9–5
The Australian Government should commission an
inquiry into the treatment of family violence in property proceedings under
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth). The inquiry should
consider, among other issues, the manner in which family violence should be
taken into account in determining
a party’s contribution under
and future needs under
; the definition of family
violence for the purpose of
proceedings; and interaction with other
schemes—for example, victims’ compensation.
Property conditions
in protection orders
9.101 As discussed in Chapter 4, family violence legislation in each of
the states and territories makes provision for courts to issue
protection orders
which prohibit a person from entering or approaching the protected
person’s residence. With the exception
of the ACT, this legislation
expressly specifies that such orders may cover a property in which the person
against whom the order
was made has a legal or equitable interest (exclusion
Most family violence
laws provide for a court to make orders permitting an excluded person or victim
of violence to gain access to
the premises for the purpose of taking personal
possessions, usually by an arrangement or in the company of
For the purpose of the
following discussion, these will be referred to as ‘personal property
directions’.
9.102 Some excluded persons, when returning to the premises for the purpose
of retrieving property, may take more than that to which
they are entitled. This
has the potential to influence disputes or conflict with property orders made
under pt VIII of the
Family Law Act
. Additional issues can arise
where victims of family violence flee their home without the chance to collect
their personal property
and with little practical capacity to return. The issue
was described as follows by the NSW Law Reform Commission (NSWLRC) in its
Apprehended Violence Orders
Sometimes the defendant denies the applicant access to the property as a means
of getting the applicant to return home. This can
result in the children being
deprived of clothing, toys and school books. There appears to be no effective
means of responding to
this very real
difficulty.
9.103 Personal property directions can interact with property proceedings
pursuant to the
Family Law Act
where they:
influence future property proceedings under
Family Law Act
—for example, where a party gains possession of
property pursuant to a personal property direction and no longer needs or wants
to contest ownership in the family courts;
are directly inconsistent with existing property orders made under
Family Law Act
are used as an indication of possessory or ownership rights by a
federal family court and thereby impact on the outcome of future
proceedings under the
Family Law Act
9.104 These
interactions are discussed in more detail below, followed by proposals for
reform. Provisions in family violence legislation
may also interact with
residential tenancy laws. The interaction between such laws is outside the Terms
of Reference for this Inquiry
and, therefore, will not be given further
consideration.
Influencing federal family court
proceedings
9.105 Depending on the property that an excluded person or victim obtains
through a personal property direction, he or she may not
have the need or desire
to commence property proceedings in the federal family courts. The likelihood of
this occurrence, and its
appropriateness, will depend to some extent on the type
of property to which access is gained and the ownership or possessory rights.
The scope for this to occur will depend on the breadth of personal property
directions which may be issued by a state or territory
court in exercising
9.106 Most, but not all, family violence laws provide for an excluded person
to gain access for the purpose of taking personal possessions.
Often, this is
achieved by giving a court the discretion to include additional provisions in
the protection order to deal with property
recovery. In Queensland, for example,
a court that imposes an exclusion order must consider including in the order
another condition
allowing the excluded person to recover ‘stated
Crimes (Domestic and Personal Violence) Act 2007
(NSW) permits a court
that has issued an exclusion order to make an ancillary property recovery order
to enable the removal of personal
property that has been left at the premises.
The order may specify the ‘type or types of property’ to which the
9.107 Family violence laws in the Northern Territory and Western Australia
provide additional detail about the type of property which
may be taken. An
excluded person may recover ‘prescribed property’ pursuant to an
order made under the
Restraining Orders Act 1997
(WA) including: property
used to earn income; personal property of a child of the person; property that
is wholly or partly the property
of the excluded person that is used by or for
his or her child; and property that the victim has agreed that the person can
and Family Violence Act 2007
(NT), an excluded person may retrieve personal
property including ‘clothes, tools of trade, personal documents and other
of personal
provisions in other family violence legislation—in which recovery of
property is contingent on an additional court
order—where a Northern
Territory court makes an exclusion order in respect of property on which the
personal property of an
excluded person is located, a right of recovery applies
automatically.
9.108 In South Australia and the ACT, legislative provisions only address the
retrieval of property by a
of violence. For example,
Intervention Orders (Prevention of Abuse) Act 2009
(SA) provides that
a protection order may require an excluded person to ‘return specified
personal property to a protected
person’, or to ‘allow a protected
person to recover or have access to or make use of specified personal
provisions relate to the recovery of property by an excluded
Family Violence Act 2004
(Tas) does not expressly cover the
recovery of property by either an excluded person or a victim. However, the
Justices Act 1959
(Tas), provides for a court to direct that a victim
should allow an excluded person to recover possession of property or have access
to property.
9.110 Some family violence laws specify property that
by an excluded person. In Victoria, an excluded person is not permitted to take
‘the furniture or appliances in the
residence that enable the normal
running of the home’.
In Western Australia, a court may restrain an excluded person from
‘obtaining and using personal property reasonably needed
by the victim,
even if the excluded person is the owner of, or has a right to be in possession
of, the property’.
Similarly, the ACT legislation provides that an order that includes an exclusion
condition may prohibit an excluded person from taking
possession of personal
property that is ‘reasonably needed’ by the victim or a child of the
victim. Further, the order
may require the excluded person to give the victim
particular personal property that is in the excluded person’s
possession.
9.111 In its report,
Apprehended Violence Orders
, the NSWLRC
recommended that a court could decline to make a personal property direction if
it was satisfied that title to the property
is genuinely in dispute; or other
more appropriate means are available for the issue to be addressed. This could
include, for example,
ongoing property proceedings in a federal family
No provision to this
effect is included in the
Crimes (Domestic and Personal Violence) Act 2007
Inconsistent orders
9.112 Personal property directions under state and territory family violence
legislation may be inconsistent with ownership or possessory
rights declared
Family Law Act
property proceedings
In accordance with
s 109 of the
Constitution
, when a law of a state is
inconsistent with a law of the Commonwealth which is intended to cover the
field, the latter shall prevail
to the extent of the inconsistency.
9.113 One way to deal with inconsistency is by specifying that the personal
property direction does not confer a right to take property
that a person does
not own or have a legal right to possess. A provision to this effect is
included, for example, in the
Crimes (Domestic and Personal Violence) Act
9.114 A similar outcome is reached pursuant to
Violence Protection Act 2008
(Vic), which provides that:
(1) The power … to include a condition relating to personal property in a
family violence intervention order is subject to
any order to the contrary made
by the Family Court, or another court or a Tribunal with relevant jurisdiction
to adjudicate in property
(2) To the extent of any inconsistency between a condition relating to personal
property in a family violence intervention order
and an order made by the Family
Court, another relevant court or a relevant Tribunal the order of the Family
Court, other relevant
court or relevant Tribunal prevails.
9.115 The Explanatory Memorandum advises that the purpose of
ensure that property disputes can be resolved in the appropriate jurisdiction
and any condition imposed by a family violence intervention
order applies in the
absence of, or prior to, any determination of the property rights of the
9.116 The South Australian family violence legislation expressly requires
courts issuing personal property directions to take into
account any agreement
or order for the division of property under the
Family Law Act
Domestic Partners Property Act
(SA) of which it has been
If it makes an
order in relation to access to or use of property, the court must also consider
the income, assets and liabilities
of the person who has used violence and of
the victim.
9.117 Under
Intervention Orders (Prevention of Abuse) Act
(SA), an applicant for a protection order must inform the court of any
agreement or order for the division of property under the
Family Law Act
Domestic Partners Property Act 1996
(SA), or any pending
application for such an order. However, there is no specific question in
relation to property orders on the application
form for a protection order in
the Magistrates Court of South
9.118 No other state or territory family violence legislation expressly
requires an applicant for a protection order to inform the
court about any
property order under
Family Law Act
, or pending
proceedings for such an order, nor do any application forms expressly seek this
information.
Future federal family court
proceedings
9.119 The provisions discussed above address inconsistency between ancillary
property conditions made under family violence laws and
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
(Vic) takes this one step further, addressing the potential repercussions of
ancillary property conditions on any future
Family Law Act
proceedings.
The provision specifies that a condition relating to personal property in a
protection order does not affect any rights
the protected person or excluded
person may have in relation to the ownership of the property. The Explanatory
Memorandum notes that
this could be an issue, for example, if the court orders
that an excluded person’s refrigerator is to remain in the residence
an exclusion condition. In accordance with the section, the excluded person will
still own the refrigerator and a federal family
court will be able to take this
into account in a division of property in association with divorce
proceedings.
Section 106B
Justices Act 1959
(Tas) provides that a
protection order that affects possession of, or access to, premises or property
does not affect any legal or
equitable interest that any person holds in the
premises or property.
Commissions’ views
9.121 Courts making protection orders may impose personal property directions
as a part of those orders in most states and
territories.
9.122 In the Commissions’ preliminary view, most property disputes
should be resolved in the federal family courts and other
courts with the
expertise, time and resources to address the issues comprehensively, including
courts responsible for resolving property
disputes under state and territory
de-facto relationships legislation. Protection order proceedings should only
deal with property
issues to the extent necessary to give effect to the
protective objectives of family violence legislation—for example, to
that excluded parties obtain access to personal possessions necessary for
day-to-day living so as to preclude the need for any further
access to the
restricted premises. This is consistent with the policy stated by the NSWLRC in
Apprehended Violence Orders
report—that is, a personal property
is not designed to ‘create a jurisdiction by stealth’ for the Local
Court to intervene in family court property disputes,
but is an attempt to
address a ‘practical legal vacuum’ which arises almost everyday and
can give rise to significant
9.123 The interactions between personal property directions and property
proceedings under the
Family Law Act
are especially vexed where parties
take possession of property which they do not own or have a right to possess, or
wrongfully deny
the other party access to property—which may be done as a
part of coercive and controlling behaviour. The Commissions are interested
further feedback on the extent to which these scenarios arise in practice. This
information will provide an important evidentiary
basis for formulating
proposals for reform.
Influencing federal family court proceedings
9.124 The availability of comprehensive personal property directions may
influence property proceedings under the
Family Law Act
Commissions’ preliminary view, this is only appropriate in very limited
circumstances. The property that a person may
recover pursuant to orders should
be limited to that which is necessary for daily living. At this stage, the
Commissions support
recovery of the types of property listed under the
Domestic and Family Violence Act 2007
(NT)—that is, clothes, tools
of trade, personal documents and other personal effects. For recovery of all
other property, it
is preferable for parties to commence proceedings in, for
example, the federal family courts. The Commissions are interested in
stakeholder
views about whether access to any other types of property should be
available to excluded persons, for example, the personal property
of a child of
the excluded person—as in the
Restraining Orders Act
9.125 The Commissions further consider that a court should decline to make a
personal property direction if the property is ‘reasonably
by the victim or a child of the victim. Recovery should not be allowed where
title to the property is genuinely in
dispute or other more appropriate means
are available for the issue to be addressed—for example, if there are
ongoing property
proceedings in a federal family court. The workability of this
provision depends upon a court having knowledge of family court proceedings.
Commissions propose that parties involved in protection order proceedings should
have an obligation to inform the court of property
orders made by a federal
family court, or pending proceedings for such orders. This information should be
sought in application forms
for protection orders.
Inconsistent orders about property
9.126 Personal property directions may conflict with existing orders of a
federal family court made under pt VIII of the
Family Law Act
is likely where a court is not informed about the existence of such orders.
Accordingly, there should be clear strategies in
place for courts making
protection orders to obtain information about, and consider, property orders
made under the
Family Law Act
. The South Australian family violence
legislation, which requires applicants for a protection order to inform the
court of any agreement
or order for the division of property, or any pending
application for such an order, may be instructive. Courts issuing personal
property directions should take into account any such agreement or order,
thereby avoiding the potential for inconsistency.
9.127 Family violence legislation may need to clarify the effect, if any, of
inconsistent orders. The Victorian and NSW legislation
include provisions to the
effect that a personal property direction in a protection order is subject to
any order to the contrary
made by a federal family court. To the extent of any
inconsistency, the order of the family court prevails.
9.128 Arguably, such a provision is rendered redundant by s 109 of the
Constitution
. In the Commissions’ preliminary view,
legislative provisions mirroring the constitutional principle in family violence
legislation
could nevertheless play an important educative role.
Future federal family court proceedings
9.129 Personal property directions may have repercussions for subsequent
property proceedings in a federal family court. For example,
where an order
provides for furniture belonging to an excluded person to remain with the
victim, there is scope for this to be put
forward as a victim’s
‘property’ for the purpose of a declaration under
Family Law Act
. In the Commissions’ view, it is inappropriate for
protection order proceedings to take the place of dedicated processes for
resolving property disputes, such as those set out in
Family Law Act
. Accordingly, the Commissions support a clear legislative
statement in the family violence laws of each state and territory that
condition relating to personal property in a protection order does not affect
any rights the victim or person who has used violence
may have in relation to
the ownership of the property.
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
(Vic) should be referred to as a model in this
How often are persons who have been the subject of exclusion
conditions in protection orders made under family violence legislation
victims of family violence taking possession of property which they do not own
or have a right to possess, or denying the other
person access to property? If
so, what impact does this have on any property proceedings or orders relating to
property under the
Family Law Act 1975
Proposal 9–6
Provisions in state and territory family violence
legislation dealing with exclusion orders should:
(a) limit the types of property which a court may order an excluded person
to recover to clothes, tools of trade, personal documents
and other personal
effects, and any other items specified by the court; and
(b) provide that any order to recover property should not include
(i) which are reasonably needed by the victim or a child of the victim;
(ii) in which title is genuinely in dispute; and
(c) provide that an order to recover property should not be made where
other more appropriate means are available for the issue
to be addressed in a
timely manner.
Are there any types of property other than those set out in
Proposal 9–6 which should, or should not, be subject to recovery
an excluded person under state and territory family violence
legislation—for example, should an excluded person be able
property of his or her child?
Proposal 9–7
State and territory family violence legislation
should require applicants for protection orders to inform courts about, and
to consider, any agreement or order for the division of property under
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth), or any pending application for such an
Proposal 9–8
Application forms for protection orders in family
violence proceedings should clearly seek information about any agreement or
for the division of property under the
Family Law Act 1975
any pending application for such an order.
Proposal 9–9
State and territory family violence legislation
should provide that personal property directions made in protection order
proceedings
are subject to orders made by a federal family court or another
court responsible for determining property disputes.
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
(Vic) should be referred to as a
model in this regard.
Proposal 9–10
State and territory family violence legislation
should provide that personal property directions do not affect any ownership
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
should be referred to as a model in this regard.
[back to top]
Relocation and
recovery orders
Family Law Act
does not expressly address relocation
issues—that is, the problems which arise when one parent seeks to move a
long way away
from the other parent, for example, because of concerns about
their own safety or the safety of their children. Relocation disputes
determined in accordance with the general parenting order principles set out in
of the Act, discussed in detail in Chapter 8. For the purpose
of the following discussion, it is useful to reiterate some of that
principal features.
9.131 First, and fundamentally, the object of pt VII is stated as being
to ensure the best interests of children are met by:
(a) ensuring that children have the benefit of both of their parents having a
meaningful involvement in their lives, to the maximum
extent consistent with the
best interests of the child; and
(b) protecting children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected
to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence;
(c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them
achieve their full potential; and
(d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities,
concerning the care, welfare and development of their
9.132 In determining a child’s best interests, courts are directed to
have regard to two ‘primary’ and 13 ‘additional’
considerations. Primary considerations are the benefit to the child of having a
meaningful relationship with both of his or her parents;
and the need to protect
the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or
exposed to, abuse, neglect or family
violence. Additional considerations
include, for example, any final or contested protection orders; any views
expressed by the child;
the nature of the child’s relationship with his or
her parents and other persons; the willingness and ability of each of the
child’s parents to facilitate, and encourage, a close and continuing
relationship between the child and the other parent; and
the practical
difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a
parent. Federal family courts must also,
to the extent that it is consistent
with the child’s best interests, ensure that orders are consistent with
any protection
9.133 Pursuant to s 61C, each parent has ‘parental
responsibility’ for a child under the age of 18, unless displaced by
a parenting order. One effect of shared parental responsibility is a requirement
for decisions about ‘major long term issues’
to be made jointly by
the parents.
This includes
‘changes to the child’s living arrangements that make it
significantly more difficult for the child to
spend time with a
Section 61DA sets out a presumption that it is in a child’s best
interests for his or her parents to have ‘equal shared
responsibility’. This presumption does not apply if there are reasonable
grounds to believe that a parent has engaged
in child abuse or family
9.134 Where a court orders that a child’s parents should have equal
shared parental responsibility, the court must:
(a) consider whether the child spending equal time with each of the parents
would be in the best interests of the child; and
(b) consider whether the child spending equal time with each of the parents is
reasonably practicable; and
(c) if it is, consider making an order to provide (or including a provision in
the order) for the child to spend equal time with
each of the
9.135 If the court does not make an order for a child to spend equal time
with each of his or her parents, the court must consider
whether it is
reasonably practicable and in the child’s best interests for the child to
spend ‘substantial and significant
time’ with each of his or her
Relevant factors in
determining whether it is reasonably practicable for a child to spend equal
time, or substantial and significant
time, with each of the child's parents
(a) how far apart the parents live from each other; and
(b) the parents’ current and future capacity to implement an arrangement
for the child spending equal time, or substantial
and significant time, with
each of the parents; and
(c) the parents’ current and future capacity to communicate with each
other and resolve difficulties that might arise in implementing
an arrangement
of that kind; and
(d) the impact that an arrangement of that kind would have on the child; and
(e) such other matters as the court considers
9.136 The 2010 judgment of the High Court in
may influence
the determination of future relocation disputes. In that case, a mother appealed
a parenting order made by the Federal
Magistrates Court for the parents to have
equal shared responsibility for the child and for the child to spend equal time
of them. The orders were made on the basis that (contrary to the
mother’s expressed wish to return to Sydney) both parents
would live in
Mount Isa. The High Court held that, in the circumstances, equal time parenting
was not ‘reasonably practicable’
. The Court’s decision was influenced by the mother’s
lack of appropriate accommodation, limited opportunities for employment
isolation from her family. The matter was remitted to the Federal Magistrates
Court for a new hearing.
9.137 Stakeholders have raised significant concerns with the Commissions
that, in practice, relocation orders are being refused where
a parent and his or
her children are at risk of exposure to family violence, illustrated by the
following case study commentary:
One woman who had two young daughters lived with her partner (their father) in a
remote community in NT. She had primary responsibility
for the care of the
girls. She had experienced economic abuse combined with physical abuse
throughout her relationship with her partner
but finally had the courage to
leave him. At that point he started to make threats to kill her. She moved, with
their two daughters,
into local domestic violence crisis accommodation. The
crisis accommodation staff were so concerned for her safety that they organised
a rare emergency evacuation to Darwin for her and the girls through a domestic
violence legal service. The father then told the court
that she had relocated
the girls without his consent. In spite of the surrounding circumstances, the
judge ordered the woman to return
to the remote community she had been evacuated
The clear disregard of the woman’s safety to one side, there did not seem
to be any concern about the appropriateness of the
father’s style of
parenting whereby children were witnessing acts of domestic violence and
whether, in the balance of things,
it was appropriate to disrupt the rest of the
family for the sake of access by him to the children. Women who have experienced
are all the more in need of extended family support, which may only be
available outside of the Territory. Many times they have moved
to the Territory
to be with the man, leaving behind all family and friend networks. The support
they get from these networks feeds
directly into their ability to be good
parents and it may well be in the best interests of the child for relocation in
circumstances
of [family violence] to be viewed more sympathetically. Refusal to
consent to relocation is a prime opportunity for violent partners
to retain a
pattern of abuse and control of their partner after the relationship has ended.
Domestic violence needs to be taken into
account in a more significant and
central way where relocation is being
9.138 Some literature suggests that some victims choose not to raise
allegations of family violence in relocation proceedings. A review
relocation matters heard in the federal family courts from 2003–08
considered the implications of the 2006 shared parenting
reforms. It reported
that, in the pre-2006 cohort, in all but one case in which allegations of
violence by the father towards the
mother were accepted as true and relevant to
the best interests of the child, the mother was given permission to relocate
immediately.
In three cases post-2006, where the woman wanted to relocate, a
prior history of violence was acknowledged. Two of these mothers
were successful
in their request to relocate.
9.139 The authors extrapolated from these findings that, when the court
acknowledges family violence, it will outweigh the requirement
‘meaningful relationship with both parents’. However, they went on
to discuss the small number of cases in the
post-amendment sample in which
allegations were raised about a past history of violence, commenting that:
This is one of the more interesting and unexpected findings of our study.
Perhaps the ‘gatekeepers’ are advising clients
that relocations are
more likely to be allowed where there is family violence, leading to these
matters not getting to court, or
perhaps movers who have experienced family
violence are more reluctant to make such allegations in the post-2006
legislative climate.
9.140 In 2006, the Family Law Council recommended to the Attorney-General
that additional provisions should be inserted into the
Family Law Act
deal specifically with relocation. The recommended provisions included that a
court should consider what parenting arrangements
could be made if a party were
to relocate to ensure that the child maintains a meaningful relationship with
both parents, to the
extent consistent with the need to protect the child from
physical or psychological harm. In justifying its recommended provisions,
Council commented that:
Proposed arrangements must be consistent with the object … of protecting
the child from physical or psychological harm. Council
believes that it is
useful to specifically refer to this object here, in light of the submissions
received about some relocations
being motivated by the need to escape violence
and/or abuse.
9.141 In its submission to that inquiry, Women’s Legal Services
Australia argued that family violence should be accorded a much
greater weight
in relocation orders:
In our view, the guidelines should emphasise that, in cases where there has been
family violence, it is likely to be in the best
interests of the child for the
resident parent to be able to relocate a safe distance from the perpetrator. The
United States National
Council of Juvenile and Family Court Judges’
Family Violence Model State Code
provides a model that could be adapted
for this purpose. The Code provides for a rebuttable presumption that it is in
the best interests
of the child to reside with the parent who is not the
perpetrator of violence in a location of that person’s choice, within
outside the state.
Commissions’ views
9.142 Refusing to make relocation orders in situations involving family
violence has serious repercussions for the safety of victims
and their children.
Victims in rural or remote areas of Australia may not be able to be (or feel to
be) safe from violence and yet
remain in close enough proximity to the person
who has used violence to keep child contact arrangements unchanged. For victims
have been distanced geographically from their extended family or primary
support network, regaining this support could be crucial
to moving forward in
their lives.
9.143 In Chapter 8, the Commissions put forward a number of questions
and proposals for reform directed towards improving the visibility
accorded to protection order proceedings in parenting proceedings generally.
Recommendations to facilitate allegations
of family violence being raised in the
federal family courts are also set out in two 2009 reviews—the
Courts Violence Review
conducted by Professor Richard Chisholm and the
Family Law Council advice
Improving Responses to Family Violence in the
Family Law System
reports are discussed in Chapter 1.
9.144 The Commissions are interested in stakeholder views as to whether any
additional legal or practical reforms are needed to address
issues related to
the practical interaction of protection order proceedings and relocation
disputes. For example, should there be
any presumption in legislation or
policy—for example, the
Best Practice Principles for Use in Parenting
Disputes when Family Violence or Abuse is Alleged
issued by the Family
—that, in cases
where a family court determines there has been family violence, it is likely to
be in the best interests of
a child to be able to relocate to a safe distance
from the person who has used violence? A broader question is whether the
Family Law Act
should be amended to include provisions dealing with
family violence in relocation matters over and above the provisions of the Act
that apply to family violence in parenting proceedings generally.
9.145 Any additional recognition of family violence in the context of
relocation disputes will need to be flexible enough to accommodate
the varying
severity and nature of the violence in a particular case. The Commissions seek
stakeholder views on whether any legal
or practical reforms in the context of
relocation disputes should apply in all or only some cases of family violence.
If reform is
warranted in
cases of family violence, then a question
arises as to how this should be determined.
9.146 An additional issue that may arise where a victim seeks to relocate to
another state or territory is the recognition of the
existing protection order
in that other state or territory—currently attainable through registration
of the order. Models for
registering external protection orders are described in
Chapter 10.
In practice, what issues arise from the interaction between
relocation orders and protection orders or allegations of family violence?
so, what legal or practical reforms could be introduced to address these issues?
For example, should there be a presumption that,
in some or all cases where a
family court determines there has been family violence, it is likely to be in
the best interests of
a child to be able to relocate to a safe distance from the
person who has used violence? If so, to which type of case should such
presumption apply?
Question 9–9
Family Law Act
(Cth) be amended to include provisions dealing with family violence in
relocation matters in addition to the provisions of the Act
that apply to family
violence in parenting proceedings?
9.147 Many relocation disputes are associated with unilateral moves after
separation but prior to court
proceedings.
This may give
rise to a recovery order under pt VII of the
Family Law Act
Convention on the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction
Convention) as implemented by the
Family Law (Child Abduction Convention)
Regulations 1986
9.148 Pursuant to
Family Law Act
, federal family
courts are empowered to make orders requiring the return of a child, typically
to a parent. In deciding whether to
make a recovery order, a court must regard
the best interests of the child as the paramount
consideration.
In determining
the child’s best interests, the court must have regard to the factors set
out in ss 60CC and 60CG of the Act,
which are discussed above in the
context of relocation orders. It is an offence to prevent or hinder a person
taking action to give
effect to a recovery
Hague Convention
is a multilateral treaty, which seeks to
protect children from the harmful effects of abduction and retention across
international
boundaries by providing a procedure to bring about their prompt
return. Signatories commit to the prompt return of children to the
which they habitually reside so that issues of parental responsibility can be
resolved by the courts in that country.
The basis of the Convention is the best
interests of all children for issues of their welfare to be determined by the
courts of the
country in which they habitually reside, rather than the best
interests of an individual
There is an exception
to the requirement for the immediate return of a child, however, if it is
established that the child would
be exposed to physical or psychological harm or
otherwise be placed in an intolerable
9.150 One approach that courts have used to alleviate concerns about the risk
of physical or psychological harm to a child is to request
non-molestation and
other undertakings from the ‘left-behind’
The practical use and
effect of such undertakings has been questioned. A 2003 report by the United
Kingdom Reunite Research Unit
reported that, of the six non-molestation orders
given in abduction cases which the Unit considered, all six were
Where a parent sought
to enforce the undertakings through police complaints, the outcome generally was
unsuccessful.
In one case the mother called the police in relation to the constant pestering
and harassment by the father in the home State in
contravention of an
undertaking given to an English Court. These undertakings had been registered in
the local Court in the home
State. Nevertheless, the mother states that the
police advised her that she would have to obtain a protection Order as the
undertaking
had ‘no real effect’. The mother states that she has
heard this story time and again from women who have been sent home
undertakings. She states her view that undertakings are ‘completely
ineffective’.
Commissions’ views
9.151 The Commissions seek stakeholder feedback on whether issues arise in
practice from the interaction between protection orders
under state and
territory family violence legislation and recovery orders under div VII of
Family Law Act
Hague Convention
, as implemented by
Family Law (Child Abduction Convention) Regulations
. If issues are
identified, the Commissions are interested to hear what reforms are necessary or
desirable in this context. One option,
for example, could be to institute a
formal legal or practical connection between undertakings sought as a condition
of returning
a child pursuant to the
Hague Convention
and protection
orders under family violence legislation. This could involve, for example, a
formalised process through which entry
into non-molestation undertakings
pursuant to a
Hague Convention
recovery order trigger proceedings for a
protection order in favour of the child under state and territory family
violence legislation,
bringing all this information to the attention of
magistrates.
9.152 Further, in Chapter 10, the Commissions consider the development
of a national protection order database. One of the issues
raised by such an
initiative is which orders should be included and whether, for example,
undertakings entered into as a condition
of returning a child pursuant to the
Hague Convention
In practice, what issues arise from the interaction between
protection orders under state and territory family violence legislation
recovery orders under div VII of the
Family Law Act 1975
return of a child pursuant to the
Convention on the Civil Aspects of
International Child Abduction
, as implemented by the
Family Law (Child
Abduction Convention) Regulations 1986
(Cth)? If so, what legal or practical
reforms could be introduced to address these issues?
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) be amended to include
provisions dealing with family violence in recovery matters, in addition to the
provisions of the Act
that apply to family violence in parenting
proceedings?
Family Law Act 1975
s 68B(1)(a)
s 68B(1)(c)
exercising jurisdiction under the
Family Law Act
have a more limited
power to issue an injunction in de facto financial proceedings, in that the
injunction is confined to the use
or occupancy of the parties’ property or
In the Marriage of
[1984] FamCA 24
(1984) 10 Fam LR 125
Family Law Act 1975
R Alexander, ‘Family
Violence’ in Springvale Legal Centre (ed)
Lawyers Practice Manual
(2009) 208–1, [2.8.313]. The constitutional framework is set
out in Ch 2.
Family Law Rules
(Cth) r 21.02.
Family Law Act 1975
s 114AA(3).
Section 68C(3)
applies this section to breaches of injunctions
granted under
s 144AA(4).
definition of ‘order under this Act affecting
A person may have a
reasonable excuse for contravening an order that affects a child if he or she
did not understand the obligations
imposed or if he or she believed on
reasonable grounds that actions were necessary to protect the health or safety
of a person: Ibid
s 70NAE(2), (4), (5), (6),
Ibid ss 70NFB;
A person may have a reasonable
excuse for contravening a s 114 injunction if he or she did not understand
the obligations imposed
and the court is satisfied that the person ‘ought
to be excused’: Ibid
s 112AD(2A).
L Young and G Monahan,
Family Law in Australia
(7th ed, 2009),
R Alexander,
Violence in Australia: The Legal Response
(3rd ed, 2002),
L Young and G Monahan,
Law in Australia
(7th ed, 2009),
Comment on ALRC Family
Violence Online Forum: Women’s Legal Service
R Alexander, ‘Family
Violence’ in Springvale Legal Centre (ed)
Lawyers Practice Manual
(2009) 208–1, [2.8.602], app
Ibid, [2.8.602].
Victoria Police,
Code of Practice
for the Investigation of Family Violence
(2005), [5.3.2]. Not all state and
territory family violence legislation provides a role for police in making an
application for
a protection order: see, eg,
Domestic Violence and Protection
Orders Act 2008
(ACT). The role of police in assisting persons to apply for
a protection order under state and territory family violence legislation
discussed in Ch 5.
R Alexander,
‘Family Violence’ in Springvale Legal Centre (ed)
Practice Manual Victoria
(2009) 208–1,
Family Court of Australia,
Form 4—Notice of Child Abuse or Family Violence
<www.familylawcourts.gov.au> at 9 February 2010. See also R Alexander,
‘Family Violence’ in Springvale Legal Centre
Practice Manual Victoria
(2009) 208–1, [2.8.802]. Form 4 is discussed
in detail in Ch 8.
R Alexander,
‘Family Violence’ in Springvale Legal Centre (ed)
Practice Manual Victoria
(2009) 208–1, [2.8.803].
Crimes (Domestic and
Personal Violence) Act 2007
Domestic Violence
and Protection Orders Act 2008
Crimes (Domestic and
Personal Violence) Act 2007
Family Violence Protection
Domestic and Family Violence Protection Act
(Qld) s 80;
Intervention Orders (Prevention of Abuse) Act
Restraining Orders Act 1997
Family Violence Act 2004
Domestic Violence and
Protection Orders Act 2008
(ACT) s 90;
Domestic and Family Violence
The consequences of contravening a protection
order under state and territory family violence legislation, including offence
and maximum penalties, are discussed in Ch
L Young and G Monahan,
Law in Australia
(7th ed, 2009), [16.18]; R Alexander,
Domestic Violence
in Australia: The Legal Response
(3rd ed, 2002),
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Equality Before the Law: Justice for Women
, ALRC 69 (1994), Rec
9.12; Australian Law Reform Commission,
, ALRC 35 (1987),
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Equality Before the Law: Justice for Women
(1994), [9.75].
Conditions that may be
imposed by a protection order under state and territory family violence
legislation are discussed in Ch 6.
These, and a number of other advantages of using protection orders under state
and territory family violence legislation, are listed
in R Alexander,
‘Family Violence’ in Springvale Legal Centre (ed)
Practice Manual Victoria
(2009) 208–1,
The registration and
recognition of interstate protection orders under state and territory family
violence legislation is discussed
in the context of the national protection
order database in Ch 10.
Law Regulations 1984
(Cth) reg 19 prescribes the following laws for the
purpose of s 114AB:
Crimes (Domestic and Personal Violence) Act 2007
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
Domestic and Family
Violence Protection Act 1989
Peace and Good Behaviour Act 1982
Restraining Orders Act 1997
(WA) pts 1–6;
Violence Act 1994
Family Violence Act 2004
Domestic Violence and Protection Orders Act
Domestic and Family Violence Act 2007
Violence Act 1995
Law Act 1975
s 114AB(2).
R Alexander,
Domestic Violence in Australia: The Legal Response
Constitution
The constitutional framework is discussed in Ch
Family Law Act 1975
s 68R(1)(c).
Courts with jurisdiction under
Family Law Act
include: the
Family Court of Australia, each Family Court of a state, the Supreme Court of
the Northern Territory, the Federal Magistrates
Court, and, subject to some
conditions, courts of summary jurisdiction of each state and territory:
Family Law Act 1975
Family Law Act 1975
s 68R(5)(c).
The operation of
in relation to parenting orders made under the
Family Law Act
is discussed in Ch 8.
Family Violence Act
Domestic Violence and Protection Orders Act
(ACT) ss 31, 47(1)(f); 71;
Domestic and Family Violence Act
s 19(2)(a).
Family Law Act 1975
Australian Government
Domestic Violence Laws in Australia
Family Law Act 1975
s 114AB(1).
Government Solicitor,
Domestic Violence Laws in Australia
R Alexander,
Violence in Australia: The Legal Response
(3rd ed, 2002),
Family Law Act 1975
s 114AB(2).
For example, by
excluding a person from a property in which he or she has a legal or equitable
interest, prohibiting a person from
taking personal property reasonably needed
by the victim, or by terminating and replacing a tenancy agreement for the
the victim.
The types of conditions
that can be included in protection orders under state and territory family
violence legislation are summarised
Proposals 8–2 to 8–5,
In Ch 8, the
Commissions ask whether
Family Law Act 1975
should be amended to empower state and territory courts to
orders in those circumstances in which they can revive, vary, discharge or
suspend such order: Question 8–10.
Family Law Act 1975
In the Marriage of
[1978] FamCA 33
(1978) 30 FLR 565.
The Family Court considered, but did not make, an
order under
In the Marriage of Hayne
92–512: A Dickey, ‘Relief from the Performance of Marital
Obligations’
Australian Law Journal
A Dickey, ‘Relief from the
Performance of Marital Obligations’
Australian Law Journal
Family Law Act
[1991] HCA 48
(1991) 174 CLR 379
L Young and G Monahan,
Family Law in Australia
2009), [12.28].
Ibid, [13.8].
discussion of the purposes of the
Family Law Act
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Equality Before the Law: Justice for Women
(1994), [9.8] (citations omitted).
In the Marriage of Soblusky
(1976) 28 FLR 81;
Marriage of Ferguson
[1978] FamCA 70
(1978) 34 FLR 342
In the Marriage of Fisher
[1989] FamCA 61
(1990) 99 FLR 357.
‘Domestic Violence and the Judicial Process’
Journal of Family Law
In the Marriage of Kowaliw
For example, see,
respectively:
Ibbott v Ibbott and Anor
[2008] FMCAfam 38
[2002] FMCAfam 164
Shaw v Shaw
[2009] FMCAfam
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Equality Before the Law: Justice for Women
(1994), [9.12].
Marriage of CK and IW Kennon
[1997] FamCA 27
(1997) 22 Fam LR
S Middleton, ‘Domestic
Violence, Contributions and
Considerations: An Analysis of Un-reported
Property Judgments’
Australian Journal of Family Law
As argued by Middleton, a party raising a ‘serious adverse effect’
argument could be conceding that he or she made a
reduced contribution.
Comment on ALRC Family Violence
Online Forum: Women’s Legal Service Providers
. Two other participants
in the Online Forum stated that they were not aware of any cases where
protection orders—whether made
under state and territory family violence
legislation or injunctive provisions under the
Family Law Act
been taken into account in financial
proceedings.
An analysis of unreported
cases in 2001, however, found that judicial officers have been prepared to make
inferences in cases of
longstanding and severe physical violence: S Middleton,
‘Domestic Violence, Contributions and
Considerations: An Analysis
of Un-reported Property Judgments’
Australian Journal of
However, in recent cases, reservations have been expressed
Bingham & Bingham
[2009] FMCAfam 99
Kucera & Kucera
[2009] FMCAfam 1032.
See, eg, P Nygh,
‘Family Violence and Matrimonial Property’
Journal of Family Law
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Equality Before the Law: Justice for Women
, ALRC 69 (1994); Family Law Council,
Violence and the
: Financial Remedies
, Discussion Paper
Kozovska & Kozovski
[2009] FMCAfam 1014
Law Reform Commission,
Equality Before the Law: Justice for Women
, ALRC 69 (1994), Rec 9.6.
See for discussion: S Middleton, ‘Matrimonial Property Reform:
Legislating for the “Financial Consequences” of
Australian Journal of Family Law
The Terms of Reference are set
out at the front of this Consultation
Although, recognition should
also be given to situations where family violence is exercised by other
household members.
The interaction
between victims’ compensation schemes and family violence is discussed in
The relationship between
these reports and this Inquiry is described in
In addition, no such
specification is set out for police-issued protection orders in Western
For example, a typical
scenario would be for an exclusion order to include an exception permitting an
excluded husband to return
to the former marital home, under police escort, to
collect any of his personal
possessions.
New South Wales Law
Reform Commission,
Apprehended Violence Orders
, Report No 103
(2003), [7.88].
and Family Violence Protection Act 1989
(Qld) s 25A(3). See also
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
Crimes (Domestic and
Personal Violence) Act 2007
Restraining Orders
Regulations 1997
Domestic and Family
Violence Act 2007
Intervention Orders
(Prevention of Abuse) Act 2009
Similarly, see:
Violence and Protection Orders Act 2008
Justices Act
s 106B(5A).
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
s 86(b)(i).
Restraining
Orders Act 1997
Domestic Violence and Protection Orders Act 2008
New South Wales Law
Reform Commission,
Apprehended Violence Orders
, Report No 103
(2003), [7.92]–[7.93].
Crimes (Domestic and Personal Violence) Act 2007
Explanatory
Memorandum,
Family Violence Protection Bill 2008
Intervention Orders
(Prevention of Abuse) Act 2009
s 10(2)(c).
s 10(2)(d).
Magistrates Court
of South Australia,
Complaint for a Domestic Violence Restraining Order
<www.courts.sa.gov.au/lawyers/index.html> at 9 February
Explanatory Memorandum,
Family Violence Protection Bill 2008
In Ch 6, the Commissions
suggest options for reform of exclusion order
conditions.
New South Wales Law
Reform Commission,
Apprehended Violence Orders
, Report No 103
(2003), [7.95].
If a personal
property direction makes provision for an excluded person to recover property of
his or her child, this may conflict
with any order which prohibits an excluded
person from recovering property that is ‘reasonably needed’ by a
Law Act 1975
s 65DAA(1).
s 65DAA(2).
s 65DAA(5).
[2010] HCA 4.
Comment on ALRC
Family Violence Online Forum: Women’s Legal Service
P Easteal and K
Harkins, ‘Are We There Yet? An Analysis of Relocation Judgments in Light
of Changes to the
Family Law Act
Australian Journal of
R Chisholm,
Courts Violence Review
(2009); Family Law Council,
Improving Responses to
Family Violence in the Family Law System: An Advice on the Intersection of
Family Violence and Family Law Issues
Family Court of Australia,
Best Practice Principles for Use in Parenting Disputes When Family Violence
or Abuse is Alleged
See, eg, J Behrens, B Smyth and R Kaspiew, ‘Australian Family Law Court
Decisions on Relocation: Dynamics in Parents’
Relationships Across
Australian Journal of Family Law
Law Act 1975
‘The Hague Convention and the Flight from Domestic Violence: How Women and
Children are being Returned by Coach and
International
Journal of Law, Policy and the Family
Convention on
the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction
, 25 October 1980, Hague
XXVIII, (entered into force generally on 1 December 1983) art
See discussion in M Kaye,
‘The Hague Convention and the Flight from Domestic Violence: How Women and
Children are being Returned
by Coach and Four’
International
Journal of Law, Policy and the Family
Reunite International,
The Outcome for Children Returned Following an
(2003), 28.
Question 10–21.
ALRC CP1 Family Violence � Improving Legal Frameworks
10. Improving Evidence and
Information Sharing
Introduction
Protection orders as a factor in decision making about parenting orders
Use of protection orders as evidence of family violence
Orders made by consent
Undertakings
Improving evidence in protection order proceedings
Written evidence
Oral evidence
Abuse of process
False or misleading evidence about family violence
Vexatious applications in protection order proceedings
Removing impediments to information sharing
Federal family court proceedings
Family dispute resolution information
State and territory family violence proceeding information
Agency information
Strategies to promote information sharing
Information-sharing protocols
A national protection order database
10. Improving Evidence and
Information Sharing
[back to top]
Introduction
10.1 A central theme of this Inquiry is ‘seamlessness’—the
idea that the laws and procedures victims of family violence
engage with should
work together to protect and assist them.
10.2 This chapter considers two key issues relating to improving the
information available to courts dealing with family violence.
First, the chapter
examines the use of evidence and other information provided by victims of family
violence across family violence
and family law matters, including ways in which
protection orders granted under state and territory family violence legislation,
and evidence given in protection order proceedings can be used in concurrent or
pending family law proceedings. This discussion is
framed within the context of
an acknowledgement that not all persons who obtain protection orders will be
involved in
Family Law Act
proceedings. For example, not all persons who
obtain a protection order will also seek to resolve family law matters in the
Court, while others, such as victims of violence by a sibling or a same
sex partner, will not be able to access the Family Court.
10.3 Secondly, this chapter considers ways to improve information sharing
between courts, practitioners, relevant government agencies
and other people and
institutions involved in the family violence and family law systems, while
protecting the privacy and safety
of people involved in family violence
litigation.
[back to top]
orders as a factor in decision making about parenting orders
10.4 As discussed in Chapter 8, a federal family court must have regard to a
number of considerations when making a parenting order.
The ‘paramount
consideration’ is ‘the best interests of the
Section 60CC
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) sets out a number of matters that a court must
consider when determining the best interests of the child. A ‘primary
consideration’
is the need to protect the child from physical or
psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, family
Additional considerations
that a court may take into account include:
any family violence involving the child or a member of the
child’s family
(s 60CC(3)(j))
any family violence order that applies to the child or a member of
the child’s family, provided the order is a final order
or its making was
(s 60CC(3)(k)).
10.5 The effect of these provisions
is that family violence is expressly relevant to the court’s decision
making in relation
to a parenting order. Further,
s 60CC(3)(k)
indicates that
the existence of a final order (including final orders made by consent with or
without admissions) or a contested
protection order (including both final and
interim orders) under state and territory family violence legislation is also,
a relevant consideration in determining the best interests of a
10.6 Prior to amendments in 2006, s 68F of the
Family Law Act
former equivalent of
, directed the court to consider
violence order that applied to the child or a member of the child’s
family. The amendments in 2006 narrowed this consideration
to only a final or a
contested family violence order in order to ‘address a perception that
violence allegations are taken
into account without proven foundation in some
family law proceedings’.
Use of protection
orders as evidence of family violence
10.7 In 2007, the Australian Institute of Family Studies published research
into allegations of family violence made in relation to
parenting matters under
Family Law Act
(the Moloney
The study considered the
prevalence and nature of allegations of family violence in family law
proceedings involving children; the
nature of the evidence filed in support of
the allegations; and the effect that the allegations, and evidence, had on the
in the case.
10.8 The research indicated that most allegations of family violence were
accompanied by little or no supporting
The study concluded that
the ‘scarcity of supporting evidentiary material suggests that legal
advice and legal decision-making
may often be taking place in the context of
widespread factual
uncertainty’.
10.9 The Moloney study examined the evidence filed in support of allegations
of family violence made in a selection of federal family
courts, and the
apparent strength of the evidence for, and responses to, allegations. The study
grouped corroborative evidence into
two groups. The evidence in the first
category—evidence with ‘relatively strong probative
weight’—included
a criminal conviction; a final protection order by
contest; a final protection order at which the defendant did not appear; and
witness accounts of violence or injuries. Evidence in the second
category—evidence of ‘less probative weight’—included
final protection order made by consent or consent without admissions; an interim
protection order granted in the absence of the
respondent; and sworn or unsworn
hearsay accounts of family
10.10 The Moloney study also found that the outcomes in cases where
allegations of family violence were made, but not supported by
strong evidence,
were similar to those in cases where there were no allegations of family
violence. However, where allegations were
made with a high degree of specificity
and supported by evidence of strong probative weight, the family violence did
influence the
orders made by the
It is therefore important to
consider ways in which to encourage and facilitate the provision of evidence of
family violence of strong
probative value. This issue is discussed later in this
Stakeholder views and other
10.11 During consultations, a number of stakeholders raised concerns that, in
family law proceedings, a federal family court did not
give sufficient weight to
the fact that one party had obtained a protection order against the other.
10.12 In particular, some stakeholders expressed the view that
s 60CC(3)(k)
should permit a federal family court to consider interim protection orders, and
protection orders made by consent, as well as final
and contested orders.
Women’s Legal Services Australia, in a submission to the review of the
Family Court’s response
to family violence undertaken by Professor Richard
Chisholm (the Chisholm Review),
stated that:
In WLSA’s view, there is no good reason to exclude consideration of
non-contested interim AVOs. Such evidence could be set
out, along with other
evidence in a family law matter, so that the judge can appropriately give weight
to each factor when determining
the best interests of the child. Excluding
consideration of non-contested AVOs may lead perpetrators to consent to an
interim AVO
as a tactic to exclude consideration of the AVO in a family law
In some registries there seems to be a reluctance by the court to give any
weight at all to the existence of AVOs as they have been
seen as a tactical move
in family law proceedings. In combination with the affidavit evidence of the
nature and extent of the violence,
judges should also be encouraged to consider
AVOs as good evidence of the existence of domestic violence. It is unacceptable
orders granted by a jurisdiction to protect the lives of people who have
experienced violence not be taken into account in a jurisdiction
that, on the
balance of probabilities, is charged with the responsibility to determine what
parenting arrangements are in the best
interests of
10.13 An opposing view is that any kind of protection order, in itself and
without further evidence, should not be a separate, specific
factor when
determining a child’s best interests. In particular, many protection
orders are made by consent without admission
of liability and, in such
circumstances, the court is not required to make any findings as to whether the
grounds for making the
order are satisfied—meaning that a court has not
determined whether there was in fact family violence. In such cases, it is
argued that the fact of a protection order should have little or no weight in
family law proceedings where family violence is alleged.
10.14 The Commissions heard in consultations that protection orders are
sometimes sought for strategic advantage in family law matters,
rather than
because a person necessarily needs protection from family violence. Some claim
that men and women make false allegations
of family violence, an issue discussed
later in this chapter. However, an empirical study by academics at Sydney
University of the
use of protection orders during post-separation conflict found
[w]hile applicants reported a valid legal basis for applying for family violence
orders, orders were also sought for ‘collateral
purposes’ such as
determining the occupancy of the home on separation or maintaining boundaries
between newly separated parents.
In certain cases they were used as well for
purposes connected with the family law dispute, on legal
10.15 The study suggested that consideration should be given to removing the
references to family violence orders in
s 60CC(3)(k)
Family Law Act
Given that the list of considerations in
already refers twice to
family violence, the authors considered that the additional reference in
s 60CC(3)(k)
to protection orders was ‘superfluous’. Instead,
‘[w]hat the court will really be concerned with is the substance
matters with which the [protection order] sought to
10.16 The Chisholm Review noted some issues with including protection orders
Family Law Act
By including family violence orders in this list of matters relevant to the
assessment of children’s interests, it might be
taken as suggesting that
the order itself is a factor that should be taken into account. It then partly
retreats from that suggestion
by excluding interim and non-contested orders. The
rationale is, obviously, that it may be wrong to infer from the making of such
orders that there is a risk of violence. But is the implication that the court
should infer that there is a risk of violence from
the making of final and
contested orders?
... [W]hat is important is that the court should learn about the factual
circumstances that might suggest a risk to the child or
other person, regardless
of what was the basis of a previous family violence order. As one legal
submission pointed out, ‘It
is the underlying allegations that are far
more important to the Court in determining the case than the existence or
otherwise of
10.17 As noted in Chapter 8, the Chisholm Review made several recommendations
to revise how the courts consider the best interests
of the child in family law
proceedings. The Review considered that parents, advisers and courts should be
encouraged to consider
the best arrangements for a child in each particular
case, rather than starting with an assumption that a particular outcome is
to be best in a particular category of case. The Review recommended that
family courts should consider a range of factors, similar
to those presently
included in
Family Law Act
. The Chisholm Review
concluded that, if such reforms were adopted, there would be no need for
Commissions’ views
10.18 The fact that a victim of family violence has obtained a protection
order may be one of many pieces of evidence provided by
a victim to a family
court to support allegations of family violence—other evidence could
include, for example, doctors’
reports or witness statements. A court
exercising jurisdiction under the
Family Law Act
, when determining a
child’s best interests, will need to be satisfied for itself that there
has been, or there is a risk of,
family violence.
10.19 The Commissions consider that the distinction between final or
contested orders, and interim orders, is arbitrary and not reflected
practice. An interim protection order may be made for a number of reasons that
do not reflect the level of risk, or evidence,
of family violence. For example,
as noted in Chapter 6, the Commissions have heard that some magistrates in some
to make only interim protection orders and adjourn the
final hearing until related criminal proceedings are resolved.
10.20 As noted by the stakeholders and commentators cited above, a federal
family court must consider all evidence of family violence
and give appropriate
weight to that evidence. The legislative guidance in
s 60CC(3)(k)
suggests that some, but not all, protection orders are relevant—is
misleading, in that it suggests that courts
give more or less consideration to
various kinds of protection orders, rather than looking behind those orders to
the evidence of
family violence.
10.21 In Chapter 8, the Commissions express a preliminary view that the
distinction made in
s 60CC(3)(k)
between considering final or contested
protection orders on the one hand, and interim or uncontested orders on the
other, should
be removed. The Commissions consider two options for the reform of
s 60CC(3)(k):
removing the express reference in
s 60CC(3)(k)
to consideration of
protection orders altogether and, instead, relying on a general criterion of
family violence contained in
s 60CC(3)(j)
s 60CC(3)(k)
to provide that any family violence, including
evidence of such violence given in any protection order
proceeding—including
proceedings in which final or interim protection
orders are made either by consent or after a contested hearing—is an
consideration when determining the best interests of a
10.22 Both options focus on the allegation and evidence of
family violence, rather than the type of protection order. As such, it
important that steps are taken to improve the quality of evidence of family
violence before federal family courts.
Orders made by
10.23 All state and territory family violence acts include provisions that
allow a court to make a final protection order by consent.
These provisions
generally provide that:
a court may make a final protection order if the applicant and the
respondent consent to the
if the order is made by consent, the court is not required to make
any findings as to whether the grounds for making the order are
satisfied—for example, that there has been a particular act of family
violence; and
a court can make an order on the basis that the respondent disputes
some or all of the allegations made in the application—that
admissions’.
making of a protection order ‘by consent without admission of
liability’ enables a protection order to be made
urgently, while also
protecting a respondent’s legal rights with respect to any pending
criminal charges he or she may be facing.
However, the Commissions have heard
that the notation ‘without admissions’ is commonly added to orders
by consent, even
where there are no pending or likely criminal charges.
10.25 The Commissions have heard that the majority of protection orders are
made by consent. By consenting to a protection order,
both parties avoid having
to attend a contested hearing before a magistrate. As noted by Professor
Rosemary Hunter, this can have
benefits for the parties and the court:
Proponents of the practice argued that consent without admissions represented a
win-win-win solution for all parties. It saved time
for the court, the applicant
got her order without having to wait around and without going into the witness
box to ensure a potentially
traumatic hearing, and the defendant was able to
‘save face’ to some
10.26 However, Hunter has identified some drawbacks to the practice of making
consent orders without admissions. First, while in civil
proceedings consent
orders generally require negotiation and consent by both parties, in protection
order proceedings the applicant
for a protection order is rarely given an
opportunity to oppose the order being made without admissions. When an order is
consent, the applicant loses the opportunity to put detailed evidence
before the court and for the court to make findings of family
If the great majority of intervention orders are granted either ex parte or by
consent without admitting the allegations ... there
is an overall lack of
institutional affirmation of women’s stories of abuse ... There are few
findings by magistrates that
these stories are
10.27 Hunter argues that this lack of affirmation reinforces notions that
women invent or exaggerate allegations of family violence,
and use the legal
system for collateral purposes.
10.28 Secondly, Hunter expresses concerns about courts relying on consent in
the context of family violence characterised by the exercise
of power and
control by one partner over the
The consent of the
applicant is particularly relevant where the person against whom the order is to
be made wishes the order to be
made without admissions or seeks to vary the
terms of the order. In such circumstances, courts should not assume that the
have equal negotiating power, or that intimidation or threats will not
influence the consent given by a victim of family violence.
10.29 Finally, protection orders made by consent—particularly consent
without admissions—are seen to have less weight
when it comes to proving
allegations of family violence in family law proceedings. Because a consent
order is a final order, it falls
within the kinds of protection orders that may
be considered by a federal family court when determining the best interests of a
Family Law Act
. While the Explanatory
Memorandum stated that the intention of this provision was ‘to ensure that
the court does not take account
of uncontested’ protection orders, the
s 60CC(3)(k)
—which direct a court to consider a protection
order if ‘the order is a final order; or the making of the order was
by a person’—arguably suggest otherwise.
10.30 However, as noted above, the Moloney study characterised final
protection orders made by consent or consent without admissions
as evidence of
‘less probative weight’ in family law
proceedings.
One participant in
the ALRC’s Family Violence Online Forum also noted that:
If [a protection order] was made without admissions, some lawyers for the
respondent may say it has no teeth as the person may have
just agreed to it for
the sake of peace or to move on. ... [T]he fact that the [protection order] was
made without admissions goes
to the quality of the evidence against the
respondent and not the other way around. That is, the respondent consented to
without admissions because it was in his interest to do so without a
Magistrate actually making findings against him with the strong
Commissions’ views
10.31 The Commissions note that making an order by consent without admissions
will be appropriate in some circumstances, such as where
the respondent is
facing criminal charges for related conduct and does not want to prejudice that
trial. The Commissions also recognise
that it would be unrealistic to dispense
with the making of consent orders. No court has the resources to hear every case
10.32 There are a number of options for reform to ensure that orders made by
consent ‘without admissions’ are used appropriately.
One option is
to ensure that the notation on protection orders and court files specifically
states that the order is made by consent
‘without admission as to criminal
liability of the allegations in the application for the protection order’.
10.33 Other options for reform are directed to improving the scrutiny and
quality of the consent process. Judicial officers should
be required to ensure
that the victim agrees to the court making consent orders without admission of
liability—agreement to
orders by consent on such grounds should not be
implied from the application alone.
10.34 Secondly, courts should satisfy themselves that consent orders give
attention to the safety of victims of family violence. Courts
should assure
themselves that the victim of family violence has considered the practical
implications of consenting to the order
and, in particular, to any variations to
the terms sought in the original application. There may be circumstances where
be appropriate for the court to request a safety plan in writing to
accompany the making of the protection order by consent. For
example, a safety
plan may cover matters such as how to facilitate contact with children safely,
or access to the family home.
10.35 Finally, courts should ensure that the parties are aware of the
consequences of consenting to a protection order without admission
of liability.
This is particularly important if parties are unrepresented or if there are
concurrent or pending family law proceedings.
Proposal 10–1
Judicial officers, when making a protection order
under state or territory family violence legislation by consent without
admissions,
should ensure that:
(a) the notation on protection orders and court files specifically states
that the order is made by consent ‘without admission
as to criminal
liability of the allegations in the application for the protection
(b) the applicant has an opportunity to oppose an order being made by
consent without admissions;
(c) the order gives attention to the safety of victims, and, if
appropriate, requires that a written safety plan accompanies the
(d) the parties are aware of the practical consequences of consenting to a
protection order without admission of liability.
Undertakings
10.36 In some circumstances, a person seeking a protection order may agree to
withdraw the application if the person against whom
a protection order is sought
(the respondent) provides an undertaking. An undertaking is a promise to the
court that a person will
do, or refrain from doing, certain things. Usually, the
undertaking will include the same types of conditions and prohibitions which
would have been included in the protection order had it been issued.
10.37 There is some variation in the form of undertakings given in protection
order proceedings. Sometimes, undertakings are given
orally by the respondent,
or the respondent’s lawyer. Other times, undertakings are given in writing
and may be signed by the
respondent. In some cases, the applicant may also sign
the respondent’s written undertaking.
10.38 Dr Renata Alexander notes that sometimes the respondent is encouraged
by the court or on legal advice to give an undertaking
to the court, rather than
consent to an order, so as to avoid a contest in
Occasionally, parties are
encouraged to agree to mutual
undertakings.
10.39 Undertakings are problematic for a number of reasons. Unlike a
protection order, breach of an undertaking is not a criminal
offence and cannot
be enforced by the police. Further, there is no obligation on parties to inform
a court exercising jurisdiction
Family Law Act
of undertakings
in relation to family violence, nor is the existence of an undertaking a
specified factor to be considered when determining
the best interests of a
10.40 Participants at the NSW Ombudsman Domestic Violence Community
Stakeholders forum held in December 2009 noted concerns that there
is a current
trend on the part of police prosecutors to accept undertakings rather than
proceed with hearings.
10.41 The Commissions heard in one consultation that, before accepting an
undertaking from a respondent, some magistrates will speak
separately to the
applicant to ensure that he or she is not withdrawing the application because of
unfair pressure or intimidation
by the respondent. Some magistrates will also
explain that undertakings are not enforceable, and that if the respondent
the undertaking, the only option is for the victim of family violence
to make a new application for a protection
Commissions’ views
10.42 The Commissions understand that a victim of family violence may wish to
avoid a contest in court and therefore agree to withdraw
his or her application
for a protection order on the basis that the respondent gives an undertaking to
the court not to engage in
family violence or other proscribed conduct.
10.43 A victim of family violence can also avoid contest in court by agreeing
to a protection order by consent. However, the acceptance
of undertakings can
compromise the safety of victims of family violence because a breach of an
undertaking—unlike a breach
of a protection order—is not a criminal
offence. Accordingly, the Commissions consider that it is essential that, prior
accepting an undertaking from a respondent, the court should be satisfied
that the applicant understands the implications of withdrawing
the application
and relying instead on undertakings to the court from the respondent. The
respondent should also understand that,
in accepting an undertaking rather than
pursuing an application for a protection order, the applicant is not precluded
from making
a further application if the respondent does not honour the
undertaking, or the applicant continues to be at risk of family violence.
10.44 The Commissions are interested in stakeholder views on how these
objectives may be achieved. Some options for reform include:
legislative
provisions directing judicial officers, when accepting an undertaking, to
explain these matters to the parties; judicial
training and education; or a
requirement that the court forms used to take written undertakings note that an
undertaking is not enforceable,
and that, by accepting an undertaking, the
applicant is not precluded from making a further application for a protection
10.45 In the Commissions’ preliminary view, undertakings should
generally be given in writing, rather than orally to the court.
Undertakings
given in writing mean that both parties can have a copy of the undertakings, and
reduce the potential for ambiguity
or confusion about the scope or content of
the undertakings.
10.46 The Commissions are interested in hearing whether proceedings in which
undertakings have been given, instead of a protection
order being made, return
to court on allegations of breach of the undertaking, or further family
violence. The Commissions are also
interested in hearing whether, in practice,
persons who have provided undertakings to the court, or victims of family
violence who
accept such undertakings, inform a federal family court of the
existence of such undertakings as part of their evidence of family
violence in
family law proceedings.
Proposal 10–2
Before accepting an undertaking to the court from
a person against whom a protection order is sought, a court should ensure
(a) the applicant for the
protection order understands the implications of relying on an undertaking to
the court given by the respondent,
rather than continuing with their application
for a protection order;
(b) the respondent understands that the
applicant’s acceptance of an undertaking does not preclude further action
by the applicant
to address family violence, if necessary; and
undertaking is in writing.
Question 10–1
What practical reforms
could be implemented in order to achieve the objectives set out in Proposal
Question 10–2
In practice, do victims of family
violence, who rely on undertakings to the court from a person against whom a
protection order is
sought, often return to court because the undertaking has
been breached, or to seek further protection from family violence?
In practice, do victims of family violence who rely on
undertakings to the court from a person against whom a protection order is
sought inform federal family courts of the existence of such undertakings during
family law proceedings?
[back to top]
Improving evidence
in protection order proceedings
10.47 As noted above, the Commissions’ view is that the evidence of
family violence given in protection order proceedings—rather
than the fact
that a particular kind of protection order has been made—should, where
relevant, be considered in family law
proceedings. This is consistent with the
approach in the Chisholm Review.
The fact that a person has obtained a protection order—be it final or
interim, contested or by consent—should alert a
federal family court to
the likelihood or risk of family violence. It should also prompt parties and
their lawyers to put any evidence
of family violence before the court, so it can
look behind the fact of the order and consider any supporting evidence of family
when making parenting orders.
10.48 Giving evidence of family violence can be a traumatic experience for
victims of family violence. As noted by the Victorian Law
Reform Commission
Giving evidence can be one of the most intimidating and distressing aspects of
the legal system for people who have been subject
to family violence. Their
evidence may include testimony about their experiences of sexual abuse, physical
assault or other ways
they have been humiliated, verbally abused or controlled.
The dynamics of family violence, and the way it is seen by many in the
community, mean that people who have been subjected to it often feel ashamed
10.49 This trauma is heightened if a victim is involved in multiple
proceedings, which take place in different courts, subject to
evidentiary and procedural requirements—for example, evidence by affidavit
or produced orally to the court—and
may involve different, or no, legal
representation.
10.50 Further, family violence, by its nature, is often difficult to
corroborate and prove. The Moloney study noted that:
Obtaining corroborative evidence is likely to be very difficult when the
violence has occurred over an extended period of time, potential
proof may be lost, witnesses (where there were any) may no longer be available,
injuries may have faded and the non-physical
symptoms of trauma may not be
10.51 Improving the way in which evidence is given in protection order
proceedings is an important aspect of promoting better outcomes
for victims of
family violence involved in multiple legal proceedings. It is also likely to
have a flow-on effect in improving the
quality of evidence before the courts.
Better quality evidence in protection order proceedings enhances the capacity
for other courts
to rely on protection orders, and the evidence adduced in the
supporting proceedings—for example, for determining a child’s
interests in family law proceedings.
10.52 One practical problem with this approach is that, because of the nature
of protection order proceedings, the evidence given
may not always meet the
standards of evidence required in family law proceedings. Local and magistrates
courts deal with a high volume
of applications for protection orders. Given
this, list hearings for protection orders are often brief. Dr Jane
Wangmann, in her
study of protection order proceedings in NSW Magistrates
Courts, estimated that most protection order mentions were dealt with in
than three minutes.
In addition,
many applications are finalised without a contested hearing. The oral evidence
of victims is usually limited.
10.53 In light of this reality, courts hearing applications for protection
orders are likely to rely on information contained in application
forms, and in
more limited cases, oral evidence. In this section, the Commissions discuss how
these forms of evidence may be improved,
while retaining the advantages of the
speedy and accessible protection order process.
Information provided in application
10.54 A person seeking a protection order under state or territory family
violence legislation may apply for an order by completing
an application form.
There is some variation in this process across jurisdictions—for example,
in Victoria, a person seeking
a protection order fills out an information form,
and the Court Registry uses this information to lodge a formal application for
an order on the person’s behalf. In some cases, the police may also apply
for a protection order on behalf of a victim of family
10.55 The information and degree of detail sought in the application forms
varies across jurisdictions. Some application forms simply
ask the applicant to
set out the grounds that he or she relies
This approach assumes that
the person seeking a protection order understands the legislative definition of
family violence and can
frame his or her application accordingly—knowledge
that a person is unlikely to have without assistance from the police or
lawyer. Other forms ask the applicant to describe the respondent’s
behaviour, but give no guidance as to the kinds of behaviour
that may constitute
family violence and lead the court to make a protection
10.56 In contrast, some application forms guide the applicant step by step
through the application. Some include a list of conduct
that reflects the
statutory definition of family violence and asks for details of recent
Other application forms
include the statutory definition of family violence as part of the
Commissions’ views
10.57 The Commissions consider that one way in which the quality of evidence
before courts exercising jurisdiction under state and
territory family violence
legislation to support allegations of family violence can be improved is to
improve the quality of information
sought and therefore provided in application
10.58 In particular, the Commissions consider that application forms should
include an illustrative list of the kinds of conduct that
constitute family
violence. This will help make victims aware of the full range of conduct that
may constitute family violence and
prompt them to provide evidence of the types
of family violence they have suffered. It would also assist applicants to
identify certain
sexual assault or psychological or emotional
This is particularly
important to assist victims of family violence who are making an application for
a protection order without
the assistance of lawyers or the police.
10.59 Application forms in different jurisdictions take different approaches
to seeking information about family violence. For example,
some forms set out a
list of conduct that the applicant can tick if relevant; others set out the
definition of violence before asking
the applicant to provide details of
incidents of family violence. The Commissions do not suggest that all forms need
to be identical,
but do propose that all application forms provide some guidance
to applicants about the kinds of conduct that constitute family violence.
Proposal 10–3
Court forms for applications for a protection
order under state and territory family violence legislation should include
information
relevant jurisdiction.
Affidavit evidence in protection order
proceedings
10.60 In some jurisdictions, the application form completed by a person
seeking a protection order must be sworn or made on oath.
For example,
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
(Vic) requires that an
application for a protection order made by a police officer must be made on oath
or certified by the police
officer, while an application made by a person other
than a police officer must be made on oath or by affidavit. To this end, the
final paragraph of the information form to be completed by a person seeking a
protection order is headed ‘Affidavit’
and, by signing, the
applicant swears or affirms that ‘the contents of my application are true
and correct to the best of my
knowledge’.
Application
forms in Queensland and Tasmania take a similar
10.61 In other jurisdictions, there is no requirement that an application be
supported by an affidavit. For example, in NSW, South
Australia and the ACT, the
court has discretion to accept affidavit evidence in certain circumstances,
generally where the applicant
is not able to give oral evidence to the court
during a hearing.
Restraining Orders Act 1997
(WA) takes a different approach and gives the
applicant the option of providing evidence by affidavit in support of the
application.
In the Northern
Territory, the application form includes a note, recommending that the applicant
file a Statutory Declaration setting
out the facts and circumstances which
establish a domestic relationship, the basis for the application and future
expectations.
Commissions’ views
10.62 One reason for not requiring an application to be accompanied by an
affidavit is to make the application process more user-friendly
and accessible,
particularly to applicants without legal representation or police assistance.
However, the fact that an application
is unsworn can affect the evidentiary
value of the matters set out in the application. This is not an issue where
there is a court
hearing, because the courts will critically assess the
information provided in the application form, and confirm the content of the
written application. However, if a protection order is made by consent, the
evidentiary value of the matters set out in an unsworn
application form is
reduced—particularly in pending or concurrent family law proceedings.
10.63 The Commissions are interested in hearing whether there is value in the
approach taken in the Victorian and Tasmanian family
violence acts, which
require that the information form (in Victoria) and application form (in
Tasmania) be made on oath or sworn.
10.64 An alternative approach is that taken in the Western Australian family
violence legislation, which gives the applicant for a
protection order the
option of providing affidavit evidence in support. This would give an applicant
who is currently involved in
family law proceedings, or who anticipates such
proceedings, the opportunity to provide stronger evidence in support of a
order that may be relied on in later family law proceedings.
10.65 The Commissions are interested in hearing about other mechanisms that
would facilitate the use of evidence given in protection
order proceedings in
pending, concurrent or subsequent family law proceedings where family violence
is alleged. In particular, the
Commissions are interested in whether there would
be any benefits or disadvantages to a standard form of affidavit that could be
used in protection order proceedings under state or territory family violence
legislation.
In order to improve the evidentiary value of information
contained in applications for protection orders under state and territory
violence legislation, would it be beneficial for such legislation to:
require that applications for protection orders be sworn or affirmed; or
give applicants for protection orders the opportunity of providing affidavit
evidence in support of their application?
Question 10–5
the advantages or disadvantages of providing written rather than oral evidence
to a court when seeking a protection order?
Would a standard form of affidavit
be of assistance to victims of family violence?
Are there any other ways to facilitate the use of evidence given
in proceedings for a protection order under state and territory family
legislation in pending, concurrent or subsequent family law proceedings where
family violence is alleged?
10.66 State and territory courts have adopted a number of strategies to
improve the way oral evidence is given in protection order
proceedings. This
section briefly considers the desirability of adopting any of these strategies
more broadly.
Closed or open
court proceedings
10.67 Principles of open justice generally require that court proceedings
should be open to the public. Accordingly, most family violence
legislation
contains an express or implied presumption that protection order proceedings
will be held in open court, but also includes
provisions that allow or require
the court to be closed in certain
circumstances.
Circumstances in
which the court may be closed differ across jurisdictions, for example:
in NSW, where a child is a person seeking protection or is a witness
in protection order proceedings, the court must be closed unless
directs otherwise;
in Victoria, the court may be closed, or certain people excluded, if
the court considers it necessary to do so to prevent an affected
family member,
protected person or witness from being caused undue distress or
embarrassment;
in Western Australia, the court must be closed if the applicant
wants the first hearing of the application to be held in the absence
respondent;
in the ACT, the court can order that proceedings be closed if it is
in the public interest or the interests of justice to do
in the Northern Territory, the court must be closed if the only
person seeking protection is a child, or when a vulnerable witness
evidence, unless the court directs
contrast, the
Domestic and Family Violence Protection Act 1989
states that a court hearing an application for a protection order ‘is not
to be open to the public’ but notes that
the court ‘may open the
proceedings or part of the proceedings to the public or specified
10.69 In its review of family violence laws, the VLRC noted that hearing
protection order proceedings in closed court may ‘significantly
stress of having unidentified people hearing intimate details about the
parties’ family
circumstances’.
other hand, the VLRC commented on the importance of ensuring that ‘courts
do not reinforce the view that family violence
is a private matter’ and
that ‘the system is open to public
recommended that a magistrate should have a discretion to order that the court
be closed for protection order proceedings
as well as for criminal prosecutions
involving acts of family
Commissions’ views
10.70 Where open court proceedings inhibit a victim of family violence or
another witness from giving evidence, inadequate or incomplete
evidence may be
adduced. This may have repercussions not only for the victim and the case in
issue, but also broader flow-on effects
where family violence is alleged in
pending, concurrent or subsequent family law proceedings involving the
10.71 On the other hand, conducting protection order proceedings in open
court ensures that the system is open to public scrutiny,
may reinforce the
obligation on all witnesses to tell the truth and makes more visible the reality
of family violence in our community.
10.72 As noted above, there is some variation in the provisions in state and
territory family violence legislation regarding the power
to close the court.
However, the Commissions note that, while the grounds to close the court vary,
judicial officers hearing protection
order proceedings in most states and
territories have a discretion to close or open courts in certain circumstances.
The point of
greatest difference between state and territory family violence
legislation is in the Queensland legislation, which states that protection
proceedings are to be heard in closed court, unless a court orders otherwise.
The Commissions are interested in hearing how
effective the different approaches
of each jurisdiction are in protecting vulnerable applicants and witnesses in
protection order
proceedings, and, in particular, how the requirement under the
Queensland legislation that, generally, protection order proceedings
be heard in
closed court, works in practice.
Are the provisions in state and territory family violence
legislation that allow the court to hear protection order proceedings in
court effective in protecting vulnerable applicants and witnesses?
How is the requirement in s 81 of the
Domestic and Family
Violence Protection Act 1989
(Qld), that a court hearing an application for
a protection order should not generally be open to the public, working in
Cross-examination
by a person who has allegedly used violence
10.73 Many parties to protection order proceedings represent themselves,
including persons seeking protection and persons alleged
to have used violence.
This is often due to difficulties in obtaining legal representation. Unless
legislation provides otherwise,
a self-represented party will have a right to
cross-examine witnesses. This can be problematic where a person alleged to have
violence is self-represented and cross-examines the person seeking
protection. One victim of family violence who made a submission
VLRC’s review of family violence laws commented that:
I have experienced this [personal cross-examination by the respondent]
firsthand, and can say that to be cross-examined by the respondent
and to have
to cross-examine the respondent myself, is not a position I would wish on
anyone. I was unprepared, overwhelmed and scared
of the prospect of having to
look at this man, little less have to talk to him and ask/answer
10.74 The VLRC recommended that a person against whom allegations of violence
have been made should not be able to personally cross-examine
the person seeking
protection, any family members of the parties, or any other person the court
declares to be a ‘protected
witness’ in protection order
proceedings.
This recommendation
was implemented in
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
There are also restrictions preventing persons alleged to have used violence
from personally cross-examining witnesses in family
violence legislation in
Western Australia, South Australia and the Northern
10.75 An issue that arises in this context is how to ensure that a
self-represented party who is prevented from cross-examining a
witness receives
a fair hearing. In South Australia, Western Australian and the Northern
Territory, the party may submit his or her
questions to the court, which the
court or an authorised person will then ask the witness. Under the Victorian
family violence legislation,
a court must adjourn proceedings to provide the
party with a reasonable opportunity to obtain legal representation for the
of cross-examination.
he or she does not obtain legal representation after being given a reasonable
opportunity to do so, the court must order Victoria
Legal Aid to offer legal
representation for that purpose. Victoria Legal Aid is required to comply with
this order.
10.76 In Chapter 18, the Commissions discuss restrictions on the
cross-examination of complainants in sexual offence proceedings by
unrepresented
defendants. In that chapter, the Commissions propose that Commonwealth, state
and territory governments should legislate
to prohibit an unrepresented
defendant from personally cross-examining any complainant or other witness in
sexual offence proceedings.
The Commissions further propose that any person
conducting such cross-examination should be a legal practitioner, as making a
officer ask questions on behalf of the accused may place the judicial
officer in a difficult position in determining the admissibility
questions and may raise perceptions of bias.
Commissions’ views
10.77 The Commissions recognise the concerns about allowing a person who has
used family violence to personally cross-examine a victim
of that violence. This
approach provides an opportunity for a person to misuse legal proceedings and
exert power and control over
the victim of his or her family violence.
Considering the nature and dynamics of family violence, this may significantly
the ability of a victim, or another witness, to provide truthful and
complete evidence in protection order proceedings.
10.78 In the Commissions’ preliminary view, state and territory family
violence legislation should prohibit a person, who has
allegedly used family
violence, from personally cross-examining a person against whom he or she is
alleged to have used family violence.
This is consistent with the
Commissions’ proposal in the context of sexual
For the reasons set out
in that chapter, the Commissions further propose that any person conducting such
cross-examination should
be a legal practitioner. The Victorian family violence
legislation provides an instructive model for how such a requirement could
implemented in practice—that is, for the court to adjourn proceedings to
provide an unrepresented party with a reasonable
opportunity to obtain legal
representation and, if he or she is unable to obtain representation, issuing a
court order for representation
by Legal Aid in the relevant state or
Proposal 10–4
State and territory family violence legislation
(a) prohibit a person who has allegedly used family violence from personally
cross-examining, in protection order proceedings, a
person against whom he or
she has allegedly used family violence; and
(b) provide that any person conducting such cross-examination be a legal
practitioner representing the interests of the person who
has allegedly used
family violence.
[back to top]
10.79 One way of improving the integrity of evidence of family violence is to
ensure that safeguards are in place to address two abuses
of process: false or
misleading evidence of family violence and vexatious applications and cross
applications for protection orders
under state and territory family violence
legislation.
or misleading evidence about family violence
10.80 The Chisholm Review noted the impact of false or misleading evidence
relating to family violence in family law proceedings:
false or misleading evidence relating to violence can cause great distress, and
lead to outcomes adverse to the interests of children.
If it consists of false
allegations, the adverse outcomes might be that the children spend less time
than they should with the person
wrongly accused of violence. If it consists of
false denials, the adverse outcomes might be to put children or other family
at risk, or to prevent or discourage productive ways of dealing with the
10.81 Some stakeholders have expressed concerns that allegations of family
violence or child abuse are sometimes fabricated in order
to gain an advantage
in family law proceedings, or to remove a person’s partner from the home
and deny him or her contact with
children. However, there is no clear evidence
to support such claims. Indeed, the Human Rights and Equal Opportunity
Commission has
urged ‘caution against accepting this contention
uncritically’:
There is no doubt that Family Court proceedings often are accompanied by
allegations of domestic violence and the use of protection
orders. However, this
may reflect the fact that domestic violence often escalates when couples
separate. Australian data demonstrate
that women are as likely to experience
violence by previous partners as by current partners and that it is the time
around and after
separation which is most dangerous for
False allegations and statements in family law proceedings
10.82 Section 117AB of the
Family Law Act
requires a court to make a
costs order against a person who ‘knowingly made a false allegation or
statement in the proceedings’.
This section was included to address
‘concerns expressed, in particular that allegations of family violence and
abuse can be
easily made and may be taken into account in family law
proceedings’.
There is no
specific provision in the
Family Law Act
to deal with false denials of
family violence.
10.83 As discussed in Chapter 8, the Chisholm Review raised concerns that
this provision could impede the disclosure of family violence
in cases where a
vulnerable parent’s allegations of family violence cannot be corroborated
by reliable evidence.
Chisholm Review recommended that the costs order provision in s 117AB of
Family Law Act
should be repealed and suggested that consideration
should instead be given to amending the general costs provision in s 117 of
Act to direct a court to have regard to whether any person knowingly gave
false evidence in the
proceedings.
This kind of
provision would cover both false allegations and false denials of family
10.84 In addition, the Family Law Council found that there is no evidence
that s 117AB ‘has achieved its purpose’ in relation
allegations of family violence and recommended that the Attorney-General give
consideration to clarifying the intention
of s 117AB, either through
legislative amendment or public
False evidence given in proceedings for protection orders under state
and territory family violence legislation
10.85 State and territory family violence legislation generally deals with
persons who give false evidence or make false allegations
or denials by using
provisions relating to vexatious applications or other legislation protecting
court processes. A person who gives
false evidence may also be charged with a
number of offences, including perjury, false swearing and false
10.86 In some circumstances, a court’s ability to award costs against a
person who brings an application for a protection order
‘deliberately false’ or made in ‘bad faith’ is linked to
vexatious application provisions. For example,
s 61 of the
Domestic and
Family Violence Protection Act 1989
(Qld) provides that a court may not
award costs on an application for a protection order, or a revocation or
variation of the order,
unless the court dismisses the application as
‘malicious, deliberately false, frivolous or vexatious’. In other
costs may be awarded against a person if the court is satisfied
that an application for a protection order was made ‘in bad
or ‘has not
been made honestly’.
Issues relating to vexatious applications are discussed below.
10.87 In 2004, the Parliament of Tasmania considered whether the
Violence Act 2004
(Tas) should include a provision to impose a penalty for
false or contrived claims of family violence. The government did not support
such amendments on the basis that there were adequate sanctions in the
Offences Act 1935
(Tas) and other legislation for making false
allegations:
If you make a false report to the police you can be charged; if you make a false
statutory declaration you can be charged. If you
falsely swear you can be
charged and it is perjury. All of these things are available for people who
fabricate claims, under the
Criminal Code
as well as the
Offences Act
. Anyone who does that will be charged and people have been
charged. We would not put it in here because it is in other legislation
is covered.
Commissions’ views
10.88 The Commissions’ preliminary view is that existing measures to
sanction persons who give false evidence of family violence
are sufficient. Such
measures include the courts’ power to dismiss vexatious applications and
award costs against a person
who brings a vexatious application. The Commissions
consider that these measures are sufficient safeguards against giving false
before courts generally and that there is no need for specific
provisions relating to false allegations of family violence.
10.89 The Commissions endorse the recommendations made in the recent reviews
Family Law Act
by Chisholm and the Family Law Council relating to
s 117AB of the
Family Law Act
, and note that false denials of family
violence, as well as false allegations, should trigger the court’s
discretion to make
a costs order.
applications in protection order proceedings
10.90 Vexatious legal proceedings are proceedings that are brought or
continued without reasonable grounds or for wrongful purposes—such
harass or annoy the other party, or to cause delay or detriment.
10.91 Vexatious applications may arise in a number of ways in protection
order proceedings under state and territory family violence
legislation,
vexatious applications for a protection order against the same
person based on the same or similar allegations;
vexatious cross applications by the respondent to an existing
protection order against the person who sought the original order,
resulting in mutual orders where both parties are granted protection orders
against each other;
vexatious applications by the respondent to vary or revoke a
protection order made against him or her; and
vexatious appeals against the making of protection orders or the
conditions of the order.
10.92 There are concerns that, in bringing
vexatious applications, a person who has used family violence can use the legal
to further harass, control and abuse the victim. In a submission quoted
in the Victorian Parliament Law Reform Committee’s
report on vexatious
litigants, Women’s Legal Service Victoria stated that:
Family violence is often characterized by one party attempting to control the
other party and stalking by one party attempting to
have contact with the other
party against their wishes. Similarly a key feature of at least some vexatious
litigation is an attempt
to control the other party or maintain contact with
him/her via persistent litigation. It appears that some vexatious litigants
to be using the legal system as a vehicle for control and harassment of
the other party.
10.93 During consultations conducted by Professor Ian Freckelton SC with
Victorian judicial officers and tribunal members for the
purposes of the Law
Reform Committee’s report, a magistrate noted that:
There are not a lot of vexatious litigants in the family violence jurisdiction
but they have a big impact. They are difficult and
can be violent and
intimidating. They take time and energy and invoke frustration. Some are quite
cold and calculating. Often people
use the law to try to contact or see a person
or to try to inconvenience them through repeated applications or applications
for variations.
Vexatious applications for protection
10.94 Courts can deal with vexatious applications and cross applications for
protection orders using provisions in family violence
legislation, court rules
or legislation that deals specifically with vexatious court proceedings.
Legislation differs across jurisdictions,
but may allow the court to dismiss
vexatious applications, award costs against a person who has brought a vexatious
application and,
in some circumstances, to order that a person cannot institute
further proceedings without leave of the court.
Dismiss the application
. Some state and territory family
violence acts specifically state that a court can dismiss frivolous or vexatious
applications for
protection orders. For example, the
Intervention Order
(Prevention of Abuse) Act 2009
(SA) provides that the court, at the
preliminary hearing—to which the respondent is not summonsed to
appear—may dismiss
an application on the ground that it is
‘frivolous, vexatious, without substance or has no reasonable prospect of
application for an apprehended personal violence order can be refused on the
same basis.
However, the
legislation does not contain a similar provision in relation to apprehended
domestic violence orders. In other jurisdictions,
court rules generally allow a
court to stay or dismiss vexatious
applications.
. Most state and territory family violence acts
allow a court to make a costs order against a person who has made a vexatious
application.
For example,
Crimes (Domestic and Personal
Violence) Act 2007
(NSW) provides that a court is not to order costs against
an applicant seeking protection unless the court is satisfied that the
application was frivolous or
Prohibition on making further applications without leave of the
. While dismissing the application and awarding costs may deal with
a particular vexatious application, these measures do not prevent
making further vexatious applications that harass the other party and abuse
court processes. Legislation in some jurisdictions
allows a court to declare a
particular person to be a vexatious litigant, with the effect that that person
may not commence new proceedings
without leave of the court.
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
(Vic) is the only state
or territory family violence legislation that permits the court to make orders
with respect to vexatious litigants,
as well as vexatious applications. The Act
allows the Attorney‑General, a person against whom the applications have
or a person with leave of the court, to apply for an order declaring
a person to be a vexatious
The Chief Magistrate,
Deputy Chief Magistrate or the President of the Children’s Court may make
such an order if satisfied
that the person has ‘habitually, persistently
and without reasonable ground instituted proceedings under this Act against the
same person’.
10.99 The provision includes, as an example of such conduct, where a person
has persistently and without any reasonable grounds:
• made applications for family violence intervention orders against the
same family member;
• applied for the variation of a family violence intervention order
made against a family member;
• applied for the revocation of a family violence intervention order
made against the person;
• appealed against the making of a family violence intervention order,
or the conditions of the order, made against the
10.100 A person declared to be a vexatious litigant cannot make an
application for an order, cross application, or variation, revocation
extension of an order, without leave of the court. The Act includes provisions
to allow a person who has been declared a vexatious
litigant to appeal that
10.101 These provisions implemented recommendations made by the VLRC in its
review of family violence laws.
The Explanatory Memorandum for the
Family Violence Protection Bill 2008
that this provision was included to:
ensure that the procedures under the Bill cannot be misused as a form of
harassment and to acknowledge that it would only be appropriate
person’s access to the court system if the person had demonstrably abused
court processes in the past.
10.102 In Queensland and Western Australia, the relevant magistrates court
has a general power to prohibit a person from commencing
certain proceedings
without leave of the court.
other states and territories, court rules or legislation governing vexatious
proceedings permit only Supreme Courts to declare
a person to be a vexatious
litigant, or to require that a person seek leave before commencing further legal
proceedings.
Commissions’ views
10.103 Vexatious applications in protection order proceedings under state and
territory family violence legislation can be a means
for a person to misuse the
legal system to harass or intimidate a victim of family violence. In addition,
because the existence of
certain kinds of protection order is a relevant
consideration to be taken into account by a court when making orders under the
Family Law Act
vexatious applications for protection orders have the
potential to affect the operation of both the family law and state and territory
family violence regimes.
10.104 Courts exercising jurisdiction under state and territory family
violence legislation should be able to respond to the misuse
of protection order
provisions—in particular, vexatious applications for protection orders
made to harass or intimidate victims
of family violence or other persons. The
Commissions are particularly concerned about the risk that a person subject to
applications may be pressured to consent to a protection order, or do
so in order to avoid repeated appearances in court.
10.105 The Commissions consider that there is merit in allowing courts to
order that a person who has brought several vexatious applications
applications for protection orders against the same person without reasonable
grounds may not make further applications
except with the leave of the court.
The Victorian family violence legislation—which has comprehensive
vexatious litigant provisions—and
the South Australian family violence
legislation—which allows a judicial officer to strike out an application
at a preliminary
stage before a respondent is served—provide instructive
models. The Commissions recognise that provisions that inhibit a person’s
ability to bring an application before a court can be inconsistent with the
principle that justice should be accessible and open
to all. However, such
provisions may be justified to protect people from having to defend unreasonable
and repeated applications
for protection orders and to prevent abuse of the
protection order system.
Should state and territory family violence legislation allow a
(a) make an order that a person who has made two or more vexatious
applications for a protection order against the same person
may not make a
further application without the leave of the court; and/or
(b) dismiss a vexatious application for a protection order at a preliminary
hearing before a respondent is served with that application?
Vexatious cross applications
10.106 In addition to concerns that applications for protection orders may be
used by some people to harass or intimidate family members,
the Commissions have
heard concerns that some respondents make cross applications for protection
orders against the original applicant
without reasonable grounds to do
In particular, there are
concerns that some respondents make cross applications in order to obtain a
procedural advantage in anticipated
10.107 Vexatious cross applications are particularly problematic, because a
person may agree to a mutual protection order being made
by consent in order to
avoid further proceedings. The VLRC considered the issue of cross applications
in its review of family violence
laws in Victoria:
Original applicants are often pressured to accept an intervention order being
made against them by consent, in exchange for respondents
consenting to the
intervention order against them. According to the commission’s
consultations, pressure to consent to having
an intervention order made against
the original applicant comes from magistrates, respondents’ advocates and
sometimes the
applicant’s own
10.108 The VLRC concluded that there were a number of problems in the current
use of cross applications, including that:
a cross application can coerce or pressure a victim of family
violence into consenting to a mutual order;
unfair pressure to consent to a mutual order can lead to a
protection order being imposed on a victim of family violence when there
evidence that he or she has committed any acts of violence;
mutual orders do not promote responsibility and accountability for
those who use family violence; and
mutual orders are difficult for police to
VLRC considered that there should be a limitation on making mutual orders by
consent. The Commission recommended that a
mutual protection order should not be
made unless the magistrate is satisfied that there are sufficient grounds for
making orders
against each party on the basis that each party has committed
family violence.
Commissions’ views
10.110 The Commissions are concerned about the misuse of cross applications
for protection orders, and in particular about the potential
for respondents to
make cross applications in order to harass a victim of family violence or to
affect concurrent or pending family
law proceedings.
10.111 The Commissions note that cross applications can be made for
legitimate reasons—for example, where both parties have
engaged in violent
conduct and there is a risk that the same or other family violence will be
repeated. The Commissions also note
that courts already have power to dismiss a
cross application if it is made without reasonable grounds, or brought in order
or intimidate a person, and award costs.
10.112 However, given concerns expressed about the misuse of cross
applications, and the difficulties involved in making and enforcing
protection orders by consent, the Commissions consider that safeguards are
required to prevent the misuse of cross applications.
The Commissions consider
that the family violence legislation in Victoria, based on recommendations by
the VLRC, provides an instructive
model, and propose that mutual orders should
not be made by consent. Instead, a court should make a mutual protection order
where it is satisfied that the grounds for a protection order have been
made out by both parties.
Proposal 10–5
State and territory family violence legislation
should provide that mutual protection orders may only be made by a court if it
satisfied that there are grounds for making a protection order against each
Vexatious applications to vary or revoke
protection orders
10.113 There are also concerns that some respondents make repeated
applications to vary or revoke a protection order as a way to harass
intimidate a person who has obtained a protection order against them. State and
territory family violence legislation may set
out different procedures to vary
or revoke a protection order, depending on whether the order was issued by a
court or by police.
This section is concerned only with protection orders made
by a court.
10.114 State and territory family violence legislation generally provides
that a court may vary or revoke a protection order. The
most common ground to do
so is where the court is satisfied that there has been a change in circumstances
since the original order
10.115 Procedures to vary or revoke protection orders differ across
protection order
to make an application to vary or revoke the order only with the leave of the
court. For example,
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
(Vic) states that:
(1) ... the respondent for a family violence intervention order may apply for
the variation or revocation of the order only if the
court has given leave for
the respondent to make the application.
(2) The court may grant leave under subsection (1) only if the court is
satisfied that—
(a) there has been a change in circumstances since the family violence
intervention order was made; and
(b) the change may justify a variation or revocation of the order.
10.116 This provision implemented a recommendation made by the VLRC’s
review of family violence laws, which considered that
the requirement to seek
a necessary safeguard against court processes being used as a form of further
abuse. It will ensure that a protected person only
needs to attend court to
defend the application where the respondent has demonstrated to a magistrate
that there may be grounds for
granting the
application.
10.117 Family violence legislation in Western Australia and the Northern
Territory similarly requires a respondent to seek leave before
application to vary or revoke a protection
Family Violence
(Tas) requires both the original applicant and the respondent to
seek leave in relation to protection orders made by a court, as opposed
protection orders issued by
There are no similar
requirements in other family violence legislation.
Commissions’ views
10.118 The Commissions consider that there is merit in requiring that a
respondent to a protection order seek leave from the court
before making an
application to vary or revoke a protection order made against them. A provision
of this kind will ensure that a
variation or revocation is only sought by the
respondent when there are reasonable grounds to do so—such as a change in
circumstances since the original order was made—and protect against
vexatious applications against the victim of family violence.
Proposal 10–6
State and territory family violence legislation
should require the respondent to a protection order to seek leave from the court
making an application to vary or revoke the protection order.
[back to top]
Removing impediments
to information sharing
10.119 The remainder of this chapter considers how to improve information
sharing between courts, practitioners, relevant government
agencies and other
people and institutions in the family violence and family law systems.
Information sharing has been identified
as an ongoing challenge in ensuring the
safety of victims of family violence in proceedings in federal family courts and
territory courts. As noted in the 2009 report of the National Council
to Reduce Violence against Women and their Children (
obstacles to information-sharing by stakeholders in the family law system remain
a significant impediment to ensuring that women
and their children are safe.
Evidence of violence is collected on a case-by-case basis via subpoenae to
different organisations,
but confidentiality guidelines and legislative
limitations on disclosure restrict access to child-protection records, civil and
law records and education and medical records. With the exception of
the Family Court of Australia’s Magellan Case Management
project, there is
a ‘factual vacuum’ as there are few formal agreements and
communication channels between organisations
able to provide this evidence, and
neither the Family Court of Australia nor associated socio-legal services have
the power to investigate
allegations of
10.120 The National Council recommended that information-sharing systems and
protocols should be developed and supported by all organisations
in response to
sexual assault and family violence. It also considered that such protocols
should give primacy to the safety of women
10.121 The following two sections of this chapter consider
information-sharing issues in proceedings involving family violence. The
section discusses legislative constraints on information sharing, and suggests
options for relaxing some of these provisions.
The second section considers
strategies to promote information sharing between federal family courts, state
and territory courts,
and federal, state and territory government
agencies—in particular, information-sharing protocols and a national
order database.
10.122 Information sharing is one element of an integrated response to family
violence in the context of multiple legal proceedings.
It also has significance
in risk assessment and the sharing of critical safety information. Integrated
responses, and elements of
those integrated responses, such as inter-agency
collaboration and data collection, are discussed in Chapter 19.
Federal family court
proceedings
Access to records
10.123 Information included in federal family court records may be relevant
to proceedings under state and territory family violence
laws. This information
could include, for example, details of current or prior parenting orders,
reasons for making these orders,
as well as injunctions granted under the
Family Law Act
. Interviews or assessments of parents or children for the
purposes of court proceedings, including family consultant assessments
clinicians’ reports that have been obtained through the court, may also be
relevant and are discussed later in this chapter.
Family Law Rules 2004
(Cth) specify a limited range of
people who may search the court record relating to a case, or—with the
permission of the court—a
document forming part of the record. These
persons are:
(a) the Attorney-General;
(b) a party, a lawyer for a party, or an independent children’s lawyer, in
(c) with the permission of the court, a person with a proper interest:
(i) in the case; or
(ii) in information obtainable from the court record in the case;
(d) with the permission of the court, a person researching the court record
relating to the case.
10.125 In considering whether to give permission to a person seeking to
obtain access to a part of the court record other than court
documents, the
court must consider:
(a) the purpose for which access is sought;
(b) whether the access sought is reasonable for that purpose;
(c) the need for security of court personnel, parties, children and
(d) any limits or conditions that should be imposed on access to, or use of, the
10.126 The only situation in which the
Family Law Act
provides for details of injunctions or orders to be provided to other courts is
where a federal family court has made an
order or granted an injunction that is
inconsistent with an existing protection
10.127 The Family Law Council made a submission to the ALRC’s 2008
inquiry into Australian privacy laws
(ALRC 108),
commenting on
the challenge of information sharing in the context of family violence. It noted
In many cases information held by one part of the system is not available to
another part because of privacy considerations. Decisions
are therefore made in
the absence of a complete picture of the family circumstances. This lack of
transparency often leads to misguided
decisions being taken or problems being
ignored. This is particularly so when decisions have to be made on an urgent
basis and there
is no time for the leisurely process of subpoenas or information
orders to be sought.
10.128 The Council advised that it was considering whether police officers
should have access to databases of the family courts to
prepare officers better
to deal with situations of family violence which arise in a family law context.
One of the examples that
the Council provided was where a court has ordered that
a supervisor be present when a parent spends time with a child:
Without access to information on the child related orders, police might attend a
scene and remove the person responsible for supervising
a parent spending time
with a child without also removing the child ... At the moment, police must rely
on seeing the physical orders
when they attend the
10.129 It was noted in ALRC 108 that, pursuant to r 24.13 of the
Family Law Rules
, police officers are already able to obtain access to
information held by the Family Court where the officer can demonstrate a
interest’ in the court
Accordingly, the ALRC
did not recommend legislative change in this regard.
Commissions’ views
10.130 The Commissions are interested in stakeholder feedback on the
accessibility and timeliness—in practice—of the record
relevant family court proceedings to persons who have an interest in protection
order proceedings under state and territory
family violence legislation,
including police who may be involved in enforcing protection orders.
10.131 In the Commissions’ preliminary view, there is adequate
flexibility in the provisions in the
Family Law Rules
to allow police
officers and others to access information for the purpose of protection order
proceedings under state and territory
family violence legislation. To the extent
that persons with a justifiable interest are not able to obtain access to family
records, this indicates a need for formalised information-sharing
practices—for example, through an information-sharing protocol.
option is discussed below.
10.132 However, information-sharing obligations could also be imposed at the
legislative level. The Commissions are interested in
stakeholder views about the
need for, or desirability of, a requirement in the
Family Law Act
rules under that Act, for a federal family court to provide details of
injunctions or orders to another court—for example,
a state or territory
court hearing proceedings under family violence legislation involving one or
more of the parties to the family
law proceedings.
In practice, are records of proceedings under the
(Cth) accessible—in a timely fashion—to persons seeking
access for the purpose of protection order proceedings under
state and territory
family violence legislation? If not, are any amendments to the
Family Law Rules 2004
(Cth) necessary or
desirable—for example, to impose an obligation on federal family courts to
provide details of injunctions
or orders to a state or territory court hearing
proceedings under family violence legislation involving one or more of the
to the family law
proceedings?
Publication
10.133 As noted in Chapter 2, art 14 of the
International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights
entitles all persons to a ‘fair and public
hearing’. However, the Covenant provides that suits of law need not be
public in proceedings concerning matrimonial disputes or the guardianship
of children.
10.134 Consistently with this,
Family Law Act
it an offence to publish any account of any proceedings under the Act that
identifies a party to the proceedings; a person
who is related to, or associated
with a party to the proceedings; or a witness in the
proceedings.
The provision
sets broad parameters for when information will be taken as identifying a
person. These include any of the following
particulars, where they are
sufficient to identify that person to a member of the public, or a section of
the public to which the
account is communicated:
the person’s name, title, pseudonym or alias;
the address of any premises at which the person resides or works, or
the locality in which premises are situated;
the person’s physical description or style of dress;
any employment or occupation in which the person engages;
the person’s relationship to identified relatives, friends or
businesses;
the person’s recreational interests or political,
philosophical or religious beliefs; and
any real or personal property in which the person has an interest or
with which the person is otherwise associated.
10.135 There are a
number of exceptions to the publication offence in s 121—most
relevantly, for disclosures to persons concerned
in proceedings in ‘any
court’ for use in connection with those
proceedings.
Other exceptions
include, for example, disclosures made to legal professional disciplinary
boards; disclosures made to bodies providing,
or considering whether to provide,
legal aid; notices or reports published pursuant to a court direction; and
publications intended
primarily for use by members of the legal profession.
Accounts of proceedings may also be published with court approval.
10.136 The impact of the publication offence in s 121 on the communication of
information for the purpose of protection order proceedings
under state and
territory family violence legislation will depend on the interpretation of the
terms an ‘account of proceedings’
and dissemination ‘to the
public or to a section of the public’. In
Hinchcliffe v Commissioner of
Police of the Australian Federal Police
, Kenny J of the Federal Court
gave a narrow interpretation to both of these
Justice Kenny
commented that an ‘account of proceedings’ requires a narrative,
description, retelling or recitation of
something about, or that has happened
in, the proceedings. This is not made out merely because some allegations made
in the proceedings
are reiterated outside the court. Justice Kenny noted with
approval the ruling in
Re Edelsten; Ex Parte
dissemination ‘to the public or to a section of the public’ should
be taken as a reference to a ‘widespread
communication with the aim of
reaching a wide
not encompass communications to close personal associates or members of a group
with an interest that is substantially
greater than, or different from, the
interest of other members of the public.
Commissions’ views
10.137 The Commissions are interested in stakeholder views about whether
Family Law Act
unduly restricts public communication
sharing of information
with persons seeking access for the purpose of protection
order proceedings under state and territory family violence legislation,
including police who enforce such orders.
10.138 The Commissions’ preliminary view is that the exception to allow
disclosure to persons concerned in any court proceedings
for use in connection
with those proceedings sufficiently enables the sharing of information for the
purpose of protection order
proceedings under state and territory family
violence legislation. This is supported by the interpretations that courts have
in assessing whether a particular disclosure constitutes an
‘account of proceedings’ and dissemination ‘to the
In practice, does the prohibition on publication set out in
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) unduly restrict communication
under state
and territory family violence legislation, including police who
enforce such orders? If so, are any amendments to
necessary or
Family dispute
resolution information
10.139 The role of family dispute resolution (FDR) is discussed in detail in
Chapter 11. Broadly speaking, the
Family Law Act
requires the use of
FDR before court action can begin, but provides for exceptions in cases of
family violence and child abuse. This
policy reflects concerns about the use of
FDR in cases of family violence, which are discussed in Chapter 11.
10.140 However, under the
Family Law Act
, information obtained during
FDR processes is in general confidential and inadmissible in subsequent court
proceedings, although
there are exceptions relevant to child abuse and family
violence, discussed below. The confidentiality of FDR processes is important
a number of reasons, including: the need for candour by the parties and for
impartiality on the part of the practitioner; the
absence of legal safeguards
(which may prejudice the position of parties); and protection of FDR processes
from the distraction and
harassment caused by legal
proceedings.
Importantly,
parties may opt for FDR processes precisely because of the confidentiality of
such proceedings.
10.141 An issue for this Inquiry is whether the information obtained during
FDR processes should be more readily available to family
courts. This would have
the advantages of improving information flow between FDR practitioners and the
courts, and ensuring that
courts are aware of relevant information about family
violence disclosed during FDR processes. FDR practitioners presently communicate
limited information to the courts, in the form of certificates from FDR
practitioners. These certificates are discussed first. The
next section
considers the confidentiality of information communicated to FDR practitioners
and the admissibility of such information
Certificates from family dispute resolution
practitioners
10.142 Pursuant to
Family Law Act
, before applying
for an order under
of the Act (child-related proceedings), a person
must first make a genuine effort to resolve the dispute by family dispute
resolution.
Subject to certain exceptions—including where the court is
satisfied that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there
has been, or
there is a risk of, family violence by one of the parties to the
proceedings—a court must not hear an application
for such an order unless
the applicant has filed a certificate from an FDR practitioner (a s 60I
certificate).
10.143 Despite the exception from FDR for matters involving family violence,
experiences of physical or emotional abuse may be reported
for the first time
during FDR.
Commonly, an FDR
practitioner in this situation will issue a s 60I certificate to the effect
that FDR did not proceed because the
practitioner considered that it would not
be appropriate.
10.144 In a submission to the Chisholm Review, Family Relationships Service
Australia submitted that:
Currently Family Dispute Resolution practitioners have limited options for
passing on information about risks identified to the Family
Court where this
would be appropriate. The Certificates prescribed in
Section 60I
Family Law Act
allow for limited identification of reasons why Family
Dispute Resolution is either inappropriate or
unsuccessful.
10.145 The Chisholm Review suggested that ‘it may prove useful’
to reconsider the drafting of
10.146 The Family Law Council considered the issue in more detail its 2009
report. In its view:
The function of the Certificate as simply the vehicle which authorises parties
to move to litigation does not reflect the financial
investment by Government in
creating family relationship centres, or the skill of the family dispute
resolution practitioner in working
with the family to provide guidance to the
Court as to the program or services best suited to the needs of the
participants.
10.147 However, the Council was unable to ‘ascertain a consensus’
as to whether FDR practitioners could have some responsibility
for communicating
relevant information to the court without ‘compromising the
inadmissibility of the intervention, or the anonymity
of a violence allegation
thereby placing a victim at
The Council
noted that ‘many unintended consequences’ would flow from changing
the role of the FDR practitioner in this
way, including: the need for increased
funding for the additional report writing skills and tasks required; the
probability that
FDR practitioners would have to testify about their methods and
conclusions; and the disincentive for those committing violence to
participate
in, and for victims to disclose violence in, FDR
Council’s recommendation was that an options paper be written, outlining
the advantages and disadvantages of reforms in
this area, for comment by
stakeholders.
Commissions’ views
10.148 During consultations with the Commissions, some federal magistrates
noted the benefit of
certificates in signalling that a proceeding
Family Law Act
involves family violence
The limited amount
of information currently included on
certificates, however,
constrains their potential for passing on information about family violence
risks to federal family courts.
10.149 The Commissions consider there to be merit in the suggestion that the
certificates should include additional information about
why family dispute
resolution was inappropriate or unsuccessful—for example, because there
has been, or there is a future risk
of, family violence by one of the parties to
the proceedings. In addition to increasing the usefulness of
certificates in proceedings in courts exercising family law jurisdiction, such a
reform could also lead to a role for
certificates in protection order
proceedings under state and territory family violence legislation.
10.150 The Commissions note the concern that requiring additional information
will change the role of FDR practitioners. Some of these
concerns—such as
the probability that FDR practitioners will have to testify—depend upon
whether the information in
certificates is treated as evidence of the
allegation, and the nature of other information gained during FDR processes
to courts exercising family law jurisdiction. The Commissions are
interested in hearing further from stakeholders about whether it
is desirable to
limit the use of information provided in
certificates, such as by
providing that the information can only be used for the purposes of screening
and risk assessment by courts;
or whether such certificates should be used more
widely and, if so, in what ways.
Proposal 10–7
Certificates issued under
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) should include information about why family
dispute resolution was inappropriate or unsuccessful—for example, because
there has been, or is a future risk of, family violence by one of the parties to
the proceedings.
If more information is included in certificates issued under
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) pursuant to Proposal
10–7, how should this information be treated by family courts? For
example, should such information
only be used for the purposes of screening and
risk assessment?
Communications to family counsellors and FDR
practitioners
Sections 10D
Family Law Act
information-handling obligations on family counsellors and FDR practitioners
respectively. These persons must maintain the
confidentiality of all
communications made to them except in limited situations, including
disclosure:
with the consent of the person who made the disclosure or, if the
person is under the age of 18, with the consent of each of the
parents or a court; or
where the counsellor or practitioner reasonably believes that
disclosure is necessary to:
protect a child from the risk of physical or psychological
prevent or lessen a serious and imminent threat to the life or
health of any person; or
report the commission, or prevent the likely commission, of an
offence involving violence or a threat of violence to a
10.152 Family counsellors and FDR practitioners
disclose a communication if they reasonably believe that the disclosure is
necessary to comply with a law of the Commonwealth or
a state or territory. This
includes, for example, mandatory reporting of child
10.153 Previous reviews have suggested the need to relax the confidentiality
provisions in
Family Law Act
report of the Australian Institute of Family Studies suggested that
communication of disclosures made in FDR processes may
allow greater
coordination where matters move between relationship services and the
Currently, much relevant information may be collected by relationship service
professionals in screening and assessment processes,
but this information is not
transmissible between professionals in this sector and professionals in the
legal sector, or between
other agencies and services responsible for providing
assistance. Effectively, families who move from one part of the system to the
other often have to start all over again. For families already under stress as a
result of family violence, safety concerns and other
complex issues, this may
delay resolution and compound
disadvantages.
10.154 The Chisholm Review recommended that the Australian Government should
consider amending the confidentiality provisions in the
Family Law Act
make information relevant to assessing the risks from family violence more
readily available to federal family
The Review commented
that the court’s capacity to protect children and families that come
before it ‘would almost certainly
be enhanced if it had access to relevant
information held by external agencies, including dispute resolution
10.155 On 25 February 2010, the
Sydney Morning Herald
reported that the Chief Justice of the Family Court had raised concerns with the
Attorney-General about the non-disclosure of FDR
information to the Family
Court. It was reported that Chief Justice Bryant argued that this information
should be made available
to family law judges making parenting orders where an
FDR practitioner believes there is a risk to a person’s safety—for
example, due to family violence, mental health or drug and alcohol
Options for reform
10.156 One option for reform is to broaden the scope of the exceptions to the
confidentiality requirements imposed by
. A relevant model in
this regard is the exceptions to provisions regulating the use and disclosure of
personal information under
federal and state and territory privacy laws.
10.157 As discussed in more detail below, Information Privacy Principle
(IPP) 10 in the
(Cth) imposes a duty on Australian
Government agencies not to disclose personal information other than in limited
circumstances,
including where an agency ‘believes on reasonable grounds
that the disclosure is necessary to prevent or lessen a serious and
threat to the life or health’ of a
10.158 In ALRC 108, the ALRC recommended that the requirement for a
threat to be imminent should be removed from principles governing
disclosure in federal, state and territory privacy laws, noting that:
The current requirement that the requisite threats to an individual be imminent
as well as serious sets a disproportionately high
bar to the use and disclosure
of personal information. This is problematic in circumstances in which there may
be compelling policy
reasons for the information to be used or disclosed but it
is impracticable to seek consent. Agencies and organisations should be
take preventative action to stop a threat from escalating to the point of
materialisation. In order to do so, they may need
to use or disclose personal
information.
10.159 In responding to the recommendation, the Australian Government agreed
that the requirement for a serious threat to be imminent
can be too restrictive.
However, the Government noted some stakeholder views that the
‘imminence’ requirement operated
as an important safeguard against
the mishandling of personal information. The Government suggested a compromise
position, which
would permit the disclosure of personal information where
necessary to prevent or lessen a serious—but not necessarily
imminent—threat
only after consent has first been sought, where seeking
consent is reasonable and
practicable.
10.160 Sections 10D and 10H do not permit disclosures by family
counsellors and FDR practitioners in situations where disclosure is
intended to
avert a threat to a person’s safety. In comparison, similar exceptions to
non-disclosure requirements are included
and secrecy
In ALRC 108, the
ALRC recommended that a reasonable belief that use or disclosure is necessary to
lessen or prevent a serious threat
to a person’s safety should be an
exception to the use and disclosure
10.161 Another exception to the obligation of confidentiality in ss 10D
and 10H applies where a family counsellor or FDR practitioner
seeks to report
the commission, or prevent the likely commission, of an offence involving
violence or a threat of violence to a person.
An option for expanding the scope
of sharing information in this context is to permit the disclosure of
information where a counsellor
or practitioner reasonably believes that
disclosure is necessary to report actual or threatened conduct that constitutes
for issuing a protection order.
10.162 Another option is for a broader exception to the confidentiality
obligations that extends beyond threats to the life, health
or safety of a
person, to reflect the fact that a range of information is likely to be relevant
to a parenting order that may not
fall within such exceptions. For example, the
Community and Disability Services Ministers’ Advisory Council submitted to
ALRC in its inquiry into secrecy laws that, in the context of child
protection, the threshold for release of information on public
interest grounds
should be whether the release is ‘necessary to prevent or lessen a threat
to health, safety or
of a person’ (emphasis
The Council
emphasised that the inclusion of ‘welfare’ was particularly relevant
in child protection. The ALRC noted
that the desirability and operation of these
there ‘may be circumstances in which it is appropriate for
exceptions of this kind to cover a person’s welfare, as well
health or safety’.
Another example would be a more specific exception enabling release of
information to courts exercising family law jurisdiction in
circumstances, or in accordance with specific protocols.
Commissions’ views
10.163 The Commissions seek further information about whether, in practice,
Family Law Act
operate to restrict
inappropriately the release of information relating to the risks of family
violence to courts—including
state and territory courts exercising
10.164 The Commissions’ preliminary view, however, is that the
operation of the
confidentiality provisions should be
relaxed. In particular,
ss 10D(4)(b)
(4)(b) should permit family
counsellors and FDR practitioners to disclose communications where they
reasonably believe that disclosure
is necessary to prevent or lessen a serious
threat to a person’s life, health or safety.
10.165 This proposal would expand the present exception in two ways. The
first is removal of the ‘imminence’ requirement.
Commissions’ preliminary view, there are compelling policy reasons to
permit the disclosure of personal information
in such circumstances. Family
violence often manifests as controlling behaviour over a number of years, the
threat from which may
be very difficult to characterise as
‘imminent’ even where it is ‘serious’. Expanding
in this way is consistent with the reasoning in
10.166 Secondly, the proposed changes would permit a family counsellor or FDR
practitioner to disclose communications where he or
she reasonably believes that
disclosure is necessary to prevent or lessen a serious threat to a
person’s safety. Safety has
been described as ‘the central concern
of domestic violence
intervention’.
safety concerns in the context of family violence will coexist with concerns
this will not always be the
case—for example, where a victim of family violence is in danger of
harassment or intimidation.
In the Commissions’ preliminary view, this
should be recognised as a permissible basis for the disclosure of
information.
10.167 The Commissions are also interested in stakeholder views on the merits
of permitting a family counsellor or FDR practitioner
to disclose communications
when he or she reasonably believes that disclosure is necessary to report
conduct that he or she reasonably
believes constitutes grounds for issuing a
protection order under state and territory family violence legislation. The
clearest application
of any such reform is in jurisdictions where police
officers apply directly for protection orders. A family counsellor or FDR
practitioner
who has been made aware of conduct that would constitute grounds
for issuing a protection order would have the option of reporting
information to the police. A police officer could then decide, in accordance
with standard operating procedures, whether to
apply for a protection order. The
process is less straightforward in those jurisdictions in which police officers
do not play an
active role in applying for protection orders. Although the
police are still likely to be the most relevant agency for family counsellors
and FDR practitioners to inform, there is no clear avenue through which police
could make use of the information.
10.168 A common interpretative framework for family violence—proposed
in Chapter 4—would assist a family counsellor or
FDR practitioner who
seeks to communicate information pursuant to an exception where he or she
reasonably believes disclosure to
be necessary to report conduct that he or she
reasonably believes to constitute grounds for issuing a protection order under
and territory family violence legislation.
10.169 The Commissions are also interested in stakeholder views whether these
proposals are sufficiently broad to encompass the range
of information gained by
family counsellors and FDR practitioners that should be available to courts,
bearing in mind the competing
interests in the confidentiality of counselling
and dispute resolution processes. For example, should the exception be extended
preventing or lessening a serious threat to a child’s welfare?
Are the confidentiality provisions in
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) inappropriately restricting family
counsellors and family dispute resolution practitioners from releasing
information relating
to the risks of family violence to:
exercising family law jurisdiction; and
(b) state and territory courts
exercising jurisdiction under family violence
legislation?
Proposal 10–8
Sections 10D(4)(b)
(4)(b) of the
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) should be amended to permit family counsellors
and family dispute resolution practitioners to disclose communications where
they reasonably believe that disclosure is necessary to prevent or lessen a
serious threat to a person’s life, health or safety.
Proposal 10–9
Sections 10D(4)(c)
(4)(c) of the
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) should permit family counsellors and family
dispute resolution practitioners to disclose communications where they
believe that disclosure is necessary to report conduct that they
reasonably believe constitutes grounds for a protection order under
territory family violence legislation.
Should there be any other amendments to
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) enabling the release of any other types of
information obtained by family counsellors or family dispute resolution
practitioners?
For example, should the legislation permit release where it would
prevent or lessen a serious threat to a child’s
Admissibility of communications to family
counsellors and FDR practitioners
10.170 Even where a family counsellor or FDR practitioner is permitted to
disclose a communication, it may not be admissible as evidence
proceedings. Pursuant to
Family Law Act
evidence of anything said, or any admission made, by or in the company of a
family counsellor or FDR practitioner is inadmissible
‘in any court
(whether or not exercising federal jurisdiction)’ or ‘in any
proceedings before a person authorised
to hear evidence (whether the person is
authorised by a law of the Commonwealth, a State or a Territory, or by the
consent of the
parties)’. There are exceptions where:
an admission by an adult indicates that a child under 18 has been
abused or is at risk of abuse; or
a disclosure by a child under 18 that indicates that the child has
been abused or is at risk of abuse.
10.171 The competing public
interests relating to the disclosure of communications to family counsellors
have been explained as follows:
On the one hand, the success of the counselling procedure may well depend on the
counsellors and the parties being counselled knowing
that what occurs at the
meeting or counselling session is absolutely confidential and will not be
disclosed in any way to any other
person. If there is any risk of disclosure of
what occurs in the course of the meeting, the parties will in all likelihood be
from engaging in full and frank discussion of relevant matters. On the
other hand, the interests of justice may require disclosure
in certain limited
situations.
10.172 The Family Law Council briefly considered the prohibition on the
admissibility of communications made to family counsellors
2009 report in the general context of the disclosure of family violence in
family law proceedings. The Council noted that
it ‘is therefore possible
that a party to proceedings involving a child does not disclose that he or she
and/or the subject
children are being, or have been exposed to serious family
recommended that, among other things, the Attorney-General consider amending
s 10E of the Act to include an exception to the
inadmissibility of
communications to a family counsellor or FDR practitioner ‘when an adult
or child discloses that a child
has been exposed to family
reasoning appears capable of applying to s 10J (which deals with FDR
practitioners) as well as s 10E (which deals with family
counselling).
10.173 Another issue concerns the interpretation of s 10E. In
(WA) v Department of Family & Children’s Services
, the Supreme
Court of Western Australia held that the prohibition on admissibility ‘in
any court (whether or not exercising
federal jurisdiction)’ set out in
s 19N of the
Family Law Act
—the predecessor to the current
—was limited by the definition of ‘court’ in
Family Law Act
—being the court exercising
Family Law Act
proceedings. Accordingly, the
inadmissibility provisions did not extend to proceedings in the Children’s
Court of Western
10.174 Similar reasoning was used by the majority of the Supreme Court of
South Australia in
R v Liddy (No 2)
to permit the admission of
Family Law Act
counselling records in criminal proceedings. However, in a
dissenting opinion, Wicks J expressed the view that ‘any court
exercising federal jurisdiction or not)’ should be interpreted
more broadly.
Where non-federal jurisdiction, ie State jurisdiction, is concerned, the words
(whether exercising federal jurisdiction or not) clearly
make the expression
‘court’ applicable to courts generally, including this court, the
Supreme Court of South Australia.
If the expression ‘court’ is used to have the widest possible
meaning and is not limited merely to courts exercising
federal jurisdiction
relating to family law, the structure of sub-s (2) is logical. The
sub-section begins by prohibiting courts
of every complexion and whether
exercising federal or State jurisdiction, from admitting into evidence anything
said at a meeting
or conference to which the sub-section applies. Par (b) then
proceeds to deal with tribunals, mediations and arbitrations where the
concerned are authorised to hear evidence. In other words, sub-s (2)
embraces the entire field in Australia of bodies authorised
to hear evidence, be
they courts or otherwise, from admitting into evidence anything said or any
admission made at a meeting or conference
referred to in the sub-section.
… It seems to me that it would be illogical to limit the operation of the
section to a few courts which deal with family law
and yet to express
par (b) in the widest possible terms specifically including persons
authorised by a law of the Commonwealth, or
of a State or territory or even by
the consent of the parties, to hear
Commissions’ views
10.175 The Commissions support the Family Law Council’s recommendation
Family Law Act
be amended to include an exception
allowing communications to a family counsellor or FDR practitioner to be
admitted in evidence when
an adult or child discloses that a child has been
exposed to family violence. This appears in line with the existing exceptions in
that provision protecting the interests of children. This amendment should also
apply to s 10J of the Act, which applies to communications
made to FDR
practitioners.
10.176 The Commissions are interested, however, in stakeholder views as to
whether ss 10E and 10J should be amended to enable the
admission of any
other evidence relating to family violence and, if so, what limits should be
placed on the admissibility of such
10.177 Another issue is whether ss 10E and 10J should be amended to
apply clearly to state and territory courts when they are not
exercising family
law jurisdiction. There is no clear policy rationale for communications to
family counsellors and FDR practitioners
being inadmissible in
proceedings but admissible in protection order proceedings under state
and territory family violence legislation. Such a policy also
appears to be out
of step with the inadmissibility of such communications in all federal, state
and territory tribunal, mediation,
and arbitration proceedings. On this basis,
the Commissions consider that there is merit in expressly extending the
application of
the non-admissibility provisions in
Family Law Act
to other courts, including state and territory courts
hearing protection order proceedings under family violence
legislation.
10.178 However, the Commissions are concerned about the potential for such a
reform to be detrimental to victims of family violence
who are involved in
family law proceedings and protection order proceedings under family violence
legislation in state and territory
courts. The Commissions seek feedback from
stakeholders on the merits of extending the inadmissibility of communications
family counsellors and FDR practitioners to proceedings in other
courts—for example, courts hearing protection order proceedings
state and territory family violence legislation.
Proposal 10–10
Sections 10E
Family Law Act
(Cth) should enable the admission into evidence of disclosures made by
an adult or child that a child has been exposed to family violence,
disclosures have been made to family counsellors and family dispute resolution
practitioners.
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) permit the admission into evidence of communications made to family
counsellors and family dispute resolution practitioners
which disclose family
violence? If so, how should such an exception be framed?
Family Law Act 1975
amended to apply expressly to state and territory courts when they are not
exercising family law jurisdiction?
State and territory
family violence proceeding information
10.179 The previous sections of this chapter have discussed options for
improving access to information obtained in the course of,
or in association
with, federal family court proceedings by appropriate persons. Below, the
Commissions discuss the availability
of information obtained in protection order
proceedings under state and territory family violence legislation to federal
family courts.
The manner in which this information can be shared is governed by
specific provisions in family violence legislation in each of the
territories. These operate over and above relevant state and territory court
Non-publication provisions in family violence
legislation
10.180 The family violence legislation in every state and territory imposes
prohibitions on the publication of certain information
in, or associated with, protection order
proceedings.
triggered by a court order—including
any harm threshold that must be
satisfied before a court may make an order for non-publication—and the
exceptions and defences
available to permit publication. Non-publication
provisions in state and territory family violence legislation also differ as
their duration—while some last indefinitely, others only apply
until such time as a court has disposed of the proceedings.
10.181 In some states and territories, a prohibition on publication of
certain aspects of protection order proceedings applies by
default. Under the
Queensland family violence legislation, for example, it is an offence to publish
an account of proceedings that
identifies, or is likely to identify the
aggrieved person, a named person, the respondent, the applicant, the appellant,
or a child concerned in the proceedings. An exception to the
prohibition applies where publication is with the magistrate’s
permission’.
comparison, under the Tasmanian family violence legislation, a prohibition on
publication only applies following a court order
to this effect. However, a
make an order prohibiting the publication of material which
may disclose the identity of a child affected by protection order
proceedings.
The NSW family
violence legislation also distinguishes between information relating to children
and other persons involved in protection
order proceedings, only imposing a
default prohibition in relation to
10.182 The distinction between publishing identifying information relating to
adults as compared with children is supported by art
on the Rights of the Child
, which requires that in all actions in courts of
law concerning children, ‘the best interests of the child shall be a
consideration’.
Identifying a child involved in protection order proceedings will generally not
be in that child’s best interests. Article
International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
also recognises the particular
made public ‘where
the interest of juvenile persons otherwise
requires’, in addition to where proceedings concern matrimonial disputes
guardianship of children.
10.183 The Northern Territory family violence legislation sets out a harm
threshold that must be satisfied before a court can make
a non-publication order
in relation to a protected person or witness in a proceeding—that is, that
the court must be satisfied
that publication would expose the person to risk of
This does not apply in
the context of publishing identifying information about children involved in
protection order proceedings,
on which there is a default
prohibition.
Permissible and required publication of court
proceedings
10.184 There are exceptions and defences to the broad scope of the
prohibitions on publication included in state and territory family
violence laws
which affect the sharing of information with courts. In particular, the
Queensland family violence legislation has
an exception for ‘persons
concerned in proceedings in a court or to a police officer, of any transcript of
evidence, or other
document for use in connection with the
proceedings’.
family violence legislation includes a specific exception for information given
to a court under
Family Law Act
(‘informing the
court of relevant family violence
exceptions in the ACT legislation include, for example, the provision of
information to agencies responsible for child protection,
legal aid and criminal
justice. A court may also make an order to allow publication if it is in the
public interest, will promote
compliance with the protection order, or is
necessary or desirable for the proper functioning of the
Many of the prohibitions
on publication in state and territory family violence laws include exceptions
where publication is with
the consent of the person to whom the information
relates or the court.
10.185 In addition to provisions that
the publication of
information relating to protection order proceedings, some family violence laws
courts to inform certain people about the making of a protection
order. In Western Australia, where the person against whom a protection
made is a child under 16 years of age, and the protected person is the
child’s parent or guardian, or another person
responsible for the
child’s day to day care, the registrar must notify the Western Australian
child protection agency of the
In South Australia, if
a court makes a tenancy order, it must give notice of this order to the
protected person, tenant, landlord,
assignee and the registrar of the
Residential Tenancies
10.186 In March 2010, the Queensland Department of Community Services
released a consultation paper on the
Domestic and Family Violence Protection
(Qld). The Department noted that the benefits of information
sharing include, for example; the capacity to provide a holistic approach
service provision; assisting non-government organisations to undertake their
functions more effectively; and alleviating the inconvenience
associated with
victims having to supply the same information on a number of occasions to
different service providers. The Department
raised concerns, however, that
increased information sharing could result in a reluctance to report family
violence due to concerns
as to how the information will be used, and the need to
ensure that information sharing is sensitive to any cultural issues that
arise—for example, where the information relates to Indigenous peoples or
people from culturally and linguistically diverse
backgrounds. The Department
asked whether personal information should be able to be shared in the context of
ensuring an integrated
approach to family violence and, if so, what information
and for what purpose.
Prohibitions on courts and others disclosing
information
10.187 A further way in which information sharing can be restricted is where
family violence legislation restricts the information
that a court may disclose,
as compared with the prohibitions on publication considered above that apply to
For example, the Western Australian family violence
legislation places an obligation on courts not to disclose information to a
to proceedings that would, or would be likely to, reveal the whereabouts
of another party or witness in the
proceedings.
10.188 The NSW family violence legislation prohibits information about the
address at which the protected person resides from
being included in a
protection order or its supporting
application.
Commissions’ views
10.189 Limiting the public disclosure of information relating to protection
order proceedings under family violence legislation is
important to protect the
proceedings. Arguably, the
need for secrecy in the context of protection order
proceedings may be even greater than in the context of proceedings under the
Family Law Act
, discussed above. By definition, protection order
proceedings will require parties to disclose highly sensitive information about
physical and psychological harm which has been inflicted on them,
and—where relevant—their sexual relationship. These
issues may be
absent from, or peripheral to, many proceedings captured by
Family Law Act
10.190 However, the Commissions are concerned about the possibility that
non-publication provisions in state and territory family
violence proceedings
unduly restrict communication about protection order proceedings—in
particular, with persons associated
with family law proceedings in federal
family courts. The Commissions are interested in stakeholder views on whether
issues in this
regard arise in practice.
10.191 In the event that there are such problems, the Commissions have
identified several legislative options which may facilitate
greater sharing of
identifying information about adults involved in or associated with proceedings
for protection orders, namely:
requiring the prohibition on disclosure to be activated by a court
order where the identifying information relates to an adult, rather
imposing a requirement that the disclosure of identifying
information must be reasonably likely to expose a person to risk of harm
precondition for a court to issue an order prohibiting publication—as
applies, for example, in proceedings under the Northern
Territory family
violence legislation that are not related to children; and/or
including an exception to prohibitions on publication for the
disclosure of pleadings, transcripts of evidence or other documents
to a police
officer or to persons concerned in any court proceedings for use in connection
with those proceedings—as applies,
for example, under the Queensland
family violence legislation.
10.192 The Commissions are interested
in stakeholder views on the merits or otherwise of any such reforms. The
Commissions do not
suggest any options for increasing the publication of
identifying information about children involved in protection order proceedings,
since this would not be in the best interests of the
10.193 Ensuring that laws allow disclosure of information to, for example,
federal family courts may not be sufficient to ensure that
information is
actually shared in practice. This raises the question of whether state and
territory family violence legislation should
courts to provide
information about proceedings in certain circumstances—for example, where
the court is aware of proceedings
underway in a federal family court involving
one or more of the parties to the protection order proceedings.
10.194 In the Commissions’ preliminary view, a practical way, in the
short term, in which to impose information-sharing requirements
information-sharing protocols, rather than direct legislative obligations. Such
protocols allow the development of a more
nuanced framework that can accommodate
situations in which disclosing information would be inappropriate or should be
additional conditions. However, the Commissions are interested in
stakeholder views on whether there are some circumstances in which
necessary or desirable for state and territory family violence legislation to
require courts to disclose information which
may be relevant to proceedings in
federal family courts.
In practice, do prohibitions on publication in state and
territory family violence legislation unduly restrict communication about
protection order proceedings which may be relevant to proceedings in federal
family courts?
Question 10–18
Should prohibitions on
publication of identifying information about adults involved in protection order
proceedings under state and
territory family violence legislation be modified in
one or more of the following ways to
(a) require the
prohibition on disclosure to be activated by a court order;
(b) impose a
requirement that the disclosure of identifying information must be reasonably
likely to expose a person to risk of
harm as a precondition for a court to issue
an order prohibiting publication; and/or
(c) include an exception to
prohibitions on publication for disclosure of pleadings, transcripts of evidence
or other documents
to police or other persons concerned in any court
proceedings, for use in connection with those proceedings—for example, the
exception set out in s 82(3)(a) of the
Domestic and Family Violence
Protection Act 1989
Are there any situations in which state and territory family
violence legislation should require courts to provide details of protection
order proceedings or orders to federal family
information
10.195 The sharing of information that has been generated in, or in
connection with, court proceedings is considered above. Information
federal and state and territory government agencies may also be relevant to
protection order proceedings under state and
territory family violence laws and
Family Law Act
proceedings. The persons and courts with which this
information is shared will impact on the availability of an integrated response
in legal proceedings to protect victims of violence and their children.
10.196 Legal obstacles to sharing information may stem from privacy and
secrecy laws. The extent to which these laws impede information
sharing will
also depend on the availability of provisions in other laws that authorise or
require information sharing in certain
contexts. Some state and territory family
violence legislation includes such information-sharing provisions.
10.197 However, barriers to information sharing need not be legislative in
nature. Often the obstacles are cultural. Promoting a culture
of effective
information sharing is considered in the following section of this chapter.
10.198 The handling of personal information is regulated at the federal level
and by each of the states and territories. The principal
piece of federal
legislation regulating privacy in Australia is the
applies to Australian and ACT Government agencies and private sector
organisations.
contains a set of 11 IPPs that apply to Australian and ACT Government
agencies, and 10 National Privacy Principles (NPPs)
that apply to the
private sector.
10.199 Of particular relevance to this Inquiry are IPPs 10 and 11, which
impose limits on the manner in which Australian Government
agencies use and
disclose personal information. IPP 10 provides that a
‘record-keeper’ in an Australian Government agency
possession or control of personal information shall not use the information for
any other purpose unless:
(a) the individual concerned has consented to use of the information for that
other purpose;
(b) the record-keeper believes on reasonable grounds that use of the information
for that other purpose is necessary to prevent or
lessen a serious and imminent
threat to the life or health of the individual concerned or another person;
(c) use of the information for that other purpose is required or authorised by
or under law;
(d) use of the information for that other purpose is reasonably necessary for
enforcement of the criminal law or of a law imposing
a pecuniary penalty, or for
the protection of the public revenue; or
(e) the purpose for which the information is used is directly related to the
purpose for which the information was
10.200 IPP 11 imposes an obligation of non-disclosure of personal
information on Australian Government agencies other than where particular
conditions have been satisfied. These conditions closely reflect the exceptions
to the prohibition on use in IPP 10. Similar, but
not identical,
limitations on use and disclosure apply to many state and territory government
agencies under state and territory
obligations.
10.201 Time for Action
noted that privacy laws can contribute to a
lack of communication and collaboration between government and non-government
organisations,
which impedes systems working together effectively:
While privacy laws generally allow the sharing of information between government
agencies and other specified organisations where
there is a serious and imminent
threat to a person’s safety, … many service providers report
inconsistencies in the way
the need for clarification of, and/or education for, relevant agencies about
Common risk assessment tools are also an important aspect of improving the
consistency and effectiveness of service responses across
systems and
organisations. Adopting a common approach for assessing and managing domestic
and family violence throughout the service
system ensures the focus of
intervention and support remains on the safety of victims/survivors, and that
they receive a consistent
response regardless of the approach of the
organisation that is providing the
10.202 In 2008, the ALRC recommended that a uniform set of privacy principles
should apply to private sector organisations and federal,
state and territory
government agencies.
expressed the view that the use and disclosure of personal information should be
for a purpose that is directly related to the primary purpose of
collection, where the individual about whom the information relates
reasonably expect the information to be used in this way;
with the consent of the individual to whom the information
where the agency or organisation reasonably believes that the use or
disclosure is reasonably necessary to lessen or prevent a serious
threat to an
individual’s life, health or safety; or public health or public
where the use or disclosure is required or authorised by or under
where the agency or organisation reasonably believes that the use or
disclosure is necessary for certain law enforcement and regulatory
including ‘the prevention, detection, investigation or remedying of
seriously improper conduct or prescribed conduct’;
for research
Australian Government generally accepted the ALRC’s recommended use and
disclosure principle, including that the
use or disclosure of personal
information should be allowed where an agency or organisation reasonably
believes the use or disclosure
is necessary to lessen or prevent a serious
threat to an individual’s life, health or safety, or public health or
public safety.
However, in light of stakeholder concerns about the possible
breadth of this exception, the Government suggested that this exception
only apply after an agency or organisation has sought the consent of the person
to whom the information relates, where reasonable
and practicable. The
Australian Government also expressed the view that the use and disclosure of
personal information should be
permitted where it is necessary for the purpose
of locating missing
Secrecy laws
10.204 While privacy laws impose obligations on agencies with respect to the
handling of personal information, secrecy laws impose
obligations on individual
public servants with respect to the handling of personal and other information
held by government. Frequently,
breach of secrecy laws gives rise to criminal
liability. The manner in which secrecy laws can impact on information sharing in
context of proceedings associated with allegations of family violence can be
illustrated by the
Social Security (Administration) Act 1999
(Cth), which
governs, among other matters, the handling of social security information.
10.205 Pursuant to div 6 of the Act, the Secretary of the Department of
Education, Employment and Workplace Relations may require
a social security
recipient to provide information and, in some circumstances, to undergo a
medical, psychiatric or psychological
examination.
Many situations
can be envisaged where information collected under this division could be
relevant to proceedings under family violence
legislation or the
. A prior psychiatric or psychological examination of a person against
whom allegations of family violence have been made could assist
in supporting or
refuting such allegations. A prior medical examination of an alleged victim
could be used to similar effect.
10.206 A secrecy offence is set out in
Social Security
(Administration) Act
, which prohibits any person intentionally making a
record of, disclosing or otherwise making use of information without
authorisation.
The Secretary
is permitted to disclose information in limited circumstances, including where
he or she certifies that it is ‘necessary
in the public interest’ to
do so in a particular case or class of
Social Security
(Public Interest Certificate Guidelines) (DEEWR) Determination 2008
provides that, in issuing a public interest disclosure certification, the
Secretary must have regard to ‘any situation
in which the person to whom
the information relates is, or may be, subject to physical, psychological or
emotional abuse’.
10.207 In 2009, the ALRC conducted a review of Commonwealth secrecy laws,
with a focus on the increased need to share information
within and between
governments and with the private
The ALRC recommended that Australian Government agencies should review the
secrecy offences on the Commonwealth statute book to determine
criminal offence is warranted; and, if so, whether the offence complies with the
ALRC’s recommended best practice
principles.
These include
that—other than in limited circumstances—secrecy offences should
include an express requirement that the
unauthorised disclosure caused, or was
likely or intended to cause, harm to an identified essential public
The ALRC also
recommended that secrecy offences should include an exception for disclosures in
the course of an officer’s functions
This exception may
permit disclosures that are required or authorised under another law—for
example, state and territory family
violence legislation.
Information sharing required or authorised by
10.208 Some state and territory family violence laws include
information-sharing provisions that are directed towards overriding obligations
of non-disclosure that would otherwise apply under privacy and secrecy laws.
These provisions differ with respect to whether information
sharing is required
or merely authorised, and the kinds of information and agencies to which the
disclosure provision applies.
10.209 Under the Tasmanian family violence legislation, ‘personal
information custodians’—within the meaning of
Information Protection Act 2004
(Tas)—are permitted (but not required)
to collect, use, disclose or otherwise deal with personal information where this
done in good faith for the purpose of furthering the objects of the
Violence Act
Section 3 of the Act states the objects as follows: ‘In the
administration of this Act, the safety, psychological wellbeing
and interests of
people affected by family violence are the paramount considerations’.
10.210 Section 70A of the
Restraining Orders Act 1997
provides for ‘interested parties’ to share prescribed information if
the parties agree that this is necessary to
ensure the safety of a person who is
the subject of a protection order or the wellbeing of a child who is affected by
such an order.
‘Interested parties’ are defined as:
the Commissioner of Police;
the Chief Executive Officer of the agency assisting the Minister
administering the Restraining Orders Act—presently the Attorney-General;
the Chief Executive Officer of the agency assisting the Minister
administering
Sentence Administration Act 2003
(WA)—presently the Minister for Corrective Services; and
the Chief Executive Officer for child
10.211 ‘Prescribed
information’ includes, among other matters:
the name, address, telephone number, age and ethnicity and other
details of the victim, a child of the victim, or a person bound
by a protection
a description of any offence relevant to the granting of the
protection order and an abridged description of the circumstances of
commission;
any information about the grounds on which the protection order was
granted; and
the status of the investigation and prosecution of any offence
relevant to the granting of the protection order by a police
10.212 Persons
who provide information under s 70A ‘in confidence and good
faith’ are protected from any civil or criminal
liability, or breach of
professional ethics or standards, in respect of the provision of the
information.
10.213 In the ACT, a more restricted information-sharing scheme is
established under
Domestic Violence Agencies Act 1986
(ACT). This section enables police officers who suspect the past or future
commission of a ‘domestic violence offence’
to disclose to approved
crisis support organisations ‘any information that is likely to aid the
organisation in rendering assistance
to the person or to any children of the
person’. Crisis support organisations are approved by the Minister
pursuant to disallowable
legislative instruments.
10.214 In some situations, agencies are
to share information
relevant to family violence proceedings. The South Australian family violence
legislation requires South Australian
Government agencies, and persons providing
services to those agencies, to make available to police officers, on request,
information
that ‘could reasonably be expected to assist in locating a
defendant to whom an intervention order is to be
The Western
Australian family violence legislation requires the Commissioner of Police,
where practicable, to provide the court with
information in relation to the
respondent’s criminal record or any previous similar behaviour that is
relevant to a matter
Commissions’ views
10.215 As noted above,
Time for Action
identified privacy laws as one
of the ongoing obstacles to an integrated and effective response to family
violence. Many stakeholders
consulted in this Inquiry have agreed that they
encounter difficulties sharing information because of privacy and secrecy laws.
Commissions seek further stakeholder views on whether privacy and secrecy
laws are impeding federal, state and territory agencies
from disclosing
information which may be relevant to:
protection order proceedings under state and territory family
violence legislation;
Family Law Act
proceedings in federal family courts, to the
extent that these give rise to family violence concerns.
Commissions are particularly interested in whether additional legal or practical
issues are encountered where information
sharing takes place across federal and
state and territory boundaries—for example, where a state or territory
government agency
provides information to a federal family court.
10.217 In the Commissions’ preliminary view, the public interest in
protecting victims of family violence from further abuse
should take precedence
over the public interest in respecting an individual’s privacy. In
particular, federal, state and territory
agencies should be able to disclose
personal information, on a confidential basis, to other agencies and court
officers where this
information is necessary for the purpose of initiating or
conducting protection order proceedings. If limitations on use and disclosure
under privacy laws are preventing this cooperation, then there is a strong
argument for relaxing the limitations.
10.218 Implementation of the model use and disclosure principle set out in
ALRC 108 would address many of the barriers currently raised
laws. Of particular relevance in this context is the discretion to use and
disclose personal information where an agency
reasonably believes that such use
or disclosure is necessary to lessen or prevent a serious threat to an
individual’s life,
health or safety. As noted above, the Australian
Government substantially accepted this recommendation, with the caveat that the
agency should first obtain the consent of the person to whom the information
relates, where reasonable and practicable. Pursuant
to the ALRC’s
recommended framework, these same exceptions would also apply to use and
disclosure principles in state and territory
10.219 The Commissions are concerned, however, that such a reform may not be
sufficient to enable information sharing in all circumstances
where such sharing
would be warranted. In particular, the Commissions consider there is merit in
state and territory family violence
legislation authorising certain information
sharing. Such provisions would mean that information sharing would be
or authorised by law’, and, therefore, an exception under
the purpose of
many secrecy laws. In the Commissions’ preliminary view,
information-sharing provisions should be included in
all state and territory
family violence legislation.
10.220 The Commissions do not intend to specify the manner in which such
information-sharing provisions should be drafted. The Commissions
consider that
each state and territory should have the discretion whether to draft such a
provision as an open-ended authorisation
to disclose information for the purpose
of achieving a specified purpose—the Tasmanian model—or a codified
information-sharing
regime, under which disclosure may only be made of certain
information and to specified persons—the Western Australian model.
However, several elements of the information-sharing provision warrant
10.221 The purposes for which information can be disclosed
stage, the Commissions endorse the purpose for information sharing set out in
the Western Australian family violence legislation—that
is, where the
agency reasonably believes that disclosure is necessary to ensure the safety of
a victim or the wellbeing of an affected
child. In effect, this modifies the
‘life, health and safety’ exception in privacy laws, discussed
above, by removing
the requirement that a specific threat be
‘serious’. The Commissions consider this change to be justifiable
nature and dynamics of family violence. As discussed in
Chapter 4, a central feature of family violence is that the person using
exercises control and power over the victim by inducing fear. In this way,
violence can involve a continuum of controlling behaviour
occurring over a
number of years, rather than the single serious incidents that are the focus of
the relevant privacy exception.
10.222 To whom information may be disclosed
: This may not be an issue
where information-sharing provisions are drafted in accordance with the
Tasmanian model—that is,
where the only requirement for disclosure is that
it satisfies the requisite purpose. However, provisions modelled on, for
the Western Australian family violence legislation, may unduly
constrain the persons with whom information can be shared. In the
Commissions’ preliminary view, disclosure should be permitted to, at
least, relevant government officers in other jurisdictions—for
Commissioners of Police—and officers of federal, state and territory
10.223 Legislative reform will only solve some of the barriers to information
sharing. In this and previous inquiries, the Commissions
have been made aware of
significant cultural barriers to information sharing by government agencies.
This issue is addressed below.
Do privacy and/or secrecy laws unduly impede agencies from
disclosing information which may be relevant to:
(a) protection order
proceedings under state and territory family violence legislation; and/or
family law proceedings in federal family
Proposal 10–11
Legislative privacy principles applying to the
use and disclosure of personal information by Australian Government and state
and territory
government agencies should permit use or disclosure where an
agency reasonably believes it is necessary to lessen or prevent a serious
to an individual’s life, health or safety, as recommended by the ALRC in
For Your Information: Australian Privacy Law and Practice
(ALRC 108).
Proposal 10–12
State and territory family violence legislation
should authorise agencies in that state or territory to use or disclose personal
information
for the purpose of ensuring the safety of a victim of family
violence or the wellbeing of an affected child.
Proposal 10–13
Information-sharing provisions introduced
pursuant to Proposal 10–12 should permit disclosure to, at least,
relevant government
officers in other jurisdictions and federal, state and
territory court officers.
[back to top]
Strategies to
promote information sharing
10.224 A common theme that has been raised throughout this discussion of
information sharing is the limited change that can be effected
by legislation
alone. Many of the barriers to exchanging information are administrative and
cultural in nature. This may occur where
persons who hold information are unsure
to whom it may be provided and on what conditions, which may lead to
unnecessarily conservative
approaches to disclosure. Accordingly, reforms to
facilitate the sharing of information in appropriate circumstances may arise
strategies such as clear information-sharing protocols and a nationally
accessible database of family violence-related information.
These are discussed
Information-sharing
10.225 Information-sharing protocols formalise what information can be
exchanged, to whom, and on what conditions. A number of information-sharing
protocols have been entered into between courts and child protection
However, the
Commissions are only aware of one such protocol in the context of family
violence—the protocol in Western Australia
between the Family Court of
Western Australia, the Magistrates Court (in particular, the specialist Family
Violence Court), and the
Attorney-General’s Department, Corrective
Services Department and Legal Aid. The parties entered into the protocol in
10.226 The protocol acknowledges that ‘as far as is practicable, and
permissible under the relevant statutory provisions, the
parties should share
and exchange information and resources in individual cases’ where to do so
would assist in achieving the
parties’ common commitment to protecting
victims of violence and providing the best possible outcomes for
10.227 The protocol makes provision for the exchange of information between
courts which share common clients. In order to ascertain
the existence of a
common client, officers from the Magistrates Court may access information from
the Family Court of Western Australia,
and an officer from the Family Court of
Western Australia or a family consultant may access information from the
Magistrates Court’s
Where a common
client is established, the protocol permits, on written request, inspection of
the relevant court records.
The protocol also specifies processes for liaison between a family consultant in
the Family Court of Western Australia and the case
management coordinator in the
Family Violence Court.
10.228 Where a family violence service worker (employed by the
Attorney-General’s Department) is concerned that a child who is the
subject of parenting order proceedings in the Family Court
of Western Australia
may be at risk, the worker may advise the family consultant that there is
information or documentation available
that may be relevant to the assessment of
risk for the child.
where a family violence service worker has referred a client to the Family Court
of Western Australia to file applications
for parenting orders, or becomes aware
that such an application is likely to be filed, the worker must notify the court
service has information that may be of use to the court. The judicial
officer dealing with the file may then make appropriate inquiries
service and request any relevant information or
documentation.
10.229 The Commissions have heard anecdotally in this Inquiry that the Family
Court of Western Australia receives better quality information
than its federal
counterpart because of a greater willingness by Western Australian Government
agencies to share information with
a state court. However, the protocol applies
only to the Family Court of Western Australia—it does not extend to
proceedings
in the federal family courts. In addition, the protocol does not
apply to proceedings in the District Court. Extending the protocol
District Court could ensure, for example, that judges sentencing in the District
Court are aware of orders made in the Family
Court of Western Australia and that
Family Court Judges are aware of protective bail conditions or orders made in
sentencing in the
Commissions’ views
10.230 At present, there are few information-sharing protocols in the context
of family violence. Such protocols appear to have considerable
potential to
improve information sharing between federal family courts, state and territory
courts, and other relevant agencies and
organisations. In particular,
information-sharing protocols can clarify the situations in which information
sharing is desirable
and necessary, as well as the lawful boundaries of
disclosure. In the Commissions’ preliminary view, courts that hear
order proceedings in each state and territory should enter into an
information-sharing protocol with the Family Court, Federal Magistrates
police and relevant government departments. It may also be appropriate to
include non-government organisations such as family
violence support workers.
The development of information-sharing protocols in the context of family
violence is consistent with the
views expressed in
Time for Action
Proposal 10–14
Courts that hear protection order proceedings in
each state and territory should enter into an information-sharing protocol with
Family Court of Australia, Federal Magistrates Court, police, relevant
government departments and other organisations that hold information
in relation
to family violence.
protection order database
10.231 Implementation of a national protection order database provides the
opportunity for a system-wide approach to information-sharing.
The impetus for a
national protection order database is closely connected to the Australian
Government’s commitment to work
with states and territory governments to
establish a national registration system for protection
National registration of protection
10.232 Currently, a protection order that has been obtained in one state or
territory is not automatically enforceable in another
state or territory.
Rather, the victim of family violence or some other person must register the
‘external protection order’
in the latter
Registration is
essentially an administrative process; however, there are some differences
between jurisdictions with respect to
the types of orders that are capable of
registration, provisions for notification of the person against whom the order
has been made,
and duration for which the external protection order is in force.
In some jurisdictions—including NSW, Queensland, Tasmania
and the Northern
Territory—a court may vary an external protection order before
registration.
10.233 Provisions for notification between courts that an external protection
order has been registered are only set out in some state
and territory family
violence laws. Family violence legislation in Victoria, Western Australia, the
ACT and the Northern Territory
provides that if the court registers an external
protection order, the court or registrar is to provide notice of the
registration
to the court that made the order (the original court). In Victoria
and the ACT, the court also must provide the original court with
notice of any
variation to the original order. The ACT is the only jurisdiction that also
provides for feedback from the original
court to a court which has registered
the external protection order—if an ACT court has been notified by an
external court
that it has registered an ACT protection order, the ACT court
must notify the external court if it revokes or varies the
10.234 One of the ‘immediate actions’ to which the Australian
Government committed in its response to
Time for Action
was to work with
the states and territories, through the Standing Committee of Attorneys-General,
to establish a national scheme
for the registration of protection orders. The
Australian Government noted that this scheme would allow orders to be enforced
state and territory
10.235 At the time of writing, details have not been released about the
manner in which the Australian Government intends to implement
this commitment.
Potentially, for example, a national scheme could take the form of mutual
recognition or model family violence laws.
However national registration is
brought into effect, a logical way to support its operation would be through a
national protection
order database. Such a scheme was suggested in the Model
Domestic Violence Laws report released in 1999 by the Domestic Violence
Legislation Working
A supporting database
10.236 The 1999 Model Domestic Violence Laws report proposed a national
registration system for protection orders with a central database
repository of the relevant information. As soon as possible after a court made a
protection order, the court clerk would be
required to give written
notification. Notice would also be required if the order was extended, varied,
revoked or set aside on appeal.
Information would include the names of the
parties, the period for which the order has effect and the prohibitions or
imposed by the order. Upon the entry of an order into the database,
the order would be deemed to have been registered and to be enforceable
state and territory.
10.237 In 2008, the Australian Government Solicitor (AGS) commented on the
ongoing usefulness of the scheme proposed in the 1999 Model
Domestic Violence
Laws, noting it had been unable to ascertain why a scheme of this kind had not
been pursued.
CrimTrac as the supporting
10.238 The 1999 Model Domestic Violence Laws report noted the potential
advantages of using CrimTrac—developed for exchanging
national policing
information—as the supporting database, commenting that:
CrimTrac appears to offer a vastly improved concept in national registration of
orders and overcomes all of the problems associated
with manual registration,
such as notice to the defendant of registration, mechanical or administrative
processes and costs incurred
by State and Territory courts, reliability of
orders and enforcement of orders. It is consequently the Working Group’s
option with regard to the alternative registration schemes detailed in
this division and the previous
10.239 It appears that CrimTrac already includes some information about
protection orders.
has noted that:
Our understanding is that police in all jurisdictions provide at least some
information to CrimTrac about such orders for inclusion
in the database,
although we understand that the amount of detail provided varies significantly
between jurisdictions.
10.240 CrimTrac includes extensive safeguards to ensure the integrity and
security of information held on its systems. All personal
information is held
securely. Access to operational data is acquired on a ‘need to know’
basis and audit logs are maintained
of access to, and disclosure of,
information.
Extending the ambit of a protection order
10.241 The 1999 Model Domestic Violence Laws report and, from the information
presently available, the Australian Government’s
commitment to a national
protection order registration system are both limited to information about
protection orders obtained under
state and territory family violence
legislation. A question that arises in this Inquiry is whether this should be
expanded to include,
for example, orders and injunctions issued by a federal
family court.
A review of the
South Australian domestic violence laws commented, for example, that a national
could meet the need for reliable information about orders made in all Australian
of parenting of children and
injunctions for the personal protection of children or parties were also
included on such a database,
it would go some way towards facilitating Courts
exercising jurisdiction under State Acts to fulfil their obligations and in
would facilitate the enforcement of State based
10.242 Including orders made by federal family courts on a centrally
accessible database would deal with the concerns expressed by
the Family Law
Council in its submission to ALRC 108 discussed earlier in this
chapter—that is, that police may attend a scene
and remove a person
responsible for supervising contact under a parenting order without also
removing the child. Inclusion of family
court orders would be consistent with
information about court notices and orders available on CrimTrac.
10.243 There may also be scope for a national protection order database to
include other types of information, such as undertakings
entered into by a
person requesting that a child be returned to Australia under the
on the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction
Convention).
Most relevantly,
an overseas court can grant such a request on the condition that the person
requesting the child’s return
enters into an undertaking of
non-molestation. No enforcement mechanism for the undertaking appears to be
available in either jurisdiction
after the child has been returned. The Full
Court of the Family Court has noted that:
If undertakings are to be given, it is important to make sure they can be
enforced … There does not appear to be any existing
mechanism by which the
Court that extracts the undertaking can ensure that it is complied with. There
does not appear to be any legal
basis upon which the Court of the State in which
the child has been returned, can require compliance with an undertaken given to
another court.
10.244 An important issue relates to who should have access to information
held on a national protection order database. Clearly,
the key stakeholders who
can access information held on CrimTrac are police officers. In the context of a
national protection order
broader class of persons should be permitted to seek access, including federal
family courts, state and territory courts and child protection agencies.
Commissions’ views
10.245 A national protection order database provides an opportunity for a
formalised exchange of information relevant to proceedings
involving family
violence concerns. At its core is information about protection orders, including
the prohibitions or conditions
imposed by orders and their duration. However,
there may also be scope to extend the ambit of the database to include
information
protection information from state and territory agencies and undertakings
entered into pursuant to Hague Convention recovery orders. The Commissions are
interested in stakeholder views about what information
should be included in a
national protection order database.
10.246 A related issue is the persons and entities that may access
information on the national protection order database. The Commissions’
preliminary view is that—at a minimum—access should be available to
police officers, federal family courts and state
and territory courts that hear
protection order proceedings. However, the Commissions are also interested in
hearing about others
for whom access may be beneficial—for example, child
protection agencies and children’s courts. The Commissions note
to a ‘need to know’ basis. Current
safeguards in CrimTrac, such as
audit logs, should also apply.
Proposal 10–15
A national protection order database should be
established as a component of the Australian Government’s commitment to
the implementation
of a national registration system for protection orders. At a
minimum, information on the database should:
(a) include protection orders made under state and territory family
violence legislation as well as orders and injunctions made
Law Act 1975
(b) be available to federal, state and territory police officers, federal
family courts, and state and territory courts that hear
protection order
proceedings.
Is there any other information which should be included on, or
are there any other persons who should have access to, the national
order database, over and above those set out in
Proposal 10–15?
Family Law Act 1975
Explanatory Memorandum,
Law Amendment (Shared Parental Responsibility) Bill 2005
L Moloney and others,
Allegations of Family Violence and Child Abuse in Family Law Children’s
Proceedings: A Pre-reform Exploratory Study
(2007) Australian Institute of
Family Studies.
Ibid, viii.
Ibid, app E.
R Chisholm,
Family Courts
Violence Review
on ALRC Family Violence Online Forum: Women’s Legal Service
P Parkinson, J Cashmore
and J Single,
Post-Separation Conflict and The Use of Family Violence
R Chisholm,
Family Courts
Violence Review
(2009), 139–140.
Generally, only a court may
make a final protection order by consent. The exception is
Domestic and Family Violence Act 2007
(NT), which allows a court or clerk
to make a final order.
(Domestic and Personal Violence) Act 2007
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
Restraining Orders Act 1997
(WA) s 43(2);
Intervention Orders (Prevention of Abuse) Act 2009
Family Violence Act 2004
Violence and Protection Orders Act 2008
(ACT) s 43;
Domestic and Family
Violence Act 2007
There are some variations across the
Restraining Orders Act 1997
(WA) specifies that ‘consent does not constitute an admission by the
respondent of all or any of the matters alleged in the
application’.
Domestic Violence Law Reform and Women’s Experience in Court: The
Implementation of Feminist Reforms in Civil Proceedings
Ibid, 97 (emphasis in
L Moloney and others,
Allegations of Family Violence and Child Abuse in Family Law Children’s
Proceedings: A Pre-reform Exploratory Study
(2007) Australian Institute of
Family Studies, app E; see also R Hunter,
Domestic Violence Law Reform and
Women’s Experience in Court: The Implementation of Feminist Reforms in
Civil Proceedings
(2008), 98.
Comment on ALRC Family Violence Online Forum: Women’s Legal Service
R Alexander,
‘Family Violence’ in Springvale Legal Centre (ed)
Practice Manual Victoria
(2009) 208–1,
NSW Ombudsman,
Violence Community Stakeholders Forum
, 9 December
G Zdenkowski,
Consultation
, Sydney, 6 November
R Chisholm,
Family Courts
Violence Review
(2009), 140.
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Review of Family Violence Laws: Report
(2006), [11.1].
L Moloney and others,
Allegations of Family Violence and Child Abuse in Family Law Children’s
Proceedings: A Pre-reform Exploratory Study
(2007) Australian Institute of
Family Studies,
J Wangmann,
‘“She Said …” “He said …” : Cross
Applications in NSW Apprehended Domestic
Violence Order Proceedings’,
, University of Sydney, 2009, 104. Wangmann notes that Hunter, in
her research on protection order proceedings in the Victorian Magistrates’
Court, also found that most uncontested matters were considered within three
See, eg, New South Wales,
Application—Apprehended Domestic Violence Order
; Northern Territory
Magistrates Courts,
Application for Domestic Violence Order
<www.nt.gov.au/justice/ntmc/forms
_fees.shtml> at 29 March 2010.
See, eg, Magistrates Court of Western Australia,
Violence Restraining Order
Application
<www.magistratescourt.wa.gov.au/content/restraining.aspx>
at 9 April 2010.
Magistrates’ Court of Victoria,
Information for Application for an
Intervention Order
(2009) <www.magistratescourt.vic.gov.au> at 2
February 2010; Magistrates Court of Tasmania,
Application for a Family
Violence Order
<www.magistratescourt.tas.gov.au/divisions/family_violence/forms> at
29 March 2010.
Magistrates Court of Queensland,
Protection Order Application
<www.communityservices.
qld.gov.au/violenceprevention/legislation/dom-violence-orders.html> at 9
February 2010; ACT Magistrates Court,
Application for a Domestic Violence
(2009) <www.courts.act.gov.
au/magistrates> at 9 February 2010.
The kinds of conduct that may constitute family violence are discussed in Ch
Magistrates’ Court of
Information for Application for an Intervention Order
<www.magistratescourt.vic.gov.au> at 2 February
Magistrates Court of Queensland,
Protection Order Application
<www.communityservices.
qld.gov.au/violenceprevention/legislation/dom-violence-orders.html> at 9
February 2010;
Justices Rules 2003
(Tas) r 54L; Magistrates Court of
Application for a Family Violence Order
<www.magistratescourt.tas.gov.au/divisions/family_violence/forms> at 29
March 2010.
Crimes (Domestic and
Personal Violence) Act 2007
(interim orders only);
Intervention Orders (Prevention of Abuse) Act 2009
orders only);
Domestic Violence and Protection Orders Regulation 2009
(ACT) reg 23.
Restraining Orders
Territory Magistrates Courts,
Application for Domestic Violence Order
<www.nt.gov.au/justice/
ntmc/forms_fees.shtml> at 29 March
Crimes (Domestic and Personal
Violence) Act 2007
Family Violence Protection Act
Restraining Orders Act 1997
(WA) ss 26–27;
Family Violence Act 2004
Domestic Violence and Protection Orders Regulation
(ACT) reg 13;
Domestic and Family Violence Act 2007
Intervention Orders (Prevention of Abuse) Act 2009
(SA) does not address this issue.
Crimes (Domestic and Personal Violence) Act 2007
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
Restraining Orders Act
Violence and Protection Orders Regulation 2009
(ACT) regs 14,
Domestic and Family Violence
and Family Violence Protection Act 1989
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Review of Family Violence Laws: Report
Ibid, [11.27].
Restraining Orders
(WA) s 44C;
Intervention Orders (Prevention of Abuse) Act
Domestic and Family Violence Act 2007
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
R Chisholm,
Family Courts
Violence Review
(2009), 115.
Australian Human Rights Commission,
Submission to the Senate Legal and
Constitutional Committee’s Inquiry into the Provisions of the
Amendment (Shared Parental Responsibility) Bill 2005
<www.hreoc.gov.au/legal/submissions/shared_parental_responsibility.html>
at 29 March 2010.
Explanatory
Memorandum,
Family Law Amendment (Shared Parental Responsibility) Bill 2005
R Chisholm,
Courts Violence Review
(2009), 118.
Ibid, 108–120,
Family Law Council,
Improving Responses to Family Violence in the Family Law System: An Advice on
the Intersection of Family Violence and Family Law Issues
(2009), Rec
Crimes Act 1900
Crimes Act 1958
Criminal Code
(Qld) s 123;
Criminal Code Act Compilation 1913
(WA) s 124;
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
Criminal Code
(Tas) ss 94–95;
Criminal Code
(ACT) ss 703, 705;
Criminal Code
(NT) ss 96,
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
s 154(3)(b)
Domestic and Family Violence
Domestic Violence and Protection Orders Act 2008
Parliamentary
, House of Assembly, 18 November 2004, 166 (J
Jackson—Attorney-General).
Reform Committee—Parliament of Victoria,
Inquiry into Vexatious
(2008), 59. See also B Paxton, ‘Domestic Violence and
Abuse of Process’
(2003) 17(1)
Australian Family Lawyer
I Freckelton,
Litigants: A Report on Consultation with Judicial Officers and VCAT Members
(2008) Paper prepared for the Victorian Parliament Law Reform Committee, Inquiry
into Vexatious Litigants, 34.
Intervention Orders (Prevention of
Abuse) Act 2009
Crimes (Domestic and
Personal Violence) Act 2007
Magistrates Court
Civil Procedure Rules 2009
(Vic) rr 9A.01, 9A.02;
Uniform Civil Procedure
(Qld) r 389A;
Magistrates Court (Civil) Rules 1992
Court Procedure Rules 2006
Family violence legislation in
all jurisdictions except South Australia contain similar provisions:
Violence Protection Act 2008
Domestic and Family
Violence Protection Act 1989
(Qld) s 61;
Restraining Orders Act
Family Violence Act 2004
Domestic Violence and Protection Orders Act 2008
(ACT) s 117;
Domestic and Family Violence Act 2007
Australia, the relevant provisions are contained in the
Summary Procedure Act
(SA) s 189.
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Review of Family Violence Laws: Report
(2006), Recs
Explanatory Memorandum,
Family Violence Protection Bill 2008
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules
(Qld) s 389A;
Vexatious Proceedings Restriction Act 2002
Proceedings Act 2008
(this Act also confers power on the Land
and Environment Court and Industrial Court);
Supreme Court Civil Procedure
Supreme Court Act 1933
Vexatious Proceedings Act 2006
Issues regarding the use of cross
applications in protection order proceedings in NSW courts are discussed in J
Wangmann, ‘“She
Said …” “He said …” :
Cross Applications in NSW Apprehended Domestic Violence Order
Proceedings’,
, University of Sydney,
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Review of Family Violence Laws: Report
Crimes (Domestic and
Personal Violence) Act 2007
Intervention Orders
(Prevention of Abuse) Act 2009
Violence and Protection Orders Act 2008
(ACT) s 59(2)(a)(i)
(interim orders only).
Victorian Law
Reform Commission,
Review of Family Violence Laws: Report
Restraining Orders Act
Domestic and Family Violence Act 2007
Violence Act 2004
Provisions relating to police-issued
protection orders are contained in
National Council to
Reduce Violence against Women and their Children,
Time for Action: The
National Council’s Plan for Australia to Reduce Violence against Women and
their Children, 2009–2021
(2009), 104 (citations
Ibid, Rec 6.2.1.
Law Rules 2004
r 24.13(1).
r 24.13(3).
Family Law Act
Law Reform Commission,
For Your Information: Australian Privacy Law and
, ALRC 108 (2008).
Law Council,
Submission to the Australian Law Reform Commission Review of
Australian Privacy Law
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
For Your Information: Australian Privacy Law and Practice
ALRC 108 (2008), [35.108].
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
, 16 December 1966,
[1980] ATS 23
, (entered into force generally on 23 March
The offence is punishable by
a maximum penalty of imprisonment for one
Family Law Act 1975
s 121(9)(a).
Hinchcliffe v Commissioner of Australian Federal Police
[2001] FCA 1747
(2001) 118 FCR
Re Edelston; Ex
parte Donnelly
(1988) 18 FCR
Hinchcliffe v Commissioner
of Australian Federal Police
[2001] FCA 1747
(2001) 118 FCR
‘Toward Candor or Chaos: The Case of Confidentiality in Mediation’
Seton Hall Legislative Journal
This is discussed in Ch
R Chisholm,
Family Courts
Violence Review
(2009), 77.
Family Law Council,
Improving Responses to Family Violence in the Family Law System: An Advice on
the Intersection of Family Violence and Family Law Issues
Federal Magistrates Court,
Consultation
, Sydney, 3 February
Specific issues in relation
to information sharing in the context of suspected child abuse are discussed in
Australian Institute of
Family Studies,
Evaluation of the 2006 Family Law Reforms
(2009), 367.
R Chisholm,
Family Courts Violence Review
‘Family Court Wants Access to Mediation’,
Sydney Morning
(Online), 25 February 2010,
<www.smh.com.au>.
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
For Your Information: Australian Privacy Law and Practice
ALRC 108 (2008), [25.83],
Government,
Enhancing National Privacy Protection—Australian Government
First Stage Response to the Australian Law Reform Commission Report
108 For Your
Information: Australian Privacy Law and Practice
(Cth) sch 3,
NPP 2.1(e)(i).
Aged Care Act 1997
(Cth) s 86-2;
Customs Administration Act
Australian Law Reform Commission,
For Your Information: Australian Privacy
Law and Practice
, ALRC 108 (2008),
See Australian
Law Reform Commission,
Secrecy Laws and Open Government in Australia
ALRC 112 (2009), [10.102].
Assessment in Domestic Violence
(2004) Australian Domestic & Family
Violence Clearinghouse, 1.
R v Liddy (No 2)
(2001) 79 SASR
Family Law Council,
Improving Responses to Family Violence in the Family Law System: An Advice on
the Intersection of Family Violence and Family Law Issues
In this case, the
communications to the family counsellor were inadmissible due to
Family Court Act 1997
Anglicare (WA) v Department of Family
and Children’s Services
[2000] WASC 47
(2000) 26 Fam LR
R v Liddy (No 2)
79 SASR 401
, [24]–[26].
Related issues will arise in the context of state and territory child
protection proceedings.
Australia, however, the prohibition is limited to information that would, or
would be likely to, lead to the whereabouts
of a party or a person who gives
Restraining Orders Act 1997
Domestic and Family
Violence Protection Act 1989
Family Violence Act
prohibition on publishing the name of any other person involved in protection
order proceedings only applies where there is a
court order to this effect. See
Domestic and Family Violence Act 2007
Domestic and Family Violence
An offence for breach of such an order is set out
Domestic and Family
Violence Protection Act 1989
s 82(3)(a).
Violence and Protection Orders Act 2008
(ACT) ss 111,
Restraining
Orders Act 1997
(WA) s 50C.
Intervention Orders (Prevention of Abuse) Act 2009
Queensland Department of
Communities,
Review of the Domestic and Family Violence Protection Act
1989—Consultation Paper
Question 5.1.1.
Restraining
Orders Act 1997
(WA) s 70. This prohibition does not apply where
disclosure is with consent or the person to whom the information is revealed is
already aware of such whereabouts.
Crimes (Domestic and Personal Violence) Act 2007
As noted above, this
would risk violating international conventions which give primacy to promoting
the best interests of the child.
(Cth) defines ‘agency’ to
include ‘a federal
National Council to
Reduce Violence against Women and their Children,
Time for Action: The
National Council’s Plan for Australia to Reduce Violence against Women and
their Children, 2009–2021
(2009), 154 (citations
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
For Your Information: Australian Privacy Law and Practice
ALRC 108 (2008).
Ibid, Model
Unified Privacy Principle 5.
Australian Government,
Enhancing National Privacy
Protection—Australian Government First Stage Response to the Australian
Law Reform Commission Report
108 For Your Information: Australian Privacy Law
and Practice
Security (Administration) Act 1999
The maximum penalty for
this offence is two years
imprisonment.
Social Security
(Administration) Act 1999
s 208(1)(a).
Security (Public Interest Certificate Guidelines) (DEEWR) Determination 2008
Australian Law
Reform Commission,
Secrecy Laws and Open Government in Australia
112 (2009).
Violence Act 2004
Restraining Orders
(WA) s 70A(1).
Restraining Orders Regulations 1997
Restraining Orders
(WA) s 70A(4).
Intervention Orders (Prevention of Abuse) Act 2009
Restraining Orders
(WA) s 12(4).
disclosure of information concerning child protection orders and proceedings is
considered in Ch 14.
Information
sharing in the context of child protection is discussed in
A more limited
information-sharing protocol in the context of family violence is in place in
Tasmania. The protocol operates between
police prosecutors, the Magistrates
Court and the Tasmanian registry of the Family Court and relates to the
suspension of Family
Court parenting orders while protection orders are
determined. It enables the transfer of files between the courts: see Urbis (for
the Tasmanian Government Department of Justice),
Review of the
Violence Act 2004
(2008), [3.5].
Family Court of
Western Australia and others,
Information Sharing Protocols between the
Family Court of Western Australia, Magistrates Court of Western Australia,
Department of
the Attorney-General, Department of Corrective Services and Legal
Aid Western Australia in Matters Involving Family Violence
(2009), cls 1.2.1, 1.2.2.
Ibid, cl 2.2.
Correspondence
, 23 December
Australian Government,
National Plan to Reduce Violence against Women—Immediate Government
(2009), 4.3.1.
exception is the Northern Territory, where a police officer can enforce a
protection order if the officer ‘reasonably
believes a person in the
Territory is a defendant named in an unregistered external order’. The
police officer must, as soon
as possible, make a declaration to the Commissioner
of Police stating the belief and the grounds for belief:
Domestic and Family
Violence Act 2007
Domestic Violence
and Protection Orders Act 2008
Australian Government,
The National Plan to Reduce Violence against Women—Immediate Government
(2009). See Ch 1.
Domestic Violence Legislation Working Group,
Model Domestic Violence
(1999), pt 3 ‘External Protection
Australian Government
Domestic Violence Laws in Australia
(2009), [3.4.11].
Violence Legislation Working Group,
Model Domestic Violence Laws
(1999), 169.
Police Information
<www.crimtrac.gov.au/police_information/index.html> at 12 March
Australian Government
Domestic Violence Laws in Australia
(2009), [3.4.9].
Police Information
<www.crimtrac.gov.au/police_information/index.html> at 12 March
A further option for
inclusion may be child protection
South Australian
Domestic Violence Laws: Discussion and Options for Reform
(2007), 139.
is noted in Ch 2.
Police Commissioner of South Australia v Temple [No 2]
(1993) 114 FLR
ALRC CP1 Family Violence � Improving Legal Frameworks
11. Alternative Processes
Introduction
Family dispute resolution and family violence
Appropriateness of FDR in cases of family violence
FDR in family law legislation
Intersections between FDR and other agencies
FDR practitioners and lawyers
Interactions between FDR and protection orders
ADR in family violence legislation
Dispute resolution in child protection
Dispute resolution law and practice in child protection cases
Restorative justice
Definitions
Application to family violence
Benefits of, and concerns about, restorative justice
Appropriateness of restorative justice
Effectiveness of restorative justice
Commissions’ views
11. Alternative Processes
Introduction
11.1 Disputes of all types are increasingly dealt with by methods of dispute
resolution that do not involve a decision by a court
or tribunal and instead
involve ‘alternative dispute resolution’ (ADR) or—even more
broadly—non-adversarial
justice. This chapter examines ADR and restorative
justice in disputes involving family violence; processes that operate within or
alongside family law and criminal law respectively and which thus affect the
operation of some of the legal frameworks that are the
subject of this Inquiry.
11.2 ADR and restorative
justice share common origins and philosophies as part of a move away from
traditional legal processes and
towards new forms of conflict resolution. A
number of factors drove this shift, including the victims’ rights
movement, concern
incarceration rates, and growing awareness of the failure of the traditional
system to address the underlying causes of offending and
re-offending.
11.3 This broader shift in awareness has also driven other approaches,
including therapeutic jurisprudence and problem-solving courts,
discussed in Chapter 20. However, ADR, restorative justice and therapeutic
jurisprudence have developed as distinctive
areas of law. ADR focuses on
managing disputes in a collaborative way, whereas restorative justice is
concerned with reparation and
dialogue between offenders and
Therapeutic jurisprudence
differs from both ADR and restorative justice in that its focus is on judicially
led interventions to ‘solve’
(for example) drug or housing problems.
It also focuses more on the impact of the law on the
11.4 For reasons examined in this chapter, the use of non-adversarial methods
is controversial in disputes involving violence and
abuse. A major concern is
that non-adversarial methods are often based on negotiations between parties and
consensual agreements.
In the context of family violence, the power
relationships between the parties may make this dangerous or produce unfair or
agreements. Further, non-adversarial methods often take place in private
and may thus conceal violence. Nevertheless, much work has
been done in recent
years to develop non-adversarial methods in ways that provide protections for
vulnerable parties.
11.5 This chapter focuses first on family dispute resolution (FDR), a form of
ADR. It then deals with the use of ADR in child protection
cases. While child
protection is generally dealt with in Part C of this Consultation Paper, it is
convenient to deal with the ADR
practices in child protection within the broader
context of ADR generally. Finally, this chapter discusses the potential and
of restorative justice in the context of family violence (including
sexual assault).
[back to top]
Family dispute
resolution and family violence
11.6 FDR is defined broadly in the
Family Law Act
any non-judicial process where an independent FDR practitioner helps people
affected, or likely to be affected, by separation
or divorce, to resolve some or
all of their disputes with each
Dispute resolution processes
include mediation, conciliation and arbitration. In mediation, an impartial
third party assists parties
to negotiate an agreement. Conciliation is similar
to mediation, except the conciliator may provide expert advice on possible legal
outcomes and have an advisory role. In arbitration, an independent third party
assesses the facts and determines the dispute according
In practice, mediation is the
key process used for Australian family
However, FDR services and
agencies vary in their approaches and underlying
philosophies.
11.7 When the Family Court of Australia was established in 1976, it used
counselling and conciliation. Since that time, FDR has expanded
and developed
extensively. FDR services are now provided by courts, Legal Aid
Commissions,
community agencies and
private providers. Most recently, the federal government has established a
network of Family Relationships
Centres (FRCs) throughout Australia that provide
referral and FDR services.
Practitioners have developed increasingly sophisticated approaches and
strategies for assessing the appropriateness of FDR in differing
situations,
addressing power imbalances, and including children in their
11.8 FDR is presently governed by a detailed legislative framework under the
Family Law Act
and associated regulations, discussed in more detail
below. Broadly speaking, the current legislative framework encourages or
the use of FDR before court action and supports referral to FDR after
an application to the court has been made. Exceptions are provided
in cases of
family violence and child abuse, reflecting concerns, discussed below, about the
use of FDR in such contexts. Information
gained during the FDR process is, in
general, confidential and inadmissible in subsequent court proceedings, although
there are exceptions
relevant to child abuse and family
Appropriateness of
FDR in cases of family violence
11.9 Both practitioners and commentators have expressed concerns about using
facilitative methods of FDR in cases involving family
violence. As discussed
below, the New South Wales Law Reform Commission (NSWLRC) explored these
concerns in its 2005 report,
Community Justice
where it expressed
its concern ‘about mediation taking place where violence is a factor,
particularly in situations involving
11.10 The reasons why FDR may be inappropriate in the context of family
violence include:
safety concerns—the FDR process may place women and children
in danger because the offender may use FDR as an opportunity for
violence or
intimidation;
power imbalances—the extreme imbalance of power in
relationships characterised by family violence undermines the fairness of
negotiating process in facilitative methods of FDR;
mediation requires honesty, desire to settle the dispute and some
capacity for compromise—behaviours which are ‘not within
repertoire of perpetrators of violence, at least not in relation to the target
of violence’;
mediation places too great a burden on the woman who has been the
victim of violence, who may, for example, be afraid to be in the
same room with
the perpetrator; and
FDR is a private and confidential process, with the effect that
violence against women is shielded from the public
11.11 Other
concerns include the difficulty of identifying violence. It has been suggested
that it is very difficult for the targets
of violence to reveal violence, and
that those who commit violence are also unwilling to do
FDR may therefore take place
in the absence of crucial information and there may be ongoing impacts on
parties and their children.
Another issue is whether FDR is effective in situations of family violence: some
research indicates that mediation will not produce
agreements or, if it does,
the agreements will not be successful in many
11.12 On the other hand, there are potential benefits of using FDR in cases
involving family violence. The first is that FDR may be
a more accessible method
of resolving family disputes, as it is arguably both cheaper and faster than
going to court.
Australia provide three hours of mediation without charge and many other
services have affordable fee levels. As one FDR
practitioner
There were a lot of women who have been through family violence who want to
mediate because the alternative for them is worse. The
alternative for them is
courts, is costs, is delay, is a decision they may not like anyway and they see
this as a better option.
11.13 Secondly, if FDR is conducted by an experienced practitioner with
appropriate safeguards, it may have positive outcomes for
people who have
experienced family violence.
Some studies of FDR have identified high rates of participant satisfaction where
there are well-trained, problem-solving FDR service
providers with effective
intake processes.
FDR may offer
the parties more involvement in resolving their dispute, and may give
victims more opportunity to speak about matters
which are important to
As one woman explained:
I was able to speak my mind and not have my opinions dismissed. The mediator
gave me the opportunity to talk. He [ex-partner] had
11.14 Governments and service providers have devoted resources to training
and development of FDR practitioners in the area of family
violence. FDR
practitioners must be accredited and the relevant Vocational Graduate Diploma of
Family Dispute Resolution includes
compulsory units dealing with violence and
providing for the safety of vulnerable
There has also been
investment in research and policy development on FDR and
As discussed below, a
screening and risk assessment framework for cases involving violence and abuse
has been developed.
FDR are being developed that include lawyers in the process, with particular
relevance to disputes involving
11.15 The risks associated with family violence in FDR processes may be
managed in a number of ways. Some examples include:
ensuring that victims are prepared for the
taking practical measures to ensure safety, such as obtaining a
silent phone number;
taking care with client contact, for example by making written
material only available at the centre and not leaving phone
minimising contact between clients on the day, by using separate
waiting rooms and exits for clients, and staggered arrival and departure
allowing the presence of support
continuously assessing clients’ comfort levels and emotional
using ‘shuttle’ mediation, where parties sit in
different rooms and the mediator ‘shuttles’ between them,
co-mediation with a gender-balanced team of
private follow-ups with each party between
11.16 While
there are a range of views on the appropriateness of FDR in family violence
contexts, a degree of consensus exists on
certain matters. First, using FDR in
cases involving family violence carries particular risks. Secondly, if family
violence is to
be dealt with in FDR processes, it must be handled by skilled and
knowledgeable FDR practitioners using appropriate safeguards. Thirdly,
practice, some cases involving family violence do—and will continue
to—proceed to mediation.
Indeed, as is discussed below, the evaluation of the 2006 family law reforms by
the Australian Institute of Family Studies (AIFS)
shows that FDR is attempted in
more frequently in cases involving violence than those not involving
FDR in family law
legislation
11.17 This section sets out the legislative provisions regulating the use of
Family Law Act
. Different regimes apply to FDR in relation to
parenting orders and financial disputes. There are also some general provisions
Family Law Act
that govern FDR.
FDR and parenting orders
11.18 The 2006 reforms to the
Family Law Act
extended the use of FDR.
With some exceptions, parties with a dispute about children must go to FDR
before they can go to court,
must make a genuine effort to resolve their dispute through
The exceptions to this
requirement include where the parties agree and are applying to court only for a
consent order.
Importantly, they
also include cases where violence is an issue, such as where the court is
satisfied that there has been, or there
is a risk of, child abuse or family
or where there are
circumstances of urgency.
11.19 If the parties do not reach agreement through FDR and do not satisfy
one of the exceptions, the federal family courts can only
hear parenting cases
if the FDR practitioner provides a certificate relating to the parties’
attendance and effort in the FDR
FDR practitioners may
give several different types of certificates under
, including a certificate to the effect that the person did not
attend FDR because, having regard to the
Family Law (Family Dispute
Resolution Practitioners) Regulations 2008
FDR Regulations
practitioner considers that ‘it would not be appropriate’ to conduct
or continue FDR.
11.20 In determining whether a dispute is appropriate for FDR, the FDR
practitioner must take into account whether the ability of
any party to
negotiate freely is affected by a number of factors, all of which are
potentially relevant to cases of violence. These
include: any history of family
violence among the parties; the likely safety of the parties; the equality of
bargaining power among
the parties; the risk that a child may suffer abuse; the
emotional, psychological and physical health of the parties; or any other
relevant matter.
Regulations
also require that an FDR practitioner must be satisfied of the
appropriateness of FDR in each case before providing
An FDR practitioner is also
obliged to terminate FDR if the practitioner is no longer satisfied it is
appropriate, or is requested
to do so by a
FDR and financial disputes
11.21 The s 60I framework applies only to parenting orders. In relation to
applications for financial disputes, the requirements are
set out in the
Family Law Rules 2004
(Cth). Consistently with s 60I, the Rules
include mechanisms for removing obligations to participate in FDR in cases of
family violence.
11.22 This is done in two ways. First, the Rules require compliance with
pre-action procedures set out in sch 1, but there is an exception
for cases of
allegations of family violence or the risk of family violence or
Secondly, while the
procedures in sch 1 generally require the use of FDR, the Rules set out
circumstances, including allegations
of family violence or cases of urgency, in
which the court may accept that it was not possible or appropriate for a party
with the pre-action
procedures.
FDR and the Family Law Act
11.23 Other provisions of the
Family Law Act
deal with aspects of FDR,
including provisions encouraging its use.
Section 13C
empowers the court to make
orders referring parties to FDR or family counselling at any stage in
proceedings, on its own initiative
or on application by a party or an
independent children’s
If a party does not
comply with such an order, the court may make further orders as it considers
appropriate following a report from
an FDR practitioner or
counsellor.
Section 62B
a court to inform parties in a parenting proceeding about FDR and family
counselling services.
Section 69ZQ
requires a court in child-related proceedings
to encourage the use of FDR, where it considers it appropriate. A requirement to
FDR may also be imposed as a condition of a bond where parenting orders
are contravened.
Intersections
between FDR and other agencies
11.24 FDR is part of a wider system of family law, and it intersects with
that system at many points. How those intersections, and
the law relevant to
them, work in practice is of particular relevance to this Inquiry.
The Family Law Act and issues of
confidentiality
11.25 First, some provisions in the
Family Law Act
are relevant to the
way in which FDR intersects with other services. Division 3 of pt 2 of the Act
includes provisions which make
communications in FDR processes confidential and
inadmissible in court proceedings, except for certain
Importantly, the
exceptions to the confidentiality of such communications include where the
practitioner reasonably believes it is
necessary for a range of purposes
relevant to family violence.
exceptions to the admissibility of such communications include admissions or
disclosures of child abuse or a risk of child
There are also
obligations on FDR practitioners to notify child protection authorities in cases
of suspected child abuse.
11.26 The confidentiality provisions of the
Family Law Act
discussed in Chapter 10 in the broader context of information sharing in
the family law system. While the confidentiality of
FDR is important in
promoting an honest and open exchange between the parties that may lead to
agreement, it may also inhibit information
sharing and the development of
collaborative relationships between different actors in the family law system.
It may also impact
on safety in cases that involve violence. That chapter
therefore considers how best to achieve the right balance between these
considerations.
Screening and risk assessment
11.27 A key element of FDR in practice is the process of screening and risk
assessment, which is designed to ensure that victims of
family violence are not
using FDR in inappropriate circumstances, or to identify and mitigate any risk
factors where FDR may be appropriate
despite such
Screening and risk
assessment are important for any agency handling family
but it appears that
FDR agencies may be taking on this role for many professionals in the family law
system, and may be acting as
gatekeepers in the family law system. This issue is
discussed below.
11.28 Screening and risk assessment varies across different FDR agencies. A
report on the practice of FDR in Legal Aid Commissions
completed by KPMG for the
Australian Government Attorney-General’s Department in 2008 indicated the
wide variety of FDR practices
that exist, even within the legal aid
The report noted
variations in practice in relation to:
what and how information was obtained for the purposes of
which questions were asked about family violence and child abuse;
who conducted the initial screening;
how it was determined whether the case was suitable for FDR;
the length of time taken for screening and intake (between one to
six hours); and
the skill and knowledge of intake officers to assess
report noted that most screening questions focused on the physical aspects of
family violence,
and recommended
enhanced screening for non-physical forms of
Secondly, it
FDR practitioners across all
[protection orders] and allegations
of child abuse) are not collected during
screening, it can derail the conferencing process. FDR practitioners commented
on examples
where parties presented to conference and, during the conference,
child abuse allegations or the existence of a [protection order]
was revealed,
requiring the FDR practitioner to discontinue the
11.30 The report also identified that in all Legal Aid Commissions, matters
involving allegations of child abuse were automatically
considered unsuitable
for conferencing.
However, there
was variation in how Legal Aid Commissions approached issues of family violence.
While the existence of family violence
would ‘not affect the mode of
conferencing in one jurisdiction … in others it [would] be a serious
consideration, determining
suitability and the mode of
conferencing’.
family violence arose as an issue, the usual practice was to adopt
‘shuttle’ conferencing (where the practitioner
shuttles between the
two parties who are in separate locations), either by person or
The report noted that
the vast majority of clients surveyed felt safe or very safe both during and
after the conference,
majority of FDR practitioners agreed that there were appropriate protocols in
place for family violence.
11.31 A number of other recommendations to strengthen screening and intake
processes were made. Some of these relate to increasing
the experience and
knowledge of intake officers, lawyers, and FDR practitioners on particular
using or modifying
particular practices, such as interviews and screening
and ensuring better
preparation for the FDR process.
The report also recommended establishing protocols for delivering services to
marginalised groups;
detailed practice guidance on the best interests of the child;
examining strategies for providing
referral pathways to other support
and developing
nationally consistent strategies for appropriately managing these
11.32 The Australian Government Attorney-General’s Department has
published a
Framework for Screening, Assessment and Referrals in Family
Relationship Centres and the Family Relationship Advice Line
and Assessment Framework
which addresses many of these issues in detail. The framework is an
extensive resource available on the departmental website for
practitioners. It includes a screening and assessment framework,
referral guidelines, and indicators of domestic and family violence,
child abuse
and abduction, and risk of self-harm. It discusses issues of supervision and
practice support, and provides a range of
resources for practitioners, including
sample questions relevant to identification of violence.
11.33 The Victorian Government has similarly produced a comprehensive
screening and risk assessment framework for all service providers
This sets out a common
framework, including six components: a shared understanding of risk and family
violence; standardised risk
assessment; referral pathways and information
sharing; risk management strategies; data collection and analysis; and quality
It also includes three practice guides directed towards different
levels of risk assessment processes for different categories of
providers. A common framework has advantages in terms of inter-agency trust and
cooperation.
11.34 In relation to the issue of screening and risk assessment, the Family
Law Council considered that:
appropriate training in screening for family violence issues is essential for
family dispute resolution practitioners, and those
who refer matters to them. It
is essential that practitioners have appropriate responses and options to offer
once family violence
identified.
11.35 The Council recommended that a consistent framework for screening and
risk assessment be developed in accordance with principles
adopted in the common
knowledge base proposed by the
and that frameworks,
tools and materials be endorsed by the expert panel and reference
FDR practitioners and other agencies in the
family law system
11.36 FDR practitioners have become the gatekeepers to the family courts in
children’s cases because of the requirements of
, discussed above.
The evaluation of the 2006 reforms of the family law system conducted by AIFS
showed that 50% of parents, post-2006,
reported they had contacted or used a
counselling, mediation or dispute resolution service, although only 31% of
fathers and 26%
of mothers reported they had attempted FDR or mediation
specifically.
A significant
proportion of cases in the AIFS study involved victims of family violence, and
they were ‘much more likely to
have attempted FDR’ than those who
11.37 The AIFS evaluation indicated that the legislative scheme may not be
working well for victims of family violence. One of the
problems relates to the
way FDR practitioners are being used to issue
certificates. Some lawyers
appear to be sending victims of family violence to FDR services as a method of
certificate. While FRCs did not provide certificates ‘as a
matter of course’, some clients or legal advisers nonetheless
providing certificates as the primary function of FRCs or believed a certificate
should be issued as a default
Importantly, the AIFS
survey also revealed that clients who clearly fell within the exception to FDR
in the family law legislation
were ‘not infrequently referred to the FRCs
by lawyers (and to a lesser extent by
evaluation concluded that the rate of issuing of certificates had likely
increased, and this was ‘in part connected
with an absence of triage by
lawyers and other
professionals’.
evaluation noted that this may be linked to the ‘anxiety on the part of
lawyers about clients making or being seen to be
making deliberately false
allegations’.
11.38 The views of FDR practitioners and clients as to when FDR is
appropriate may diverge. The AIFS evaluation noted that victims
may choose to
use FDR in cases of family violence as the ‘least worst’ alternative
for those families.
appeal to victims of family violence who hope that an agreement will mean an end
to the violence. FDR practitioners may be
pressured by those who commit violence
and who see FDR as a method of achieving their own goals.
11.39 It also appears that, for some clients, the risk posed by family
violence was not identified and managed effectively. The evaluation
following response as an example:
For me, there were not enough sessions in the process. I was so scared and
intimidated by my ex-husband that I had trouble thinking
clearly. As a
consequence of this, I felt bulldozed into making an agreement. … I also
had to sit through a face-to-face session
with my ex-husband before they’d
believe that I was worried about him … I felt that my concerns were swept
the focus was on my ex-husband’s
needs/wants.
11.40 Such examples led AIFS to conclude that:
It has become clearer that the implementation of ‘FDR with
exceptions’ is a complex process. Implementing the exceptions
assumes that the person consulted by the client has the skills to make a
reasonable judgment about eligibility (and perhaps
just as importantly, has the
time come to carefully ‘hear’ the client’s story). The more
conservative approach
frequently seems to be to let an FRC or an FDR
practitioner make such a judgment and use the certificate system as a substitute
claiming an exception. This represents a post-reform change that clearly
places a greater set of responsibilities and resource demands
on practitioners
in the family relationships sector. It is a process that must also at times be
confusing for clients.
11.41 AIFS also concluded that FRCs have ‘become a ‘logical entry
point for effective triage’ or an ‘insurance
policy’ for
victims of family violence.
Cases which clearly meet the legislative exception are frequently issued with
certificates, and some parents ‘who would probably meet the exception
criteria commence and/or complete
Commissions’ views
11.42 Three concerns arise from the AIFS study. First, there is evidence that
some victims of family violence are being encouraged
to participate in FDR
processes or obtain
certificates, despite the exceptions for family
violence in the
Family Law Act
. Secondly, there is evidence that FDR
practitioners are becoming an entry point for ‘effective triage’ or
an insurance
policy for victims of family violence. Thirdly, at least some
victims of family violence feel that FDR processes fail to identify
the risk of family violence effectively.
11.43 The first and second issues raise the question of whether reforms are
needed to the complex legislative scheme governing FDR
—in particular, to
—to ensure the appropriate
handling of disputes involving violence.
11.44 The Commissions are interested in hearing from stakeholders how these
provisions could be improved. For example, as the AIFS
evaluation suggests, it
may be that the exceptions in
for cases of family violence are
under-used because it is simpler for lawyers to ‘tick a box’ by
submitting a
certificate, rather than performing the more difficult task
of screening and evaluating whether the risk of family violence will
satisfy the
court that the exception can be invoked. In that case, the legislation could be
reformed (for example) to make it easier
for a lawyer to know when a client can
be exempted from the requirement to undergo FDR—for example, the
legislation could specify
that the exception applies if there is a protection
order in place.
11.45 It may also be the case that non-legislative reforms are necessary to
ensure the legislative scheme operates appropriately.
Ideally, all personnel in
the family law system should be capable of identifying violence and dealing with
it appropriately. The
extent of violence in the separating and divorcing
population is such that violence is likely to be core business for most
professionals
in the family law system. Further, any agency or professional
could be the first port of call for a party who has been the target
of violence,
and that agency or professional needs to be able to identify, manage or refer
cases appropriately.
11.46 In order to achieve this, family lawyers need training on how to
identify and manage family violence appropriately. Preferably,
as discussed
below, this training should be conducted in conjunction with FDR practitioners,
in order to improve interdisciplinary
collaboration. Family lawyers also need
adequate support for this role. Family lawyers need clear pathways for referring
to other services, and a support network for dealing with issues of
family violence. Family lawyers also need clear guidance as to
appropriate to refer a matter to an FDR practitioner. This could be provided,
for example, in the best practice principles
for family lawyers developed by the
Family Law Council.
11.47 The third issue, the inadequacy of at least some FDR processes to
manage the risk of family violence, highlights the need to
ensure best practice
in screening and risk assessment. As discussed above, much valuable work has
already been done in this field,
including the development of the
and Risk Assessment Framework
by the Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department, and the publication by the Victorian
Government of a comprehensive
screening and risk assessment framework. In the
Commissions’ view, these frameworks are valuable resources that should be
11.48 As noted earlier, the Family Law Council recommended in its 2009 report
that screening and risk assessment frameworks, tools
and materials be endorsed
by an expert panel and reference group. The adoption of these frameworks and
tools should be encouraged
through appropriate training, inclusion in
accreditation processes, and through audits and evaluation.
11.49 The Commissions consider that the recommendations made by KPMG in its
evaluation of FDR practices in the legal aid sector have
significant value.
Many, but not all, of those recommendations relating to cases of family violence
may also be relevant outside
of the legal aid sector. For example, FDR
practitioners should ensure appropriate screening for non-physical forms of
violence, further
develop policies as to how to manage the risk of family
violence, and ensure appropriate preparation for FDR processes. Further
development
of best practice in this area should take these recommendations into
Should any amendments be made to the provisions relating to
family dispute resolution in the
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth)—and, in
particular, to
of that Act—to ensure that victims of family
violence are not inappropriately attempting or participating in family dispute
resolution? What other reforms may be necessary to ensure the legislation
operates effectively?
Proposal 11–1
Australian governments, lawyers’
organisations and bodies responsible for legal education should develop ways to
ensure that
lawyers who practice family law are given adequate training and
support in screening and assessing risks in relation to family violence.
Proposal 11–2
The Australian Government should promote the use
of existing screening and risk assessment frameworks and tools for family
resolution practitioners through, for example, training, accreditation
processes, and audit and evaluations.
FDR practitioners
and lawyers
11.50 The level of cooperation and collaboration between FDR practitioners
and lawyers was raised as an issue in both the AIFS evaluation
and the 2009
report of the Family Law
The AIFS evaluation
noted the potential for the aims of legal and service professionals to conflict,
and stated that:
Any initiatives designed to promote a shared commitment to responsible FDR
between lawyers and FDR professionals, and between lawyers
and other service
sector professionals, are likely to improve the efficacy of services
11.51 Research by Professor Helen Rhoades and others in 2008 on
inter-professional relationships between FDR practitioners and lawyers
demonstrated that, although some practitioners enjoy positive professional
other profession and
there are some significant misunderstandings and tensions between the two
11.52 This study also found that successful collaborative relationships were
marked by a number of features:
practitioners described their relationship as a complementary
services approach in which each group saw themselves and the other
profession as
contributing different but equally valuable complementary skills and expertise
to the dispute resolution process;
practitioners from both groups understood and respected the nature
of each profession’s roles, responsibilities and ways of
working with
family law clients;
practitioners had a shared expectation of the dispute resolution
process and a shared understanding of the FDR program’s aims
and approach
to working with family law clients;
family lawyers engaged in ‘positive’ advocacy practices;
practitioners trusted the intake screening and referral practices of
the other profession in cases involving family violence; and
practitioners engaged respectfully with members of the other
profession and extended professional courtesies, such as the provision
groups with good inter-professional relationships, practitioners trusted each
other to handle violence appropriately in most
cases, although some reservations
were still expressed by both groups about the identification and handling of
However, a survey of a
larger group of lawyers and FDR practitioners conducted for the same study found
that there was much greater
distrust of the practices of the other profession in
identifying and handling cases involving
11.54 In its 2009 report, the Family Law Council suggested a number of
strategies ‘to develop and enrich inter-disciplinary
cooperation and
collaboration, particularly between FDR practitioners and family
recommendations were based on the work conducted by Rhoades and others, and
building opportunities for positive personal contact;
building understanding of roles and responsibilities;
providing lawyers and judicial officers with information about
funded community based programs;
considering ways to improve communication and feedback about
clients; and
family violence training for both
professions.
Family Law Council recommended the expansion of Australia-wide family pathways
networks to support cooperation and referrals
across the family relationship and
family law system.
Commissions’ views
11.56 FDR practitioners and lawyers are likely to be required to work
together more extensively as FDR develops. Although some lawyers
practitioners have good relationships, there is room to improve relationships
between the two sectors. The Commissions support
the recommendations of the
Family Law Council in this respect. However, the Commissions are interested in
hearing from stakeholders
if any further strategies are desirable to improve
relationships between the sectors.
Proposal 11–3
Measures should be taken to improve collaboration
and cooperation between family dispute resolution practitioners and lawyers, as
recommended by the Family Law Council.
Interactions between
FDR and protection orders
11.57 This section discusses three potential issues arising out of the
interaction of the requirements for FDR in the
Family Law Act
violence legislation: whether different definitions of family violence in
legislation and in practice cause any practical
difficulties; the role of
protection orders in FDR processes; and the potential for FDR processes to
breach protection orders.
Definition of family violence
11.58 The definition of family violence in
Family Law Act
and proposals to amend the definition, are discussed in detail in Chapter 4
of this Consultation Paper. As discussed there, this
definition is more
restrictive than that used in some state or territory family violence
legislation, and in practice-based material
such as the
Screening and Risk
Assessment Framework
, discussed
and in the Family
Court of Australia’s
Family Violence
11.59 Dr Rae Kaspiew has noted in this regard:
The issues around definition, and the contrast between the legislative
definition … and the practice-based definitions …
point to shifting
and potentially inconsistent approaches in legal and FDR processes. They may
militate against the development of
a coherent understanding of violence being
applied across different practice
11.60 As noted above, the evaluation of FDR practices in the legal aid sector
found that screening questions tended to focus on physical
and recommended
enhanced screening for non-physical forms of
11.61 The Commissions are interested in hearing from stakeholders whether the
variations between the legislative definitions and practice-based
definitions in
FDR have had any practical impact in FDR practices.
Does the definition of family violence in the
Family Law Act
(Cth) cause any problems in family dispute resolution
Protection orders in FDR
11.62 Another potential issue is the use of protection orders in FDR
processes. As discussed earlier, the evaluation of FDR practices
in the legal
aid sector noted that FDR practitioners across all jurisdictions commented that
failures to ask about and obtain copies
of protection orders could ‘derail
the conferencing
11.63 Some, but not all, examples of screening tools in the
Framework for
Screening and Risk Assessment
include questions about the existence of
protection orders.
the Victorian screening and risk assessment tool, the practice guide for
identifying family violence does not include a question
protection orders, but does list breaches of protection orders as a
consideration for preliminary
assessments.
11.64 The existence of a protection order indicates that there are likely to
be issues of safety involved that need to be addressed,
and the conditions of a
protection order may provide useful information about the nature of the risks
involved. Further, as noted
below, it may be necessary to obtain a copy of a
protection order to ensure that FDR practitioners are not making arrangements
FDR that require parties to breach the order. For these reasons, the
Commissions consider that it is clearly necessary to include
questions about the
existence of protection orders, and to ask for copies of protection orders, as
part of the process of identification
and risk assessment in FDR.
11.65 The Commissions are interested to hear from stakeholders whether, in
practice, protection orders are identified and used in
risk assessment and
management in FDR processes and whether any reforms are necessary to improve
such identification and use.
In practice, are protection orders being used appropriately in
family dispute resolution processes to identify family violence and
risks associated with it? Are any reforms necessary to improve the use of
protection orders in such processes?
Breaches of protection orders by
11.66 Another issue that may arise is that, as noted earlier, the conditions
of a protection order may be inconsistent with arrangements
made for, or the
requirement in
Family Law Act
to attend, FDR. Conditions of
protection orders are discussed in Chapter 6. As discussed there, a
protection order often will prohibit
a person from directly or indirectly
presence of both parties
could, therefore, breach a protection order.
11.67 Most commonly, this issue is dealt with in the application forms for
protection orders, which include an exception to prohibitions
on contacting the
protected person for the purposes of FDR processes. There is such an exception
in the application forms of Victoria,
Tasmania, the Northern Territory and the
The form for South
Australia includes a standard exception for counselling (but not mediation), if
it is directed by the Family Court,
and for any orders made by the Family
The application form
in NSW includes an ambiguous exception for counselling, mediation and
conciliation.
There is no
standard exception in the forms for Queensland or Western
11.68 In 2003, the NSWLRC recommended that the terms of a standard APVO be
amended to permit parties to contact each other for the
purpose of arranging or
engaging in mediation.
was based on a suggestion made by the Community Justice
The Local Court NSW
suggested that the legislation should be amended to similar
11.69 Typically, the standard condition prohibiting contact automatically
includes an exception allowing contact for the purposes
of FDR process. The ACT
form, however, enables the applicant to nominate which exceptions to the
prohibition on contact should apply,
including at counselling or mediation.
11.70 A different approach is taken in Western Australia. The
Restraining
Orders Act 1997
(WA) provides that it is a defence to a breach of a
protection order if the person was using FDR as defined by the
Family Law Act
or using conciliation, mediation or another form of consensual dispute
resolution provided by a legal
practitioner.
This is the
only such provision in family violence legislation.
Commissions’ views
11.71 Practical problems are apparent, at least in NSW, with the conditions
of protection orders that preclude the use of FDR processes.
This raises the
potential for conflict between the protection order and family law
legislation.
11.72 As discussed below, in many cases, FDR processes are likely to be
inappropriate if a protection order has been issued for cases
violence. Further, strategies such as shuttle mediation can be employed to
enable compliance with such a condition. Nevertheless,
there may be cases where
an exception for counselling or mediation is justified. The approach taken in
most jurisdictions, of allowing
such an exception as part of a standard order,
minimises the potential for conflict when this occurs.
11.73 The Commissions’ preliminary view is that the protection order
application forms should include the option of an exception
allowing contact in
the case of FDR processes. There is merit in making this a separate option that
can be selected by the applicant,
as is done in the ACT, rather than
automatically including it within the general prohibition on contact. This gives
the applicants
(and the court) the opportunity to consider the desirability of
advantages in an automatic exception, because family law proceedings may not be
contemplated at the time a protection order
is obtained. The Commissions are
interested in hearing stakeholder views on this issue.
11.74 This exception should apply to participation in FDR processes as
ordered or directed by the Family Court, or provided under
. This would cover the use of FDR to comply with
as discussed above. The exception should not apply to
informal attempts to mediate by family or community members, as these do not
necessarily include appropriate safeguards for addressing family violence, and
may leave victims vulnerable to pressures to mediate.
11.75 The Commissions’ view is that it is preferable to minimise the
potential for conflict through an exception to a condition
of a protection
order, rather than provide (as is done in Western Australia) in legislation that
attendance at mediation is a defence
to a breach of a protection order.
Proposal 11–4
State and territory courts should ensure that
application forms for protection orders include an exception allowing contact
purposes of family dispute resolution processes.
ADR in family
violence legislation
11.76 In most Australian jurisdictions, there is no specific provision in
family violence legislation empowering courts to refer parties
to mediation,
although there may be power to refer matters to mediation under other
legislation.
11.77 The key exception is in the ACT, where a registrar may refer a
protection order proceeding to
preliminary conference for an application for protection
if the registrar is
satisfied that the application is likely to be more effectively resolved by
mediation than by a hearing, the
registrar must recommend mediation to the
parties, give the parties information about mediation, and adjourn the
preliminary conference
to enable mediation. This requirement was first inserted
in 2005, and the Explanatory Statement for the relevant bill explains that
obligation ‘highlights the importance of alternative dispute mechanisms in
preventing further violence by facilitating
discussions between the parties to
Magistrates Court also has express power under the
Domestic Violence and
Protection Orders Act 2008
(ACT) to order the respondent or an aggrieved
person to take part in (among other things)
11.78 In NSW, there is legislative power to refer matters to mediation in
relation to Apprehended Personal Violence Orders
but not in relation
to Apprehended Domestic Violence Orders (ADVOs). ADVOs relevantly apply to
domestic relationships, broadly
This reflects the
NSWLRC’s recommendations in its 2003 report,
Apprehended Violence
report, while the NSWLRC recommended an explicit legislative basis for referral
to mediation in the context of
it expressed the
following view:
It should be emphasised that this section deals exclusively with mediation of
APVO disputes. The Commission is of the view that mediation
should not be
encouraged in relation to ADVOs. The Commission concurs with the arguments put
in submissions that the fear and imbalance
of power typically characterising
domestic violence makes mediation in ADVO matters unsuitable, unproductive and
11.79 Consistently with this view, the NSWLRC also considered that there
should not be a power of referral in the case of APVOs where
there was a history
of, or allegations of, personal violence, or conduct amounting to serious
harassment.
This view is
reflected in the legislation.
11.80 The NSWLRC considered the issue again in its 2005 report reviewing
Community Justice Centres, which provide mediation services
It noted that
negotiations concerning a return to a violent relationship or the level,
frequency and the intensity of violence ‘will
inappropriate’, a view which was reflected in the policy of the Community
Justice Centres.
further stated:
The Commission puts no premium on the distinction between ADVOs and APVOs in
this context. The distinction between ADVOs and APVOs
may, in some cases, be an
inadequate way of identifying appropriate matters for mediation and more
information will usually be required
before a properly trained person can make a
decision about whether or not to proceed. Some APVO matters may be similar in
many respects
to some ADVO matters but the relationship between the parties may
not be ‘domestic’ under the terms of the law. The dynamics
violence, harassment and controlling behaviours can be present in many
relationships besides those that fall within the current
definition of
… ADVOs may be used inappropriately (although such cases may be rare) in
much the same way that APVOs are often said to be
used inappropriately.86
It will also be the case that domestic violence and other violence does
not only take place in the context
of ADVOs and APVOs. So even if policies
regarding mediation of ADVOs and APVOs are dealt with in the context of AVO
legislation,
some matters involving violence will still come to CJCs by other
means. CJCs, therefore, need to deal with domestic violence and
other violence
when it presents itself as part of a dispute and, while paying due regard to the
presence of an AVO (and any restrictions
contained in it) or an application for
one, should not use the type of AVO as a sole guide to the appropriateness, or
of a dispute for mediation.
The Commission, however, remains concerned about mediation taking place where
violence is a factor, particularly in situations involving
11.81 The NSWLRC recommended that a list of factors indicating when mediation
might be inappropriate be included in the
Community Justice Centres Act 1983
recommendation was not implemented in the subsequent
Community Justice
Centres Amendment Act 2007
11.82 Similarly to the NSW legislation, the
Intervention Order (Prevention
of Abuse) Act 2009
(SA) distinguishes between protection orders in relation
to family violence and in other cases. Section 21(4) of that Act provides
court must consider, in determining whether to dismiss an application,
‘whether it might be appropriate and practicable
for the parties to
attempt to resolve the matter through mediation or by some other means’.
However, this only applies where
the application alleges ‘non-domestic
Commissions’ views
11.83 The Commissions endorse the concerns expressed by the NSWLRC about the
use of ADR where family violence is a factor. Only the
ACT specifically mandates
referral of matters to mediation in protection order proceedings involving
family violence.
11.84 However, the Commissions are not aware of how frequently this provision
is used or whether in other jurisdictions ADR mechanisms
are used in relation to
similar proceedings. The Commissions are also not aware whether the policies of
ADR practitioners prevent
the use of ADR in protection order proceedings
involving family violence.
11.85 The Commissions are, therefore, interested in hearing from stakeholders
whether ADR mechanisms are used in relation to protection
order proceedings
under family violence legislation and, if so, whether reforms are necessary to
ensure that they are used only in
appropriate circumstances.
In practice, are alternative dispute resolution mechanisms used
in relation to protection order proceedings under family violence
legislation?
If so, are reforms necessary to ensure these mechanisms are used only in
appropriate circumstances?
[back to top]
Dispute resolution
in child protection
Dispute resolution
law and practice in child protection cases
11.86 In most Australian states and territories, child protection legislation
includes provisions designed to facilitate negotiated
solutions. In addition,
some government and community agencies use ADR procedures for child protection
cases and have developed policy
and practice in relation to ADR. There is a
great deal of variation in the processes and terminology used to describe them.
11.87 Two frequently used processes are family group conferencing and
mediation. Other examples of ADR in this area are conferences
prior to a court
hearing; the role of Family Consultants in the Family
and ADR processes
developed for Indigenous families, such as Care Circles.
Family group conferencing and pre-hearing
conferences
11.88 Family group conferencing began in New Zealand in the late 1980s and
was based on Maori concerns and cultural
As originally
conceived in New Zealand, family group conferences involve the child or young
person, their representative, the parents,
extended family members, other
support people nominated by the family, the referring care and protection worker
and possibly other
participants.
The focus of
the conference is on empowering the family to make its own decision about the
care of the child or children.
11.89 The first stage of the conference involves provision of information by
child care workers and other professionals, especially
focusing on the concerns
held for the child and the resources that might be available to the child and
family. It provides an opportunity
for supported dialogue between professionals
and the family. The second phase of the conference involves ‘family alone
when the family
discusses possible solutions without the professionals. The third stage involves
working towards an agreement, where
the family and professionals negotiate a
plan that is acceptable to all. If a plan is agreed, it will be recorded and
implemented.
11.90 The original New Zealand model has been adapted in other
Australian states and territories have adopted a form of conferencing, the
characteristics of conferences vary. There
are differences in how often and when
conferencing is used, how ‘family alone time’ is used, and the way
in which conferencing
outcomes are
implemented.
For example, in
New Zealand the conferencing outcome must be implemented unless it is
impractical or inconsistent with the legislation,
whereas in Australia
implementation is generally not mandated and the relevant child protection
departments retain some
discretion.
11.91 ADR is also used prior to hearings in child protection cases. For
example, the
Children and Young Persons (Care and Protection) Act 1998
provides that after a care application has been served, the
Registrar of the Children’s Court is to arrange and conduct a preliminary
conference between the
However, it appears
that while these conferences are sometimes conducted as a form of ADR, they are
also sometimes conducted as a
directions hearing designed to prepare the case
for litigation.
11.92 The Children’s Court of Victoria also uses dispute resolution
conferences.
Guidelines for
those conferences indicate that the dispute resolution conference is to be
‘an exercise in negotiation and joint
problem solving’ which aims to
‘optimise the participation of significant persons from a child’s
11.93 It is apparent from these examples that there is variation in the way
that pre-hearing conferences are used. They can be conducted
with a dispute
resolution focus, and have many similarities to mediation or family group
conferences, or they can be focused on case
management for litigation.
11.94 The ALRC and the Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission
examined the use of
family group conferencing and pre-hearing conferences in the report,
Heard: Priority for Children in the Legal Process
The report discussed the
benefits of such procedures and noted a number of concerns, including the fact
that ‘the vulnerability
of some family members within violent and abusive
families may mean that dynamics in conferences could hamper appropriate
resolutions’.
recommended further research into effective conferencing practices, and the
setting down of procedures in child protection legislation
based on this
recommendations have not yet been
implemented.
11.95 Mediation is also used in child protection matters. For example, the
NSW government agency, Community Services (formerly known
as the Department of
Community Services) offers ADR, using its own staff who have been trained in
Where internal ADR
has not succeeded, or where it would be unsuitable, external mediators may be
used. Extensive preparation occurs
before the mediation session, and safety
plans may need to be made. Techniques such as shuttle mediation,
teleconferencing and co-mediation
may be used in cases where there are safety
concerns. Mediation is seen as an extension of good case work practice,
supportive of
good relationships with families and reducing litigation.
Family Consultants
11.96 The Family Court of Australia uses Family Consultants in
children’s cases. They have a general role in supporting negotiated
resolution of disputes concerning children. The court has a Child Responsive
Program for children’s cases and Family Consultants
become involved with
families early in their engagement with the
Family Consultants
perform an important role in identifying cases that involve violence and
The Family Court also
has the Magellan case management model for cases involving serious allegations
of child abuse, which involves
allocation of cases to a small team of judges,
registrars and Family Consultants. The Magellan Project is discussed in detail
ADR and Indigenous peoples
11.97 There has also been a focus on using ADR in child protection matters
involving Indigenous peoples. In 2006, the NSW Aboriginal
Child Sexual Assault
Taskforce addressed the issue of using ADR for child sexual assault matters and
concluded that further research
and consideration was required on this
In 2002, a Western
Australian inquiry into the response of government agencies to complaints of
family violence and abuse in Indigenous
communities also supported the use of
11.98 Such a focus has particular significance for Indigenous peoples because
of the high levels of involvement of child protection
agencies with Indigenous
children, the high levels of violence in some Indigenous communities and the
significant levels of distrust
of child protection agencies by Indigenous
11.99 One example of ADR in this context is the pilot of Care Circles in the
Children’s Court in Nowra, NSW. Such a Circle can
be convened by consent
where the Children’s Court had already determined a child or young person
to be in need of care and
protection.
Participants in
the Care Circles include three Indigenous community members, family members,
lawyers (including a children’s
lawyer), departmental child protection
officers, the Care Circle Project Manager and a
magistrate.
Care Circle
conferences focus on issues such as custody and contact arrangements and support
for the family, although the magistrate
ultimately makes the
Care Circles thus
have some similarities with family group conferences, but also borrow from and
adapt ideas and procedures from
sentencing circles used in criminal matters
(discussed below).
Children, Youth and Families Act 2005
(Vic) requires that
significant decisions under the Act involving an Indigenous child should involve
a conference including an Indigenous
convener from an approved organisation, the
family and other appropriate members of the Indigenous community as determined
In practice,
departmental facilitators work with independent Indigenous facilitators to
convene a conference.
developed from a pilot program involving a partnership between the Victorian
Department of Human Services and the Rumbalara
Aboriginal Co-operative, which
was evaluated as a success in
Benefits, concerns and
intersections
11.101 The benefits of using ADR in child protection matters are significant.
ADR processes are often faster and more
cost-effective.
There is the
potential to repair important relationships and open channels of
communication.
Procedures and
outcomes may be tailored to the needs and interests of children, families and
their cultures.
11.102 Importantly for this Inquiry, many of the models of ADR in child
protection involve group processes in which anyone who is
relevant to the
child’s life, care and safety can be present. All of the agencies who are
involved with the child and family
can come together, talk directly with each
other and hear and understand the perspectives of all involved. The family law
and socio-legal
service systems have been referred to as a
It is possible that
forms of ADR could assist in creating pathways of communication and
decision-making for the individuals who may
find the ‘maze’ hard to
11.103 ADR in child protection matters is, at least initially, resource
intensive, as it may require extensive preparation in order
However, there is
empirical evidence from programs in the United States that using ADR may save
resources later.
possible that the fragmentation of the system may make the assessment of savings
difficult, as expenditure by one organisation
may result in savings for
11.104 There are a number of concerns about the use of ADR in child
protection cases similar to those about the use of FDR in cases
violence. A key concern is the potential for such processes to compromise the
safety of children.
there are significant imbalances in power between: the child and parents,
between parents (especially in cases of violence);
and between families and
government departments and other
There is also the
challenge of representing the interests of children who sometimes
(appropriately) may not be part of the ADR process
but are directly affected by
The complexity of the
cases means that most ADR involves multi-party processes requiring skilled
management by well trained, experienced
and possibly multiple conveners.
11.105 Although the use of ADR in child protection matters appears to be
developing, and has received strong support from some
there appears also
to be resistance to its development. Concern has been expressed that existing
powers in legislation to use ADR
are not used frequently
This may be the
result of a lack of familiarity or training in ADR, or a lack of understanding
of its potential in child protection
It would appear that
some lawyers do not understand the appropriate role of lawyers in child
protection mediation, and this may impede
agreements in some
Commissions’ views
11.106 As the ALRC and HREOC stated in ALRC 84, the use of ADR in child
protection cases ‘hold[s] a good deal of promise for
the resolution of
disputes about the care and protection of
particular relevance to this Inquiry is the possibility that ADR can improve
communication between the many agencies and individuals
involved in making
decisions in child protection matters. As well as providing an opportunity for
professionals to meet and hear
each other’s perspectives, it may help
children and young people and their families understand a system that has been
as a ‘maze.’ The Commissions are interested in hearing
from stakeholders how these potential benefits can best be realised.
11.107 The Commissions note that, as with FDR, ADR in child protection
matters involves a number of challenges in the context of family
violence. These
include dealing with relationships of power; protection from violence, abuse and
intimidation; and ensuring that
all voices are heard, including the voice of the
child. Many of these concerns, however, may be addressed through training of
and ensuring best practice in ways similar to that discussed above in
the context of FDR. The Commissions are interested in hearing
views on whether
legislative or other reforms are needed to ensure that family violence is
addressed appropriately in such practices.
How can the potential of alternative dispute resolution
mechanisms to improve communication and collaboration in the child protection
system best be realised?
Question 11–6
Is there a need for
legislative or other reforms to ensure that alternative dispute resolution
mechanisms in child protection address
family violence
appropriately?
[back to top]
Restorative
Definitions
11.108 As the ALRC noted in the 2006 Report,
Same Crime, Same Time:
Sentencing of Federal Offenders
(ALRC 103), there is no accepted
definition of restorative justice. Restorative justice may be defined as a
process, or in terms
of its aims or philosophy.
11.109 One widely accepted definition of restorative justice is ‘a
process whereby parties with a stake in a specific offence
collectively resolve
how to deal with the aftermath of the offence and its implications for the
However, such
processes need not involve face-to-face meetings between victims and offenders,
and can be used for victims alone or
involve representatives of
Restorative justice
initiatives may be employed at any stage in the criminal justice process,
including the sentencing
Other stages could
include: before or at the time a person is charged; after a person is convicted
but before sentencing; and after
a person has served his or her sentence.
11.110 On a philosophical level, restorative justice can be described
‘as an approach to crime that focuses on repairing the
harm caused by
criminal activity and addressing the underlying causes of criminal
behaviour’.
purposes of restorative justice include ‘reintegrating offenders into
their communities … and restoring the relationship
between victim and
11.111 The underlying principles of restorative justice programs have been
described as follows:
Restorative justice programs are based on the belief that parties to a conflict
ought to be actively involved in resolving it and
mitigating its negative
consequences. They are also based, in some instances, on a will to return to
local decision-making and community
building. These approaches are also seen as
means to encourage the peaceful expression of conflict, to promote tolerance and
inclusiveness,
build respect for diversity and promote responsible community
11.112 Restorative justice is founded on a critique of the adversarial nature
of the conventional criminal justice system:
Restorative justice is a way of thinking about what is best for the many
connections among crime victims, their offenders and the
criminal justice
process. Restorative justice advocates suggest that conventional assumptions
that victims should be at the centre
rather than excluded from the process, that victims and offenders are not
natural enemies, that
victims are not primarily retributive in their view of
justice, that prison is not necessarily the best way to prevent repeat crime.
The erroneous assumptions of conventional justice, the advocates suggest,
contribute to rising public dissatisfaction with justice
across the common law
11.113 The critiques of the criminal justice system in the restorative
justice literature are relevant to an understanding of the
limitations of legal
frameworks in addressing issues of family violence, and have informed many of
the laws reforming, for example,
sexual assault, as is discussed in Chapter
11.114 Professor John Braithwaite has suggested that restorative justice has
far-reaching implications. In his view, it is more than
a way of reforming the
criminal justice system. Rather, ‘it is a way of transforming the entire
legal system, our family lives,
our conduct in the workplace, our practice of
11.115 Restorative justice is not a simple ‘one size fits all’
practice. Professor Julie Stubbs has used the term ‘restorative
practices’ to ‘highlight the diversity among initiatives undertaken
in the name of restorative
Inquiry, the Commissions use the term ‘restorative justice
practices’ when referring to the practices and processes
associated with
restorative justice, although authors also use terms such as
‘initiatives’, ‘processes’ and
‘programs’.
11.116 There are a number of restorative justice practices, with the three
most common being victim-offender mediation, conferencing,
and circle and forum
sentencing.
practices have in common is the use of
inclusive decision-making processes that involve bringing the offender, the
victim, and sometimes members of the wider community,
together to determine
collectively the approach to be taken to a
11.117 In victim-offender mediation, the focus is face-to-face dialogue
between victims and offenders, under the guidance of trained
mediators. The
usual outcome is an agreement about what needs to be done to repair the
harm—for example, an apology, repayment,
or an undertaking to seek
counselling.
However, the key
feature is the dialogue, which aims to empower the victim and develop empathy
for the victim in the
11.118 Conferencing involves a wider kind of meeting between victims,
offenders, family members, and supporters under the guidance
of a coordinator.
This approach became popular in the
victim-offender mediation, participants discuss the crime and its impact, and
typically reach an agreement. Conferencing
is used commonly for young offenders
in Australia, in which case its purpose is usually to divert the offender from
the criminal
justice system. In some cases, such as in NSW and Tasmania, the
option for conferencing is part of a wider scheme in which police
are empowered
to warn, caution or conduct conferences as an alternative to court
11.119 Another type of restorative practice, developed primarily in the
context of Indigenous offenders, is circle (or forum) sentencing.
This practice
usually involves judicial officers sitting together with elders of the
community, as well as lawyers and other participants,
in an informal setting to
discuss the crime, its impact, and the appropriate sentence. Circle sentencing
is unlike victim-offender
mediation in that it is led by a judicial officer
rather than a mediator, and the judicial officer determines the sentence, rather
than an agreement being made by the
participants.
The principles
of circle sentencing have been extended to non-Indigenous offenders in some
contexts, such as the Northern Territory
Community Court.
11.120 A number of restorative justice practices have been established in
Australian states and territories. These vary widely in
their scope and the
stage of the criminal justice process at which they may be invoked. The
practices differ in terms of their impact
or link with the criminal justice
system. For example, practices that occur post-sentence are purely for the
benefit of the parties
and have no impact on the sentence received. On the other
hand, youth justice conferencing is typically intended to divert the incident
from the criminal justice altogether. Other ways in which practices might
interact with the criminal justice system include, for
example, the possibility
that the outcomes of such processes are considered in sentencing, or may suspend
the criminal justice process.
Where restorative justice practices do interact
with the criminal justice system, one concern is whether a person’s
to be involved in such a practice is triggered by a fear of the
consequences of the criminal
11.121 Restorative justice practices in Australian states and territories
have been used primarily for juvenile
These practices,
however, are being used increasingly for adult offenders—for example, the
Neighbourhood Justice Centre pilot
commenced in Victoria in 2008 deals with
adult offenders, and the
Crimes (Restorative Justice) Act 2004
out comprehensive schemes for youth and adult offenders, although the latter is
yet to commence.
discussed further below.
11.122 Restorative justice practices have been introduced since 1999 in
nearly all Australian states and territories to sentence Indigenous
However, Kathleen
Daly has cautioned against conceptualising restorative justice practices as a
form of Indigenous justice. She states
that ‘the devising of a (white,
bureaucratic) practice that is
flexible and accommodating
cultural differences does not mean that conferencing
an indigenous
justice practice’.
Rather, Daly prefers to understand conferencing as ‘a fragmented justice
form: it splices white, bureaucratic forms of justice
that may include non-white
(or non-western) values or methods of judgement, with all the attendant dangers
of such “spliced
11.123 Importantly for this Inquiry, restorative justice practices
traditionally have been used in cases of ‘minor’ or
serious’ offences in Australia. They have not frequently been used in
cases of family violence or sexual assault,
although as discussed below, there
have been some developments in this area.
Application to
family violence
11.124 Restorative justice practices in Australia differ widely in their
application to family violence. There are some general limits
to, and criteria
for, these programs that restrict their application to family violence. As most
of these programs are located at
the level of the Local or Magistrates Court,
they are limited to the same criminal jurisdiction as those
Further, the programs
usually require some acknowledgement of responsibility or finding of guilt;
require the consent of both parties;
and depend upon the assessment of the
offender as suitable for the program, which usually takes into account the
willingness of the
offender to engage with such a practice. In NSW, some schemes
also require the likelihood of imprisonment, which may render ineligible
offences that may constitute family
11.125 In addition, a large number of these programs have specific
exclusions, either by way of legislation or guidelines, for conduct
constitute family violence. In particular, it is common for such programs to
exclude sexual offences and certain violent
offences. For example, the NSW
legislation establishing youth justice conferencing, the
Young Offenders Act
(NSW), excludes its application to offences under the relevant family
violence legislation (including a breach of a protection order,
stalking and
intimidation), and to a range of other offences that may constitute family
11.126 Similarly, in Western Australia, youth conferences (known as juvenile
justice teams) cannot be held with respect to offences
contained in schs 1 and 2
Young Offenders Act
These include
offences involving sexual assault and violence.
11.127 The youth conferencing practice in Tasmania (known as Community
Conferencing) excludes ‘prescribed’ offences including
attempted murder, manslaughter, aggravated sexual assault, and
Procedure Act 1986
(NSW), certain offences are excluded from the scope of
intervention programs such as forum sentencing and circle sentencing. These
offences include malicious wounding or infliction of grievous bodily harm;
sexual offences; stalking and intimidation; and offences
In Victoria, sexual
offences are excluded from the Young Adult Restorative Justice Group
Conferencing program by
legislation.
11.128 The most ambitious restorative justice legislation in Australia, the
Crimes (Restorative Justice) 2004 Act
(ACT), makes specific provision for
restorative justice practices to apply (in the case of both young and adult
offenders) to crimes
constituting family violence under its family violence
legislation.
However, these
provisions are part of the ‘second phase’ of the restorative justice
program, and to date have not been
brought into
The Restorative
Justice Unit of the ACT Department of Justice and Community Safety is currently
consulting and planning for this
phase’ of the program applies to ‘less serious offences’
committed by young offenders.
The restorative justice program in the ACT is broad, operating at every stage of
the criminal process and enabling multiple agencies
to refer cases to such
11.129 More commonly, the relevant guidelines or procedures list the offences
that are excluded from the scope of restorative justice
practices. Most
straightforwardly, the NSW Forum Sentencing Operating Procedure excludes
‘domestic violence offences’
where the offender has been in an
intimate personal relationship with the
Sexual offences are
excluded by the practice direction of the Ngambra Circle Sentencing Court in the
and by the guidelines of
the Community Court in the Northern Territory.
11.130 These exclusions may apply only to certain serious offences. For
example, the juvenile pre-court diversion scheme in the Northern
excludes certain offences including murder, manslaughter, rape, serious physical
and serious property
The Victorian youth
justice conferencing program excludes similar offences including serious crimes
of violence.
Other guidelines
state that caution should be exercised in respect of certain offences relevant
to family violence—for example,
the Tasmanian Community Conferencing
guidelines,
and the Community
Court in the Northern
11.131 In other cases, while offences constituting family violence may not be
excluded, additional guidelines or protocols may be
in place. For example,
additional guidelines apply to mediation and conferencing practices run by the
Restorative Justice Unit in
and the youth justice
conferencing practice in
Queensland.
11.132 Other restorative justice practices, do not appear to give special
treatment for offences of family violence. For example,
sexual assaults are
dealt with in family conferences in South
Benefits of, and
concerns about, restorative justice
11.133 Restorative justice practices may have a number of benefits. The ALRC
has noted that:
Restorative initiatives have the potential to: increase the satisfaction of
participants in the criminal justice system; encourage
offenders to accept
responsibility for their conduct; reduce recidivism by addressing the causes of
criminal behaviour; and provide
insight into the causes of
11.134 Lawrence Sherman and Heather Strang have noted that there are two
claim and the
effectiveness claim:
The procedural claim is that restorative justice (RJ) is seen by victims and
offenders as a more humane and respectful way to process
crimes than
conventional justice (CJ). The effectiveness claim is that RJ is better than CJ
in producing important results that we
want from justice: less repeat offending,
more repair of harm to victims, fewer crimes of vengeance by victims, more
reconciliation
and social bonding among families and friends affected by crime,
and more offences brought to
11.135 However, others have expressed general concerns about restorative
justice, including the lack of conceptual clarity and empirical
evidence in
support of the claims for restorative justice, and the tendency to
underemphasise the role of criminal law in denouncing
Appropriateness of
restorative justice
11.136 In the context of this Inquiry, the Commissions acknowledge that the
appropriateness of restorative justice in relation to
family violence and sexual
assault is a divisive issue. This is particularly so in the context of
Indigenous women and child victims
of family violence or sexual assault.
Family violence
11.137 Some advocates have supported the use of restorative justice practices
in the context of family violence, arguing that they
have the potential to
increase women’s choices; provide women with a voice; draw on the support
of their family and friends
in a way that may increase their
provide a flexible
environment for communication and, if desired, repair the
relationship.
11.138 However, many others have voiced significant
These concerns
include fears for women’s safety, concerns about the ability of
restorative justice to hold offenders accountable,
and broader concerns about
the role of restorative justice in the politics of gender and
11.139 Stubbs, for example, has noted that restorative justice practices may
be an opportunity for further abuse, especially emotional
abuse, in the context
of family violence:
It is not clear what, if any, victim-centred screening occurs. Safety
assessments that are not informed by an adequate understanding
of domestic
violence or family violence may be of little value or even dangerous. Moreover,
there seems to be a common focus on safety
within the process of restorative
justice but little recognition of ongoing safety concerns subsequent to the
restorative justice
conference, sentencing circle or
11.140 Another objection is that restorative justice practices may not take
sufficient account of the dynamics of family violence.
In doing so, they may
compromise women’s safety and fail to hold offenders accountable.
11.141 For example, there are questions about:
the genuineness of apologies within a family violence context, as
apologies are often a feature of the violence
the ability of restorative justice practices to recognise and
redress the power imbalance inherent in relationships characterised
violence, and to recognise the subtle signs of that power
the potential for misconceptions and stereotypes of family violence
to prevail;
the capacity for sustained changes in the behaviour of the
the assumptions embedded in restorative justice practices such as
the paradigm of crime as a discrete incident between
and reliance on
the norms of participants concerning family
the potential for restorative justice to create a privatised, or
‘second rate’, justice system for victims of family
that focuses on
‘restoring’ relations rather than denouncing family
11.142 Donna
Coker draws a distinction between the terms ‘restorative justice’
and ‘transformative justice’:
the concept of
restoration
suggests that a prior state existed in which
the victim experienced significant liberty and the offender was integrated into
a community;
in many cases neither is true. Rather than restorative justice,
battered women should have the option to choose processes that operate
transformative
11.143 For Coker, transformative justice models may be more appropriate in
cases of family violence. These models ‘rely more
prominently on changes
in batterer networks, provision of support for battered women, and processes
that link gender ideology and
subordination with experiences of racial
subordination and
colonization’.
Transformative justice focuses on reintegration of the offender rather than
eliciting forgiveness from the victim, as ‘[p]ressure
to forgive places
the victim in an untenable position of once again subordinating her own needs to
those of the abuser’.
Further, transformative justice should move beyond ‘symbolic
reparations’ to address the material needs of the victim,
for example,
through access to victims’ compensation schemes or direct transfers of
money from the offender to the
11.144 So far, little empirical research has been undertaken specifically in
relation to the application of restorative justice practices
to situations of
family violence. One important study is the 2007 review of restorative justice
practices in family violence in New
Zealand. This review found that participants
generally viewed those processes positively, with 79% of victims saying they
it again, although these findings are based on a small sample of 19
victims and are based on particular models in New
Only two of the
victims felt unsafe during the process—but only six victims were asked
11.145 A further debate is the appropriateness of restorative justice for
Indigenous victims of family
Stubbs notes that
while there are ‘problems in conflating Indigenous justice with
[restorative justice], [there is] no agreement
on how to differentiate between
For example,
circle sentencing is commonly considered a restorative justice practice, but
this is contested by
11.146 Part of that debate stems from the perception that restorative justice
may be more culturally appropriate to Indigenous legal
systems than conventional
criminal justice,
over the degree of community control and
recognition of the distinctive voices
and needs of Indigenous women, including their needs for safety. Professor
Larissa Behrendt
has emphasised that
principles of self-determination and empowerment need to guide any restorative
justice strategy that seeks to navigate and negate
the dynamics and forces that
encourage family violence to
11.147 The design of restorative justice practices for Indigenous people
requires extreme care. Loretta Kelly cautions that:
Family violence programs should be designed and implemented in a manner that
acknowledges the post-colonial context of violence,
but which protects the
well-being and safety of women and children. … Non-Indigenous people
design and enforce oppressive and
discriminatory institutions, which we are then
expected to use to protect
Sexual assault in the family
11.148 Few empirical studies have been conducted about the use of restorative
justice in sexual assault
Notwithstanding this,
conferencing for sexual assault takes place for juvenile sexual assault
offenders in South Australia and
Queensland.
11.149 Daly suggests that ‘
crime may be amenable to a
restorative process (whether as diversion from court, pre-court sentencing
advice, or post-probation or
post-prison meeting), but in many cases, victims
may not want to participate in a face-to-face meeting with an
With respect
to sexual assault, she states:
restorative justice must ultimately be concerned
with vindicating
the harms suffered by victims (via retribution and reparation) and then,
, with rehabilitating offenders. Currently, the use of conferencing
as a diversion from court in Australia and New Zealand is skewed
more toward
diversion as a form of rehabilitation. … Perhaps because the offenders are
juveniles in these diversionary conferencing
schemes, this skew toward
rehabilitation is appropriate; but if restorative justice is to be applied to
more serious cases and to
adult offenders, then the process, and underlying
philosophical premises, may have to
11.150 Dr Annie Cossins disagrees with Daly that restorative justice may
provide victims of sexual assault with ‘a greater degree
of justice than
queries whether restorative justice practices are ever appropriate for adult
sexual assault offenders:
In assessing the appropriateness of restorative justice for child sexual assault
cases, it is necessary to recognize that sexual
assault is one of the
‘hard cases’, because it is unclear whether it is possible to
achieve the philosophical ideals
of restoration when bringing together an
offender and a victim in an informal meeting to deal with one person’s
exploitation
of another. The question that many proponents and critics have
discussed is whether restorative justice should become ‘mainstream
justice’ for sexual assault or whether it should only be available for
juvenile offenders to encourage them ‘to grow
out of crime without
punishment and
stigmatization’.
11.151 The Victorian Law Reform Commission (VLRC) has considered the use of
restorative justice practices in the context of family
violence and sexual
offences. In its review of family violence, it concluded that:
Establishing any restorative justice model for family violence matters depends
on the development of appropriate models based on
rigorous research. The
commission’s position is that there is insufficient clarity in the
research to support the adoption
of restorative practices for use in family
violence matters and little experience in using such practices. Common standards
of practice
have not been developed and it would be necessary to train
practitioners to use these practices in family violence
11.152 The VLRC, in its report on sexual offences, recommended the
establishment of a joint working party to consider options for
responding, with
a particular focus on the South Australian
In 2009, the Victorian
Parliament Law Reform Committee further considered the use of restorative
justice practices in the context
of family violence and sexual assault. It
concluded it did not have sufficient evidence for it to make recommendations,
recommendations for further research in the
The Commissions are not
aware that any research has begun as a result of these recommendations.
11.153 The National Council to Reduce Violence against Women and their
Children, in the
Time for Action
report, similarly concluded:
These perceived benefits of and concerns about restorative justice have not been
adequately tested because gender-based violence
has been almost entirely
excluded from restorative justice processes in Australia and
internationally.
In efforts to guard against the risks of revictimisation, women subjected to
sexual assault and domestic and family violence may
be deprived of potential
enhancements in access to justice. With this in mind, the National Council
supports the cautious exploration
of how elements of restorative justice may be
incorporated into, or run in parallel with, the conventional criminal justice
to achieve just outcomes for
11.154 The National Council recommended that trials should
be undertaken and evaluated, ‘with necessary caution … to explore
the utility and suitability of restorative justice for cases of domestic and
family violence and sexual
It similarly
recommended that restorative justice practices, driven by Indigenous
communities, should be trialled and evaluated in
the context of Indigenous
victims of family violence and sexual
Effectiveness of
restorative justice
11.155 Later in this chapter, the Commissions ask a question about the
appropriateness of restorative justice practices in the context
A separate issue is
whether such practices are effective—whether in terms of outcomes for the
offender, victim, or society
more broadly. In relation to one outcome with
respect to offenders—recidivism—the ALRC noted in ALRC 103
Participants in restorative justice initiatives generally report high levels of
satisfaction with the process but studies of the
effect of restorative justice
initiatives on recidivism rates have produced mixed
11.156 In the Indigenous context, Jacqueline Fitzgerald has studied
statistics from the New South Wales Bureau of Crime Statistics
and Research that
relate to adult Aboriginal offenders in NSW involved in circle sentencing.
Fitzgerald concludes that the evidence
suggests that ‘circle sentencing
has no effect on the frequency, timing or seriousness of
[re]offending’.
Reducing recidivism rates, however, is only one of several objectives of circle
sentencing for Indigenous offenders. She notes that,
‘[i]f it strengthens
the informal social controls that exist in Aboriginal communities, circle
sentencing may have a crime
prevention value that cannot be quantified through
immediate changes in the risk of reoffending for
individuals’.
Fitzgerald also suggests that consideration could be given to complementing
circle sentencing with programs such as cognitive behavioural
therapy, drug and
alcohol treatment and remedial
11.157 Thus far, little evidence is available to assess the effectiveness of
restorative justice practices in the family violence
context, or the extent to
which restorative justice practices address the underlying causes of family
The New Zealand
evaluation, referred to above, does provide some insights. It provides support
for the claim that the procedures
of restorative justice are helpful, with
victims and offenders appreciating ‘the open dialogue and the healing
process that
occurred in a non-judgemental environment’, ‘being able
to meet the offender in a safe supportive environment’;
able to put things right, feeling supported and being treated with
It reported,
however, that victims expressed mixed views as to whether the violence had
stopped after the meeting, with about a third
saying it had, while another third
reported the nature of the violence had shifted from physical to
psychological.
than half the offenders felt they had learnt about their behaviour and thought
they needed to change, victims generally
thought offenders still needed more
Commissions’
11.158 The Commissions’ preliminary view is that the use of restorative
justice practices in the context of family violence
is fraught with
difficulties, and any use of such practices in that context requires extremely
careful thought and preparation. These
difficulties have, to date, caused family
violence to be excluded from the scope of a number of restorative justice
practices, or
to be subject to additional protocols. If restorative justice
practices are to be used in the family violence context, the Commissions’
preliminary view is that these should be implemented only after extensive
community consultation in the development of protocols
by restorative justice
professionals, as the Restorative Justice Unit in the ACT is currently
11.159 The use of restorative justice practices for sexual offences, however,
appears to the Commissions to be inappropriate generally.
The dynamics of power
in a relationship where sexual offences have been committed make it very
difficult to achieve the philosophical
and policy aims of restorative justice in
that context. The Commissions consider that restorative justice processes carry
risk of secondary victimisation for victims of sexual offences.
Nevertheless, in view of the availability of conferencing for sexual
certain jurisdictions, the Commissions are interested in hearing about the
experiences of participants. The Commissions
are also interested in hearing
whether conferencing is appropriate for a limited class of sexual offences or
offenders and, if so,
what safeguards are necessary or desirable.
11.160 The Commissions agree with the recommendations of the VLRC that
appropriate models need to be ‘based on rigorous
research was recommended by the VLRC and the Victorian Parliament Law Reform
As well, the
Restorative Justice Unit in the ACT is presently exploring the application of
restorative justice processes in the context
of family violence. Further trials
and evaluations were also recommended by the National Council to Reduce Violence
Against Women
and their Children. In the Commissions’ view, it is
premature to make proposals in this area given these current and proposed
developments. This issue should be revisited at a later stage.
11.161 The Commissions are interested, however, in views from stakeholders as
to the appropriateness or otherwise of restorative justice
in the context of
family violence, including whether it is appropriate for particular types of
conduct or categories of people. If
it is appropriate at all, the Commissions
are interested in hearing what safeguards are necessary to ensure both the
safety of the
victims and the efficacy of the practice.
Is it appropriate for restorative justice practices to be used in
the family violence context? If so, is it appropriate only for certain
conduct or categories of people, and what features should these practices have?
Question 11–8
Is it appropriate for restorative justice
practices to be used for sexual assault offences or offenders? If so, what
limits (if any)
should apply to the classes of offence or offender? If
restorative justice practices are available, what safeguards should
Law Reform Committee—Parliament of
Inquiry into Alternative Dispute Resolution and Restorative
See L McCrimmon
and M Lewis, ‘The Role of ADR Processes in the Criminal Justice System: A
View’ (Paper presented at
Association of Law Reform Agencies for Eastern
and Southern Africa, Entebbe, Uganda, 6 September 2005) and Law Reform
Committee—Parliament
of Victoria,
Inquiry into Alternative Dispute
Resolution and Restorative Justice
(2009), 9–10.
Law Reform Committee—Parliament of
Inquiry into Alternative Dispute Resolution and Restorative
(2009), 198.
Council and Law Council of Australia—Family Law Section,
Best Practice
Guidelines for Lawyers Doing Family Law Work
D Cooper and R Field,
‘Family Dispute Resolution of Parenting Matters in Australia: An Analysis
of the Notion of an Independent
Practitioner’
[2008] QUTLawJJl 8
University of Technology Law and Justice Journal
Ibid, 164–165, discusses
different models of mediation.
Commissions are required to consider whether a matter can be dealt with by
dispute resolution before a grant of legal
aid for family law matters can be
made. If a matter is considered appropriate for dispute resolution, a grant of
assistance will
be made for a conference where the lawyer will represent the
assisted party. The conferences are chaired by trained and qualified
practitioners. See KPMG,
Family Dispute Resolution Services in Legal Aid
Commissions: Evaluation Report
(2008) Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
P Parkinson, ‘Keeping
Child and Family Law Quarterly
Australian Institute of
Family Studies,
Evaluation of the 2006 Family Law Reforms—Summary
(2009), 94–95.
further below. This issue is discussed in detail in Ch 10, in the context of
information sharing generally in family
New South Wales Law Reform
Commission,
Community Justice Centres
, Report 106 (2005), ch 4.
Ibid, [4.41].
H Astor, ‘Violence and Family
Mediation: Policy’
Australian Journal of Family Law
also R Field, ‘Using the Feminist Critique of Mediation to Explore
“the Good, the Bad and the Ugly” Implications
for Women of the
Introduction of Mandatory Family Dispute Resolution in Australia’
Australian Journal of Family Law
H Astor, ‘The Weight of
Silence: Talking About Violence in Family Mediation’ in M Thornton (ed)
Public and Private: Feminist Debates
(1995) 174.
D Kirkwood and M McKenzie,
‘Family Dispute Resolution and Family Violence in the Family Law
System’ (2009) 14
Current Family Law
149, 150–152; M Kaye, J
Stubbs and J Tolmie, ‘Domestic Violence and Child Contact
Arrangements’
Australian Journal of Family Law
A Bailey and A Bickerdike,
‘Family Violence and Family Mediation ’ (2005) Autumn
13, 13; Australian Institute of Family Studies,
Evaluation of
the 2006 Family Law Reforms
Domestic Violence and Incest
Resource Centre,
Behind Closed Doors: Family Dispute Resolution and Family
, Discussion Paper No 6 (2007),
Cited in Ibid,
Cited in Ibid.
Family Law (Family
Dispute Resolution Practitioners) Regulations 2008
(Cth) reg 5.
Position Paper on
Mediation [for the] National Committee on Violence Against Women
Office of the Status of Women; Keys Young,
Research/Evaluation of Family
Mediation Practice and the Issue of Violence: Final Report
(1996) Australian
Government Attorney-General’s Department.
Australian Catholic University and
Australian Government Attorney-General’s Department,
Framework for
Screening, Assessment and Referrals in Family Relationship Centres and the
Family Relationship Advice Line
R Field, ‘A Feminist Model of
Mediation That Centralises the Role of Lawyers as Advocates for Participants who
are Victims
of Domestic Violence’
Australian Feminist Law
Domestic Violence and
Incest Resource Centre,
Behind Closed Doors: Family Dispute Resolution and
Family Violence
, Discussion Paper No 6 (2007),
Keys Young,
Research/Evaluation
of Family Mediation Practice and the Issue of Violence: Final Report
Australian Government Attorney-General’s Department,
Domestic Violence and Incest
Resource Centre,
Behind Closed Doors: Family Dispute Resolution and Family
, Discussion Paper No 6 (2007),
Family Dispute Resolution
Services in Legal Aid Commissions: Evaluation Report
(2008) Australian
Government Attorney-General’s Department, 46; Domestic Violence and Incest
Resource Centre,
Behind Closed Doors: Family Dispute Resolution and Family
, Discussion Paper No 6 (2007),
Domestic Violence and
Incest Resource Centre,
Behind Closed Doors: Family Dispute Resolution and
Family Violence
, Discussion Paper No 6 (2007),
H Astor, ‘Violence
and Family Mediation: Policy’
Australian Journal of Family Law
Australian Institute of
Family Studies,
Evaluation of the 2006 Family Law Reforms
(2009), 100.
The evaluation is noted in Ch 1.
Family Law Act 1975
For a discussion
of genuine effort in
, its meaning and the implications of the
provision in cases of violence, see H Astor, ‘Making a “Genuine
in Family Mediation: What Does It Mean?’
Australian Journal of Family Law
Family Law Act 1975
s 60I(9)(d).
Other circumstances include: where orders are applied for in response to other
applications; where there has been serious disregard
of previous family law
orders; where parties are unable to participate effectively in FDR; and where
other circumstances specified
in the regulations are satisfied. No other
circumstances are presently prescribed by the
regulations.
s 60I(8)(aa)
Family Law (Family Dispute
Resolution Practitioners) Regulations 2008
Ibid reg 25(1),
Ibid reg 29(c).
Family Law Rules 2004
Ibid sch 1, cl
The court is required to
consider seeking the advice of a family consultant before making such an
Family Law Act 1975
also applies to proceedings before a person authorised to hear
purposes include: protecting a child from the risk of harm; preventing or
lessening a serious and imminent threat to the life
or health of a person;
reporting the commission, or preventing the likely commission, of an offence
involving violence or a threat
of violence to a person; preventing or lessening
a serious and imminent threat to the property of a person; reporting the
commission,
or preventing the likely commission, of an offence involving
intentional damage to property of a person or a threat of damage to
property; or
assisting an independent children’s lawyer to represent a child’s
Australian Catholic University
and Australian Government Attorney-General’s Department,
Framework for
Screening, Assessment and Referrals in Family Relationship Centres and the
Family Relationship Advice Line
Screening and risk assessment in
family law proceedings is discussed in Ch
Family Dispute Resolution
Services in Legal Aid Commissions: Evaluation Report
(2008) Australian
Government Attorney-General’s
Department.
Commissions variously used
lawyers, clinically trained case managers, or intake officers: Ibid,
The Western Australian Legal Aid
Commission was reported to offer face to face conferencing only on the basis
that all parties were
legally represented: Ibid,
Ibid, 36 (in relation to risk
assessment and management), 41 (knowledge of lawyers about the FDR process, and
training for FDR practitioners,
lawyers and intake officers on support
Ibid, 36 (providing practitioners
with 24 hours’ notice of information), 41 (preparing parties for the FDR
process and its
underlying intention).
Australian Catholic University
and Australian Government Attorney-General’s Department,
Framework for
Screening, Assessment and Referrals in Family Relationship Centres and the
Family Relationship Advice Line
Government of Victoria,
Family Violence Risk Assessment and Risk Management: Supporting an Integrated
Family Violence Service System
Family Law Council,
Improving Responses to Family Violence in the Family Law System: An Advice on
the Intersection of Family Violence and Family Law Issues
This is noted in Chs 1 and
Family Law Council,
Responses to Family Violence in the Family Law System: An Advice on the
Intersection of Family Violence and Family Law Issues
Australian Institute of Family
Evaluation of the 2006 Family Law Reforms
(2009), 95. AIFS
refers to this as the ‘narrow’ definition of FDR.
Ibid, 100. This was a finding based
on a longitudinal survey of parents.
Ibid, 5–16.
Ibid. The deterrent effect
of the provisions in s 117AB which provide for costs sanctions in cases where
deliberately false allegations
are made is discussed in Ch
Ibid, 5–11. See also National
Council to Reduce Violence against Women and their Children,
Time for Action:
The National Council’s Plan for Australia to Reduce Violence against Women
and their Children, 2009–2021
Cited in Australian Institute of
Family Studies,
Evaluation of the 2006 Family Law Reforms
Ibid, ch 5; Family Law
Improving Responses to Family Violence in the Family Law System: An
Advice on the Intersection of Family Violence and Family Law Issues
Australian Institute of Family
Evaluation of the 2006 Family Law Reforms
H Rhoades, H Astor, A Sanson and
M O’Connor,
Enhancing Inter-Professional Relationships in a Changing
Family Law System: Final Report
Family Law Council,
Improving Responses to Family Violence in the Family Law System: An Advice on
the Intersection of Family Violence and Family Law Issues
Australian Catholic University
and Australian Government Attorney-General’s Department,
Framework for
Screening, Assessment and Referrals in Family Relationship Centres and the
Family Relationship Advice Line
(2008), 52, notes the definition in the
Family Law Act
definitions.
Family Court of
Family Violence Strategy
(2004–2005),
R Kaspiew, ‘Family
Violence in Children’s Cases under the
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth): Past
Practice and Future Challenges’ (2008) 14
Journal of Family Studies
Dispute Resolution Services in Legal Aid Commissions: Evaluation Report
(2008) Australian Government Attorney-General’s Department,
Ibid, 32. In an older survey
conducted in 1996, the agencies surveyed all reported asking about protection
orders and indicated
that a current order would increase their caution about
proceeding, although they would not definitely exclude mediation merely because
of the order: Keys Young,
Research/Evaluation of Family Mediation Practice
and the Issue of Violence: Final Report
(1996) Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
See Australian Catholic
University and Australian Government Attorney-General’s Department,
Framework for Screening, Assessment and Referrals in Family Relationship
Centres and the Family Relationship Advice Line
(2008). For examples where
protection orders are not asked about, see Attachment A, 79; Attachment F;
Attachment G, 109–110.
For examples where protection orders are asked
Victorian Department of Human
Family Violence Risk Assessment and Risk Management Framework
(2007), 61.
Magistrates’
Court of Victoria,
Information for Application for an Intervention Order
(2009) <www.magistratescourt.vic.gov.au> at 2 February 2010; Magistrates
Court of Tasmania,
Application for a Family Violence Order
<www.magistratescourt.tas.gov.au/divisions/family_violence/forms> at 29
March 2010; Northern Territory Magistrates Courts,
Application for Domestic
Violence Order
<www.nt.gov.au/justice/ntmc/forms_fees.shtml> at 29
March 2010; ACT Magistrates Court,
Application for a Domestic Violence
(2009) <www.courts.act.gov.au/magistrates> at 9 February
Magistrates Court of South
Affidavit to Support Application for Domestic Violence Restraining
<www.courts.sa.gov.au> at 8 March
New South Wales,
Application—Apprehended Domestic Violence Order
. The condition is,
however, ambiguous, as it states that the defendant must not ‘approach or
by any means whatsoever, except through the
defendant’s legal representative or as agreed in writing or as permitted
order or directions under the
Family Law Act 1975
, for the purpose
of counselling, conciliation, or mediation’. It is not clear from this
whether the counselling, conciliation
or mediation must be directed or ordered
Family Law Act
Magistrates Court of Queensland,
Protection Order Application
<www.communityservices.qld.gov.au/
violenceprevention/legislation/dom-violence-orders.html> at 9 February 2010;
Magistrates Court of Western Australia,
Violence Restraining Order
Application
<www.magistratescourt.wa.gov.au/content/
restraining.aspx> at 9 April 2010. As noted in Ch 6, the application
form for Western Australia does not allow applicants to indicate
conditions they would like imposed upon the respondent. The Commissions propose
that this form should be amended to allow applicants
to do so: Proposal
New South Wales Law
Reform Commission,
Apprehended Violence Orders
, Report No 103 (2003),
Restraining Orders Act
(WA) s 62(a), (b).
example, see
Alternative Dispute Resolution Act 2001
Domestic Violence and
Protection Orders Act 2008
(ACT) s 25.
Other than an emergency protection
Explanatory Statement,
Domestic Violence and Protection Orders Amendment Bill 2005
(ACT). The present
clause is the same as s 18A of the
Domestic Violence
Orders Act 2001
(ACT), which was inserted by s 11 of the
Violence and Protection Orders Amendment Act
(ACT). This clause
was not discussed in the Legislative Assembly of the ACT during the passage of
the latter Act.
Violence and Protection Orders Act 2008
Crimes (Domestic and
Personal Violence) Act 2007
New South Wales Law
Reform Commission,
Apprehended Violence Orders
, Report No 103 (2003),
Ibid, Rec 17.
Crimes (Domestic and
Personal Violence) Act 2007
provides that a matter is not to
be referred to mediation if the court is of the opinion that there has been a
history of physical
violence to the protected person by the defendant; the
protected person has been subjected to conduct by the defendant amounting
personal violence offence or stalking or intimidation under
of that Act;
the defendant has engaged in conduct amounting to harassment relating to the
protected person’s race, religion,
homosexuality, transgender status,
HIV/AIDS infection or disability; or there has been a previous attempt at
mediation in relation
to the same matter and the attempt was not successful.
Further, the
Community Justice Centres Act 1983
(NSW) provides the
Director with a discretion to decline any dispute:
New South Wales Law Reform
Commission,
Community Justice Centres
, Report 106 (2005),
[4.31]–[4.41].
[4.31]–[4.34].
This passage
referred to the definition in legislation that was later repealed. The present
definition of ‘domestic’
Crimes (Domestic and
Personal Violence) Act 2007
(NSW) is broader. This definition is discussed
New South Wales Law
Reform Commission,
Community Justice Centres
, Report 106 (2005),
[4.40]–[4.41].
Ibid, Rec 17.
This provision is not discussed in
the Second Reading Speech or canvassed in M Pyke,
South Australian Domestic
Violence Laws: Discussion and Options for Reform
The Magellan project is
considered below and in Ch 14.
Report of the Special Commission of Inquiry into Child Protection
Services in NSW
(2008), 481; N Harris,
Family Group Conferencing in
Australia 15 Years On
(2008) National Child Protection Clearinghouse
Family Group
Conferencing in Australia 15 Years On
(2008) National Child Protection
Clearinghouse, 1, 3.
‘Family Group Conferencing and Child Protection Mediation: Essential Tools
for Prioritizing Family Engagement in
Child Welfare Cases’
Family Court Review
Australian Law Reform Commission and Human Rights and Equal Opportunity
Commission,
Seen and Heard: Priority for Children in the Legal Process
ALRC 84 (1997), 12.
Report of the Special Commission of Inquiry into Child Protection Services in
(2008), 481; N Harris,
Family Group Conferencing in Australia 15
(2008) National Child Protection Clearinghouse,
Family Group
Conferencing in Australia 15 Years On
(2008) National Child Protection
Clearinghouse, 1.
Children and Young
Persons (Care and Protection) Act 1998
Report of the
Special Commission of Inquiry into Child Protection Services in NSW
Children’s Court of
Guidelines for Dispute Resolution Conferences
This has since been renamed the
Australian Human Rights Commission.
Australian Law Reform Commission and Human Rights and Equal Opportunity
Commission,
Seen and Heard: Priority for Children in the Legal Process
ALRC 84 (1997).
Ibid, [17.49].
Other concerns included: the appropriate level of children’s involvement;
the need to ensure that the best
interests of the child were promoted in
conferencing; and the need to ensure that the initial risk assessment was not
negotiation or compromise:
[17.49]–[17.54].
Further information
on implementation is available on the ALRC’s
C Abram, ‘ADR in a
Care and Protection Context—The NSW DoCS Model’ (2001–2) 2
Developing Practice: The Child, Youth and Family Work Journal
See also Ch
J McIntosh and C Long,
Child Responsive Program Operating Within the Less Adversarial Trial: A Follow
Up Study of Parent and Child Outcomes
(2007), 5. For an overview of Family
Court initiatives in children’s cases see B Fehlberg and J Behrens,
Australian Family Law—The Contemporary Context
Aboriginal Child Sexual
Assault Taskforce (NSW),
Breaking the Silence: Creating the Future.
Addressing Child Sexual Assault in Aboriginal communities in NSW
S Gordon, K Hallahan and D
Putting the Picture Together, Inquiry into Response by Government
Agencies to Complaints of Family Violence and Child Abuse in Aboriginal
Communities
Child Sexual Assault Taskforce (NSW),
Breaking the Silence: Creating the
Future. Addressing Child Sexual Assault in Aboriginal communities in NSW
Report of the
Special Commission of Inquiry into Child Protection Services in NSW
NSW Department of
Justice and Attorney General and NSW Department of Community Services,
(2009) <www.lawlink.nsw.gov.au/lawlink> at 22 March
Children, Youth and
Families Act 2005
s 12(1)(b).
Family Group Conferencing in Australia 15 Years On
(2008) National Child
Protection Clearinghouse, 16.
Linqage International,
ATSI Family Decision Making Program Evaluation:
Approaching Families Together
(2003) Victorian Department of Human Services.
N Thoennes, ‘What We Know:
Findings from Dependency Mediation’
Family Court Review
32–33; R Sheehan, ‘Alternative Dispute Resolution in Child
Protection Matters: The Victorian Experience’
Social Work
N Thoennes,
‘What We Know: Findings from Dependency Mediation’
Family Court Review
; Australian Law Reform Commission and Human Rights
and Equal Opportunity Commission,
Seen and Heard: Priority for Children in
the Legal Process
, ALRC 84 (1997),
T Brown and R Alexander,
Child Abuse and Family Law: Understanding the Issues Facing Human Service and
Legal Professionals
(2007), 128.
P Ban, ‘Dialogue and Alignment in Preparing Families for Family Group
Conferences’ (2009) 20
Australian Dispute Resolution Journal
N Thoennes, ‘What We
Know: Findings from Dependency Mediation’
Family Court Review
Family Group
Conferencing in Australia 15 Years On
(2008) National Child Protection
Clearinghouse, 4, cites UK research that suggests that the decentralised
structure of the child
welfare system there may contribute to low take-up of
Family Group Conferencing.
Report of the Special Commission of Inquiry into Child Protection Services in
(2008), 489.
‘Alternative Dispute Resolution in Child Protection Matters: The Victorian
Experience’ (2006) 59
Australian Social Work
Ibid; Strategic Partners,
Family Services Branch Child Inclusive Practice in Family and Child
Counselling and Family and Child Mediation
In NSW the Wood Inquiry was
‘of the strong view that ADR should be used before and during care
proceedings: J Wood,
Report of the Special Commission of Inquiry into Child
Protection Services in NSW
Family Group
Conferencing in Australia 15 Years On
(2008) National Child Protection
Clearinghouse, 7; J Wood,
Report of the Special Commission of Inquiry into
Child Protection Services in NSW
Report of the
Special Commission of Inquiry into Child Protection Services in NSW
R Sheehan, ‘Alternative
Dispute Resolution in Child Protection Matters: The Victorian Experience’
Australian Social Work
157; C Abram, ‘ADR in a Care and
Protection Context—The NSW DoCS Model’ (2001–2) 2
Developing Practice: The Child, Youth and Family Work Journal
Australian Law Reform
Commission and Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission,
Seen and Heard:
Priority for Children in the Legal Process
, ALRC 84 (1997),
T Marshall,
Restorative
Justice: An Overview
(1996) Home Office—United Kingdom, 5. John
Braithwaite has similarly described it as ‘a process where stakeholders
by an injustice have an opportunity to communicate about the
consequences of the injustice and what is to be done to right the wrong’:
J Braithwaite and H Strang, ‘Restorative Justice and Family
Violence’ in H Strang and J Braithwaite (eds),
Restorative Justice
and Family Violence
(2002) 1, 4.
K Daly, ‘Sexual Assault and Restorative Justice’ in H Strang and J
Braithwaite (eds),
Restorative Justice and Family Violence
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Same Crime, Same Time: Sentencing of Federal Offenders
103 (2006), [7.156].
‘Restorative Justice and Child Sex Offences: The Theory and the
British Journal of Criminology
United Nations Office of Drug
Handbook on Restorative Justice Programmes
(2006), 5. See also
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Same Crime, Same Time: Sentencing of
Federal Offenders
, ALRC 103 (2006), [4.20].
LW Sherman and H Strang,
Restorative Justice: The Evidence
(2007) Smith Institute,
J Braithwaite,
‘Principles of Restorative Justice’ in A von Hirsch and others
Restorative Justice and Criminal Justice: Competing or Reconcilable
(2003) 1, 1.
Stubbs, ‘Domestic Violence and Women’s Safety: Feminist Challenges
to Restorative Justice’ in H Strang and J
Braithwaite (eds),
Restorative Justice and Family Violence
See, eg, Law Reform
Committee—Parliament of Victoria,
Inquiry into Alternative Dispute
Resolution and Restorative Justice
(2009), 194–195; United Nations
Office of Drug and Crime,
Handbook on Restorative Justice Programmes
See generally United
Nations Office of Drug and Crime,
Handbook on Restorative Justice
(2006), Ch 2.
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Same Crime, Same Time: Sentencing of
Federal Offenders
, ALRC 103 (2006), [4.20].
New South Wales Government
Victims of Crime–Registers and Conferencing
<www.lawlink.nsw.gov.au> at 11 November
J Ptacek, ‘Resisting
Co-optation: Three Feminist Challenges to Antiviolence Work’ in J Ptacek
Restorative Justice and Violence Against Women
Young Offenders Act 1997
Youth Justice Act 1997
See generally NSW
Attorney-General’s Department,
Evaluation of Circle Sentencing
(2008). The Judicial Commission of NSW has also produced a DVD on
Circle Sentencing.
J Braithwaite
and H Strang, ‘Restorative Justice and Family Violence’ in H Strang
and J Braithwaite (eds),
Restorative Justice and Family Violence
See, eg, Law Reform
Committee—Parliament of Victoria,
Inquiry into Alternative Dispute
Resolution and Restorative Justice
(2009), 190. See also A Cossins,
‘Restorative Justice and Child Sex Offences: The Theory and the
British Journal of Criminology
Other examples of restorative
justice practices include Forum Sentencing in NSW and programs run by the
Restorative Justice Unit
(of the NSW Department of Corrective Services); the
Community Court in Darwin; the Justice Mediation Program in Queensland; and
victim-offender
mediation practices in South Australia. Tasmania and Western
Australia. Programs specific to Indigenous peoples typically include
For a brief history,
see I Potas and others,
Circle Sentencing in New South Wales: A Review and
(2003) Judicial Commission of New South Wales and Aboriginal
Justice Advisory Council, 3.
Daly, ‘Restorative Justice: The Real Story’ in E McLaughlin and
others (eds),
Restorative Justice: Critical Issues
(2003) 195,
These are generally offences
that are triable summarily, which are normally less serious than offences tried
on indictment.
Procedure Regulation 2005
(NSW) sch 4, cl 8(1)(e); sch 5, cl
Young Offenders Act
Crimes (Domestic and Personal Violence) Act 2007
Crimes (Domestic and
Personal Violence) Act 2007
(NSW) defines a ‘personal violence
offence’ as including several offences set out in
Crimes Act 1900
(NSW), including sexual assault offences set out in
Young Offenders Act
, schs 1, 2.
Youth Justice Act 1997
(definition of ‘prescribed
offence’). Only murder, attempted murder, and manslaughter are prescribed
offences for those
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
Magistrates' Court
Children, Youth and Families Act 2005
The Young Adult Restorative Justice Group Conferencing program is for
18–25 years old in the City of Yarra, run under the auspices
Neighbourhood Justice Centre.
Crimes (Restorative Justice) Act 2004
Consultation
, Canberra, 16 December 2009.
Crimes (Restorative Justice)
Forum Sentencing Operating Procedure specifies that the person cannot be
referred to a Forum if the offence before the court,
among other things, is a
domestic violence offence where the offender has been in an intimate personal
relationship: NSW Department
of Justice and Attorney General,
Sentencing Operating Procedure
(2008), [2.1.1]. ‘Intimate personal
relationship’ is further defined broadly in the procedures, in similar
terms to the
family violence legislation in NSW. The
Criminal Procedure
Regulation 2005
(NSW) sch 5 cl 7 also requires that the offender not have a
previous conviction for a large number of violent offences and weapons
firearms offences. Further, the
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
excludes offences including malicious wounding or infliction of
grievous bodily harm; sexual offences; stalking and intimidation;
and offences
involving firearms. There is also a requirement that the facts are likely to
lead to a sentence of imprisonment:
Criminal Procedure Regulation 2005
(NSW) sch 5, cl 7(1)(c).
According to its Final Interim Practice Direction, 21 April 2004, cl 15. In
addition, those with an ‘unresolved addiction
to illicit drugs (other than
cannabis)’ are also not eligible: cl 14.
T Cunningham,
Diversion in the Northern Territory: Impact on Juvenile Reoffending
Australian Institute of Criminology, 2.
See Northern Territory Police,
Juvenile Pre-Court Diversion Scheme
(2006) <www.pfes.nt.gov.au> at
18 November 2009.
Government Department of Human Services,
Youth Justice Group Conferencing
Program Guidelines
(2007), 6. See also
Children, Youth and Families Act
of Health and Human Services—Tasmania,
Community Conferencing
(2008), [3.2.4] (sexual offences).
Information obtained
from the Restorative Justice Unit of the NSW Department of Corrective Services,
11 January 2010.
Special procedures
apply for serious and sexual offences: Queensland Government Department of
Communities,
Youth Justice Conferencing Queensland—Restorative Justice
in Practice
(2009), 110.
Young Offenders Act 1993
(SA). See also K Daly, B Bouhours and S
Curtis-Fawley,
South Australia Juvenile Justice
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Same Crime, Same Time: Sentencing of Federal Offenders
, ALRC 103 (2006),
LW Sherman and H Strang,
Restorative Justice: The Evidence
(2007) Smith Institute,
Restorative
Justice, Domestic Violence and Family Violence
(2004) Australian Domestic
and Family Violence Clearinghouse, 4.
LW Sherman and H Strang,
Restorative Justice: The Evidence
(2007) Smith Institute,
J Stubbs, ‘Restorative
Justice, Gendered Violence, and Indigenous Women’ in J Ptacek (ed)
Restorative Justice and Violence Against Women
(2010) 103,
For overviews of the debate,
see, eg, J Braithwaite and H Strang, ‘Restorative Justice and Family
Violence’ in H Strang
and J Braithwaite (eds),
Restorative Justice and
Family Violence
(2002) 1; J Ptacek, ‘Resisting Co-optation: Three
Feminist Challenges to Antiviolence Work’ in J Ptacek (ed)
Restorative
Justice and Violence Against Women
(2010) 5; J Stubbs,
Restorative
Justice, Domestic Violence and Family Violence
(2004) Australian Domestic
and Family Violence Clearinghouse; J Stubbs, ‘Restorative Justice,
Gendered Violence, and Indigenous
Women’ in J Ptacek (ed)
Restorative
Justice and Violence Against Women
J Ptacek, ‘Resisting
Co-optation: Three Feminist Challenges to Antiviolence Work’ in J Ptacek
Restorative Justice and Violence Against Women
J Stubbs, ‘Domestic
Violence and Women’s Safety: Feminist Challenges to Restorative
Justice’ in H Strang and J
Braithwaite (eds),
Restorative Justice
and Family Violence
Restorative
Justice, Domestic Violence and Family Violence
(2004) Australian Domestic
and Family Violence Clearinghouse,
Ibid, 14–15.
J Stubbs, ‘Domestic Violence
and Women’s Safety: Feminist Challenges to Restorative Justice’ in
H Strang and J
Braithwaite (eds),
Restorative Justice and Family
(2002) 42, 57.
D Coker, ‘Transformative
Justice: Anti-Subordination Processes in Cases of Domestic Violence’ in
H Strang and J Braithwaite
Restorative Justice and Family
(2002) 128, 139.
example, Coker cites research that indicates that friends and family of a man
who engages in family violence tend to support
his view of himself as a victim:
Ibid, 129, 149.
‘Resisting Co-optation: Three Feminist Challenges to Antiviolence
Work’ in J Ptacek (ed)
Restorative Justice and Violence Against
(2010) 5, 20.
‘Transformative Justice: Anti-Subordination Processes in Cases of Domestic
Violence’ in H Strang and J Braithwaite
Restorative Justice
and Family Violence
(2002) 128,
V Kingi, J Paulin and L
Review of the Delivery of Restorative Justice in Family Violence
Cases by Providers funded by the Ministry of Justice
(2008) Crime and
Justice Research Centre Victoria University of Wellington,
For an overview, see J Stubbs,
‘Restorative Justice, Gendered Violence, and Indigenous Women’ in
J Ptacek (ed)
Restorative Justice and Violence Against Women
Ibid, 112. See also
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Review of Family Violence Laws: Report
(2006), 80.
L Behrendt,
‘Lessons from the Mediation Obsession: Ensuring that Sentencing
“Alternatives” Focus on Indigenous
Self-Determination’ in H
Strang and J Braithwaite (eds),
Restorative Justice and Family Violence
(2002) 178, 190.
‘Using Restorative Justice Principles to Address Family Violence in
Aboriginal Communities’ in H Strang and
J Braithwaite (eds),
Restorative Justice and Family Violence
(2002) 206,
A Cossins, ‘Restorative
Justice and Child Sex Offences: The Theory and the Practice’
British Journal of Criminology
, 361. The only significant study
appears to be K Daly, B Bouhours and S Curtis-Fawley,
South Australia
Juvenile Justice
practices are discussed further
K Daly, ‘Sexual
Assault and Restorative Justice’ in H Strang and J Braithwaite (eds),
Restorative Justice and Family Violence
A Cossins, ‘Restorative
Justice and Child Sex Offences: The Theory and the Practice’
British Journal of Criminology
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Review of Family Violence Laws: Report
Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Sexual Offences: Final Report
Committee—Parliament of Victoria,
Inquiry into Alternative Dispute
Resolution and Restorative Justice
(2009), 333, Recs
National Council to
Reduce Violence against Women and their Children,
Time for Action: The
National Council’s Plan for Australia to Reduce Violence against Women and
their Children, 2009–2021
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Same Crime, Same Time: Sentencing of Federal Offenders
103 (2006).
J Fitzgerald,
‘Does Circle Sentencing Reduce Aboriginal Offending?’ (2008) 115
Crime and Jusice Bulletin
See J Stubbs,
Restorative
Justice, Domestic Violence and Family Violence
(2004) Australian Domestic
and Family Violence Clearinghouse, 4–5; J Stubbs, ‘Restorative
Justice, Gendered Violence,
and Indigenous Women’ in J Ptacek (ed)
Restorative Justice and Violence Against Women
(2010) 103,
V Kingi, J Paulin and L
Review of the Delivery of Restorative Justice in Family Violence
Cases by Providers funded by the Ministry of Justice
(2008) Crime and
Justice Research Centre Victoria University of Wellington,
Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of Family Violence Laws: Report
Ibid; Law Reform
Committee—Parliament of Victoria,
Inquiry into Alternative Dispute
Resolution and Restorative Justice
(2009), Recs 72–73.
ALRC CP1 Family Violence � Improving Legal Frameworks
Protection—Introduction
Introduction
Terms of Reference
Outline of this part
Extent of the problem of child abuse and neglect
Terminology
Child protection history
Parens patriae
The family and the state
Child welfare
Child protection overview
A continuum—from primary to tertiary intervention
Triggering intervention
Child protection in a federal system
A fragmented system
The welfare jurisdiction of the
Family Law Act
One family, multiple systems
One family, competing discourses
Different planets
Competing dynamics
Legal versus services response
Best interests of the child
Children and human rights
Primary consideration
Role of a rights framework
A fluid principle
Protection—Introduction
Introduction
12.1 This part of the Consultation Paper focuses upon issues concerning
children and considers, as directed in the Terms of Reference,
any, improvements could be made to relevant legal frameworks to protect the
safety of women and their
The Terms of
Reference engage issues of child protection and safety on a number of levels.
The first Term of Reference focuses on
the interaction in practice of a range of
laws—including between child protection laws and the
Family Law Act
(Cth); and between child protection laws and relevant Commonwealth,
State and Territory criminal laws.
12.2 The second Term of Reference focuses on sexual assault in the family
violence context and the impact of inconsistent interpretation
or application of
laws, including rules of evidence, on victims of such violence. As noted in
Chapter 1, in the case of children,
the issue of sexual assault potentially
brings together all the areas of law under consideration in this Inquiry. Sexual
is considered in
of this Consultation Paper.
12.3 The intersection of laws is illustrated in the following comment
provided to the Commissions, described as a ‘succinct
outline’ of
issues for children and protective parents when they attempt to navigate the
interface between child protection
and the Family Court:
If a notifier, often the mother contacts [the child protection agency] re
concerns post separation and before there is Family Court
involvement and the
notifier is being protective by preventing contact with the alleged perpetrator
at that time, this will then
mean that this child is considered to have a parent
who is able and willing to protect and therefore the response will not be an
investigation but rather recorded on the system as a Child Concern Report
Often eventually the matter goes to the Family Court and the allegations are
raised in that forum. But in these circumstances there
has been no investigation
by [the child protection agency] and no outcome to provide to the Family Court.
During these interim periods
the Family Court appears to act as if the
allegations—having not been considered adequate to investigate by [the
child protection
agency]—are not significant enough therefore to influence
the Family Court decision making and interim decisions are often
made allowing
can include physical sexual emotional
and/or neglect issues.
The Family Court is mandated to report suspected abuse to [the child protection
agency] and will provide reports of harm to [the
agency]. If the information is
considered at this time to reach the threshold then a notification maybe
recorded ... If the notifier’s
concerns are negated and/or not able to be
confirmed by the child, commonly the notifier will be considered likely to be
the problem.
The outcome will then reflect that the harm is from the notifier
not the alleged perpetrator or commonly that it is both parents
contributing to the emotional harm of a child caught up in the Family Court
conflict ...
All of the issues outlined are relevant to all types of harm to children. Child
sexual abuse seems to multiply the above identified
concerns. Counsellors are
informing mothers not to name sexual abuse as an issue due to the likely
response by systems ... This advice
is no doubt based on the litany of examples
counsellors will have been privy to about protective parents who refuse to
provide children
‘unsupervised contact’ with an alleged sexual
perpetrator and subsequently have the contact decision become a ‘live
with’ the perpetrator decision due to non compliance by the protective
parent. Often the alleged perpetrator has not had significant
responsibilities for the child before the punitive decision has been made. How
is this consistent with the child’s best
interests? I have examples of
protective parents who have refused unsafe contact for their child only to lose
the care of their child
to the alleged sexual perpetrator. They have often
exhausted every avenue for assistance and every complaints mechanism to no
... Over ten years ago a mother committed suicide and killed her young child
rather than allow her child to be placed with his father
who she believed and
counsellors believed was sexually abusing her child. I think the importance of
what is happening to our children
and their protective parents in our systems
for a long time now can no longer be
Outline of this
12.4 This part of the Consultation Paper will focus on the issues raised by
the first Term of Reference in relation to child protection.
This chapter
provides an introduction to these issues. Following a snapshot of the extent of
the problem of child abuse and a discussion
of terminology, the chapter provides
a brief overview of child protection followed by particular aspects of the
constitutional framework
for dealing with child protection issues in the
Australian federal system
consideration of the ‘best interests of the child’ principle.
12.5 The remaining two chapters in this part concern first, interactions
between child protection and criminal law and, secondly,
a chapter that focuses
on the interactions between the family law and child protection systems.
Extent of the problem
of child abuse and neglect
12.6 Child abuse and neglect, like family violence, are matters of increasing
concern in Australia. The report,
The Cost of Child Abuse in
estimated that, in
2007, 177,000 children under the age of 18 were abused or neglected in
Australia, but stated the figure ‘could
be as high as 666,000 children and
young people’.
corresponding cost of child abuse incurred by the Australian community in 2007
was estimated to be between $10.7 and $30.1 billion.
In addition, the projected
cost over the lifetime of children who were first abused or neglected in 2007 is
between $13.7 and $38.7
12.7 As with family violence, particular circumstances increase the
likelihood of child abuse and neglect. For example, younger children
vulnerable to maltreatment; children with a disability are more likely to be
abused than other children; and Indigenous
children aged 0 to 17 years were 4.6
times more likely than average to be the subject of a substantiated report of
abuse or neglect.
12.8 The exposure of children to violence has a significant community impact
because its effects may be enduring and compounded where
a child, who was
exposed to violence, uses violence in adulthood:
Children are impacted adversely by experiencing or being aware of violence
toward a parent. The impacts can be physical, emotional
or psychological, which
can be both short and long term. Children exposed to violence have higher levels
of aggression, behavioural
problems and anxiety, and lower self esteem. Exposure
to family violence affects a child’s relationships, social and cognitive
development, education and mental health.
Early childhood adversity and abuse lead to enduring consequences that extend
into adult life. Consequences can include mental health
problems in adulthood.
When predicting levels of depression in adults, the greatest contributing
factors include neglect, excessive
physical punishment and family conflict.
Among the strongest predictors of problems related to alcohol use is physical
12.9 The intergenerational and complex nature of violence in some Indigenous
communities, particularly sexual violence, was highlighted
by a Women’s
Legal Service representative on Commissions’ Family Violence Online
A real problem is the intergenerational nature of child sexual abuse, the
normalisation of it, and having to deal with that, it’s
not always an
issue of evidence, but who is the perpetrator when children are acting out. In
families where intergenerational abuse
is present, it’s hard to point the
finger, and when you’re dealing in this legal context of individual rights
and interests
in time with children—how that is constructed in a way to
protect the child and for the mother—to give the woman power
the child against the extended family, when it might be the father’s
father. I’ve been giving a lot of women
that advice about protecting a
child from a paternal grandfather. And it’s not easy to construct court
orders in terms of extended
families, because fathers step away and they may be
in denial about that abuse and may have been victims themselves. You might have
parents who are trying to break that cycle but struggling and coming to us for
advice. ...
The biggest thing from my point of view is the co-ordination of getting women
into safe houses, and making them understand that we
have to do that first, so
we’re trying to work between the lawyer and the family support services
and the court support worker,
and it’s trying to get the women to
understand to move to safety. That’s our first priority. And getting a
is a major issue. If you’ve got a lady with a son over 10, you
can’t get into the women’s shelters, so she chooses
to go back or
lives in a car, usually where they can’t be recognised, so it will be
somewhere without a big number of ATSI
people, which puts them in a dangerous
12.10 This example illustrates the points of intersection and issues of
interaction between child protection and criminal law. It
also highlights that
family violence issues require the engagement of appropriate services at
critical times—quite apart from
any issues that sit within a legal
Terminology
12.11 For the purposes of this part of the Consultation Paper the following
terminology is used.
Child protection laws
12.12 ‘Child protection laws’ includes laws described as
‘child welfare laws’. The latter term is used in
Family Law Act
and refers to a prescribed class of
Child maltreatment
12.13 In this Part the expression ‘child maltreatment’ is used
generically to refer to
any non-accidental behaviour by parents, caregivers, other adults or older
adolescents that is outside the norms of conduct and entails
a substantial risk
of causing physical or emotional harm to a child or young person. Such
behaviours may be intentional or unintentional
and can include acts of omission
(i.e., neglect) and commission
(i.e., abuse).
12.14 In particular contexts specific definitions of various types of conduct
within the concept of ‘child maltreatment’
In the absence of universal definitions of child abuse and neglect, different
professional fields have developed their own definitions.
There are medical and
clinical definitions, social service definitions, legal and judicial
definitions, and research definitions
maltreatment.
12.15 While ‘child maltreatment’ is used as the generic
expression, specific contexts may require a consideration of the
particular kind
of action or omission that triggers child protection
intervention.
Parental responsibility
12.16 The primary intersection between child protection and family law
systems arises in relation to determinations of responsibility
for the continued
care and responsibility of a child or young person. The
Family Law Act
characterises the responsibility in terms of the powers and obligations that
parents have for their children under the broad umbrella
of ‘parental
responsibility’, which is defined as meaning ‘all the duties,
powers, responsibilities and authority
which, by law, parents have in relation
to children’.
12.17 As noted in Chapter 8, parenting orders may deal with a range of
matters including with whom a child should live, spend time
or communicate; the
allocation of parental responsibility; maintenance of a child; steps to be taken
before applying to the court
to vary a parenting order; the process for dispute
resolution; and any aspect of the care, welfare and development of
12.18 Notions of parental responsibility also appear in state and territory
child protection laws that provide for decisions to be
made about who shall have
continued care and responsibility for a child. The language and content of
individually expressed concepts
varies—some legislation using terms such
as ‘guardianship’ and
using terminology to reflect the
[back to top]
Child protection
12.19 The history of child protection involves a consideration of the
inherent jurisdiction of the court, the family and the state,
the introduction
of child welfare legislation in the states and territories as well as the
emergence of federal jurisdiction. That
child protection law exists on several
levels necessarily leads into the question of the interaction between the
various laws which
is one of the focuses of this Inquiry.
12.20 The Supreme Court of each state and territory has a very wide power to
make orders to protect the welfare of children, known
(‘parent of the country’) jurisdiction. The jurisdiction
has been described as ‘a nebulous, historic
the underlying
premise of which is that the children in question have no other, or no other
suitable, guardian.
12.21 When the jurisdiction of Chancery became vested in the Supreme Courts
of the states and territories, the
parens patriae
included as part of the inherent jurisdiction of the
The family and the
12.22 The state, as
parens patriae
, and the family intersect in the
arena of child protection. More particularly, in the contemporary context, the
question is when
a parent or parents may ‘lose’ their children to
the state. In the report,
Seen and Heard: Priority for Children in the Legal
, the ALRC and the Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission
(HREOC) considered the various theories about how the family and
the state ought
to relate with respect to children.
12.23 The perspectives of intervention range from minimalist to
interventionist, and include ideas about the role of the biological
family. The
minimalist position is reflective of the period of
‘father-right’,
ideas of the ‘private sphere’ of the
Historically, children
were considered essentially as the property of their father. The construction of
children as property lingers
in the use of the pronoun ‘it’ often
used to refer to a child—which renders the child even without
For example, in the late
19th century case,
Re Agar-Ellis
Bowen LJ remarked that
To neglect the natural jurisdiction of the father over the child until the age
of twenty-one would be really to set aside the whole
course and order of nature,
and it seems to me it would disturb the very foundation of family
12.24 The interventionist approach seeks to ensure that ‘all children
are provided with a right to caring adults who meet their
It reflects a
stronger notion of children’s rights.
In this model, the state makes the decisions as to whom those adults should be.
While the focus of this model is the child rather
than the adults in the family,
this model of intervention may overlook the strength of bonds between parent and
child, even when
the parent may be considered unsatisfactory. It also places too
much faith in the value of state intervention, assuming that the
agents of the
state, such as social workers and judges, are capable of making sound and
appropriate judgments that provide better
outcomes for
12.25 The importance of maintaining the biological family wherever possible
is a third perspective:
State intervention is reserved for responding to problems within families,
attempting to redress these so that the child can remain
at home or at least in
close contact with the family. Critics argue that this view may place too much
emphasis on biological ties
and that it does not differentiate between the
interests, feelings and welfare of children and those of
12.26 Each of these perspectives is evident in different ways in the multiple
facets of interaction between families and the state—articulated
or impliedly as ‘father right’, ‘parents’ rights’,
or ‘children’s rights’,
which may be in conflict with each
There are basic personal interests at stake here, which may sometimes conflict,
such as the interest of parents to have guardianship
and custody of their
children, and the interests of children to be safe and protected from certain
raise difficult questions for child protection
professionals, legislators, policymakers and courts. Within the broader
are finer ones such as the unequal and possibly unfair application of
certain provisions and outcomes to specific population groups,
such as single
parents, and parents with an intellectual disability or mental illness. As well,
compounding these contentious problems
are practical problems such as one of the
most daunting issues facing all jurisdictions: the adequate supply and funding
12.27 The dynamics of child protection involve not only the question of
parental responsibility as between parents, but also the question
of when it is
appropriate for the state to intervene into the historically
‘private’ space of the family—when children
need to be rescued
even from their own parents through the intervention of the state.
12.28 From the mid-19th century, all Australian governments
legislated to secure the welfare of children by defining the circumstances
which children needed to be protected from neglect or abuse, and the ways in
which young people might be treated as
By the end of the
19th century an ‘increasingly pervasive protective attitude to
children’ was evident.
12.29 The ‘child rescue movement’ initially took the form of
charitable and philanthropic endeavours, following upon the
interest in the
prevention of cruelty to
It then led to the
introduction of child protection legislation and the establishment of
children’s courts, representing a
large shift in the approach to children.
These developments were often motivated by revelations of severe cases of abuse
or neglect, which spurred child welfare activists
in the late 1800s and early
1900s to form rights and advocacy bodies including societies for the prevention
of cruelty to children.
12.30 Starting with South Australia in 1890, then following with all states
by 1918, dedicated children’s courts were established
courts had two principal functions: child care and protection; and exclusive
offenders. They were required to sit
separately, either in specially designated premises, or by arranging for
segregated court time,
when other business was not being
transacted.
12.31 By the 1970s all states and territories had introduced legislation to
protect children,
although the
language differed.
Changing perceptions of childhood among professionals and the public impacted on
organisations established to protect children from
child maltreatment. These
perceptions have continued to evolve resulting in elevated standards of what
constitutes appropriate care,
a broadened concept of where childhood starts and
ends, and a growing awareness of child welfare and child
References were made to the need to employ preventive and corrective measures
rather than punitive ones and hence to ‘reclaim
those boys and girls who
are now under temptation and on the downward
12.32 The ALRC identified the importance of sharpening the distinction
between care proceedings and prosecutions for criminal offences
in its report on
Child Welfare
The evolution of the child protection system into one with a very wide reach has
prompted, in part, current reviews of child protection
services. A central and
recurring theme is when it is appropriate for the state to intervene, and,
further, what is the role of child
protection services:
Child protection was originally set up to provide a crisis response to cases of
severe abuse in which the state needed to intervene
to protect the child.
However, the crisis response is not appropriate for the majority of families who
are referred to child protection
departments as they are typically in need
rather than in crisis. There will always be a role for a ‘forensic’
response in cases where there are serious protective concerns. However,
the challenge facing the sector is to devise service responses
that are better
suited to addressing family support needs. Recognition of this fact is slowly
bringing about change to the delivery
of child protection and child and family
welfare services both nationally and
internationally.
[back to top]
Child protection
12.33 In this Inquiry the Commissions seek to focus on the range of
interaction issues through the eyes of the participants in the
system. As noted
in Chapter 1, the material has been somewhat artificially divided to focus the
discussion on a range of areas of
specific interaction. However, the Commissions
consider that to achieve the best outcomes for the safety of women and
children—indeed
for all participants—in the legal framework for
dealing with issues of family violence, it is necessary to keep returning to
standpoint of viewing the issues through the eyes of the participants. In this
part of the Consultation Paper the Commissions
are concerned to see child
protection issues through the eyes of the children—their experiences;
their protection.
12.34 This section of the chapter provides a brief overview of the engagement
of the child protection system to set the scene for
the two chapters to follow
in this part. It considers the place of legal responses in the child protection
continuum, the process
of triggering child protection intervention and the types
of orders that may be made.
continuum—from primary to tertiary intervention
12.35 The Commissions acknowledge that the interactions under review comprise
only a part of a much bigger picture, and one that is
very much of a
‘tertiary’ kind as legal framework issues sit a long way along the
child protection continuum from the
first point, or primary end, of coming to
the notice of child protection services. Leah Bromfield and Prue Holzer of the
Child Protection Clearinghouse, Australian Institute of Family Studies
(AIFS), emphasise the importance of the primary and secondary
service responses,
using a public health focus:
According to a public health model of disease prevention, tertiary services are
one platform in a well functioning service system.
The public health model is
comprised of three service platforms: primary services, secondary services, and
tertiary services. This
model can also be used in a child protection context.
Primary services provide services for all children (eg, education and health).
Secondary services are targeted at families at higher risk or in need of
additional support. Tertiary child protection services are
a last resort, and
the least desirable option for families or the state. Families that require a
tertiary response to ensure the
safety of their children form the ‘tip of
the iceberg’. Consequently, the primary and secondary service domains are
than the tertiary domain representing the need for more services in these
12.36 Bromfield and Holzer have identified the ‘multiple
strategies’ being implemented across Australia to meet the current
challenges in child protection, and the emphasis in reviews on ‘creating
an integrated service system instead of focusing on
“the child protection
department”’.
12.37 In identifying areas of interaction in practice of the various laws
under consideration and raising questions about, or proposing
options for,
reform, the Commissions are conscious of the overall constraints of focusing on
legal framework questions towards the
goal of improving the safety of women and
children in the family violence context. Moreover, legal frameworks—of
themselves—cannot
go far to break into the cycle of violence referred to
12.38 The Commissions also note that there is considerable work that has been
undertaken, and is continuing, in relation to child
protection, including in
relation to the legislative framework and the child protection services
The focus of this
Inquiry—on interactions of child protection and certain other
laws—complements such intra-jurisdictional
reform work.
intervention
12.39 As noted in Chapter 2, each state and territory has its own system of
child protection laws and supporting agencies. In each
thresholds for intervention by child protection authorities to protect children
and to assist parents and
Each year the
Australian Institute of Health and Welfare (AIHW) undertakes a comprehensive
review of state and territory child protection
and support services. The summary
information and statistics in these reports provide useful background in
relation to child protection
The 2008–09
report on child protection in Australia by the AIHW reported that while
‘the processes used to protect children
are broadly
‘significant differences’ in how jurisdictions deal with and report
child protection issues.
12.40 Child protection intervention is triggered first by a report of concern
to a child protection or support service. Reports could
come from community
members, professionals, organisations, the child, parents or relatives, and may
relate to abuse and neglect or
‘broader family concerns such as economic
problems or social
isolation’.
Reports are
then assessed against the relevant criteria and classified either as a family
support issue or warranting a child protection
notification.
12.41 An investigation involves an assessment of the degree of harm or risk
of harm for the child and will either be ‘substantiated’
‘not substantiated’ and the assessment questions may differ
according to the relevant jurisdiction:
States and territories differ somewhat in what they actually substantiate. All
have experienced
significant harm from abuse and neglect through the actions of parents. Some
the basis of the occurrence of an incident of
abuse or neglect, independent of whether the child was harmed, and others
substantiate
on the basis of the child being at risk of harm
12.42 The relevant child protection agency may apply to the court in each
is usually taken
‘only as a last resort in situations where the child protection agency
believes that continued involvement
with the child is warranted’.
This may occur in situations where the family resists supervision and
counselling, where other avenues for resolution of the situation
exhausted, or where removal of a child into out-of-home care requires legal
authorisation.
12.43 The level of reporting has increased significantly. The AIHW noted that
in the reporting period 2008–09, the number of
children subject to a
notification of child abuse or neglect; the number under care and protection
orders and the number in out-of-home
care all rose; and that Indigenous children
were over-represented in all
The increase is in part
due to a broadening over time of the definition of what constitutes child abuse
and neglect.
Also noted are
differences between jurisdictions in policies and practices in relation to child
protection, which affect data collection.
A major project to solve this problem
is part of the
National Framework for Protecting Australia’s
based on the
development of a unit record data
collection.
12.44 Some notifications may give rise to prosecutions, as considered in
Chapter 13. The police and Director of Public Prosecutions
in the relevant
proceed further down the criminal
justice pathway. If not, the matter falls back
within the overall umbrella of child protection concern.
12.45 The AIHW report includes the following diagram to illustrate the main
processes used in child protection systems across
12.46 The kinds of orders in the child protection system are described in the
AIHW report:
Guardianship orders are sought through the court. They involve the transfer of
legal guardianship to an authorised department or
to an individual. By their
nature, these orders involve considerable intervention in the child’s life
and that of the child’s
family, and are sought only as a last resort.
Guardianship orders convey to the guardian responsibility for the welfare for
(for example, regarding the child’s education, health, religion,
accommodation and financial matters).
Custody orders generally refer to care and protection orders that place children
in the custody of a third party. These orders usually
involve child protection
staff (or the person who has been granted custody) being responsible for the
day-to-day requirements of
the child while the parent retains
guardianship.
12.47 The differences with respect to particular orders are usefully
summarised:
Care and protection orders are legal or administrative orders or arrangements
which give community services departments some responsibility
child’s welfare. The level of responsibility varies with the type of order
or arrangement. These orders include guardianship
and custody orders;
third-party parental responsibility arrangements, supervision and other
finalised orders as well as interim and
temporary orders; and administrative
arrangements. The involvement might take the form of total responsibility for
the welfare of
the child (for example, guardianship); or responsibility for
overseeing the actions of the person or authority caring for the child;
responsibility for providing or arranging accommodation; or reporting or giving
consideration to the child’s welfare. Jurisdictions
can also engage in
administrative arrangements as an alternative to seeking protection orders from
a court. Administrative arrangements
are interventions where an agreement is
reached with families to meet the protection and care needs of the child by
working on a
voluntary basis.
12.48 Guardianship or custody orders in the context of child protection are
different from the range of orders under the
Family Law Act
, which now
uses the language of ‘parental responsibility’ and ‘the time a
child is to spend with another
The interaction
with the federal system is considered next.
[back to top]
Child protection in
a federal system
A fragmented
12.49 The division of power between the Commonwealth and the states and
territories is considered in Chapter 2. State and territory
laws concerning
child protection and family violence intersect and overlap with federal family
Family Law Act
Matters in relation to children, and
arguments over contact, may arise as a dispute between parents and the state in
a children’s
court—where care and protection proceedings are
initiated with respect to a child or children—or as a dispute between
parents in a court with jurisdiction under the
The following diagram
illustrates the child protection process and the interactions between state and
territory and federal laws:
12.50 As noted in the Family Law Council’s advice to the Commonwealth
Attorney-General in December 2009:
The reality for a separating family experiencing contentious issues in respect
of parenting capacity is that there is no single judicial
forum that can provide
them with a comprehensive response to address their disputes, particularly where
there are underlying issues
of family violence and/or child
12.51 Problems arise when allegations of child abuse and neglect are made in
proceedings under the
Family Law Act
. For example, as the diagram above
illustrates, there is no investigative arm of family courts. Hence the problem
of the abuse or
neglect of a child may be dealt with under two different pieces
of legislation—the
Family Law Act
and the relevant state or
territory child protection legislation. The problems caused by jurisdictional
overlap in the area of child
protection are compounded by the fact that the
family law system is federal, while the child protection and family violence
order systems are the province of the states and territories.
However, as Professor Richard Chisholm has noted, ‘to some extent
issues would arise in any system which had a child protection system that is
separate from the system of the adjudication of
family disputes relating to
12.52 The result, as noted in Chapter 2, is a fragmented system with respect
to children:
At a Commonwealth
Family Law Act
level, the referral of powers has certainly
minimised the disorderliness and complexity of jurisdiction in relation to
children. Regrettably, however, fragmentation characterises child
protection issues. Child protection issues are frequently raised
in Family Court
proceedings, even though the Family Court does not have jurisdiction. How has
this situation arisen? On one view,
it is consistent with the ideology of
liberalism ... Disputes about the care and protection of children are regarded
as public disputes
with the state acting as an applicant, but disputes under the
Family Law Act
are regarded as private disputes between parents or family
members. The states have been far less reluctant to legislate in ways
directly affect the family, or redefine the family, for example, the
(Relationships) Act 1984
(NSW) and the
Children and Young Persons (Care and
Protection) Act 1998
but ... the Commonwealth has been far more
12.53 Western Australia is in a different position. As noted in Chapter 2,
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) was introduced, Western Australia
opted instead to establish its own family law system. The court exercises
federal jurisdiction
Family Law Act
as well as state
Adoption Act 1994
(WA) and the
Children and Community Services Act
The welfare
Family Law Act
12.54 In 1983 the
Family Law Act
was amended to include provisions
expressly dealing with the welfare of children in
of the Act. The
impact of these provisions, according to Dr Anthony Dickey QC, is to supersede
‘virtually all of the
parens patriae
Courts’, with the exception of Western
This conclusion is
based upon the ‘combination of two factors’:
The first is the fact that in respect of almost all children, proceedings for
parens patriae
relief can now be commenced under Pt VII of the
Family Law Act
, and particularly under
, where the power of the
court to make an order relating to the ‘welfare’ of children is
virtually equivalent to the power
possessed by a Supreme Court pursuant to its
parens patriae
The second factor is the circumscribing effect of s 69B(1) of the 1975 Act. This
provided that if proceedings can be instituted under
Pt VII of the Act, they
must be instituted under this Part. Only if proceedings cannot be instituted
under Pt VII (and only if they
do not otherwise constitute a ‘matrimonial
case’ as defined in s 4(1)) can they be commenced in a Supreme Court or
court exercising State or Territorial
12.55 An example of residual power is where children have been placed in care
under the state’s child welfare legislation, as
matters concerning the
guardianship and custody of children in care are outside the scope of the family
law powers that were referred
to the Commonwealth Parliament by the
12.56 Western Australia did not refer powers with respect to children and,
accordingly, state law still applies, although the provisions
of Pt VII of the
Family Law Act
have been substantially reproduced in
Family Court Act 1997
12.57 The welfare jurisdiction under
is not an ‘at large’
involving the welfare jurisdiction include:
case [(1992)
[1992] HCA 15
175 CLR 218]
, where the High Court
authorised the performance of a hysterectomy on an intellectually disabled,
14-year-old girl who was unable
to care for herself [The Court’s
authorisation was required to avoid committing an unlawful assault under state
In the matter of the welfare of A (a child)
[1993] FamCA 68
(1993) FLC 92-402
where the Family Court granted an application for a female child with an extreme
degree of masculinisation (because of an adrenal
gland abnormality) to undergo
female to male sex reassignment surgery
In the matter of P and P
(1995) FLC 92-615
, where the Full
Court of the Family Court permitted the parents of an intellectually disabled
child (who also suffered from epilepsy)
to consent to a hysterectomy being
performed on the child—however, the Court was of the view that neither
sterilisation to
prevent pregnancy nor the issue of menstrual management would
(by itself) provide sufficient ground to authorise sterilisation, but
relevant considerations among many, and
In the matter of GWW and CMW
(Hannon J, 21 January 1997),
where the Family Court authorised the harvest of bone marrow cells and/or blood
from a child for transplant
to the child’s
12.58 Other examples include the decision in
Re Alex: Hormonal Treatment
for Gender Identity Dysphoria
, in which the welfare jurisdiction was used to
authorise reversible medical treatment as a pre-cursor to irreversible
(Special Medical Procedure)
, in which the court gave approval for a
hysterectomy on an eleven-year old girl suffering from Rett
One family, multiple
12.59 That families may be involved in proceedings in more than one
under review
in this Inquiry. Not only does this increase the possibility of inconsistent
orders—particularly in relation to
children—but also of
‘putting family members at risk of further violence and abuse and
exacerbating an already strained
situation’:
The jurisdictional divide has also perpetuated a culture of separation between
States and Territories as administrators of public
aspects of family law and the
federal family courts as adjudicators of [private] disputes. There is inadequate
communication, coordination
or information sharing between courts and
authorities despite significant
12.60 How can a bifurcated system overcome this fundamental problem? The
Family Law Council in its advice to the Commonwealth Attorney-General
December 2009 signalled that a referral of powers should be given so that
federal family courts can have concurrent jurisdiction
with state and territory
courts ‘to deal with all matters in relation to the children including
where relevant family violence,
child protection and parenting orders’ and
that ‘[a]chieving this goal would be the best outcome for people
experiencing
family violence and may circumvent the disparity between
children’s, state and family
12.61 The Family Law Council referred to consultations undertaken by Family
Pathways and the support expressed for an integrated court—‘one
court that would deal with criminal proceedings, protection orders, child
protection and family law
The Council
noted, however, that implementation of such an approach required constitutional
amendment or a further referral of powers
by the states and territories in
relation to child welfare and family violence orders. The former has proved,
historically, very
difficult. In this Inquiry, as noted in Chapter 1, the
Commissions consider a number of strategies for achieving the sense of
seamlessness
that the ‘one court’ idea
[back to top]
One family,
competing discourses
12.62 As noted throughout this Consultation Paper, family violence may
trigger multiple interventions with a family and multiple engagements
family—in particular women and children—with the legal system. In
Chapter 3 the Commissions consider the various
conceptualisations of family
violence across family violence legislation, the
Family Law Act
criminal law, and other types of legislation such as victims’ compensation
legislation and migration regulations. The
different purposes of the different
legislative regimes are explored in order to facilitate discussion of a common
interpretative
framework for family violence in such laws. When the child
protection system is added into the mixture of legal frameworks another
dimension emerges—what has been described as ‘contradictory
practices and discourses’.
12.63 In examining how child protection laws interact in practice with the
Family Law Act
and with criminal laws, understanding and acknowledging
the dynamics inherent in the different legislative regimes provides an
instructive
backdrop against which to consider any options for reform. Arguments
for change—and options for reform—may reflect different,
competing, dynamics. Recognising the dynamic, or propelling discourse within the
argument enables a fuller assessment of the
merit of any proposal and an ability
to weigh up competing dynamics on a principled basis.
12.64 Marianne Hester, describing the experience in the United Kingdom,
refers to the different cultural histories of what she describes
as the three
‘planets’ of domestic violence, child protection and child contact.
Her observations have been echoed in
the work undertaken in this Inquiry to
Domestic violence work in the UK (and many other countries) has been influenced
by feminist understanding of domestic violence as
gender based, and tends to see
the problem as (mainly) male perpetrators impacting on (mainly) female victims
or survivors. The work
of child protection services in the UK has a very
different history to that of domestic violence, with the family, and in
‘dysfunctional’ families, as central to the problem.
Within this approach the focus is on the child and her or his main
usually the mother. These structural factors, with domestic violence and child
protection work on different ‘planets’,
have made it especially
difficult to integrate practice, and have resulted in child protection work
where there is a tendency to
see mothers as failing to protect their children
rather than as the victims of domestic violence, and where violent male
perpetrators
are often ignored. These difficulties are made even more complex
where both child protection and arrangements for child visitation
separation of the parents intersect. Within the context of divorce proceedings,
mothers must be perceived as proactively encouraging
child contact and must
be attempting to ‘aggressively protect’ their children
from the direct or indirect abuse of a violent father. The child
protection and
child visitation/contact planets thus create further contradictions for mothers
and children: there may be an expectation
that mothers should protect their
children, but at the same time, formally constituted arrangements for visitation
may be implemented
that do not adequately take into account that in some
instances mothers and/or children may experience further
12.65 In an Australian study to consider how community workers who work with
mothers perceive the response of child protection workers
to cases where family
violence is a key risk factor, similar perceptions and juxtaposed dynamics were
evident. The study, conducted
by Dr Heather Douglas and Dr Tamara Walsh of the
University of Queensland provides another snapshot of the competing discourses
play, strongly echoing the observations quoted
12.66 Douglas and Walsh conclude that the ways that mothers are perceived by
child protection workers ‘are often pivotal in
determining the approach to
if mothers are perceived as unprotective, they may not receive appropriate
support. Further, an approach that blames a mother’s
failure to protect
her child from domestic violence is unlikely to address the perpetrator’s
violence, meaning that a violent
cycle of domestic abuse is more likely to
continue. It has been argued elsewhere that parent blaming and the adoption of a
rescue framework by child protection agencies can be a negative approach
as it reduces the possibility of a ‘therapeutic alliance’
workers and parents that may help to resolve safety issues. This is a
particularly important issue in domestic violence situations
where work with
both parents is important if the cycle of abuse is to be
12.67 The competing dynamics can be summarised as:
the ‘interpersonal conflict’
misunderstanding—failing to recognise the particular dynamics associated
with family
violence, with ‘ramifications for the way in which child
protection workers respond to abused mothers and their
the ‘protective parent’ dilemma—if a mother is not
perceived as acting protectively, she may be seen as ‘part
of the reason
for the dangerous environment’ and removal from her care becomes more
‘the mother is to blame’ phenomenon—the focus of
child protection authorities on the woman and her capacity to
protect the
children, and not on the father’s ‘capacity to cease using violent
behaviour’;
the ‘leave’ ultimatum—a choice between moving
‘to accommodation away from the domestic violence perpetrator
and continue
to care for the children, or stay with their abuser and lose the
the ‘tightrope’ women walk—between admitting they
need care to deal with family violence and yet being seen to
be able to care for
their children, so long as they are
12.68 Such dynamics, moreover, are compounded by other factors, for
example where the mother suffers an intellectual disability, as
illustrated in
the following case study provided to the Commissions:
Parent A has three children and lives in a very violent relationship with the
father (who is 30 years older and doesn’t have
an intellectual disability)
of the third child. She attends a women’s counselling service and
discloses the high levels of
violence experienced by herself and, at the same
time she discloses sexual abuse of her children but doesn’t understand
is happening as sexual abuse.
A report is made to child protection. The mother is denied access to the
children because of her failure to protect the children
but the father continues
to have weekly access to the children.
The father applies for full time care of the children. The mother does not
qualify for legal aid and is left alone throughout the
family law process. She
attends the final family law hearing alone, doesn’t understand the process
of the case and leaves the
court unaware that the father has full time care of
the children and she has not been access to them for the next 18
12.69 Further compounding factors are experienced in the context of
Indigenous and migrant women:
For many Aboriginal people the intervention of child protection services is a
common experience that often goes back several generations.
Recently it was
reported that child protection workers in Australia have begun removing the
fifth generation of Aboriginal children
from their parents, meaning that some
Aboriginal families have an eighty year history of child protection
intervention. ... Many
scholars have observed that as a result of the
intersecting factors of poverty, race and gender, Aboriginal women, and women
are recent immigrants, are particularly disadvantaged and discriminated
against in their engagements with institutional
12.70 The accuracy of such observations is evidenced in the following example
provided to the Commissions in the Family Violence Online
Forum of the
conflicting dynamics experienced by Indigenous women and the difficulty of
breaking out of the cycle of violence:
First of all our clients find it difficult to communicate with police and child
protection authorities because of the past ‘removal’
policies and
practices. Some of our women feel that to do their jobs properly the departments
should be assessing placements working
on the ‘best interests of the
child’. While our Solicitors’ cases are very
straightforward—with DVOs and
separations etc—the other staff are
dealing with domestic violence court cases, family support areas such as finding
furniture and visiting doctors and family meetings etc.
In saying this we would like to start with a common problem of a woman
fleeing her home because of a violent situation. He is belting
her, not the
children, but she fears for their safety so takes them with her. In the
instance that she has a male child over ten
years of age she has the choice
of going into a safe house and leaving the male child on the street or keeping
all the children together
and living in the car if she has one otherwise she
moves in with a friend and puts both of them in jeopardy of
losing children because
the house is crowded—especially if it is a
housing commission home.
If she has young children and goes into a home there is a real possibility of
the safe house staff reporting the incident or in one
case the safe house
arranged for the children to be taken into respite care to give her a break and
not being able to get them back
because she has no home to go to.
So now she has no home and no children. Centrelink put her back onto Newstart
payments of $450-ish per fortnight way less than her
parenting payment. This
means she has to abide by the Newstart program in trying to get a job and do
training to build her abilities
if she has been on the parenting payment for
several years. She cannot (a) afford to rent a home big enough for the
family; (b) apply
for a large home in the hope of getting her children back as
she is single; (c) buy white goods and linen as is a requirement to
children back; (d) handle the stress alone and starts drinking or taking drugs
for depression as she cannot afford to go to the
doctor and be diagnosed as
being depressed. In which event she gets a black mark against her when she is
picked up for sleeping in
the street.
If she is pressured into taking out a DVO by the department who says this
will give her a better chance in getting her children back—or
put one in place against her wishes—it then goes to court and the records
show she is drinking and maybe taking
drugs and she has been picked up on the
streets so she is automatically proven to be an unfit mother and the children
in the care of the father who has started this all by beating her in
the first place.
Our women usually have lots of community support to look after their
children—it is how that support is seen by the department
sometimes to the detriment of our women. Non-indigenous women find some of our
cultural practices hard to understand. For
instance if a women is fleeing from
her husband a sister or aunty will often take her in—move out of their
double bed into
the lounge so the fleeing family has a space of their own. If
the agency sees that sister or aunt sleeping on the lounge room floor
young child they see that as neglect to her child not assistance to the
other family.
Sometimes the taking of children is just another form of violence to our women.
It is like the man belts the hell out of her and
because she flees with the
children the department think ‘well hey, let’s knock her down some
Legal versus
services response
12.71 Professor Cathy Humphreys considers that the ‘same stories,
dominant patterns, tales of mistrust and poor practice are
depressingly
consistent’ throughout the research into the relationship between child
protection services and their interaction
with women living with family
They include: the failure of child protection to understand the dynamics of
domestic violence; holding women living with domestic
violence responsible for
the protection of children rather than the perpetrator of violence; lack of
education and training for child
protection workers; providing inappropriate
ultimatums to women to leave and keep their children or stay and lose their
and the lack of sensitivity and understanding of the position of newly
arrived migrants and Indigenous women. These are but a few
of the many listed
failings. The repetitive nature of these with previous research findings which
take a lens to the relationship
between child protection and domestic violence
specialist services point to the structural nature of the problem which clearly
beyond the intentions and practice of individual
12.72 The conflicting dynamics described above have been identified
particularly in the service field, for example ‘the disconnect
various services—police, child protection, housing services and
women’s services’, which has ‘serious
implications for
ensuring the safety of mothers and
Bromfield and
Holzer identify the ‘two highest ranked challenges for enhancing the
protection of children’ as being
to respond to pressure at the ‘front end’ of child protection and to
build prevention and early intervention (secondary)
services. From a public
health approach there should be more primary than secondary services, and in
turn, more secondary than tertiary
services. Families should be referred
directly to the most appropriate service to meet their needs. A public health
approach to child
protection would comprise system reforms to provide more
secondary services to reduce demand on tertiary services—addressing
two highest ranking key challenges for enhancing the protection of
12.73 One element of concern is the level of information provided to mothers
by child protection workers, and how being provided a
report outlining the
investigation by child protection authorities and substantiation of abuse
‘would be helpful for women
engaging with the family law system’ and
also useful to assist women to become informed and understand the nature of
child protection interventions and the expectations of the relevant
child protection
authority’.
Developments
in the child protection field may begin to address such
12.74 There are also issues which engage legal frameworks—such as the
way that family violence is defined and the thresholds
for mandatory reporting
of concerns in relation to children. Where these involve interactions of various
laws they fall within the
Terms of Reference for this Inquiry. As Professor
Leigh Goodmark commented, the focus of reform cannot merely be on
the institutional culture of child protection’, but rather
‘the law and legal system need to reflect an understanding
of domestic
Obviously, the ideal is clear legislation that is both practical and sensitive
to the needs of the various target groups, supported
by an assessment tool that
is evidence-based and reflective of our shared knowledge regarding the
challenges and opportunities faced
by those within the system, coupled with the
deployment of experienced workers who welcome the opportunity to work with all
involved towards the achievement of protective outcomes for children.
Until this is achieved, we must continue to advocate around
these issues,
regardless of how ‘repetitive’ our arguments might
[back to top]
Best interests of
and human rights
12.75 The intervention of legislatures in relation to preventing the
exploitation of children—particularly in the context of
working hours and
conditions—was elevated to the international context when, in 1929, the
League of Nations adopted the Declaration
on the Rights of the Child, prompted
by the suffering experienced by children during and subsequent to World War I.
Following World
War II, the United Nations set a common standard on human rights
with the adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in
discussed in Chapter 2. With respect to children the key instrument is the 1989
United Nations Convention on the Rights of
the Child (CROC), setting out the
civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights of
The principal
provision in this respect is art 3(1):
In all actions concerning children, whether undertaken by public or private
social welfare institutions, courts of law, administrative
authorities or
legislative bodies, the best interests of the child shall be a primary
consideration.
12.76 The concept of the ‘best interests of the child’ is now the
dominant principle in dealings with children in both
the family law and child
protection systems.
consideration
12.77 That the best interests of the child must be a primary consideration in
all actions concerning children is central to
It is also a principle
that is firmly entrenched in the
The expression
‘best interests’ was specifically incorporated into the Act in 1995
to bring the terms of the previous
‘welfare’ principle into line
with the wording of CROC.
12.78 As noted in Chapter 2, a number of other provisions of CROC sit
alongside the principal provision:
art 9—ensuring that children will not be separated from their
parents, unless this is in the best interests of the child, for
example where
there is abuse or neglect of the child by the parents, but also respecting the
right of the child who is separated
from one or both parents to maintain
personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis,
except if it is
contrary to the child’s best interests;
art 12—assuring to the child who is capable of forming his or
her own views the right to express those views freely in all
matters affecting
the child and, in particular, a right to be heard in proceedings affecting the
art 19—ensuring that all appropriate legislative,
administrative, social and educational measures will be taken to protect
children from all forms of physical or mental violence, injury or abuse, neglect
or negligent treatment, maltreatment or exploitation,
including sexual abuse,
while in the care of parent(s), legal guardian(s) or any other person who has
the care of the child;
art 34—ensuring protection from sexual exploitation and sexual
art 39—concerning the promotion of physical and psychological
recovery from, amongst other things, any form of neglect, exploitation
of a rights framework
12.79 The central dynamic in both child protection under state and territory
law, and parenting orders under the
Family Law Act
is that the best
interests of the child are
But the state
legislation also provides that, subject to this principle, the legislation is to
be administered so that where intervention
is ordered it must be the least
intrusive intervention possible, including keeping the child with his or her
family whenever possible.
Mathews argues that ‘there is a fundamental conflict here between the
rights of the child to safety, and the interests
of parents in keeping custody
and guardianship of their
conflict is also evident within CROC itself. Anastasia Powell and Susan Murray
argue that the right under art 12, and other
rights under CROC,
are inherently in contradiction for those children who are living with or
experiencing domestic violence. For instance, while Article
19 specifies
children’s right to be protected from abuse and neglect, Article 16 also
protects children’s right to ‘protection
from interference with
meanings about children and
families, namely the sanctity of the family home as
a haven for children, while ignoring that the home is most often the site of
abuse and neglect. [It has been noted] that the sanctity of the home has indeed
been used to justify non-interference in cases of
12.80 As this Inquiry focuses upon the interaction of laws involving children
in a number of ways, and where determining ‘the
best interests’ of
the child or children is of central concern, the appropriate role of a rights
framework for children is
problematic. John Tobin describes the debate
concerning the use of children’s rights ‘as a tool for both academic
and advocacy at the international and domestic levels’ as
‘detailed and
He summarises
the principal arguments of concern advanced in opposition to the relevance of
children’s rights, including that:
Rights are individualistic and only serve to undermine the family structure by
creating an adversarial climate and legitimising intervention
by the state
within the family.
Rights are excessively legalistic and do not operate to challenge the structures
and processes that undermine or threaten children’s
needs. Alternative
models, therefore, provide a more appropriate political and moral paradigm by
which to respond to children’s
needs. These models include a focus on the
obligations of parents, teachers and other persons involved in children’s
or an ethic of care which would emphasise responsibilities over rights
and provide a more effective response to children’s
The autonomy of children is misguided as their dependence is a reality.
Moreover, the liberation of children is a dangerous objective
which raises the
very real risk of harm to
12.81 Despite such arguments, Tobin suggests that the very discourse around
children’s rights as a response to children’s
needs elevates the
status of children and ‘render[s] them
12.82 The best interests principle in the context of family law has been
criticised on the basis that it has no objective standard.
As Dickey remarked,
This is undoubtedly so. The decision ultimately depends upon the judge’s
personal perception of where the best interests of
a child lie in light of the
particular facts and circumstances of the case. In the modern case of
[(1998) 197 CLR 172], the majority of the High Court observed that in
cases depending upon the best interests principle, the same
body of evidence may
produce opposite but nevertheless reasonable conclusions from different judges.
They summarized this point by
observing that best interests are values, not
12.83 The principle has been criticised ‘on the grounds of its alleged
indeterminacy and inherent
subjectivity’.
Tobin argues, however, that:
Such criticisms, however, suffer from the common problem of reading the articles
of [CROC] in isolation. While the best interests
principle remains a fluid and
flexible concept, it is not unfettered. Rather it remains informed and
constrained by the rights and
principles provided for under
12.84 Tobin also points to the appropriation of the best interests principle
‘to coincide conveniently with, or justify the
personal whims, preferences
and prejudices of, individuals who invoke the best interests principle to serve
their own agendas’,
citing as examples,
the move to amend the
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) to create a presumption
of 50/50 shared parenting and the subsequent, though somewhat different,
amendments aimed at promoting
mandatory shared parenting were couched as being
necessary to secure the child’s best interests, as were the measures of
then Liberal Government’s intervention in the Northern Territory ...
In each of these contexts, an assessment of the best interests
of children
should have been informed by the empirical evidence, rather than the subjective
interpretation, or calculated misappropriation
of this principle, by those
seeking to pursue their own agendas under the guise of children’s best
interests. If such an approach
had been adopted it would have revealed that the
Family Law Act
may well expose children to greater risk
of harm while the report of Wild and Anderson,
Little Children are
, suggests that a far more consultative, holistic and culturally
sensitive approach than that currently being adopted is required
if the best
interests of Indigenous children are to be
12.85 Balancing the various principles, and rights, expressed in
international conventions, together with the competing pressures
‘parent’s rights’ and ‘children’s rights’
create points of tension that are reflected in the
interaction issues under
consideration in this Inquiry. The next two chapters consider specific sites for
such interactions—namely,
child protection and criminal law; and child
protection and the
Family Law Act
The Terms of Reference are set out at the
front of this Consultation Paper.
Safety Senior Practitioner,
Correspondence
See further, Ch
Access Economics Pty Limited,
Australian Childhood Foundation and Child Abuse Prevention Research Australia,
The Cost of Child Abuse in Australia
Family Law Council,
Responses to Family Violence in the Family Law System: An Advice on the
Intersection of Family Violence and Family Law Issues
Comment on ALRC Family Violence
Online Forum: Women’s Legal Service
Family Law Act
Family Law Regulations 1984
(Cth) reg 12B sch
R Price-Robertson and L Bromfield,
National Child Protection Clearinghouse Resource Sheet No
6—What is Child Abuse and Neglect?
(2009) Australian Institute of
Family Studies. See also: P Holzer and L Bromfield,
Child Abuse Prevention
Resource Sheet No 12: Australian Legal Definitions—When is a Child in Need
of Protection?
(2007) Australian Institute of Family
R Price-Robertson and L
National Child Protection Clearinghouse Resource Sheet No
6—What is Child Abuse and Neglect?
(2009) Australian Institute of
Family Studies.
The different
thresholds for intervention are considered in Ch
Family Law Act 1975
Children, Youth and
Families Act 2005
(Vic) ss 4 and 5;
Child Protection Act 1999
(c) and Sch 3 (Dictionary). A note to the definition refers to
Div 2 of the
Family Law Act 1975
Protection Act 1993
Children, Young Persons and Their Families
Children and Young Persons (Care and Protection) Act 1998
(2) and 149;
Children and Community Services Act 2004
Children and Young People Act 2008
Protection of Children Act
(NT) (in force at 16 September 2009) ss 22
and 123(1)(d) provides for the making of long-term parental responsibility
directions.
M Donaldson,
the Courts and ‘Incompetent’ Children: The Welfare Jurisdiction of
the Family Court of Australia, Research Note
No 17 2004–05
Parliament of Australia <www.aph.gov.au/library/Pubs/> at 14 April 2010at
31 March 2010.
(5th ed, 2007), 287. For a fuller discussion of the historical
background, see A Dickey,
(4th ed, 2002), 389.
Historically the father was the
master of his household and, by the common law, had an ‘absolute
right’ to his children:
H Radi, ‘Whose Child’ in J Mackinolty
and H Radi (eds),
In Pursuit of Justice—Australian Women and the Law
(1979) 119, 119. He had custody and guardianship and all
other rights in relation to children and even on his death he could determine
questions of guardianship in relation to the children of his marriage:
Shaftesbury
[1722] EngR 25
(1722) 2 P Wms 103
, 107. See further: A Powell and S
Murray, ‘Children and Domestic Violence: Constructing a Policy Problem in
Australia and New
Zealand’ (2008) 17(4)
Social Legal Studies
Australian Law Reform
Commission and Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission,
Seen and Heard:
Priority for Children in the Legal Process
, ALRC 84 (1997), [3.6]. See Ch 2
in relation to international conventions concerning the
See, eg, the following
discussion of the position of the child in Roman Law: J Tobin, ‘The
Development of Children’s
Rights’ in G Monahan and L Young (eds),
Children and the Law in Australia
Re Agar-Ellis
[1883] UKLawRpCh 194
Australian Law Reform
Commission and Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission,
Seen and Heard:
Priority for Children in the Legal Process
, ALRC 84 (1997),
B Mathews, ‘Protecting
Children from Abuse and Neglect’ in G Monahan and L Young (eds),
Children and the Law in Australia
(2008) 204,
G Monahan and L Young (eds),
Children and the Law in Australia
(2008), [1.11] trace the ten principal
Acts passed in Victoria over 90 years, from 1864 to
H Radi, ‘Whose
Child’ in J Mackinolty and H Radi (eds),
In Pursuit of
Justice—Australian Women and the Law 1788–1979
(1979) 119, 125.
The difficulties a woman experienced in relation to custody cases with respect
to her children are illustrated in,
Ex parte Richardson
(1874) 12 SCR
L Bromfield and P Holzer,
National Approach for Child Protection—Project Report
(2008) National
Child Protection Clearinghouse, 12.
Mathews, ‘Protecting Children from Abuse and Neglect’ in G Monahan
and L Young (eds),
Children and the Law in Australia
(2008) 204,
Seymour details the
legislation establishing the first Children’s Courts: J Seymour,
Dealing with Young Offenders
The current legislation is:
Children and Young Persons (Care and Protection) Act 1998
Children, Youth and Families Act 2005
Child Protection Act
Children’s Protection Act 1993
Young Persons and Their Families Act 1997
Children and Young
People Act 2008
Care and Protection of Children Act 2007
L Bromfield and P Holzer,
National Approach for Child Protection—Project Report
(2008) National
Child Protection Clearinghouse, 12.
Dealing with Young Offenders
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Child Welfare
, ALRC 18 (1981). The outcome of this and other work was a
series of proposals to provide children with increased safeguards—a
to adopt a ‘justice model’: J Seymour,
Dealing with Young
(1988), 167.
L Bromfield
and P Holzer,
A National Approach for Child Protection—Project
(2008) National Child Protection Clearinghouse,
L Bromfield and P Holzer,
Protecting Australian Children
Prominent examples include: J
Report of the Special Commission of Inquiry into Child Protection
Services in NSW
(2008); Northern Territory Board of Inquiry into the
Protection of Aboriginal Children from Sexual Abuse,
Little Children are
Sacred: Report of the Northern Territory Board of Inquiry into the Protection of
Aboriginal Children from Sexual
(2007); Ombudsman Victoria,
Motion Investigation into the Department of Human Services Child Protection
(2009). At the time of writing the VLRC is conducting a review of
Victoria’s child protection legislative
arrangements.
Australian Institute of
Health and Welfare,
Child Protection Australia 2008–09
1. See also B Mathews, ‘Protecting Children from Abuse and
Neglect’ in G Monahan and L Young (eds),
Children and the Law in
(2008) 204.
2008–09 report is the 13th annual
Australian Institute of Health
and Welfare,
Child Protection Australia 2008–09
Ibid, 1. Appendix 4 of the report
provides extracts from the relevant legislation of the ‘in need of care
and protection’
Ibid, 5. L Bromfield and P
A National Approach for Child Protection—Project Report
(2008) National Child Protection Clearinghouse, App 5, provides a summary of
policy and practice differences in states and
territories.
Australian Institute of
Health and Welfare,
Child Protection Australia 2008–09
6–7; Council of Australian Governments,
Protecting Children is
Everyone’s Business—A National Framework for Protecting
Australia’s Children 2009–20
Australian Institute of Health
and Welfare,
Child Protection Australia 2008–09
Ibid, 2, Figure
Family Law Act 1975
div 2 and div 5 respectively. See Ch
Note that a parenting order may be
made in favour of a parent or ‘some other person’: Ibid
D Higgins and R Kaspiew,
‘“Mind the Gap…”: Protecting Children in Family Law
Australian Journal of Family Law
Family Law Council,
Responses to Family Violence in the Family Law System: An Advice on the
Intersection of Family Violence and Family Law Issues
R Chisholm,
Children—The Family Law Interface
T Altobelli,
Family Law in
Australia–Principles and Practice
(4th ed, 2002), 395.
(5th ed, 2007), 395–6; and see A Dickey,
ed, 2007), 288.
Northern Territory of
Australia v GPAO
(1999) 196 CLR 553, [142], Gaudron
M Donaldson,
The King, the
Courts and ‘Incompetent’ Children: The Welfare Jurisdiction of the
Family Court of Australia, Research Note
No 17 2004–05
Parliament of Australia <www.aph.gov.au/library/Pubs/> at 14 April 2010at
31 March 2010.
Re Alex: Hormonal
Treatment for Gender Identity Dysphoria
[2004] Fam CA
[2010] FamCA
Family Law Council,
Responses to Family Violence in the Family Law System: An Advice on the
Intersection of Family Violence and Family Law Issues
(2009), [7.7], 60. The
word in brackets is incorrect in the original, where it appears as
‘public’: R Sexton,
Correspondence
Family Law Council,
Responses to Family Violence in the Family Law System: An Advice on the
Intersection of Family Violence and Family Law Issues
(2009), 61,
See, eg, Ch
M Hester, ‘Comment on H
Douglas and T Walsh, “Mothers, Domestic Violence and Child
Protection”’ (Paper presented
at Key Centre for Ethics, Law, Justice
and Governance Seminar, Griffith University, 22 April 2009),
H Douglas and T Walsh,
‘Mothers, Domestic Violence and Child Protection’ (Paper presented
at Key Centre for Ethics,
Law, Justice and Governance Seminar, Griffith
University, 22 April 2009).
Ibid, 13. This is described by the
authors as a ‘binary ultimatum to stay or leave’, which, without
significant support,
‘misunderstands the complexity of many mothers’
situations’: 19.
Australian Law
Reform Commission Family Violence Inquiry—Case Studies Contribution
2 January 2010, 4.
H Douglas and
T Walsh, ‘Mothers, Domestic Violence and Child Protection’ (Paper
presented at Key Centre for Ethics,
Law, Justice and Governance Seminar,
Griffith University, 22 April 2009), 20–21. See also the comment in the
online forum quoted
at the beginning of this
Comment on ALRC Family
Violence Online Forum: Women’s Legal Service
C Humphreys,
‘Comment on H Douglas and T Walsh, “Mothers, Domestic Violence and
Child Protection”’ (Paper
presented at Key Centre for Ethics, Law,
Justice and Governance Seminar, Griffith University, 22 April 2009),
H Douglas and T Walsh,
‘Mothers, Domestic Violence and Child Protection’ (Paper presented
at Key Centre for Ethics,
Law, Justice and Governance Seminar, Griffith
University, 22 April 2009), 63.
L Bromfield and P Holzer,
Protecting Australian Children
H Douglas and T Walsh,
‘Mothers, Domestic Violence and Child Protection’ (Paper presented
at Key Centre for Ethics,
Law, Justice and Governance Seminar, Griffith
University, 22 April 2009), 89, summarising C Humphreys, ‘Comment on H
and T Walsh, “Mothers, Domestic Violence and Child
Protection”’ (Paper presented at Key Centre for Ethics, Law,
and Governance Seminar, Griffith University, 22 April
H Douglas and T Walsh,
‘Mothers, Domestic Violence and Child Protection’ (Paper presented
at Key Centre for Ethics,
Law, Justice and Governance Seminar, Griffith
University, 22 April 2009), 90 – refer to the development of a code of
from child protection workers – provision of detailed information
to parents by child protection authorities – Ainsworth
Ibid, 92, referring to L
Goodmark, ‘Comment on H Douglas and T Walsh, “Mothers, Domestic
Violence and Child Protection”’
(Paper presented at Key Centre for
Ethics, Law, Justice and Governance Seminar, Griffith University, 22 April
H Douglas and T Walsh,
‘Mothers, Domestic Violence and Child Protection’ (Paper presented
at Key Centre for Ethics,
Law, Justice and Governance Seminar, Griffith
University, 22 April 2009), 93.
Convention on the Rights of the Child
, 20 November 1989,
[1991] ATS 4
(entered into force generally on 2 September
Family Law Act 1975
, subdiv BA—Best interests of the child, for example. See discussion
in A Dickey,
(5th ed, 2007), ch
ed, 2007), 291. Explanatory Memorandum,
Family Law Reform Bill 1994
Children and Young Persons
(Care and Protection) Act 1998
Children, Youth and Families
Child Protection Act 1999
Children and Community Services Act 2004
Protection Act 1993
(SA) s 4(1)–3; Tas s 8(2)(a);
Children and
Young People Act 2008
Care and Protection of Children Act
Children and
Young Persons (Care and Protection) Act 1998
Youth and Families Act 2005
Child Protection Act
Children and Community Services Act 2004
Children’s Protection Act 1993
(SA) s 4(4);
Young Persons and Their Families Act 1997
Children and
Young People Act 2008
Care and Protection of Children
Mathews, ‘Protecting Children from Abuse and Neglect’ in G Monahan
and L Young (eds),
Children and the Law in Australia
(2008) 204,
A Powell and S Murray,
‘Children and Domestic Violence: Constructing a Policy Problem in
Australia and New Zealand’
(2008) 17(4)
Social Legal Studies
458 (references omitted).
‘The Development of Children’s Rights’ in G Monahan and L
Young (eds),
Children and the Law in Australia
Ibid, [2.6]. It is also
‘a testament to the changing understandings of children as social
agents’.: A Powell and S Murray,
‘Children and Domestic Violence:
Constructing a Policy Problem in Australia and New Zealand’ (2008) 17(4)
Social Legal Studies
(5th ed, 2007), 292.
‘The Development of Children’s Rights’ in G Monahan and L
Young (eds),
Children and the Law in Australia
Ibid, [2.22].
ALRC CP1 Family Violence � Improving Legal Frameworks
13. Child Protection and the
Criminal Law
Introduction
Duties of parents to children
The protective role of the state
Grounds for a child protection intervention
Grounds for bringing criminal proceedings
Offences under child protection legislation
Offences under general criminal law
Issues of interaction
Identifying child abuse and neglect
The hidden nature of abuse
Mandatory reporting laws
Mandatory reporters
The impact of mandatory reporting duties on criminal law
Permitting disclosure of identity of mandatory reporters
Responding to reports of child maltreatment
Intake process
Initial assessment and referral to police
Police responses
Commissions’ views
Information sharing
The operation of privacy laws
Information sharing between the police and the child protection agency
Information sharing between the police and other agencies
Commissions’ views
Protection of children from family violence
Commissions’ views
Children and young people at risk and juvenile justice
When welfare and justice collide
Release on bail
Referring care and protection issues when they arise
13. Child Protection and the
Criminal Law
Introduction
13.1 The interaction of child protection laws with state and territory
criminal laws is one of the areas under consideration in this
The focus of this chapter
is on some specific areas of practice where the child protection and criminal
justice systems intersect.
In particular, the Commissions examine how
notification provisions under child protection laws affect the number and type
of instances
of child maltreatment that are brought to the attention of the
child protection agency and the police. The chapter then considers
responds to notifications and the systems and laws in place which facilitate, or
obstruct, their joint efforts to address
safety concerns for children. Other
areas of interaction include the responsibility of the child protection agency
for a young person
in the juvenile justice system where care and protection
issues arise. The Commissions consider what improvements can be made to
relevant legislative frameworks in order to address safety concerns.
13.2 Child sexual abuse arises for consideration in this Inquiry both as an
example of potential interaction under the first Term
of Reference and also
expressly under the second Term of Reference. Issues relating to child sexual
abuse are considered in
of this Consultation Paper.
Duties of parents to
13.3 Consistently with international
conventions,
Australian law
recognises the primacy of a parent’s responsibilities and authority, as
against the rest of the world, over
his or her child, if that child is below the
For the most part, the
law respects parents’ authority to raise their children according to their
own values and beliefs, and
to make decisions relating to their religion,
schooling, discipline, where they live and medical treatment without undue
interference.
The law has also made clear, however, that parents’
authority over their children is not absolute, that such authority derives
their parental duties, and they must therefore act for the benefit of the
children, not for themselves.
13.4 The law is also clear about the duties of parents, caregivers and those
with parental responsibility to provide their children
‘necessities of life’, which include providing financial support,
food, clothing, accommodation, healthcare
and access to
The duty to provide the
‘necessities of life’ normally extends to children up to the age of
16 years, but may be extended
to older children where they have a disability.
Parents and caregivers also have a duty to protect children in their care from
including harm that is caused as a result of abuse or neglect.
13.5 Governments support and assist parents to fulfil their parental duties
by, for example, providing social infrastructure such
as schools, childcare and
health services and through the development of programs such as subsidised
housing and income support for
needy families. Governments otherwise respect
family autonomy and accept that, in most cases, children are best brought up
families. However, sometimes government intervention in the family,
even against the wishes of a parent or family member, is necessary
children’s rights. Nowhere is this more evident than when it is necessary
to protect a child from abuse and neglect.
13.6 The failure of a parent or caregiver to provide a child with the
necessities of life or to protect children in their care from
harm as a result
of abuse or neglect gives rise to certain consequences under both child
protection and criminal laws.
13.7 First, where the failure satisfies the legislative grounds for state
intervention under child protection legislation, a statutory
child protection
response may be activated. This may entail a formal application by the child
protection agency to the children’s
court for a care order under child
protection legislation. A care order can range from a supervision order to
permanent removal of
the child from the family in extreme
13.8 Secondly, the failure to provide for children’s basic needs or to
protect them from harm may constitute an offence under
general criminal law or
under child protection laws, thus exposing the parent or caregiver to criminal
proceedings and the consequences
of a criminal conviction.
13.9 Although they are based on distinct principles, both child protection
laws and criminal laws intersect with the private domain
of the family when the
safety and wellbeing of the child are at risk. As Cummins J has remarked:
The criminal law is not coextensive with parental duty. The criminal law should
not overreach itself. Much parental duty is at a
higher level than the reach of
the criminal law. Much State function—the provision of education, of
health care, of social
welfare—is at a higher level than the reach of the
criminal law. The criminal law is concerned with the bedrock of
society—safety.
Where the criminal law and the duty of parents coalesce is
at the base—the duty to protect children. If the law fails there,
fails. If the law is inadequate there, the law is inadequate. The protective
mantle of the criminal law applies especially
The protective role
of the state
13.10 The state discharges its protective role over children in two ways. The
first is by exercising its statutory powers under child
protection laws to seek
a protective order over a child who is in need of care and protection. The
second way, often additional to
the first, is by initiating a criminal justice
13.11 Child protection laws operate within a child welfare paradigm. Their
primary purpose, as outlined in Chapter 12, is to ensure
the care and protection
of children by permitting the state to intervene where it is necessary to do so
in order to protect the safety,
health and wellbeing of children and young
13.12 A consistent theme across all child protection laws—and one which
is shared with the family law jurisdiction, considered
in Chapter 14—is
that the welfare and best interests of the child are the paramount
consideration.
In a child welfare
context, central to determining the best interests of a child is the importance
of preserving the integrity of
the family unit and promoting children’s
positive relationships with their family by offering support and assistance to
Consistent with this philosophy is the obligation on the state to
limit its intervention in the relationship between a child and
parent to that
which is necessary to secure the safety and wellbeing of the
13.13 When determining what is in the best interests of the child, decision
makers are also required to take into account, among other
• the views of children and young people (to the extent that their age
and maturity allow) concerning issues which affect them;
• the importance of maintaining a child’s cultural identity and
connectedness with his or her community by taking into
account the culture,
disability, language, religion, ethnicity and sexuality of children and young
people, and where relevant, of
their families;
• the importance of protecting and promoting the cultural and spiritual
identity and development of Indigenous children, by,
wherever possible
maintaining and building their connections with their family and community;
• the desirability of continuity and stability in the child’s
13.14 These principles are founded on the set of international obligations
and children’s rights expounded in the
Convention on the Rights of the
(CROC), which are discussed in Chapter 12. For example, art 12
provides that a child who is capable of forming his or her views,
is entitled to
express those views and be heard. CROC also requires that in the consideration
of options for a child temporarily
or permanently deprived of his or her family
environment, regard must be paid to the desirability of continuity in the
upbringing and to the child’s ethnic, religious and
linguistic background.
13.15 The state also plays a protective role through the criminal justice
system. A range of policy objectives underpin the criminal
justice system, as
discussed in Chapter 4. These include, but are not limited to, affirming
fundamental standards of behaviour, holding
offenders accountable for violations
of these standards, and achieving justice for victims.
13.16 Proceedings or actions taken under criminal law that protect children
and young people are important parts of the child protection
system and,
depending on the success of proceedings, may lead to access to mandated
treatment programs for offenders and community
supervision.
13.17 Key child protection advocates argue that it is critical that child
abuse and neglect be treated not only as a child welfare
issue, but also as a
violation of children’s rights, and as a
Professor Chris Goddard
and Dr Joe Tucci, from the Australian Childhood Foundation and Child Abuse
Prevention Research Australia,
respectively, propose that any national framework
for child protection should contain a focus on the development, implementation
and evaluation of uniform national criminal legislation that strengthens the
criminal justice system’s response to child abuse
and neglect, and better
recognises the need for strong joint police and child protection action in
relation to child abuse and
[back to top]
for a child protection intervention
13.18 The main purpose of child protection laws is to provide measures to
assist and support children and young people who are in
need of care and
protection. A child protection intervention, described in Chapter 12, is
authorised where a court believes, on the
balance of probabilities, that a child
or young person
‘need of care,’ ‘in need of protection,’ ‘in need
of care and protection,’ ‘at risk,’
or ‘at risk of
harm’ as variously described in the legislation of the states and
territories. Assistance and support
for these children and young people may be
offered on an informal basis, by way of agreement with families, or by means of
care proceedings
initiated by the relevant child protection agency in special
courts for children.
13.19 The legislative grounds for a child protection response are prescribed
in the child protection statutes of each of the states
and territories.
Essentially, these define the circumstances under which the child protection
agency can and must intervene to protect
13.20 These grounds are broadly similar across all the jurisdictions, and
include circumstances where the child or young person has
been or is at risk of
being abused or neglected.
Although there is some variation in how each jurisdiction defines abuse, the
term ordinarily covers:
physical abuse or
psychological and/or emotional abuse (to such an extent that it has
caused, or is causing significant harm to the child’s wellbeing
development);
sexual abuse and
exploitation.
legislation in some states and territories refers to specific types of abuse
separately, while other legislation, like the
Northern Territory and Western
Australian laws, use overarching terms, which encompass various forms of abuse
and neglect. The legal
definitions of abuse and neglect ‘set the legal
threshold at which suboptimal parenting becomes abuse or
and form the
basis of decisions about whether reports of alleged abuse or neglect are
substantiated.
Dividing child
abuse into separate types of abuse has been criticised by child advocates for
failing to recognise that child abuse
and neglect often co-exist, and for
drawing attention away from the impact of abuse and neglect on the child’s
development
and wellbeing.
13.22 Some, but not all, of these statutory grounds for intervention may
constitute an offence under criminal laws or child protection
laws themselves.
For example, as is noted below, it is an offence for someone with parental
responsibility to abandon a child, but
not if that abandonment is a result of
the child being orphaned by the tragic death of his or her parents.
13.23 There is also some variation in relation to the thresholds that must be
met before abuse and neglect become grounds for intervention.
or that harm has
In most jurisdictions,
the threshold is satisfied where there is a combination of both acts and
consequences (caused as a result
of those acts). That is, the child or young
person must have suffered or be at risk of suffering ‘harm’ or
‘significant/serious
harm’ or a ‘detrimental effect of a
significant nature’ on the wellbeing of the child or young
13.24 Furthermore, some jurisdictions provide that the harm suffered by a
child can arise from either a single event or episode of
abuse or neglect, as
well as from a series of acts, omissions or
circumstances.
Extending the
definition in this way recognises the cumulative impact of certain behaviour
which may seem trivial on its own, but
when considered together, can amount to
significant harm to a child or young person—for example, persistent
belittling and
verbal abuse.
Dr Leah Bromfield and Robyn Miller articulate:
The unremitting daily impact of these experiences on the child can be profound
and exponential, and diminish a child’s sense
of safety, stability and
13.25 Other grounds for intervention in child protection legislation
• where the parents are dead or have abandoned the child or young
person and cannot be
• where the parents are unwilling to maintain or adequately supervise a
child or young person;
• where the child or young person is being sexually or financially
exploited or those with parental responsibility are not willing
protect him or her from sexual or financial
exploitation;
• where there is a risk of female genital
mutilation;
• where a child or young person is living with a person who has
previously killed, or who threatens to kill the child or another
person living
in the household;
• where the child or young person persistently fails to attend school
(although this is more likely to be an indicator of other
risk factors than to
be a ground for intervention on its
• where there is a risk of harm to an unborn
13.26 A child or young person who is exposed to family violence may also be
considered to be ‘at risk’ or in ‘need
of care and
protection’ justifying an intervention by the child protection agency. New
South Wales and Tasmania prescribe ‘domestic
violence’ as an express
ground for intervention.
other jurisdictions, intervention on the basis of family or domestic violence is
permitted where the child or young person is
at risk of being, psychologically
or emotionally abused as a result of his or her exposure to the
For example, in the
ACT, abuse is defined to include:
(d) emotional abuse (including psychological abuse) if—
child or young person has seen or heard the physical, sexual or psychological
abuse of a person with whom the child or
young person has a domestic
relationship, the exposure to which has caused or is causing significant harm to
the wellbeing or development
of the child or young person; or
(ii) if the
child or young person has been put at risk of seeing or hearing abuse mentioned
in subparagraph (i), the exposure to
which would cause significant harm to the
wellbeing or development of the child or young
13.27 Generally, the persons responsible for the conduct which results in the
child being found to be ‘at risk’ or ‘in
need of care and
protection’ are the child’s parents or persons acting in their
place. Typically, a child is defined
as being in need of protection only if they
do not have a parent or other adult carer who is ‘able and willing’
[back to top]
Grounds for bringing
criminal proceedings
13.28 The failure of those with parental responsibility to provide for the
basic needs of children in their care, or to protect them
from harm as a result
of abuse or neglect, may constitute an offence under general criminal law or
under child protection laws, exposing
the parent or caregiver to criminal
proceedings and the consequences of a criminal conviction.
13.29 The criminal legislation in force in Queensland, South Australia, the
ACT and the Northern Territory contain offences against
children relating to
their welfare whereas in Victoria and Western Australia, similar offences are
found in their child protection
statutes. In NSW and Tasmania, the same conduct
may give rise to offences against children under both criminal and child
legislation. These offences generally complement other provisions in
crimes legislation relating to assaults and other acts endangering
causing bodily harm.
under child protection legislation
13.30 In Western Australia, a person with the care and control of a child
must not do an act, or fail to do an act, knowing (or recklessly
disregarding)
that the conduct may cause significant
to a child from abuse
(physical, sexual, emotional or psychological) or
‘neglect’ to include the failure by the child’s parents to
provide adequate care or effective medical,
therapeutic or remedial treatment
for the child.
The penalty is
imprisonment for up to 10 years.
13.31 In Victoria and Tasmania, it is an offence for a person who has a duty
of care to a child to take, or fail to take, an action
that has either resulted
in harm to the child, or has the potential to cause
However, the penalty in
Tasmania is lower.
Furthermore,
in both these jurisdictions, proceedings for these offences cannot be brought
without first consulting the relevant
head of the child protection
13.32 In NSW, it is an offence for any person—not just one who has care
of a child—to do an act intentionally that causes
or appears likely to
cause injury or harm to a child or young
Only a person who has
care of the child or young person may be held accountable for failing to provide
the child or young person
with adequate and proper food, nursing, clothing,
medical aid or accommodation.
Both these offences attract a maximum penalty of 200 penalty units.
13.33 A number of child protection laws also make it an offence for a person
who has care and control of a child to leave a child
unattended and unsupervised
either in a motor vehicle,
more generally.
In NSW, the
offence is framed more broadly to apply to any person, not only one who has care
and control of a child.
the penalties for these offences vary substantially across the
of up to five years
imprisonment in Western
13.34 Other offences contained in child protection legislation include
removing a child or young person from the care of a person
who has protection
and care responsibility under the relevant
and offences concerning
tattooing, branding and body
Offences under
general criminal law
13.35 In Queensland, South Australia, the ACT and the Northern Territory,
offences relating to children and their welfare are contained
criminal laws. The criminal laws of NSW and Tasmania also contain some offences
relating to the abuse and neglect of children.
13.36 Under the criminal legislation of NSW, Queensland, Western Australia,
South Australia, Tasmania, the ACT and the Northern Territory,
it is an offence
for a person with parental responsibility to fail to provide a child (generally
defined as a child under the age
of 16 years) under his or her care with the
‘necessities of life’—generally defined as the provision of
accommodation,
food, clothing and access to healthcare, and
In NSW, the maximum
penalty is imprisonment for five years; in the ACT, a maximum penalty of 200
penalty units and/or imprisonment
for two years applies. In Queensland, South
Australia and Tasmania, maximum penalties of three years imprisonment apply
neglect endangers the child’s health.
13.37 In Queensland, it is an offence for any person who has the care and
control of a child to cause harm to a child aged below 16
years by reason of
failing to provide for the child, deserting the child or leaving the child
without means of support.
number of jurisdictions it is also a crime to abandon or expose a child where
that act endangers the life of the child or may
cause serious injury, although
the provisions vary in terms of the age of the
In the Northern
Territory, for instance, the offence relates to a child aged under two years
whereas in NSW and Queensland, the offence
applies to a child aged under seven
years. These offences attract maximum penalties ranging from five to seven years
imprisonment,
some depending on the age of the child.
13.38 The criminal laws of each state and territory also create a number of
sexual offences against
which are dealt with
in Part D of this Consultation Paper.
interaction
13.39 A number of issues arise in relation to provisions dealing with
offences against children. One of the most significant is whether
which the offence provisions are currently drafted—which varies across all
the jurisdictions—is appropriate
or whether practical difficulties arise
for law enforcement agencies, and how such problems affect decisions to bring
prosecutions.
Of relevance to this issue is whether the offence provisions are
more appropriately placed in child protection statutes or in the
criminal laws of the states and territories. Another issue that arises is what
range of penalties should be available to
the court in relation to these
Framing offence provisions
13.40 Offences of abuse and neglect of children—under either child
protection or crimes statutes—complement other criminal
relating to assaults and other acts endangering life or causing bodily harm. In
the most grave cases of child abuse or
neglect, which result in permanent or
fatal injury to a child, offenders are more likely to be charged with serious
offences under
general criminal laws, including assault, murder or manslaughter.
Sexual abuse is likely to result in proceedings being brought under
assault offences, which are discussed in Part D of this paper.
13.41 In the past, child neglect offences outlined in child protection
statutes could be distinguished from those outlined in criminal
law in terms of
what was required to be proved by the prosecution. These differences are more
obscure today. Criminal neglect offences
often required the prosecution to prove
that the accused not only did something that put a child in danger, but also
wilfully intended
to cause harm to the child. These requirements placed an
onerous burden on prosecuting authorities, which often proved too difficult
13.42 In recognition of the need to strengthen the criminal justice
system’s response to child neglect, a number of jurisdictions
have amended
their criminal laws to relax the prosecutorial burden in child neglect offences,
thus enabling relevant authorities
to pursue prosecutions in appropriate
circumstances. For example,
Crimes Act 1900
inserted in 2004 to provide that a person with parental responsibility for a
child who intentionally or recklessly fails
to provide the child with the
‘necessities of life’, without reasonable excuse, is guilty of an
offence if the failure
causes a danger of death or serious injury to the
The offence provision in
the South Australia criminal code is even more liberal. It does not require the
prosecution to show harm
caused as a result of the offender’s
13.43 Offences outlined in child protection statutes also similarly require
the prosecuting authority to prove only that the offender
intentionally
committed an act (or failed to do an act) that has either resulted in the child
suffering harm or has the potential
13.44 A function of the criminal justice system is, as noted above, to define
acceptable standards of behaviour. Prosecuting a person
when those standards are
breached is an essential part of a criminal justice response. It sends a clear
message to the community
denouncing abusive or neglectful conduct, punishes the
offender and acts as a deterrent to prevent others from committing the same
violations. The main focus of child protection legislation, on the other hand,
is to identify and support families to address risk
factors for abuse and
neglect of children before the child suffers harm. A question arises about the
appropriateness of placing offence
provisions in child protection statutes and
whether bringing proceedings is compatible with this goal.
Location of offence provisions
13.45 A major difference between offences created under child protection
legislation and those created in general criminal law is
the application, in the
former, of objects and principles specific to child protection legislation.
Hence, unless specifically excluded,
actions taken or decisions made concerning
the investigation or institution of proceedings in relation to conduct giving
offences under child protection law should be made having paramount
regard to the best interests of the child. So, for example, in
addition to other
matters it ordinarily considers when deciding whether to prosecute matters, a
law enforcement agency should take
into account the impact on the child of
bringing proceedings against a parent, and whether that would be in the
child’s best
interests. This may be an argument for including offence
provisions in the child protection statutes.
13.46 On the other hand, placing offence provisions in child protection
statutes place (at least some) responsibility for bringing
proceedings under
those provisions on the child protection agency. This raises a question as to
the compatibility of a law enforcement
function with the child protection
agency’s main function of working with families to ensure the safety of
Commissions’ views
13.47 The focus and thrust of modern child protection legislation is about
strategies for prevention and intervention and working
with families when there
are allegations of risk of harm and neglect. Although responsibility for the
protection of children is increasingly
recognised as a responsibility of the
whole community, ultimately responsibility to intervene in the family when
mandated to do so
under child protection legislation is a matter for the child
protection agency, and, in emergency situations, the police. Similarly,
child protection agency remains responsible, together with the police and other
law enforcement agencies, for the proper and
timely investigation and
prosecution of alleged offences against children. The Commissions are aware
that, in practice, it is the
police rather than the child protection agency that
initiates (and handles) prosecutions against parents or caregivers, although
may be a decision that they make jointly. One reason for the division of
functions may be, in some cases, to disassociate the
child protection agency
from the prosecution so that it does not jeopardise its relationship with the
child and the family. Another
reason may simply be to allow each agency to focus
on its areas of expertise.
13.48 The Commissions are interested to hear views about the appropriateness
of current offence provisions, what problems arise from
the way in which they
are currently drafted, and whether the offences are more appropriately placed in
child protection statutes
or crimes acts.
Should offences against children for abuse and neglect be
contained in child protection legislation or in general criminal laws?
Question 13–2
In practice, what issues, if any, arise from the
way in which the offence provisions are currently drafted?
In those jurisdictions where the same conduct may give rise to an
offence under both child protection or criminal legislation, what
factors are
taken into account in practice when determining whether to bring an action
against an alleged offender under child protection
or criminal
legislation?
Penalties under child protection
legislation
13.49 In NSW, questions have been raised about the appropriateness and
adequacy of the penalties prescribed for offences under the
Children and
Young Persons (Care and Protection) Act 1998
(NSW), which currently attract
maximum fines of up to $22,000. It has been argued that a monetary penalty,
regardless of how substantial,
does not adequately reflect the seriousness of
the offence, does not sufficiently denounce child abuse and neglect strongly
and does not provide an effective deterrent. The question is whether, as
is the case under other state and territory legislation,
the offences under the
NSW statute should be punishable by a period of imprisonment, either in addition
to, or as an alternative
to the monetary penalty.
13.50 The issue was considered by Justice James Wood in the
Report of the
Special Commission of Inquiry into Child Protection Services
It noted that, in a
submission to a previous inquiry, NSW Police had suggested amending the
provision to allow a term of imprisonment
to be imposed of up to six months.
However, the Wood Inquiry concluded that allowing the offences to be punished by
a term of imprisonment
was not in the best interests of the child, at least in
relation to the prosecution of parents, because to do so would be likely
exacerbate underlying risk
NSW Police have the
option of bringing proceedings for similar offences under the state’s
criminal legislation, which do provide
for imprisonment.
13.51 Another issue that arises is the appropriateness of a monetary fine for
persons convicted of these offences who have limited
financial means and
whether, in such situations, there ought to be alternative penalties available
to the court. One of these could
be, for example, the making of a community
service order. Another sentencing option may be a bond, including a supervised
bond imposing
conditions which address relevant issues.
13.52 An advantage of making alternative sentencing options available to the
court for these offences is the capacity for courts to
impose conditions,
including requiring offenders to participate in community-based offender
rehabilitation programs designed to address
risk factors associated with the
offender’s conduct, such as alcohol and substance abuse. They are
therefore more likely to
produce an effective outcome, in terms of
rehabilitation, retribution and deterrence, than the imposition of a fine.
13.53 Community service orders and other non-custodial sentencing options are
widely available in all Australian jurisdictions, generally
as an alternative to
a sentence of imprisonment,
although in some jurisdictions they are also available as an alternative to a
fine. In Victoria, for example, a court may impose
a range of community-based
orders when a person has been convicted of an offence punishable by imprisonment
or a fine of more than
five penalty
Community-based orders
are also generally available to offenders who have defaulted on paying their
fines, prior to imprisonment,
and may be imposed as a primary penalty where they are a specific penalty for a
particular offence, such as for offensive
Commissions’ views
13.54 As noted in a leading criminal law text:
[I]f the political objective is to obtain substantial behavioural compliance,
criminal law … relies on a link between prohibition
and sanction. But if
this is to be a feasible connection we need to ask serious questions about the
level of resources and techniques
available to enforcement
13.55 The Commissions acknowledge that the jailing of a parent offender may
adversely affect the child and the family—in terms
of loss of income and
loss of contact with the parent (notwithstanding the abuse). It may also cause
resentment of the child by
the parent, thereby potentially increasing the risk
While hardship on an
offender’s family is a factor which courts may consider when determining
whether to jail the offender,
the current practice is for sentencing courts to
consider hardship only in exceptional
circumstances.
13.56 Criminal sentencing options have moved away from sentences of
imprisonment in recognition of a substantial body of research
which shows that
imprisonment neither rehabilitates offenders nor acts as an effective
There is a trend
towards community-based sentencing modules with built-in offender programs,
supervised by the government corrective
services body. The incentive for
offenders to comply with court orders to attend offender programs is the risk of
being imprisoned.
13.57 Although a number of community-based sentencing options are framed as
alternatives to imprisonment, they may also be primary
sanctions, as noted
above. Where they are a primary penalty, the issue of what is an appropriate
sanction for breach of the order
inevitably arises, and in this regard,
imprisonment may be stipulated.
13.58 The Commissions are interested to hear views about what sentencing
options are currently imposed by courts when sentencing offenders
for offences
against children, and what range of penalties should be available for offences
under child protection legislation.
What range of penalties should be available to courts for
offences under child protection legislation?
Question 13–5
practice, what range of penalties are most regularly imposed, and if
conditional, what are the most usual conditions imposed by
[back to top]
Identifying child
abuse and neglect
The hidden nature of
13.59 By their very nature, child abuse and neglect are often
‘hidden’. They occur in the privacy of people’s homes,
hand of the child’s own parents or other family members or persons known
to the family. They can happen when parents
are stressed and lack support. All
children are vulnerable, but perhaps younger children and children with
disabilities are especially
vulnerable because they have fewer connections with
the community outside of the family, such as by attending school.
13.60 It is therefore important for the community as a whole to be vigilant
to address safety
concerns for children, both from a child welfare/public health perspective and
from a law enforcement perspective,
depends largely on reports being made by
professionals and ordinary members of the community when they are worried about
of a child or young person.
13.61 Unless the police have been called first, a significant prelude to any
criminal investigation or prosecution of child abuse
or neglect is the
‘trigger’ created by a notification to the relevant child protection
agency. Anyone may make a voluntary
report to a child protection agency where
they believe or suspect that a child is suffering, has suffered, or is at risk
of suffering
harm, as a result of abuse or neglect. For certain people, there is
an obligation to report.
Mandatory reporting
13.62 Since the 1960s in the United States and the 1970s in
members of selected
occupational groups who deal with children on a regular basis are required to
report known or suspected cases
of child maltreatment in relation to a
where their knowledge or
suspicion arises in the course of their
employment.
The motivations for
this kind of trigger for government agency intervention in appropriate cases
were twofold:
[The] goal of child protection ... was driven by growing awareness of the
existence and consequences of different forms of abuse,
beginning with physical
abuse. It was also motivated by the recognition that, without some form of
mandated reporting by persons
outside the child’s family, many and perhaps
most cases would not come to the attention of authorities or helping
13.63 There are legislative mandatory reporting schemes in all states and
territories except Western Australia, which have targeted
legislative
requirements for a limited class of
Although the reporting
duties are broadly similar, there are some significant differences between them,
and even within the same
state or territory in terms of:
the mandatory reporters;
the type and extent of the harm which triggers the reporting duty;
the extent of the duty in terms of whether it applies only to past
or present instances of harm, or whether it extends to future
likelihood of
13.64 The only mandatory reporting scheme that applies
consistently across all the states and territories is that prescribed by
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) which obliges Family and
Federal Magistrates Court personnel and family dispute resolution professionals
to report any reasonable
suspicion that a child has been, or is at risk of
being, abused. ‘Abuse’ is defined more narrowly than in comparable
definitions under child protection legislation, and is essentially confined to
physical and sexual assault, and sexual
exploitation.
13.65 However,
Family Law Act
also includes a
provision that authorises—rather than requires—those same reporters
to notify a child welfare authority
of any reasonable suspicion they have that a
(a) has been ill treated, or is at risk of being ill treated; or
(b) has been exposed or subjected, or is at risk of being exposed or subjected,
to behaviour which psychologically harms the child.
13.66 In this way, the Act expressly recognises the negative impact on a
child’s safety by being exposed to family
13.67 The different thresholds of child abuse, neglect and harm in mandatory
reporting provisions both between and within the states
and territories, has an
impact on the types and extent of abuse, neglect or harm that is reported to the
child protection agency
and subsequently referred to police for investigation.
13.68 The legislative mandatory reporting schemes in NSW, Tasmania, the ACT
and South Australia impose reporting obligations broadly
on people who work in
organisations that provide health, welfare, education, child care or residential
services to children.
in some jurisdictions, only those employed in government or government-funded
organisations, or who work in the frontline
of service delivery—that
actually deliver, or manage the delivery of, services to children—have
mandatory reporting obligations.
Reporting obligations do not extend to volunteers except in Tasmania and South
In the ACT, mandatory
reporters are only required to make a report where they reasonably believe that
the child or young person has
experienced, or is experiencing, sexual abuse or
non-accidental physical
13.69 Typically, mandatory reporters include law enforcement officers (police
and probation officers), doctors, nurses and providers
of children’s
services. Teachers are also mandatory reporters across all of Australia, but in
Queensland they are only required
to report suspicions of sexual abuse of a
student by another employee of the
In some states and
territories, psychologists,
and ministers of
religion (or volunteers and employees of religious
organisations)
mandatory reporters.
13.70 In all of these cases, the duty is only to report reasonable suspicions
of child abuse that have arisen in the course of the
13.71 The Northern Territory child protection legislation casts the net much
wider, by making
person a mandatory reporter and imposing
additional reporting obligations on registered health
professionals.
of harm triggering the reporting duty
13.72 In all the states and territories, the mandatory reporter’s
knowledge, belief or suspicions of child abuse or neglect
must be upon
‘reasonable grounds’, but the type and threshold of abuse or neglect
which activates the duty differs between,
and within, the states and
territories.
13.73 The rationale for setting thresholds is to ensure that only those acts
or omissions which are harmful to a child’s health,
safety, wellbeing and
development are reported and to prevent authorities being inundated with reports
of ‘trivial incidents
of less than ideal parenting
The thresholds
appear to be based on different policy considerations as they are customised to
the type of harm, albeit not always
consistently across state and territory
child protection legislation.
13.74 So, for physical abuse, a number of jurisdictions require that the
physical injury result in ‘significant’ harm
or ‘detriment to
wellbeing’ whereas the ACT requires all reports of physical abuse without
qualification.
In relation to
psychological (or emotional) abuse, most states and territories require the
reporter to believe on reasonable grounds
that there is a risk of
‘serious’ or ‘significant’ harm to the child’s
health, wellbeing or
development.
13.75 In relation to neglect, the reporting threshold is expressed in broad
terms, as failing to provide ‘basic’, ‘adequate’,
‘proper’ or ‘necessary’
which are reflected in
offences under criminal law and under child protection statutes.
13.76 In some jurisdictions, a child is considered at ‘risk of
harm’ if he or she is exposed to incidents of family violence,
consequence is at risk of suffering serious physical or psychological
Other jurisdictions have
also incorporated harm caused to a child or young person by their exposure or
risk of exposure to family
violence in their definitions of psychological abuse
of a child or young person.
13.77 In the Northern Territory and, until recently also in NSW, police
operating procedure requires police officers to make a child
notification every time they respond to a family violence incident where there
were children present.
Commissions’ views
13.78 The formal recognition of the impact of family violence on children in
the child protection context can be a double-edged
The legislative reforms
have resulted in an increase in notifications of psychological or emotional
abuse caused by exposure to family
A large number of
these notifications come from police responding to incidents of domestic
13.79 A policy requiring child protection notification every time police
respond to an incident of family violence may, moreover,
have unintended
consequences in that it may discourage women from reporting violence. Numerous
studies have established that one
of the greatest barriers for women to
reporting violence or breaches of protection orders is the fear of state
intervention and the
This fear is
particularly acute for Indigenous women, as a recent study by
Professor Chris Cunneen into family violence issues in
communities in Queensland illustrates:
The reason I haven’t reported is my kids, my babies. I’m worried
police are brought to a
house where there is violence, the kids get taken straight away. The Stolen
Generation I reckon is coming
I think the extra dimension for Indigenous women which is onerous is Child
Safety. All of these veiled threats that if you do this
you will lose the kids
…That sort of dynamic was driving people underground and they
weren’t reporting because they knew
Child Safety would get
Therefore, a police directive to make automatic reports to child protection
authorities—even though well-intentioned—could
counter-productive.
13.80 Cunneen found that many people, including police officers themselves,
questioned the usefulness of mandatory reporting by police
where a child is
present (or usually resident) at the scene of a domestic violence incident:
We are reporting on incidents but who’s investigating them? We are just
generating reports. Police should make the decision.
Police get paid to do a
job—if you can’t make a decision in relation to a four-year-old
child, you shouldn’t be
in the job. Police have the power to deprive
people of their liberty, they should be able to use their discretion to make a
as to whether a child is at
13.81 The report concluded:
Perhaps there is a need for greater flexibility by police in reporting, rather
than a mandatory policy. Should it only be reported
when children are present
rather than usually resident, or present and at risk? Certainly some of the
police interviewed indicated
that a more sensible policy would provide for
better use of police discretion on this
13.82 The Commissions are interested in hearing views as to when it is
appropriate for police to make child protection notifications
when responding to
incidents of family violence.
In what circumstances is it appropriate for police to make child
protection notifications when responding to incidents of family violence?
The impact of
mandatory reporting duties on criminal law
13.83 Mandatory reporting laws are a valuable mechanism for ensuring that
cases of child abuse and neglect are made public so that
protective responses by
both the child protective agency and the police are activated.
13.84 The introduction of mandatory reporting duties has increased the
community’s awareness of child abuse, and, consequently,
has contributed
to a large increase in the number of reports made to child protection agencies,
most of which, however, are not substantiated.
Reviews in a number of
result of this increase in
13.85 The dangers of overloading the child protection system, according to
Dr Dorothy Scott, are that:
children who are at serious risk may be overlooked because
assessments are done too superficially or cases closed prematurely;
children who fall below the threshold for legislative intervention
but who may be at risk of abuse or neglect may be overlooked because
not referred to family support services which could help prevent future abuse
and neglect;
the inappropriate reporting and investigation of low-risk families
invades people’s privacy and may increase parental stress,
itself a risk
factor of child abuse and harm;
resources are diverted away from children already in state care who
need services;
relationships between child protection agencies and other agencies
making the notifications (such as the police) may be strained
because of the
large gap between the thresholds for reporting and for statutory intervention;
high staff turnover as a result of increased stress
13.86 The effect can be detrimental from a criminal justice
perspective if there are insufficient resources for a child protection
deal with the increased demand, leading to cases either being closed too quickly
and appropriate cases not being referred
to the police. Alternatively, cases may
be referred after some delay, affecting the ability of the police to conduct a
proper investigation.
13.87 In NSW, the Wood Inquiry also concluded that:
the threshold for reporting should be raised so that families and children do
not have the stigma of being ‘known to DOCS’
in circumstances where
the risk of harm does not warrant its
Commissions’ views
13.88 Despite the differences in the child protection legislation in the
various jurisdictions, each Act has a common concern in protecting
the safety of
children. To ensure the highest level of protection for children, however, the
Commissions consider that the reporting
thresholds need to be clear and
sufficiently wide to ensure that children’s circumstances are not hidden.
They also need to
be sufficiently finely tuned so that those subject to a
mandatory reporting duty are clear about their responsibilities, and knowing
what matters are covered by their duties.
13.89 The Commissions acknowledge that mandatory reporting requirements are a
valuable tool in the child protection system. They make
a strong public
statement about the seriousness of child abuse in the community, and they
reinforce the moral responsibility of citizens
to report suspected cases of
child abuse and neglect. They also overcome the reluctance of some professionals
to become involved
in suspected cases of child abuse by imposing on them a
public duty to do so. As noted in the Wood Inquiry:
mandatory reporting has the useful effect of overcoming privacy and ethical
concerns by compelling the timely sharing of information
where risk exists and
of raising awareness among professionals working with children and young
persons. There are other mechanisms
by which professionals such as health
workers and teachers are obliged to report, with the failure to do so sometimes
carrying with
it disciplinary consequences. To abolish mandatory reporting may
leave such people obliged to report, but without the protections
in the current
Care Act, and could also weaken the opportunity for interagency collaboration
which the Inquiry considers essential
for an effective child protection
13.90 This increased awareness of child abuse both within the community and
among professionals who are obliged to report has led
to higher notifications to
child protection agencies. However, this has also led to mandatory reporting
laws being criticised as
diluting critical reports with a large number of less
urgent cases, making it difficult to identify children in the most danger.
13.91 The Commissions note that some significant reforms have taken place in
a number of the states and territories to address this
criticism of mandatory
reporting laws. One reform has been an increase in the reporting threshold in
all jurisdictions but the ACT.
The convergence of the majority of jurisdictions
in setting a higher reporting threshold for most types of child abuse has left
ACT out of step with other jurisdictions. While the problems of mandatory
reporting laws may not be as marked in the territory, the
ACT Government may
wish to review its legislative thresholds in light of reforms elsewhere in
disclosure of identity of mandatory reporters
13.92 The legislation in each jurisdiction contains a number of provisions to
encourage compliance with mandatory reporting duties,
• protecting reporters from civil liability for breaches of duties or
defamation, among other things, where the reports are
made in good faith; and
• provisions protecting the identity of reporters.
However, some of these features can hinder the investigation and prosecution
of serious offences against children.
13.93 Reports made to child protection agencies are confidential. Except to
the extent that disclosure is required for the proper
investigation of the
report, a reporter’s identity cannot be disclosed unless the reporter has
given his or her consent, or
unless a court permits
For example, the Northern
Territory allows a court to grant permission for the identity of the reporter
and the contents of the report
to be disclosed only if:
(a) the report, evidence or record is of critical importance to the proceedings;
(b) the failure to grant the leave would prejudice the proper administration of
13.94 The general prohibitions on disclosure have substantial implications
for the capacity of agencies to share information about
a child or young person
for the purpose of investigating allegations of abuse and neglect. Requiring the
police to seek a court order
to authorise a child protection agency to disclose
protected information is an obstacle to the timely and effective investigation
of allegations of child abuse and neglect.
13.95 Recent amendments in
implementing
recommendations made by the Wood Inquiry, now permit information from which a
reporter’s identity may be revealed
to be shared with a law enforcement
agency where:
the information is disclosed in connection with the investigation of
a serious offence alleged to have been committed against a child
person; and
the disclosure is necessary for the purpose of safeguarding or
promoting the safety, welfare and wellbeing of any child or young
whether or not the victim of the alleged
13.96 Importantly, to address cross-border issues, the statute
defines a law enforcement agency to include not only NSW police, but
Australian Federal Police and the police force of other states and territories.
13.97 Certain safeguards have been built in to protect the reporter. First,
the request for information must be made by a senior officer
enforcement agency who must certify that it is impractical, or would prejudice
the investigation of a serious offence, to
ask for the reporter’s
Secondly, except
where it would prejudice the investigation of a serious offence, the legislation
requires the agency which provides
the information to advise the reporter that
their identity is to be
Commissions’ views
13.98 The Commissions accept that protecting the confidentiality of reporters
is fundamental to encourage the disclosure of suspicions
of abuse and neglect to
the attention of authorities. The reporter is generally entitled to maintain his
or her privacy and to be
immune from retaliatory action. However, a general
prohibition on disclosure of the reporter’s identity or, more importantly,
of information contained in the report (because the reporter’s identity
could be deduced from it) may hinder the proper conduct
of an investigation or
prosecution of an offence against a child or young person.
13.99 In the Commissions’ preliminary view, all states and territories
should permit a law enforcement agency to request, and
receive, information
contained in a report notwithstanding that it may result in the reporter’s
identity being disclosed, where
it is necessary for a proper investigation and
subsequent prosecution of offences against children.
13.100 As a matter of good practice, the reporter’s consent should
always be sought in the first instance. But where it is impractical
consent, or where obtaining consent would prejudice the investigation of a
serious offence, a court should be able to permit
disclosure where it is
satisfied that disclosure of the information is critical for the investigation
or prosecution of a criminal
offence against a child or young person.
13.101 Given that families may move across jurisdictions, sometimes to avoid
the reach of the law, the provisions should permit the
information to be shared
with police in other states and territories, including the Australian Federal
Proposal 13–1
State and territory child protection legislation
should contain an exemption from the prohibition on the disclosure of the
of the reporter, or of information from which the reporter’s
identity could be deduced, for information disclosed to a law
enforcement agency
(a) the information is disclosed in connection with the investigation of a
serious offence alleged to have been committed against
a child or young person;
(b) the disclosure is necessary for the purpose of safeguarding or promoting
the safety welfare and wellbeing of any child or young
person, whether or not
the victim of the alleged offence.
Proposal 13–2
State and territory child protection legislation
should also provide that the exemption in Proposal 13–1 does not
apply unless
a senior officer of the law enforcement agency to which the
disclosure is made has certified in writing beforehand that:
(a) obtaining the reporter’s consent would prejudice the investigation
of the serious offence concerned; or
(b) it is impractical to obtain the consent.
Proposal 13–3
State and territory child protection legislation
should define law enforcement agency to be the police force of the relevant
the Australian Federal Police and the police force of any other state and
Proposal 13–4
State and territory child protection legislation
should provide that the person or body that discloses the identity of a
reporter—or
the information in a report from which the reporter’s
identity can be deduced— should notify the reporter of the disclosure
unless it is impractical to do so, or would prejudice the investigation of the
serious offence concerned.
[back to top]
Responding to
reports of child maltreatment
13.102 Whilst mandatory reporting obligations define the type of situations
that must be reported to child protection agencies,
the legislation defines the
circumstances and the threshold at which the state may legally intervene to
protect a child.
The two are
not aligned, although there is some support for aligning both thresholds.
13.103 In addition, not every report that justifies a statutory child
protection intervention will warrant a criminal justice response.
determination is one to be made by the police, or in more serious cases of abuse
or neglect, the office of the director of public
prosecutions, where different
considerations apply. The principal factor is whether the evidence would support
a successful prosecution.
13.104 A number of the states and territories have established inter-agency
models to deliver coordinated services to children and
young people (and their
non-offending families) who have been abused, or who are at risk of abuse. Each
state and territory has developed
specific investigative models based on its own
child protection legislation and discrete definitions of abuse and neglect.
deal with the way in which abuse of children and young people is reported
to the government, referrals are made to other agencies,
information is
exchanged between agencies, investigations and interviews are conducted, and how
services are delivered—and
vary between jurisdictions.
13.105 While some of these processes are legislatively based, practical
guidance to reporters and agencies (both government and
community-based) is
often provided through a variety of protocols, inter-agency guidelines and
memoranda of understanding between
particular agencies. Risk assessment tools
have also been developed in some jurisdictions to assist reporters to know when
to make a report,
and to assess reports made to child protection agencies for appropriate action.
Intake process
13.106 In several jurisdictions including South Australia, the ACT and the
Northern Territory, reports of child abuse are directed
to a centralised intake
service or hotline.
Victoria, Queensland and Western Australia, reports are directed to the district
child protection department office closest to
the child’s location, from
which they are then referred to the police and/or an inter-agency
13.107 For example, in Victoria, reports can either be made to the child
protection agency or the community-based Child and Family
Information Referral
Support Teams (Child FIRST). Where the initial assessment reveals safety
concerns for the child, the matter
is referred to the child protection agency.
Where the concerns are more about a child’s wellbeing, the matter will be
to Child FIRST (or another community service
organisation).
community-based intake model has recently been adopted in
13.108 In NSW, mandatory reporters who work in one of the six government
agencies where there is a Child Wellbeing Unit
may make a report to
their CWU. With the assistance of the specially trained staff at the CWU, the
reporter will apply the Mandatory
Reporters Guidance (MRG) assessment tool to
determine whether their concerns for the safety of the child meet the new
legislative
threshold. Where the tool indicates that there is a ‘risk of
significant harm’, the CWU will make a report to the Child
satisfy the threshold, and the CWU does not
have concerns about accumulated
harm, CWU staff and the reporter will work together to determine where best to
refer the child and
the family for appropriate support and assistance.
Initial assessment
and referral to police
13.109 The systems in place for an initial assessment of a report and its
referral to the police and/or the inter-agency team differ
in each state and
territory. In a number of jurisdictions, there is a positive obligation on the
child protection agency to refer
a report immediately to the police where the
report contains allegations of harm that may involve a criminal
13.110 Generally, the initial assessment involves obtaining more detailed
information about the child who is the subject of the
report, and making an
assessment of the degree of harm that the child has suffered, or the degree of
risk of harm, to determine whether
the report satisfies the reporting threshold.
The criteria for referring cases to the police vary between jurisdictions, and
even within jurisdictions. A criticism of some child protection
systems has been the inconsistency of assessing reports between district
or different entry points. For example, in a recent review of the Victorian
child protection service, the Victorian Ombudsman
Evidence obtained during my investigation shows that the degree of tolerance of
risk to children, referred to as the ‘threshold’,
varies across the
state according to the local office’s ability to respond. I located many
examples of cases where I consider
that the risk of harm to children was
unacceptable and the department had not
intervened.
13.111 To address this issue, a number of jurisdictions have developed and
implemented diagnostic assessment tools to ensure that
assessments are performed
accurately and consistently across the various entry
13.112 The police must investigate allegations of abuse or neglect when
there is a reason to believe that a criminal offence may
have been committed.
Invariably this involves interviewing the child or young person. The process
through which police approach the
issue has to be sensitive to the needs and
wellbeing of the child or young person.
13.113 The child or young person must also usually submit to an interview
by community services caseworkers to assess whether there
are legislative
grounds for making an application to the court for a care and protection order,
and to determine what family, social
support and medical services should be
of police responses
13.114 Across the states and territories, there are different models of
police responses to reports of child abuse and neglect.
Essentially these can be
divided into three model types:
inter-agency teams, involving police and other agencies;
joint investigations between police and other agencies; and
specialised police units.
13.115 Five states and
territories have inter-agency teams, as follows:
New South Wales—the Joint Investigation Response Team
Queensland—the Suspected Child Abuse and Neglect (SCAN);
Western Australia—the ChildFirst Assessment and Interview Team
Northern Territory—the Child Abuse Taskforce (CAT); and
Victoria—the Sexual Offences and Child Abuse Investigation
Unit (SOCIT).
13.116 All inter-agency teams include, as core
members, the child protection agency and the police in each state and territory,
but some jurisdictions also include other agencies or persons. For example:
JIRT comprises the health department as a core team member (although
it is not co-located with the others);
SCAN comprises the health and education departments as core team
members, and Indigenous representatives and other agencies as required;
CAIT has included the health and justice departments in training
CAT includes Indigenous representatives and other agencies as
SOCIT includes sexual assault counsellors as core team members, and
forensic medical officers as required.
13.117 The differences in
interagency team membership affect how investigations are conducted and how the
case is managed. For example,
it may increase the types of services and support
that the victims receive in addition to child protection and police assistance;
and it allows access to greater information and resources by the child
protection agency and the police.
13.118 Some inter-agency teams, such as SCAN in Queensland, are
legislatively based.
Child Protection Act 1999
sets out the membership and responsibilities of the core members of SCAN and
states that its purpose is to enable a coordinated
response to the protection
needs of children, by facilitating:
information sharing between members;
planning and coordination of actions; and
responding in a holistic and culturally responsive way to
children’s protection
The JIRT program operating in NSW is policy-based. It provides services
exclusively to children and young people aged under
18 years. The roles and
responsibilities of each of the agency members are outlined in a memorandum of
understanding between them,
which provides:
The role of the NSW Police is to detect and investigate alleged child abuse and
neglect. Where appropriate they are to initiate legal
proceedings against
identified offenders.
The role of [Community Services] is to receive and assess reports of risk of
harm to children and young people. [Community Services]
also ensure the safety
of children and their ongoing care. Where appropriate they initiate
Children’s Court proceedings.
The role of Health is to identify and report risk of harm to children and young
people. They provide treatment, crisis and ongoing
counselling as well as
medical examinations.
13.120 Caseworkers with the NSW child protection agency and police
officers, who are specially trained in interviewing child victims,
are jointly
responsible for investigating allegations of abuse to determine whether a care
and protection order is warranted and
whether a criminal offence may have been
13.121 A joint response from the three agencies means that a victim is
interviewed once and the information is shared among the
agencies so that
appropriate services are provided to the child or young person and their
non-offending family members. Not having
to repeat his or her story to officers
from different agencies significantly reduces trauma and distress to the abuse
13.122 Queensland and Victoria on occasions also organise joint
investigations, sometimes between the child protection agency and
the police or,
in Victoria, between the child protection agency and the Sexual Offences and
Child Abuse (SOCA) units.
13.123 There are specialised police units in the Australian Capital
Territory known as the Sexual Abuse and Child Abuse Team (SACAT).
Australia, there are three specialised police units—the Child and Family
Investigation Unit, the Child Exploitation
Section, and the Sexual Assault
Commissions’
13.124 The Commissions have heard in consultations that, even though there
are cooperative arrangements in place, the police may
not always understand the
importance of their actions in providing evidence of abuse when matters of
family violence or child abuse
are raised in family law proceedings. For
example, in a response to the ALRC’s family violence e-newsletter, a
mother commented
with respect to the interview process conducted with her
three-year-old son who had made disclosures to his mother about sexual abuse
his father that, notwithstanding that the ‘policeman and woman were well
intentioned good people’,
I had the impression they were just going through the motions—the process
itself was intended to fail—it was so cruel
and horrible. They did not
understand Family Law—the policeman later said to me that although he
couldn’t say if abuse
had happened, ‘If it was my child, I would err
on the side of caution’. They did not know that I had no choice. The only
evidence that would be believed in the Family Court would be statements made by
my son to independent police and/or [the child protection
agency]. They did not
appreciate the importance of their role. They were only interested in having
enough evidence for criminal conviction—which
I have learnt is almost
impossible for young
13.125 The Commissions are interested in hearing whether the current
inter-agency protocols and memorandums of understanding presently
in existence
are effective in practice to ensure that children are protected and that
professionals in each part of the system understand
the consequences of their
actions for other parts of the system. The Commissions are also interested in
hearing what changes are
required in law to facilitate effective relationships
between agencies.
In practice, are the inter-agency protocols and memorandums of
understanding between key agencies involved in child protection—such
the police and child protection agencies—effective to ensure that
professionals in each part of the system understand the
consequences of their
actions for other parts of the system?
Question 13–8
changes are required to facilitate effective relationships between agencies to
ensure that evidence is obtained in a way
that is appropriate not only for child
protection purposes but also for family law
whether to initiate proceedings
13.126 The decision whether to initiate proceedings for an offence against
a child is generally a matter for police—largely
based on whether there is
enough evidence to support a conviction.
13.127 A South Australian study in the late 1990s demonstrated how few
child abuse and neglect cases that are substantiated at the
welfare or health
level are prosecuted and result in
convictions.
tracked 500 referrals made to the Women’s and Children’s Hospital
Child Protection Services through the system
from initial filtering,
substantiation by the child protection agency, police involvement, the decision
to prosecute and criminal
proceedings.
The data showed
that police investigated only 29% of the original 500 cases, and fewer than half
of these were considered suitable
for prosecution. Of those prosecutions, 62%
resulted in a conviction, but this included a significant number of guilty
pleas. Only
17 of the original 500 referrals resulted in a conviction after a
criminal trial.
13.128 The authors of the study noted that :
The interaction between the child-focused welfare/health agencies and the
individual adult rights and state justice focused criminal
court system has at
times been problematic.
13.129 Of those that were prosecuted, allegations of physical abuse led to
more convictions than allegations of sexual abuse. The
report concluded that
factors which made it difficult to prosecute child abuse cases included the age
and developmental ability of
the child, the credibility of the child’s
word against an adult’s, the lack of concrete physical evidence and fear
the court process by victims and their
13.130 However, the prospect of a conviction is perhaps not the only matter
that ought to be taken into account when deciding whether
to bring proceedings.
As noted by the ALRC in its report,
Child Welfare
, a decision to initiate
a prosecution can have a signification impact on the family:
When a parent has abused his child the prosecution of the parent can have
devastating effects on parent and child and on their relationships.
Prosecutions
should therefore be initiated only after careful deliberation. The police should
be encouraged to consult representatives
of welfare agencies before a decision
to prosecute is taken. Further, when a prosecution has been initiated,
procedures should be
introduced which will facilitate the withdrawal of the
proceedings when this is
Consulting with child protection
13.131 When matters are referred to a joint or inter-agency team, the
decision as to whether to initiate proceedings may be one
made by the police in
consultation with the child protection agency, or at least communicated to the
child protection caseworker
involved as directed under policy and procedure
13.132 In Queensland and Tasmania, the police are statutorily required to
consult with the child protection agency before investigating
an offence against
a child who is suspected to be in need of care and protection, or before
initiating proceedings.
stated purposes are to ensure that police and the child protection agency agree
on the best strategy to proceed with an investigation
and to determine whether
initiating proceedings would be in the child’s best interests.
13.133 These provisions recognise that the child protection agency has an
interest in decisions to initiate proceedings against
a parent where such action
may conflict with their work with the family to address the underlying risk
factors that have given rise
to the abuse or neglect.
13.134 Anecdotal evidence suggests that some child protection caseworkers
may consider reporting cases to the police to be incompatible
professional role to help the child and his or her family. Consultation with the
child protection agency may alleviate
these concerns.
13.135 The Commissions are interested in hearing whether child protection
legislation should be amended to require police to consult
with the relevant
child protection agency before deciding whether to investigate an alleged
offence against a child.
Should child protection legislation be amended to require police
to consult with the child protection agency before deciding to investigate
alleged offence against a child where the child is suspected of being in need of
care and protection?
Question 13–10
Should child protection
legislation be amended to require police to consult with the child protection
agency before initiating proceedings
in relation to an alleged offence against a
Role of criminal law when care proceedings
not warranted
13.136 In its report on
Child Welfare
, the ALRC stated that
‘criminal provisions have a legitimate, though limited, part to play in
the protection of
particular, it said that where the action has not caused injury or harm, or
where care proceedings are inappropriate, the situation
may best be dealt with
by taking legal action against the parent.
13.137 An example may be where a parent leaves a child unattended in a
motor vehicle, but the child does not suffer serious harm.
Although the
circumstances do not justify an intervention by the child protection agency, the
criminal law may be useful to send
a message to the community that the law will
be enforced, and thus ensure its effectiveness. Failure to enforce legislation,
conversely,
renders it ineffective.
[back to top]
Information
13.138 A central feature of an inter-agency response is the capacity of
member agencies to share relevant information about the
child so that a joint
and complementary strategy is agreed to provide services that the child needs.
13.139 From a child welfare perspective, with its focus on attending to the
health and development needs of the child and family support,
the benefits of
information sharing include enhanced capacity to:
protect and promote the health, safety and wellbeing of all children
and young people for whom there are concerns about possible
abuse or neglect, or
are in state care or custody;
develop appropriate interventions based on a holistic assessment of
the child or young person’s circumstances and level of
facilitate early intervention and practice for children and young
people at risk in order to prevent, or reduce the likelihood of,
statutory intervention; and
facilitate regular inter-agency dialogue to protect and promote the
best interests of children and young people.
13.140 Information
sharing is also advantageous to police in terms of:
• gathering evidence of the alleged abuse or neglect, particularly
where the alleged offence is not related to an isolated incident
but relates to
a pattern of behaviour which has resulted in cumulative harm;
• making sound determinations as to whether the circumstances warrant,
and the evidence supports, the commencement of criminal
proceedings against the
alleged perpetrator; and
• determining whether interim protective orders need to be sought.
13.141 In its recent report on privacy,
For Your Information: Australian
(2008), the ALRC noted that a number of bodies have
identified instances where a child has been seriously injured or killed by a
where disclosure of information about the parent’s behaviour to
appropriate service providers could have helped to prevent
the injury or
Reviews into child
deaths have also highlighted the need for increased collaboration through
information sharing in order to protect
children from serious harm and death
through abuse and
The operation of
13.142 Privacy laws operate to protect an individual’s personal
information by restricting its collection, use and disclosure
by private and
public sector agencies. Privacy laws prevent information being shared between
government and non-government agencies
unless a specific exemption applies.
Generally, an exemption does apply for law enforcement purposes.
13.143 However, it appears from some reviews of child protection systems in
Australia that there is some confusion about the privacy
obligations that
agencies have and this has created an obstacle to information sharing. This was
particularly evident in those jurisdictions
where agencies relied on informal
mechanisms to collaborate, but where there were no information sharing
guidelines.
13.144 In a recent report, the Victorian Ombudsman noted:
a number of mistaken beliefs held by child protection staff about their
responsibilities under the
Information
. Unfounded beliefs
included that the department should not release the identity of reporters to
Victoria Police when issues of physical
and sexual abuse against children were
alleged. ...
The department has not provided child protection workers with sufficient
training, advice or resources to ensure an appropriate level
compliance.
13.145 The application of privacy laws, or rather, their non-application in
child protection in certain circumstances, ought to
be made clear in legislation
and reinforced in guidelines. Information sharing guidelines have been
recommended as a way to support,
formalise and clarify information sharing
procedures between the relevant
departments.
Numerous reviews
have also recommended that specific training be provided to ensure that agencies
and their officers understand what
information may (or must) be shared, with
whom and when.
Information sharing
between the police and the child protection agency
13.146 Currently,
each state and territory child protection law provides for the exchange of
information between police and the
child protection agency, and between the
police and other nominated persons or
However, the laws
differ in terms of:
whether they allow a two-way exchange of information or whether they
are confined to permitting one agency to give and/or request
information from
other agencies;
the situations in which the information can be shared;
the type of information that can be shared; and
other prescribed persons with whom the police can share
information.
Children and Young People Act 2008
(ACT), for example, permits information to be shared between ACT Policing,
the child protection agency and other persons where it
is in the best interests
of the child or young person and when it is for the purpose of exercising a
function under the Act.
are a number of avenues by which the police and the child protection agency can
share information in the ACT. For instance,
under s 25, information must be
provided where the department requests assistance from a ‘territory
agency’. Alternatively,
the child protection agency can divulge
‘protected information’ to ACT Policing under certain
conditions,
or can share
‘safety and wellbeing information’ as ‘information sharing
entities’ or as members of a Declared
Care Team. As an
‘investigative entity’, ACT Policing can also divulge protected
information if certain conditions outlined
Children and
Young People Act 2008
(ACT) are met.
13.148 In NSW, the child protection agency is able to provide information
to prescribed bodies and to request information from them
where the information
relates to:
the safety, welfare and wellbeing of a particular child or young
person or class of children or young
an unborn child who is the subject of a pre-natal report;
the family of an unborn child the subject of a pre-natal report;
the expected date of birth of an unborn child which is the subject
of a pre-natal
The list of prescribed bodies is extensive and includes: NSW Police; government
agencies; schools; hospitals; fostering agencies;
child care services;
out-of-home care services; adoption agencies; and any other organisation which
is responsible for or supervises
the provision of health care, welfare,
education, children’s services, residential services, or law enforcement,
partly to children. The NSW child protection agency is also authorised
to exchange information with certain Commonwealth
including the
Family Court, the Federal Magistrates Court, Centrelink and the Department of
Immigration and Citizenship.
13.150 The Act makes it clear that these provisions override any provision
contained in any other law, including privacy law, which
prohibits or restricts
the disclosure of that
information.
A prescribed
body therefore cannot refuse to release information to the child protection
agency on the basis that the privacy law
prohibits it from disclosing the
information.
13.151 In NSW and the Northern Territory, police and the child protection
agency have a mutual obligation to share the requested
information where they
believe that the information will assist the other in providing for the safety,
welfare or wellbeing of the
child to whom the information relates. The situation
varies in other states and territories. The police are only compelled to give
information at the request of the child protection agency in Queensland, South
Australia, Tasmania and the ACT. And, except for NSW
and the Northern Territory,
the child protection agency in other jurisdictions retains discretion as to
whether to supply information
to the police.
Information sharing
between the police and other agencies
13.152 A major shortcoming of the NSW information sharing provisions,
identified by the Wood Inquiry, was the inability of human
service and justice
agencies (including the police), and between those agencies and non-government
agencies, to share information
directly without needing to use the child
protection agency as a hub.
13.153 This has been addressed by the addition of a new Chapter 16A into
Children and Young Persons (Care and Protection) Act 1998
that allows
prescribed bodies to share information relating to the safety, welfare or
wellbeing of children and young
The following
principles apply to information sharing under this chapter:
(a) agencies that have responsibilities relating to the safety, welfare or
well-being of children or young persons should be able
to provide and receive
information that promotes the safety, welfare or well-being of children or young
(b) those agencies should work collaboratively in a way that respects each
other’s functions and expertise,
(c) each such agency should be able to communicate with each other agency
so as to facilitate the provision of services to children
and young persons and
their families,
(d) because the safety, welfare and well-being of children and young
persons are paramount:
(i) the need to provide services relating to the care and protection of
children and young persons, and
(ii) the needs and interests of children and young persons, and of their
families, in receiving those services,
take precedence over the protection of confidentiality or of an
individual’s privacy.
13.154 These provisions place a positive onus on prescribed bodies to take
reasonable steps to coordinate decision making and delivery
of services
regarding children and young
Information sought
by an agency must relate directly to that agency's work in relation to the
safety, welfare and wellbeing of a
particular child or young person or class of
children or young people.
prescribed body will be required to comply with a request for information when
it believes this will assist the requesting body
in providing for the safety,
welfare and wellbeing of the child and/or young person to whom the information
Where there are
inconsistencies between the Act and other legislation governing privacy, the
provisions contained in ch 16A take
precedence.
The legislation
does, however, place a number of limitations on the obligation to provide
information: for example, a prescribed
body is not required to disclose
information if the agency believes it would impact on a criminal investigation
or coronial inquest,
endanger a person's life or is not in the public
and other prescribed persons
13.155 As in NSW, Tasmanian child protection legislation also makes
provision for the police to share information with an extensive
prescribed agencies other than the child protection
In Queensland, the
list is limited to the departments of health, housing and homelessness,
community care services, accredited schools,
persons providing services to
children or families and the Mater Misericordiae
13.156 In the Northern Territory, police can request information from a
list of prescribed persons, including employees of government
agencies, schools,
health practitioners and hospitals where they are conducting an inquiry into a
child’s physical, psychological
or emotional wellbeing or a child
protection investigation. The prescribed person must comply with the
police’s request.
Shared database
13.157 A number of reviews have identified the need for a shared
information and data collection system between police and the child
Several models exist
both in Australia, such as the Client Relationship Information System (CRIS) in
and overseas.
13.158 As part of its ‘Every Child Matters’ program, the United
Kingdom, for example, has established an online directory
called ContactPoint,
which contains basic information on every child in the nation and allows
authorised practitioners in different
services (including health, education,
welfare and the police) to find out who else is working with the same child or
young person.
Its aim is to assist services work together as a team and deliver
more timely and coordinated support, and thus decrease service
duplication.
Regulations
outline what information can be held, who can (or must) provide the information,
how long it can be retained, who can
be granted access and how accuracy will be
maintained.
There are also
‘shielding’ provisions to hide the contact details of people who are
at increased risk of significant
harm, such as victims of family violence.
13.159 A common database called ‘Wellnet’ has been established
in NSW to improve sharing information about at-risk children
between the new
CWUs, and to provide limited information about children and young people known
to the child protection agency. It
allows staff of CWUs to search for a child
and young person to determine whether they are being case managed by the child
agency or if other CWUs have received notification of concerns. The
and young people
who do not meet the new threshold, allows cumulative risk to be recognised and
reported, and will record information
families, thereby assisting in the identification of service gaps.
Information sharing guidelines
13.160 While information sharing should be expressly provided for in
legislation, the availability of information sharing guidelines
is a desirable
complementary tool. As the NSW Ombudsman has noted:
It is ... important to recognise that the formal arrangements being developed in
relation to information exchange present only part
of the challenge. Both the
government and non-government agencies alike need to appreciate that effective
child protection practice
is contingent on agencies understanding the need to be
proactive in obtaining information from other agencies and in passing it on.
From our review of child protection practice over a number of years we have seen
an emphasis on the risks associated with the disclosure
of confidential
information at the expense of recognising the very significant child protection
risks which can arise from the failure
to pass on vital information. Therefore,
while the recent legislative amendments represent an opportunity to improve
practice in
relation to the exchange of information, we believe this will not
occur without a corresponding cultural shift that promotes information
as part of good child protection
13.161 Information sharing guidelines provide a practical mechanism for
explaining how the legislative provisions operate to support,
formalise and
clarify information sharing procedures between the relevant
They can set down
processes for requesting and giving information. As recommended in several
reviews of child protection systems,
they can also highlight the importance of
sharing information (between police, the child protection agency and other
relevant agencies)
early in the investigation
Commissions’
13.162 It is now widely recognised in both Australia and abroad, that the
best outcomes for children and young people—in terms
of their health,
development and safety needs—are achieved by adopting a collaborative
interagency response. The advantages
of the major players—namely the
police, the child protection agency and possibly the department of
health—collaborating
are many, and include:
the ability of agencies to combine the information that they have
the circumstances of the child;
requiring a child or young person to submit to one investigation and
interviewing process only rather than having to repeat the same
information to
different agency staff, thereby reducing the trauma and distress on the victim;
ensuring that the child or young person receives the services that
are needed, and that those services complement each
The Commissions’ preliminary view is that all jurisdictions should ensure
that its legislative and administrative frameworks
facilitate a collaborative
and cooperative approach between human service and justice agencies. At a
minimum, all child protection
legislation should contain express provisions
permitting information about a child and his or her family to be shared between
police and prescribed bodies where the information relates to the safety,
welfare and wellbeing of a child, and where such information
is needed for the
investigation and prosecution of alleged offences against children. To
facilitate information sharing, consideration
should be given to establishing a
shared database containing basic information which intra-state agencies can
access readily.
Proposal 13–5
States and territories should ensure that best
practice features of collaborative models of child protection are adopted,
(a) legislative provisions that allow agencies (including federal agencies)
to share relevant information about children and families
to make accurate
assessments of the needs of children and families and to ensure that appropriate
programs relative to those needs
are delivered in a timely and coordinated
(b) the establishment of a shared database which contains basic information
can access to see quickly
which other agencies may be dealing with a particular child or family; and
(c) the development of guidelines to assist agencies to clarify their
respective roles and functions, to assist them when performing
functions under
the legislation, and to assist them to resolve any issues that may arise.
[back to top]
of children from family violence
13.164 Protection orders under family violence legislation can name
children or young people as an aggrieved family member, and
behalf of, a child or young
13.165 Applications for protection orders are generally heard in a local or
magistrates court. However, where the respondent or
the person in need of
protection from family violence is aged under 18 years, some jurisdictions
permit the application to be heard,
and an order made, by the children’s
court. The ACT, for example, gives jurisdiction to the Children’s Court to
a protection order in favour of the child against a parent or other person
where it believes it is necessary to protect the child
from psychological abuse
arising from the child’s exposure to family
Children’s Court may make such an order either on its own motion or on
application by a party or at the request of the
public advocate, pending final
orders for the care and protection of the
However, it may only
make such an order where there are care proceedings on foot.
13.166 In NSW, the Children’s Court is only able to make a protection
order in its criminal jurisdiction
a child or young person, in
order to protect other children or adults. It has no power to make a protection
order against an adult.
It also lacks power in its care jurisdiction to make an
order against a parent or other adult to protect a child or young person,
pending final care and protection orders. It submitted to the Wood Inquiry that
it should have such a power as it would provide ‘a
handy weapon in its
child protection
It submitted
that other benefits could be gained by giving the court power to make protective
orders, as follows:
If AVOs or orders of a similar vein were to be seen as part of the care regime,
they would be a useful tool for preserving peace
and the absence of violence and
might quite often be seen as a useful alternative to an emergency care and
protection order or an
interim care order with all the disruption which they may
involve in terms of children and young persons being removed from their
and often from the care of an innocent but powerless parent. It is not suggested
that [emergency care and protection orders]
and interim care orders not be
available in suitable cases but rather tha[t] an additional option be offered to
Director-General.
13.167 It further submitted that protective orders may be better sought in
the care regime by the child protection agency rather
than the police, although
police ought to enforce them in the same way that protection orders made by
local courts are
Commissions’
13.168 There is no question that a child who is exposed to family violence
may be at risk of serious physical or psychological harm
by virtue of his or her
exposure to the violence. Allowing a children’s court to make a protection
order in favour of that
child, when the child or young person is already subject
to care proceedings before the court, and final care orders are pending,
the court another tool to protect children from harm. It is also consistent with
the broad goal of this Inquiry of providing
a more seamless system for victims
of family violence, including children. The Commissions are interested to hear
views on this issue.
In care proceedings under child protection legislation, where
final orders are pending, should children’s courts in all states
territories be given power to make protection orders in favour of the child who
is the subject of proceedings before it, where
the court considers a protection
order necessary to protect the child from serious harm arising from the
child’s exposure to
family violence?
Question 13–12
a children’s court be able to make protection orders in favour of siblings
of the child who is the subject of care proceedings
before it? If so, should it
be able to make such an order of its own motion or should it be by application
by a party to the proceedings
or an advocate for the child?
[back to top]
Children and young
people at risk and juvenile justice
13.169 There is a strong correlation between juvenile participation in
crime and rates of reported neglect or
and, in particular,
between juvenile involvement in criminal activity and neglectful
There is also a
significant correlation between young offenders and poverty, homelessness,
mental health issues, substance misuse
and poor school achievement, truancy and
early school leaving age.
Don Weatherburn and Bronwyn Lind found that an offending child or young person
is more likely to have a history of abuse or neglect.
They argue that policies
aimed at reducing socio-economic stress and early intervention policies designed
to reduce the risk of child
neglect have an important role to play in crime
prevention in the long
13.170 A NSW survey of young people in detention and on community orders
showed that between 20% and 49% had been in out-of-home
care in the child
protection system.
Victoria, a study of all young people given sentences of imprisonment by the
Children’s Court over a period of eight months
in 2001 also illustrates
the link between abuse and youth offending. It identified 94 young people, 88%
of whom had been subject
to a total of 386 prior notifications, or an average of
4.6 notifications each. Almost a third had been the subject of six or more
notifications. The study also found that 86% had been in out-of-home care
(excluding kinship care), and that over half of these had
had five or more care
placements.
13.171 The high number of young people in the juvenile justice system who
have had extensive involvement in the c6are and protection
highlighted as a matter of great concern by the ALRC and Human Rights and Equal
Opportunity Commission in the report
Seen and Heard: Priority for Children in
the Legal Process
The findings suggested that the risk factors of past abusive parental behaviour
in youth offending may have been exacerbated by the
system which was intended to
protect them.
When welfare and
justice collide
13.172 The Children’s Court in Victoria has two divisions, one which
deals with care matters and the other with criminal matters
involving children
and young people. Justice Linda Dessau has observed of this:
Whilst cases in the different divisions are heard separately, it is an
artificial separation given that the children about whom there
are protective
concerns in the Family Division are frequently the same children who are charged
with offences in the Criminal
13.173 There is also concern that the same child who is a
‘victim’ in one jurisdiction, and for whom the state shows
protective concern, is a ‘villain’ in the other and is seen to be
less ‘deserving’ of
protection.
13.174 One specific area where the child protection system crosses the path
of the criminal justice system, and where poor outcomes
for children and young
people may result, is in relation to bail. Statistics show that more young
people are being held in detention
on remand for longer periods of time, and in
part this is because, quite simply, there is nowhere else for them to
As was noted in the Wood
One problem which was repeatedly brought to the notice of the Inquiry has been
the difficulty in securing accommodation for young
people who might otherwise
have been released on bail, but cannot be released because they do not have
stable accommodation or are
unable to return home because of family breakdown or
safety or neglect
Release on bail
13.175 Young people aged between 10 and 17 years are usually dealt with by
the juvenile or youth justice system, where detention
is considered a last
resort and the emphasis is on diversion and rehabilitation in order to break
offending cycles.
the special problems that many young people face when applying for bail tend to
undermine these principles.
13.176 To be released on bail, a young person must generally have a
responsible adult (usually a parent or carer) to sign their
bail papers and
ensure they appear at court when required. Where the young person is homeless,
or cannot go home because of dysfunctional
family relationships or because of
safety risks, a court will often impose a condition on bail that they
‘reside as directed
by the [child protection agency]’. However,
there is no obligation on the child protection agency to do so except where it
has parental responsibility for the child or young
Therefore, the effect
of such a condition is that the child or young person is detained in custody
because the child protection agency
is frequently unable to find suitable
accommodation.
13.177 The Wood Inquiry noted that high remand rates were a significant
problem in NSW, where up to 60% of young people in NSW detention
centres are on
remand. Of those who were on remand because they were unable to meet a condition
of bail, the most common condition
they could not meet was to ‘reside as
directed by the Department of Community
13.178 The high rate of remand is not solely a problem in NSW. The
Australian Institute of Criminology has found that, across all
territories, about 50% of young people in detention (at any one point in time)
were on remand awaiting trial or sentencing
in 2002, and that this had increased
to almost 60% in 2007.
Commissions’ views
13.179 The detention of children and young people on remand pending trial,
where bail would otherwise have been granted, clearly
has a disproportionate
impact on homeless young people, and on those who have no stable family home to
go to. It is contrary to the
prevailing policies and principles in the juvenile
justice arena of diversion and rehabilitation, and may exacerbate existing risk
factors for that class of children and young people.
13.180 It was observed in the Wood Inquiry that:
Coming within the juvenile justice or criminal justice system should not exclude
a young offender from long-term services from [child
protection agency] and
other human service agencies. Nor should a shortage of refuges or other forms of
accommodation result in young
people who cannot live safely with their families,
being remanded in custody unnecessarily, pending
13.181 The solution recommended by the Wood Inquiry was an administrative
one, namely the establishment in NSW of an after-hours
bail and assistance
service to help children and young people access bail when they are at risk of
being remanded in custody.
Residential bail programs have also been suggested by advocacy bodies and
service providers.
these services and programs already exist in other jurisdictions including
Victoria, Queensland and Western Australia and
the Commissions support their
availability across all states and territories.
Referring care and
protection issues when they arise
13.182 Safety concerns for a child or young person who is a defendant in
criminal proceedings in a children’s or youth court
could be brought to
the attention of the child protection agency by giving the court a power to
refer the matter formally to the
child protection agency for investigation. The
NSW Children’s Court called for such a power in its submissions to the
Inquiry and to a previous review of the NSWLRC in relation to young
However, the Chief
Magistrate of the Children’s Court did not limit the proposal to the
exercise of the court’s criminal
It is submitted that, where it appears to the Children’s Court that a
child or young person, not him/herself the subject of
care proceedings but
mentioned in such proceedings or the subject of criminal proceedings, may be in
danger or in need of assistance,
the Court should be entitled … to require
the Director-General to make a report to it as to care and protection issues
such child or young person and as to the steps which the
Director-General proposes to take to address those issues and, if he proposes
take no steps, the reasons for his decision. Such a provision would address two
problems which frequently arise—firstly
where, in the course of care
proceedings, it emerges that other children or young persons have been left in
the same unsatisfactory
or dangerous situation from which the child, the subject
of the care proceedings, has been removed and, secondly, where a young person
the subject of criminal proceedings and entitled, on juvenile justice
principles, to be released either on bail or on probation
but lacks adequate
supports and will face serious danger if released and left to his/her own
13.183 The Commissions understand that while magistrates may make reports
to the relevant child protection agency in these circumstances,
either via the
usual notification processes or by special arrangement with the relevant child
protection agency, this does not occur
One of the reasons for
the infrequent referral, as noted by the NSWLRC, is the court’s lack of
power to require the child protection
agency to report back to it on the results
of its investigation:
The Children’s Court … indicated its frustration with its limited
capacity to help a young offender with care and protection
issues, beyond
reporting the problems to [the Department of Community Services]. The Court
receives no assurance that action will
flow from its reporting of its concerns
and no information as to what action might have been taken. Accordingly, a
magistrate cannot
build input from [the Department] into any probation
13.184 The Wood Inquiry considered this issue and declined to recommend
that the Children’s Court (in its criminal jurisdiction)
should have a
power to require a report from Department of Community Services, concluding
this would be inconsistent with its role as a court of law charged with the
determination of cases brought before it. To confer upon
the court an own motion
or supervisory role would cross the appropriate boundaries within which the two
institutions, one judicial
and the other administrative, need to function.
However, the Inquiry does agree that, if requested by the Court, [Department of
Community Services] should provide relevant information
within its possession
that might assist in the sentencing of young people before the Children’s
Court in relation to a criminal
offence which, it might be expected, would
identify any ongoing care and protection issues that might need to be taken into
in the exercise of the court’s sentencing discretion. It can
exercise its s 248 power for that
The Victorian model
13.185 In Victoria, the Criminal Division of the Children’s Court may
refer a matter to the child protection agency for investigation
when it believes
that grounds exist for the making of a protection order, or a therapeutic order,
in relation to a child appearing
as a defendant before
section 350
Children, Youth and Families Act 2005
(Vic), the child protection
agency is obliged to investigate any such matter referred to it by the
Children’s Court, and must
provide a report of its investigation of the
matter to the Court within 21 days of the
The report must set
out the outcomes of the investigation specifying, in particular, whether the
child protection agency has made
an application for a protection order, or a
therapeutic treatment order in relation to the child or if the investigation
that such action is not warranted.
13.186 These provisions were part of a package of reforms of the Victorian
legislation designed to address issues relating to children
and young people who
exhibited sexually abusive behaviour. Care and protection issues arise because
these children and young people
are likely themselves to have been sexually
13.187 Furthermore, research suggests that early intervention therapeutic
programs can help prevent ongoing and more serious sexual
offences by children
and young people exhibiting sexually abusive behaviour. While the
Children’s Court has power to require
young offenders to participate in
these treatment programs on sentencing, that power is only enlivened when the
young person makes
an admission of guilt or is convicted. As it is often
difficult to prove the mental intent required to secure a conviction for younger
children, aged between 10 and 15 years, an alternative pathway to treatment was
13.188 A formal referral by the Criminal Division to the Secretary provides
that alternative pathway. It directs the child protection
agency to investigate
the issues and, where the grounds for intervention are met, to seek an order in
the Family Division of the
Children’s Court directing the child or young
person to participate in a treatment program. In this way, participation in
therapeutic
treatment can be arranged when the child does not voluntarily seek
Commissions’ views
13.189 The Commissions consider that there may be merit in giving courts a
formal power to refer their concerns for the safety of
a child or young person,
who is a defendant in criminal proceedings before it, to the child protection
agency for investigation.
Section 349
of the Victorian statute provides a useful
model in this regard. Such a power gives the court a clear pathway to take
action where
it is of the view that action is warranted, rather than relying on
court officers to make a report using the notification provisions.
ensures that an investigation is carried out by the child protection agency.
13.190 As noted by the Wood Inquiry, there is also merit in ensuring the
court can request relevant information from a child protection
agency in the
exercise of its sentencing jurisdiction. This would assist it to identify any
ongoing care and protection issues that
it ought to have regard to when
sentencing young offenders.
Presently, in NSW, the court may request this information under
Children and Young Persons (Care and Protection) Act
The Commissions
are interested in hearing from stakeholders about how often, in practice, courts
request such information.
13.191 The Commissions’ preliminary view is that courts should also
be able to make a formal referral (with report back provisions)
to the child
protection agency when exercising its care jurisdiction, where it has concerns
for the safety of other children or siblings
of the child or young person who is
the subject of care proceedings before it.
Proposal 13–6
State and territory child protection legislation
should be amended to allow a court, in the exercise of its criminal jurisdiction
where a child or young person who is a defendant before it, to refer a matter to
the child protection agency for investigation where
it considers that there are
legislative grounds for a protection application, or an application for a
therapeutic treatment order,
to be made.
Proposal 13–7
State and territory child protection legislation
should require the child protection agency to provide, within 21 days of the
a report to the court setting out the outcomes of its investigation
into the matter, and specifying whether a care and protection
therapeutic treatment order is being sought, or if the investigation reveals
that such an order is not warranted.
Proposal 13–8
A court exercising care jurisdiction under state
and territory child protection legislation should have a power to refer its
for the safety of other children or siblings of the child or young
person the subject of care proceedings before it to the child
protection agency
for investigation, and to require the child protection agency to furnish it with
a report of its investigation
within a certain time period specified in the
legislation.
In practice, when sentencing young offenders, how often does the
court request information held by the child protection agency about
the offender
to be provided to it?
The Terms of Reference are set out at the
front of this Consultation Paper; and see Ch 1 for a discussion of their
Convention on the Rights of the
, 20 November 1989,
[1991] ATS 4
, (entered into force generally on 2
September 1990), art 5. See also discussion in Ch
Family Law Act 1975
Secretary, Department of Health and Community
Services v JWB and SMB (Marion’s Case)
[1992] HCA 15
(1992) 175 CLR 218
, 235 which
identified the predecessor of these provisions of
Law Act 1975
, as defining a young person’s guardian as the
person with responsibility for that young person, as against the rest of the
Secretary, Department of Health
and Community Services v JWB and SMB (Marion’s Case)
[1992] HCA 15
(1992) 175 CLR
Crimes Act 1900
Criminal Code
(Qld) s 364;
Criminal Law
Consolidation Act 1935
Criminal Code
ss 144, 145;
Criminal Code
(NT) s 183. Parents also have a
primary duty to house, educate and provide for their children under
Child Support (Assessment) Act 1989
DPP v Farquharson
, [5]. The decision has been overturned by the Victorian Court of Appeal but
not in a way that affects these remarks: see
R v Farquharson
[2009] VSCA
Children and Young Persons (Care
and Protection) Act 1998
Children, Youth and Families Act
Child Protection Act 1999
Children and Community Services Act 2004
Protection Act 1993
(SA) s 4(1);
Children, Young Persons and Their
Families Act 1997
Children and Young People Act 2008
Care and Protection of Children Act 2007
Children and Young Persons
(Care and Protection) Act 1998
Children, Youth and
Families Act 2005
s 10(3)(a).
See also Ch
Child Protection Act
Children and Community Services Act 2004
Children’s Protection Act 1993
Convention on the Rights of the
, 20 November 1989,
[1991] ATS 4
, (entered into force generally on 2
September 1990), art 20.
Childhood Foundation and Child Abuse Prevention Research Australia,
Responding to Child Abuse in Australia: A Joint Submission to the Australian
Government Responding to Australia’s Children:
Safe and Well—A
National Framework for Protecting Australia’s Children
Ibid, 16. See also Council of
Australian Governments,
Protecting Children is Everyone’s
Business—A National Framework for Protecting Australia’s Children
protection laws distinguish between a child and a young person. For example, in
Children and Young Persons (Care and Protection) Act 1998
, a child is a person under 16 years and a young person is one between
16 and 18 years. In the ACT, a child is a person under 12 years
and a young
person is a person between 12 and 18 years:
Children and Young People Act
Children and Young Persons (Care and Protection) Act 1998
Children, Youth and Families Act 2005
Child Protection Act 1999
Children and Community Services Act 2004
Children’s Protection Act 1993
(SA) s 6(2);
Children, Young
Persons and Their Families Act 1997
Care and Protection
of Children Act 2007
Children and Young
People Act 2008
Children, Youth and
Families Act 2005
s 162(1)(c)
Children and Community Services Act
s 28(2)(c).
Children and Young Persons (Care and Protection) Act 1998
Children and Community Services Act 2004
s 28(2)(c)(iii)
Children, Young Persons and Their Families Act 1997
Child Protection Act 1999
Care and Protection of Children Act 2007
Children and Young People Act 2008
s 156(2)(d)(iii).
L Bromfield and
A National Approach for Child Protection—Project Report
(2008) National Child Protection Clearinghouse,
‘substantiation’ refers to whether, on assessment, the allegations
contained in the report are found to be
prima facie true, thus requiring further
investigation.
Australian Childhood
Foundation and Child Abuse Prevention Research Australia,
Responding to Child
Abuse in Australia: A Joint Submission to the Australian Government Responding
to Australia’s Children:
Safe and Well—A National Framework for
Protecting Australia’s Children
Children and Young People Act
Children, Young Persons and Their Families Act 1997
Child Protection
defines harm as ‘any detrimental
effect of a significant nature on the child’s physical, psychological or
emotional wellbeing’.
Children and Young Persons (Care and Protection) Act 1998
Children, Youth and Families Act 2005
Children and
Community Services Act 2004
Children’s Protection Act
Care and Protection of Children Act 2007
Children and Young Persons
(Care and Protection) Act 1998
Children, Youth and
Families Act 2005
; see also definition of harm in
Law Consolidation Act 1935
L Bromfield and D Higgins,
‘National Comparison of Child Protection Systems’ (2005) 22
Abuse Prevention Issues
1; L Bromfield and P Holzer,
A National Approach
for Child Protection—Project Report
(2008) National Child Protection
Clearinghouse, 7.
L Bromfield and R
Specialist Practice Guide: Cumulative Harm
Children, Youth and
Families Act 2005
s 162(1)(a)
Protection Act 1993
(SA) s 6(2)(c);
Care and Protection of Children Act
Protection Act 1993
(SA) s 6(2)(c);
Children, Young Persons and Their
Families Act 1997
s 4(1)(c)(i)
Children and Young People
s 345(2)(c).
Children’s Protection Act 1993
(SA) s 26B;
Protection of Children Act 2007
4(3)(e)(ii).
Children and Young
People Act 2008
s 156(2)(a)
Children, Young Persons and Their
Families Act 1997
Children’s Protection Act
(SA) s 6(2)(b).
Children and Young Persons (Care and Protection) Act 1998
s 23(1)(b1)
Children’s Protection Act 1993
Children and
Young Persons (Care and Protection) Act 1998
Young Persons and Their Families Act 1997
Children and Young
Persons (Care and Protection) Act 1998
ss 23(1)(d)
Children, Young Persons and Their Families Act 1997
Care and Protection of
Children Act 2007
Children and Young People Act 2008
Children, Youth
and Families Act 2005
s 162(1)(ii)
Child Protection Act
Children and Young People Act 2008
Harm is defined as any
detrimental effect of a significant nature on the child’s wellbeing:
Children and Community Services Act 2004
Children, Youth and
Families Act 2005
Children, Young Persons and Their
Families Act 1997
The applicable penalty in Tasmania is 50 penalty units and/or up to two years
imprisonment; in Victoria, the penalty is 50 penalty
units or imprisonment of
not more than 12 months.
Youth and Families Act 2005
Children, Young Persons
and Their Families Act 1997
Children and Young Persons
(Care and Protection) Act 1998
Children and
Community Services Act 2004
Children, Youth and Families
Children, Young Persons and Their Families Act
and Young Persons (Care and Protection) Act 1998
Children and Community
Services Act 2004
The penalty for summary conviction is three
years imprisonment and a fine of
Children and
Young Persons (Care and Protection) Act 1998
Children, Youth
and Families Act 2005
Children and
Young Persons (Care and Protection) Act 1998
Children and Community Services Act 2004
Crimes Act 1900
Criminal Code Act 1899
(Qld) ss 177, 286;
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
Criminal Code
(WA) s 263;
Criminal Code
(Tas) ss 144–152;
Criminal Code
(NT) ss 149,
Children and Community
Services Act 2004
(WA) s 364. In Tasmania, it is an offence to
ill-treat a child aged below 14 years:
Children, Young Persons and Their
Families Act 1997
(Tas) s 178.
Crimes Act 1900
Criminal Code
(Qld) s 326;
Criminal Code
s 184. Also note the
Criminal Code
(WA) s 344 makes it an
offence for a parent (who is able to maintain a child) to desert a child under
the age of 16 years.
See, for example,
Crimes Act 1900
Crimes Act 1958
Criminal Code
(Qld) ss 210, 215;
Criminal Code
(WA) s 320–322;
Criminal Law Consolidation
Criminal Code
ss 124–125A;
Criminal Code
inserted by
Crimes Amendment (Child Neglect) Act 2004
(NSW). This is distinct from the similar offence in
and Young Persons (Care and Protection) Act 1998
(NSW) which does not
require the prosecution to prove that the failure by a person with parental
responsibility to provide adequate
care and support to the child has caused
Criminal Law Consolidation
Children and Young Persons (Care and Protection) Act 1998
Children, Youth and Families Act 2005
Young Persons and Their Families Act 1997
and Community Services Act 2004
Report of the
Special Commission of Inquiry into Child Protection Services in NSW
Crimes (Sentencing
Procedure) Act 1999
Sentencing Act 1991
See also Judicial College of
Victorian Sentencing Manual
Fines Act 1996
Sentencing Act 1991
Summary Offences Act 1988
D Brown and others,
Brown, Farrier, Neal and Weisbrot’s Criminal Laws—Material and
Commentary on Criminal Law and Process in New South Wales
(4th ed, 2006),
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Same Crime, Same Time: Sentencing of Federal Offenders
, ALRC 103 (2006),
Ibid, [6.121]–[6.127].
The Australian Law Reform Commission supported a more liberal approach to be
taken by the courts when
considering the impact of sentencing on the
offender’s family: see [6.126].
Ibid, [7.114]–[7.115].
Mathews, ‘Protecting Children from Abuse and Neglect’ in G Monahan
and L Young (eds),
Children and the Law in Australia
(2008) 204,
Except in NSW, which limits
the mandatory reporting duty to children aged under 16 years, the obligations
elsewhere in Australia
cover all children and young people up to 18 years.
Children and Young Persons (Care
and Protection) Act 1998
Children, Youth and Families
Public Health Act 2005
Education (General Provisions) Act 2006
Children and Community Services Act 2004
Children’s Protection Act 1993
(SA) ss 6, 10–11;
Young Persons and Their Families Act 1997
Children and
Young People Act 2008
Care and Protection of Children
B Mathews, ‘Protecting Children from Abuse and Neglect’ in G
Monahan and L Young (eds),
Children and the Law in Australia
(2008) 204,
In WA, mandatory reporting
obligations are targeted to licensed providers of child care services or outside
school hours care services;
and to court personnel, including mediators,
counsellors and lawyers, at the Family Court of Western Australia:
Court Act 1997
Family Law Act 1975
Children and Young
Persons (Care and Protection) Act 1998
Children, Youth
and Families Act 2005
Public Health Act 2005
Education (General Provisions) Act 2006
Children and Community Services Act 2004
Children’s Protection Act 1993
(SA) ss 6, 10–11;
Young Persons and Their Families Act 1997
Children and Young People Act 2008
Protection of Children Act 2007
Children, Young Persons and
Their Families Act 1997
Children and Young People Act
Children and Young Persons (Care and
Protection) Act 1998
Children’s Protection Act
(SA) s 11(2)(j) which extend obligations to those also working in
the non-government sector.
Children’s Protection Act 1993
(SA) s 11(2);
Children, Young
Persons and Their Families Act 1997
s 14(1)(k).
Children and Young
People Act 2008
Note, an exception applies where the
non-accidental physical injury is caused by another child or young person and
the person with
parental responsibility for the injured child or young person is
willing and able to protect the injured person from further injury:
Education (General
Provisions) Act 2006
Children’s Protection Act 1993
(SA) s 11(2);
Children, Young
Persons and Their Families Act 1997
Children and Young
People Act 2008
Children’s Protection Act 1993
(SA) s 11(2);
Young Persons and Their Families Act 1997
Children and
Young People Act 2008
Children’s Protection
(SA) s 11(2)(ga).
Children and Young Persons (Care and Protection) Act 1998
Children’s Protection Act 1993
s 11(1)(b).
Protection of Children Act 2007
‘Protecting Children from Abuse and Neglect’ in G Monahan and L
Young (eds),
Children and the Law in Australia
(2008) 204,
Children and Young Persons
(Care and Protection) Act 1998
Children and Young People
Children and Young Persons (Care and Protection) Act 1998
Children, Youth and Families Act 2005
s 162(1)(e)
Child Protection Act 1999
Children and Community Services
Children’s Protection Act 1993
Children, Young Persons and Their Families Act 1997
Children and Young People Act 2008
Protection of Children Act 2007
Children and Young Persons
(Care and Protection) Act 1998
Children, Youth and Families
s 162(1)(f)
Child Protection Act 1999
Children and Community Services Act 2004
Children’s Protection Act 1993
(SA) s 6(1)(b);
Young Persons and Their Families Act 1997
Children and Young
People Act 2008
Care and Protection of Children Act 2007
Children and Young
Persons (Care and Protection) Act 1998
Children and
Young People Act 2008
The Commissions note the policy has been revised in NSW since the
implementation of the reforms recommended by the Wood Inquiry
which raise the
threshold for reporting to risk of ‘significant
C Humphreys,
‘Problems in the System of Mandatory Reporting of Children Living with
Domestic Violence’ (2008) 14(2–3)
Journal of Family Studies
Australian Institute of
Health and Welfare,
Child Protection Australia 2008–09
C Humphreys, ‘Problems in
the System of Mandatory Reporting of Children Living with Domestic
Violence’ (2008) 14(2–3)
Journal of Family Studies
‘No Way to Live’: Women’s Experiences of
Negotiating the Family Law System in the Context of Domestic
Violence—Interim
Alternative and
Improved Responses to Domestic and Family Violence in Queensland Indigenous
Communities
(2009), [6.2.4].
See, eg, J Wood,
the Special Commission of Inquiry into Child Protection Services in NSW
D Scott, ‘Towards a
Public Health Model of Child Protection in Australia’ (2006) 1
Communities, Children and Families Australia
Report of the Special
Commission of Inquiry into Child Protection Services in NSW
Children and Young
Persons (Care and Protection) Act 1998
Children, Youth and
Families Act 2005
Child Protection Act 1999
Children and Community Services Act 2004
Protection Act 1993
Children, Young Persons and Their Families
Children and Young People Act 2008
Care and Protection of Children Act 2007
Care and Protection of
Children Act 2007
Children and Young Persons (Care and Protection) Act 1998
29(1)(f)(ii).
L Bromfield and D Higgins,
‘National Comparison of Child Protection Systems’ (2005) 22
Abuse Prevention Issues
Children’s Research Centre, ‘The Structured Decision Making®
System: New South Wales Mandatory Reporter Guide’
See, eg, South Australia
Government Department for Families and Communities,
Reporting Child Abuse
(2010) <www.dfc.sa.gov.au/pub/default.aspx?tabid=485> at 12 April 2010;
Tasmania Government Department of Health and Human
Notification to the Child Protection Intake
<www.dhhs.tas.gov.au/service_information> at 12 April 2010 although in
Tasmania, reports may also be made to community
based Gateway
See, eg, Queensland
Government Department of Communities, Child Safety Services,
Reporting Child
<www.childsafety.qld.gov.au/child-abuse/report/index.html> at 12 April
Victorian Government
Department of Human Services, Children, Youth and Families,
Concerns about Children or Young People: A Guide for Professionals
<www.cyf.vic.gov.au> at 12 April 2010.
Children, Young Persons and
Their Families Act 1997
, as amended by
Children, Young
Persons and Their Families Amendment Act 2009
These have been created
within NSW Health (Area Health Services, the Children’s Hospital at
Westmead), NSW Police Force, the
Department of Education and Training, the
Department of Housing, the Department of Ageing, Disability and Home Care and
the Department
of Juvenile Justice.
Child Protection Act 1999
Ombudsman Victoria,
Motion Investigation into the Department of Human Services Child Protection
(2009), [170].
NSW Health, NSW Police, NSW Department of Community Services,
Investigative Response Team (JIRT) Review
, unpublished (2006),
Child Protection Act
The original
memorandum of understanding was signed in 1997 and was revised in August 2006
following an inter-agency review of JIRT
in 2006: see NSW Health, NSW Police,
NSW Department of Community Services,
NSW Joint Investigative Response Team
(JIRT) Review
, unpublished (2006).
Comment in response to ALRC
Family Violence Inquiry E-newsletter
(January 2010), 13 January
M Hood and C Boltje,
‘The Progress of 500 Referrals from the Child Protection System to the
Criminal Court’
The Australian and New Zealand Journal of
Criminology
Australia, offences relating to child abuse and neglect are contained in the
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
M Hood and C Boltje,
‘The Progress of 500 Referrals from the Child Protection System to the
Criminal Court’
The Australian and New Zealand Journal of
Criminology
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Child Welfare
, ALRC 18 (1981),
Child Protection Act
Children, Young Persons and Their Families Act
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Child Welfare
, ALRC 18 (1981),
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
For Your Information: Australian Privacy Law and Practice
ALRC 108 (2008), [69.103].
Victorian Child Death Review Committee,
Annual Report of Inquiries into the
Deaths of Children Known to Child Protection
(2009), 47; NSW Ombudsman,
The Death of Ebony: The Need for an Effective Interagency Response to
Children at Risk
(2009), 53; NSW Ombudsman,
The Death of Dean
Shillingsworth: Critical Challenges in the Context of Reforms to the Child
Protection System
(2009), 14.
Ombudsman Victoria,
Own Motion Investigation into the Department of Human
Services Child Protection Program
Development and Justice Standing Committee—Parliament of Western
Inquiry into the Prosecution of Assaults and Sexual Offences
(2008), 169–171; R Layton,
Review of Child Protection in South
[7.9]–[7.13].
NSW Health, NSW
Police, NSW Department of Community Services,
NSW Joint Investigative
Response Team (JIRT) Review
, unpublished (2006), 19–20; Child Safety
Directors’ Network—SCAN Subcommittee,
2007–2008 SCAN System
(2008), 2; and Northern Territory Police Territory Intelligence
Strategic Intelligence Assessment Child Abuse 2009–2014
(2009), 23–24.
Child Protection Act 1999
Children, Young Persons and Their
Families Act 1997
Children and Young People Act
(ACT) ch 25;
Care and Protection of Children Act 2007
Children and Young
People Act 2008
(ACT) ch 25.
Children and
Young Persons (Care and Protection) Act 1998
Children and Young Persons
(Care and Protection) Regulation 2000
(NSW) reg 7.
Children and Young Persons
(Care and Protection) Act 1998
Report of the
Special Commission of Inquiry into Child Protection Services in NSW
[24.98], [24.173].
Amended by the
Children’s Legislation (Wood Inquiry Recommendations) Act 2009
Children and Young
Persons (Care and Protection) Act 1998
Children, Young Persons
and Their Families Act 1997
An information sharing entity
is defined broadly under
See also Tasmania Department of Health and
Human Services,
Guidelines: Information Sharing for Providers of Family and
Disability Support
(2010) <www.dhhs.tas.gov.au> at 14 April
Child Protection Act
Protection of Children Act 2007
NSW Health, NSW Police, NSW
Department of Community Services,
NSW Joint Investigative Response Team
(JIRT) Review
, unpublished (2006), 19–20; Child Safety
Directors’ Network—SCAN Subcommittee,
2007–2008 SCAN System
(2008), 2; and Northern Territory Police Territory Intelligence
Strategic Intelligence Assessment Child Abuse 2009–2014
(2009), 23–24.
But note the
criticisms made by the Victorian Ombudsman: Ombudsman Victoria,
Investigation into the Department of Human Services Child Protection Program
(2009), 11–12, 26–30.
Children Act 2004
(UK) s 12; see also Department of Children, Schools
and Families (UK),
Children Act
2004 Information Database (England) Regulations 2007
NSW Ombudsman,
of Dean Shillingsworth: Critical Challenges in the Context of Reforms to the
Child Protection System
Community Development and
Justice Standing Committee—Parliament of Western Australia,
into the Prosecution of Assaults and Sexual Offences
(2008), 169–171.
See also R Layton,
Review of Child Protection in South Australia
[7.9]–[7.13].
NSW Health, NSW
Police, NSW Department of Community Services,
NSW Joint Investigative
Response Team (JIRT) Review
, unpublished (2006), 16; Queensland Government
Department of Child Safety,
Progress in Reforming the Queensland Child
Protection System
(2006), 60.
See also Ch 19.
Children and Young People Act
A protection order is defined as a final or interim
protection order as defined under the
Domestic Violence and Protection Orders
(ACT): s 458.
Children and Young People Act 2008
NSW Children’s Court,
Submission to the Special Commission of Inquiry into Child Protection
Services in NSW
(2008), [88].
Ibid, [89].
D Weatherburn and B Lind,
Social and Economic Stress, Child Neglect and Juvenile Delinquency
P Salmelainen,
Neglect: Its Causes and its Role in Delinquency
D Kenny and others,
NSW Young People on Community Orders Health Survey 2003–2006: Key
Findings Report
(2006), 11 cited at J Wood,
Report of the Special
Commission of Inquiry into Child Protection Services in NSW
(2008), [15.2].
See also J Baker,
Juveniles in Crime—
Participation Rates and
Risk Factors
(1998) NSW Bureau of Crime Statistics and Research,
D Weatherburn and B Lind,
Social and Economic Stress, Child Neglect and Juvenile Delinquency
(1997), 47–48.
D Kenny and
NSW Young People on Community Orders Health Survey 2003–2006:
Key Findings Report
(2006), 11 cited at J Wood,
Report of the Special
Commission of Inquiry into Child Protection Services in NSW
Victorian Government
Department of Human Services,
An Integrated Strategy for Child Protection and
Placement Services
Australian Law Reform
Commission and Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission,
Seen and Heard:
Priority for Children in the Legal Process
L Dessau, ‘Children
and the Court System’ (Paper presented at Children and Crime: Victims and
Offenders Conference convened
by the Australian Institute of Criminology,
Brisbane, 17–18 June 1999.
Murray, ‘Victims and Villains—The Same Young Person’ (Paper
presented at Children and Crime: Victims and Offenders
Conference, Brisbane,
17–18 June 1999.
‘Homes for Homeless Children’
[2007] AltLawJl 28
(2007) 32(3)
Alternative Law
of the Special Commission of Inquiry into Child Protection Services in NSW
(2008), [15.8].
(Criminal Proceedings) Act 1987
which excludes
serious children’s indictable offences from being determined in the NSW
Children’s Court.
for Community Services v Children’s Court of NSW
[2005] NSWSC 154
(2005) 62 NSWLR 419
referred to in J Wood,
Report of the Special Commission of Inquiry into
Child Protection Services in NSW
Ibid, [15.12], citing a
submission by the NSW Department of Juvenile
Juveniles in
Detention in Australia, 1981-2007
Report of the
Special Commission of Inquiry into Child Protection Services in NSW
Ibid, Rec 15.1. The
recommendation has been approved in principle by the NSW Government, and an
after-hours bail hotline, to operate
under the auspices of the NSW Department of
Juvenile Justice, is expected to be implemented by June
See, for example, National
Council of Social Services,
Bail Me Out: NSW Young People and Bail
(2010), Rec 1.4; UnitingCare Burnside,
Releasing the Pressure on Remand:
Bail Support Solutions for Children and Young People in New South Wales
(2009); M Dumbach, ‘Homes for Homeless Children’
[2007] AltLawJl 28
(2007) 32(3)
Alternative Law Journal
Report of the
Special Commission of Inquiry into Child Protection Services in NSW
[15.76]; New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Young Offenders
No 104 (2005), [8.140].
Children’s Court,
Submission to the Special Commission of Inquiry into
Child Protection Services in NSW
Report of the
Special Commission of Inquiry into Child Protection Services in NSW
New South Wales Law Reform
Commission,
Young Offenders
, Report No 104 (2005),
Report of the
Special Commission of Inquiry into Child Protection Services in NSW
Children, Youth and
Families Act 2005
Report of the
Special Commission of Inquiry into Child Protection Services in NSW
ALRC CP1 Family Violence � Improving Legal Frameworks
14. Child Protection and the
Family Law Act
Introduction
Shared emphasis
Divided responsibility
Prior and ongoing reviews
Chapter outline
The extent of the problem
Section 69ZK
Family Law Act
The appropriate jurisdiction
Commissions’ views
Legal framework for interaction between the two systems
Notification of child maltreatment in Family Courts
Information flow
Falling into gaps between the systems
Administrative arrangements
Protocols and memorandums of understanding
Commissions’ views
Cooperative case management
14. Child Protection and the
Family Law Act
Introduction
Problems of the interface between child protection services and family courts
have surfaced in many countries. They are not confined
to Australia. No matter
what the structure of the various child protection services and of the various
family and divorce courts
and services, the problems are always the
14.1 This chapter addresses the first of the Terms of Reference for this
Inquiry, which requires the Commissions to consider the interaction
in practice
of state and territory child protection laws with the
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth). The principal interaction issues include: the jurisdictional overlap
and intersections, and the determination of which courts
should deal with
parenting disputes that raise serious child protection issues; the communication
of information between the child
protection system and the family courts; the
participation of child protection agencies in family law matters; and the
for children to fall into gaps between the two
14.2 Child protection issues arise in family court cases and in proceedings
under state child protection laws. Both family law and
child protection laws
share an emphasis on the rights of the child and their best interests as the
guiding principle for decision
making—as noted in Chapter 12. This shared
emphasis on the ‘best interests of the child’ reflects international
covenants to which Australia is a
and enables both systems
to complement each other to some degree. Another shared emphasis of the two
systems is a common respect
for the continued connection, culture and community
of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
responsibility
14.3 The division of responsibility for the systems between Commonwealth,
state and territory governments means that a degree of cooperation
different courts, agencies and individuals is required. In both systems,
different participants are responsible for making
decisions concerning the care,
protection and welfare of children and each needs to be aware of the role and
actions of the others,
and their interlocking consequences. The multiplicity of
agencies, courts and laws that may be involved has created numerous
challenges—and
sometimes conflicting decisions—for example about who
has parental responsibility for a child.
Prior and ongoing
14.4 The interactions between the family law and child protection systems
have been address by the Family Law Council in
by the ALRC and the then
Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission (HREOC) in the report,
Heard: Priority for Children in the Legal Process
and by Professor Richard
Family Courts Violence Review
14.5 Reviews of specific state and territory child protection systems have
also raised practical interaction issues in the context
of evaluating the
functions of child protection
The problems have also
been identified and discussed by government
committees,
in academic articles
and studies
and in judicial
14.6 Nevertheless, these issues have not yet been addressed comprehensively
and this ‘leaves open the very real possibility
that some children’s
welfare will be
jeopardised’.
Council of Australian Governments and the Standing Committee of
Attorneys-General (SCAG) are also considering issues relating
protection, and improvements that can be made at a national level to the way
government agencies and courts deal with these
14.7 This chapter begins with a summary of the jurisdictional intersections
and overlaps between state and territory child protection
laws (the child
protection system) and the
Family Law Act
(the family law system) with
respect to parental responsibility. It then focuses upon the legal framework for
interaction between
the two systems: first, how family courts find out about
child maltreatment—by notification, screening and intervention; and
secondly, the legislative mechanisms for the flow of information between the
systems. Finally, this chapter discusses the administrative
underpinnings of
cooperation, including memorandums of understanding (MOUs) and protocols for
information sharing as well as a cooperative
case management models, such as the
Magellan project.
[back to top]
intersections
14.8 Federal family courts determine disputes between separating or separated
parents. In contrast, when state or territory child
protection agencies consider
that a child will not be safe or properly looked after by either
parent—whether they are separated
or not—they may institute
proceedings in children’s or youth courts. This process of decision making
may result in the
state—with the sanction of state or territory
children’s courts—acting to remove children from their families,
taking parental responsibility from parents.
14.9 Decisions made by parents or child protection agencies may result in
concurrent proceedings relating to the same children. For
example, a parent may
express concern to a child protection agency before parenting orders are made
Family Law Act
. The child protection agency may
decide to apply for care orders in a children’s court, rather than
intervening in the family
law proceedings. In other cases, a child protection
agency may request a parent to act to protect a child by obtaining a family
order against the other
In such cases, if the
parent fails to seek a family violence protection order the agency may seek
orders from the children’s
court to remove the child.
The extent of the
14.10 A number of studies have considered the frequency with which issues of
child maltreatment or neglect arise in family law proceedings.
14.11 In 1994, a study of 294 judgments in defended Family Court matters
revealed allegations of sexual abuse of a child were made
in 10% of matters, and
allegations of physical abuse or neglect were made in a further 11% of
14.12 In 1997, an analysis of over 700 cases awaiting pre-hearing conferences
in the Melbourne registry of the Family Court found
that over 40% of
children’s cases involved allegations of some form of child
14.13 In 1998, a study concluded that matters involving allegations of child
abuse were a substantial or core component of the Family
The study, which
examined a selection of child abuse cases in the Family Court from 1994 to
mid-1995, found that one quarter of matters
involving children at the final
hearing stage involved allegations of child
Those allegations of
child abuse in the Family Court tended to be ‘serious’—that
is, they alleged physical or sexual
abuse or both—and the families
involved were not generally known to the relevant state or territory child
protection service.
14.14 In 2007, a study of 300 court files involving parenting disputes from
three registries of the Family Court and the Federal Magistrates
Court (FMC)
revealed that allegations of child abuse were raised in 19 to 50% of all
Again, those allegations
tended to be of ‘serious’ child abuse. This study also found that
more than half of the cases
in the sample involved allegations of family
violence, many at the severe end of the spectrum.
14.15 The fact that child protection concerns arise in family law proceedings
may, but does not necessarily, indicate a problem of
overlap. Such overlap is
managed in a variety of ways, discussed below.
Section 69ZK of the
Family Law Act
Family Law Act
and state and territory child protection
legislation each enable courts to make orders regulating or displacing parental
responsibility
for children. As such, parental responsibility for children is a
convenient starting place to discuss the family law and child protection
14.17 There is potential for inconsistency between the laws, and the orders
obtained, in respect of parental responsibility in different
14.18 Section 109 of the
Constitution
provides that
when a law of a state is inconsistent with a law of the Commonwealth the latter
shall prevail, and the state law shall,
to the extent of the inconsistency, be
invalid. A state law may be directly inconsistent with a Commonwealth law if it
is impossible
to obey both the state law and the Commonwealth law, or if the
state law varies, detracts from, or impairs the Commonwealth law.
Alternatively,
a state law may be indirectly inconsistent with a Commonwealth law if it relates
to a matter in respect of which the
Australian Parliament has evinced a
legislative intent to ‘cover the
14.19 Whether an order made
by a court exercising jurisdiction under the
Family Law Act
prevails over
a state child protection order was tested in 1980 in
In that case a
magistrate in Queensland made an order under the
Family Law Act
mother have custody of her daughter. Another magistrate later ordered, pursuant
to Queensland’s child protection legislation,
that the girl be placed in
the care and protection of the relevant child protection agency. The father then
sought custody under
Family Law Act
. When he was given custody, the
child protection agency sought a determination in the High Court that the
Family Law Act
order did not override the state order. The High Court
held that the relevant provision of the
Family Law Act
was invalid to the
extent that it purported to enable a custody order under the Commonwealth
legislation to override a similar order
under state child protection
legislation—the marriage power did not extend so far. It was not a case of
inconsistency that
Constitution
14.20 This separation of jurisdiction is now contained expressly in
Family Law Act
provides that a court having
child maintenance order)
in relation to a child who is under the care of a
person pursuant to a state or territory child welfare
(a) the order is expressed to come into effect when the child ceases to be under
(b) the order is made in proceedings relating to the child in respect of which
the written consent of a child welfare officer of
the relevant State or
Territory has been obtained.
14.21 A ‘child welfare law’ is any law of a state or territory
that relates to the incarceration of a child for a criminal
as well as any law
listed in sch 5 of the
Family Law Regulations 1984
(Cth). Schedule 5 sets
out 38 state and territory laws, including those dealing with child
protection.
14.22 Secondly, s 69ZK(2) confirms that state and territory courts may make
child protection orders, including where a parenting order
is in place under the
Family Law Act
, and the child protection order prevails over
Family Law Act
order so long as it is in
This expressly preserves
the operation of the state and territory child protection system, reflecting the
constitutional decision
R v Lambert
14.23 Courts exercising jurisdiction under
Family Law Act
are unlikely to make orders coming into effect when a
child ceases to be under the care of a person under a child protection law,
the needs, capacities and other circumstances of the children, of their natural
parents … and of any other person interested
in the children’s
welfare, could well change significantly before the state child protection
orders ultimately expired.
14.24 Instead, the usual course is to terminate or adjourn any proceedings of
the federal family court for the period of the child’s
care under child
protection laws.
14.25 The operation of
Family Law Act
is demonstrated by
the following hypothetical examples which refer to the NSW child protection
agency by its former name, the Department
of Community Services
and the Children’s
Court of NSW:
• After family law court parenting orders placing a child with X, DoCS
brings proceedings in a Children’s Court and obtains
orders that the child
should be removed from X and placed in the care of Y. The Children’s Court
order would prevail:
• A family law court has ordered that no further medical examinations
should be made of a child without the court’s permission.
arrangements, valid under the child welfare law, for a further medical
examination. Despite being inconsistent with the
family law court order, the
medical examination can be carried out, because the child welfare law prevails:
• While proceedings in a family law court are pending, DoCS obtains
Children’s Court orders placing the child in care.
Unless the Minister
consents in writing to the family law court proceedings, the family law court
cannot now make any orders relating
to the child (even by consent of the
parties) except orders that would come into force only when the child leaves
• DoCS intervenes and has a child removed from the mother and placed with
the mother’s sister. Later DoCS identifies
the father as a viable carer,
and with his consent withdraws its Children’s Court proceedings. The
father starts Family Court
proceedings and is granted interim residence. Some
months later, however, by parental agreement, the mother is granted residence
and the child is returned to her. It is open to DoCS to take action under the
Care and Protection Act to remove the child.
• A family law court makes a recovery
in relation to a child.
Then, before the order is acted upon, the child comes under the state child
welfare system. The recovery
order remains in force until the family law court
revokes it; but it cannot have any effect that is inconsistent with the
of the child welfare law: s 69ZK(2). If, for example, the child is
placed in the care of a foster parent under the child welfare
law, the recovery
order cannot be put into effect so as to remove the child from the care of the
foster parent.
• DoCS intervenes in a proceeding in a family law court, and orders are
made that the child should live with X. DoCS later
has reason to believe that
the child is at risk of abuse from X. Even though it is a party to the family
law court proceedings, it
seems that DoCS could use its authority under the
state law to remove the child from X, notwithstanding the family law court
14.26 In practice,
Family Law Act
requires federal
family courts to work cooperatively with child protection agencies and
children’s courts to ensure the proper
coordination of the child
protection efforts of each system, and to avoid unnecessary duplication of
proceedings or inconsistency
in approach.
The appropriate
14.27 Whether contact with a particular person is in a child’s best
interests is a key consideration of both child protection
and family law
systems. By virtue of
, where a child protection order is in place, a
Family Law Act
parenting order cannot be made. The appropriate forum to
determine who is to have contact with a child is a separate but related
Different purposes
14.28 Despite the shared emphasis of the family law and child protection
interaction between
the two systems arise because child welfare and safety are relevant for
different purposes in each jurisdiction.
14.29 Child protection proceedings determine whether, as a matter of fact, a
child is in current need of care or protection, or is
at risk of a need of care
or protection. Such proceedings—which may address the suitability of the
parents to have parental
responsibility for the child—is initiated by a
child protection agency, which will also have continuing responsibility for
follow-up action required.
14.30 Family law courts determine the competing applications of parents for
parental responsibility of a child. Where issues of abuse
or neglect arise, they
are considered as circumstances relevant to determining parental responsibility
and parenting arrangements
in the best interests of the
It is not necessary, for
example, for the court to determine whether a child was neglected by a parent
but only to determine whether
parenting arrangements are in the best interests
of the child in all the circumstances, based on the threshold of
‘unacceptable
14.31 Because federal family courts are not charged with the responsibility
of investigating allegations of child maltreatment, child
protection agencies
generally do not join these proceedings. They may do so, however, where they are
advised of the family law proceedings
and judge the alleged issues of child
maltreatment to be serious enough to warrant intervention, or the case is dealt
with through
the Magellan project—both of which are considered below.
Child protection orders
14.32 State and territory courts may make a range of care and protection
orders, including:
undertakings or recognisances by parents or children, with no
further supervision;
supervision by the department, with or without undertakings;
orders giving parental responsibility and care to other relatives or
appropriate people;
orders giving shared parental responsibility, for different aspects
of the child’s welfare, to the parents and the minister
protection agency; and
orders giving parental responsibility and care to the minister or
department.
14.33 These orders may not be available in all
Orders may be made in
combination so that, for example, a state guardianship order may be made whether
the child remains at home
or is removed from the family.
14.34 It may be necessary for a court exercising jurisdiction under child
protection legislation to determine the extent to which
a child would benefit
from a continuing relationship with one or both parents as part of its overall
determination about whether
the child needs state care and protection. Where
this is the case, courts exercising jurisdiction under child protection
legislation,
to the extent permitted, may make orders in relation to
parent-child contact, or family violence protection orders in favour of the
child or, in some jurisdictions, an adult family member.
14.35 For example,
Children and Young Persons (Care and
Protection) Act 1998
(NSW) currently empowers the Children’s Court to
make both interim and final orders concerning contact in all cases. Amendments
have recently been passed, following a recommendation made in the
the Special Commission of Inquiry into Child Protection Services
by the Hon James Wood AO QC (Wood
to limit this power to
the making of:
interim contact orders; and
final contact orders only where restoration is a realistic
possibility.
orders made by children’s courts can be registered with a federal family
Family Law Act
14.37 Any person who has a concern for the wellbeing of a child can apply for
a parenting order under the
A parenting order made
by a court under
Family Law Act
can stipulate the
content of the parties’ parental responsibilities to a very broad
and typically determines
where the child will live and how much time he or she will spend with each
parent. Although proceedings
may arise from a dispute between parents about the
division of parental responsibility, parenting orders address the welfare of the
child, rather than resolve the rights of the parents. For this reason, the court
is not limited to a consideration of the parties’
submissions.
Section 69J
Family Law Act
provides that each state and
territory court of summary jurisdiction can exercise federal family law
Section 69N
qualifies this in that a court of summary jurisdiction cannot hear defended
proceedings for a parenting order, other than a child
maintenance order, without
the consent of all the parties.
If consent is not given, the court is obliged to transfer the proceedings to the
Family Court, the Family Court of Western Australia,
the Supreme Court of the
Northern Territory, or the FMC, as the case requires.
Expanding jurisdictions
14.39 One question is whether problems caused by the intersection of state
and federal systems concerning child protection can be
overcome by expanding the
in two directions: first, ‘downwards’,
by expanding the
Family Law Act
territory courts; and, secondly, ‘upwards’, by expanding the state
and territory jurisdiction
conferred on federal courts.
14.40 Cross-vesting
. Jurisdiction may only be cross-vested in
the ‘downwards’
Each state and
territory court of summary jurisdiction is vested with jurisdiction under
Family Law Act
other than proceedings for granting leave for
adoption proceedings.
Magistrates are generally able to exercise federal family law jurisdiction under
Family Law Act
, but children’s court magistrates
are not able to do so.
84, the ALRC and HREOC considered that, in principle, there is no procedural
reason for this limitation on the jurisdiction
of state and territory
children’s courts and recommended the vesting of federal jurisdiction
Family Law Act
in children’s
14.41 Giving children’s courts power to hear parenting disputes may
divert the courts’ resources away from their core
business—determining the protection needs of children—to the
detriment of that work. From this practical implication,
it follows that the
conferral of family law jurisdiction on children’s courts ought to be
limited to situations where the child
protection agency has brought the
proceedings, and consents to the court exercising
Family Law Act
14.42 The problem nonetheless remains that cases might be brought in either
suggests that the
family law system routinely handles cases that fall into the child protection
category, many of which cross the
family law, family violence, criminal and
child protection jurisdictions.
As a consequence, the Family Court has developed the cooperative Magellan
project, which is considered below.
14.43 In a report to the Commonwealth Attorney-General in 2002, the Family
Law Council recommended that a decision should be taken
as early as possible
whether a matter should proceed under the
Family Law Act
or under child
welfare law with the consequence that there should be only one court dealing
with the matter.
14.44 Referral of power
. ALRC 84 also considered whether the
Family Court should take over the management of care
That inquiry found that
the jurisdictional divide between federal family law and state care and
protection systems resulted in both
the over- and under-servicing of families
with child protection issues, with many children falling into gaps between the
two systems.
It should be noted,
however, that that Inquiry reported before the High Court’s decision in
, which found that it is not possible to vest state judicial
power in federal courts.
14.45 In 2009, the Family Law Council advice recommended:
The Attorney-General as a member of SCAG address the referral of powers to
federal family courts so that in determining a parenting
application federal
family courts have concurrent jurisdiction with that of State Courts to deal
with all matters in relation to
children including where relevant family
violence, child protection and parenting
14.46 While the states can refer the power to make laws in relation to a
particular subject to the federal Parliament, they cannot
simply confer
could be narrowly drafted to confer
no more legislative competence on the
Commonwealth than is necessary to resolve the problems that require such a
referral of legislative
power. That, in turn, requires clarity about the
problems that need to be resolved by expanding the jurisdiction of the federal
14.47 An alternative to creating a unified federal Family Court is to
amalgamate the Family Court with the various state courts. The
exercise of
federal jurisdiction by the Family Court of Western Australia is an example of
this approach.
Section 36(6)
Family Court Act 1997
provides that where a child, who is the subject of proceedings (between
separating parents or parents and extended family members),
appears to be in
need of protection within the meaning of the
Children and Community
Services Act 2004
(WA), the court has, in relation to the child, all the
powers of the Children’s Court in addition to the powers conferred by
Family Court Act
14.48 The unitary nature of the family law and child protection jurisdictions
in Western Australia has received close attention. The
Commissions understand
that SCAG is considering options for improved cooperation between federal family
courts and state and territory
child protection agencies, and in doing so has
supported a pilot to be conducted by Legal Aid Western Australia to test the
integration
of family law and child protection systems. The Commissions
understand that Western Australia is able to utilise current jurisdictional
arrangements and a single court for family law matters, to implement an
integrated approach towards the management of children’s
circumstances where there are child welfare
Commissions’
14.49 ALRC 84 criticised legal processes which required a child’s
persistent and multiple engagement with the legal system as
being contrary to
the child’s best
It is also at odds
with the goal of seamlessness that the Commissions have identified as a
principal aim of this Inquiry.
The Commissions’ preliminary view is that, wherever possible, matters
involving children should be dealt with in one court—or
as seamlessly as
the legal and support frameworks can achieve in any given case. This was also
the outcome recommended by the Family
Law Council in 2002 as part of its
‘one court principle’—that is, that state and territory courts
should have a
broad power to make residence and contact orders under the
Family Law Act
in child protection proceedings so that one court can deal
with all substantive matters and ensure the child’s best interests
welfare are addressed.
be, for example, that the first court with which a child comes into contact
ought to be the primary court for dealing with
the range of legal issues
affecting that child, provided that it is capable of operating ‘with as
little formality and legal
technicality and form as the circumstances of the
case permit’.
14.50 There are considerable advantages in such an approach, and given
increasing specialisation in family violence and family law
in the magistrates
courts, a question may be whether state and territory courts require or desire
all the powers under
Family Law Act
. In ALRC 84, it
was suggested that magistrates may not have the training, experience or the time
in a busy court list to give proper
consideration to all the family law issues,
particularly the complex issues which relate to the determination of what is in
best interests.
This may not be the case today, given the growing development and commitment to
specialist training, education and the fact that
all courts are now seen as
‘busy’. The Commissions are interested in whether there is value in
providing local and magistrates
courts with expanded jurisdiction under the
Family Law Act
. A practical limitation on the capacity of magistrates
courts to hear
Family Law Act
matters is that they do not have the
associated counselling services or family dispute resolution processes of the
Family Court and
there are limited Family Court counselling services in rural
areas. The Commissions note however, that magistrates courts regularly
interim children’s orders under the
Family Law Act
, particularly in
regional areas.
14.51 Ideally, one court should be responsible for exercising jurisdiction in
relation to those matters where a substantial or permanent
shift of parental
responsibility for a child is first raised as an issue for resolution. The first
point of engagement should facilitate
the resolution of relevant issues as far
as possible, or assist in the smooth transition to other parts of the legal or
framework more suited to achieve such outcomes.
14.52 The power of children’s courts to make contact orders in
proceedings before them appears to complement their care and
Law Council’s ‘one court principle’.
Can children’s courts be given more powers to ensure orders
are made in the best interests of children that deal with parental
issues? If so, what powers should the children’s courts have, and what
resources would be required?
Question 14–2
Law Act 1975
(Cth) be amended to extend the jurisdiction which state and
territory courts already have under
to make orders for a parent to spend
time with a child?
Question 14–3
When should state and territory
children’s courts have power to determine contact between one parent and
another in matters
that are before the court in child protection
proceedings?
Question 14–4
What features of the Family Court of
Western Australia should be replicated in other jurisdictions?
Is there any role for a referral of legislative power to the
Commonwealth in relation to child protection matters? If so, what should
referral cover?
[back to top]
Legal framework for
interaction between the two systems
14.53 Another issue for this Inquiry is the need to ensure that each system
knows about what the other is doing. Matters involving
allegations of child
abuse or neglect often end up being heard simultaneously in family law and child
protection proceedings.
happen if the fact that there are proceedings in a court in one jurisdiction is
not communicated to a court in the other.
14.54 The legal framework for managing the intersection of the child
protection and family law systems includes two main elements:
how the family
courts find out about child maltreatment, and the legislative mechanisms for the
flow of information and documents
between the systems.
Notification of
child maltreatment in Family Courts
14.55 There are two key aspects of notification: disclosure by the parties
and screening by family courts. A consequential question
is what happens with
the information when it is received in a family court. A related, but distinct,
issue is the involvement of
child protection authorities in family court
proceedings.
Notification by parties
Family Law Rules 2004
(Cth) contain a list of forms that
must be filed by a person starting a case under the
All of the forms
dealing with applications for parenting orders ask the initiating party to
disclose if there are any ongoing child
proceedings in another court that
involve children involved in the family court proceedings, or whether there are
any existing orders,
agreements or undertakings about child welfare issues that
relate to children involved in the family court proceedings. In addition,
responding to applications for parenting orders ask the responding party
whether, since the filing of the initiating application,
any proceedings have
been commenced, or orders made, about child welfare issues that relate to
children involved in the proceedings.
Despite these prompts, parties to family
law disputes may not disclose the existence of prior or ongoing child protection
proceedings.
14.57 In their study of jurisdictional overlap in the area of child
protection and the family law system, Fiona Kelly and Dr Belinda
Fehlberg noted
a case in which the Family Court was only made aware of the existence of
proceedings in the Victorian Children’s
Court at a pre-hearing conference,
resulting in ‘duplication, uncertainty and confusion for the
participants’.
14.58 The Initiating Application for proceedings in the Family Court, FMC and
Family Court of Western Australia requests information
orders, agreements, parenting plans or undertakings’ to this or any other
court about ‘family
law, child support, family violence or child welfare
issues’ concerning any of the parties or children listed in the
application.
The purpose of the
form is to capture information about procedural, interim or final orders from a
federal family court.
is to ensure that the court is aware of the context in which orders are
sought—for example, whether the party (and
the party’s child) is
already involved in parallel child protection proceedings, or whether an order
is in current effect under
a state or territory child welfare law. Contextual
awareness enables the court to determine whether to proceed with, adjourn or
the proceeding.
14.59 A related document is Form 4—Notice of Child Abuse or Family
Violence (Form 4). As noted on the form, it is to be used:
a) when allegations of child abuse or risk of child abuse are made and a
prescribed child welfare authority must be notified of
the allegations
Family Law Act 1975
b) if, in a case where an application is made to the court for a
in relation to a child, a person alleges that there has been abuse of a child or
family violence or there is a risk of abuse
of a child or family violence and
the allegation of abuse, family violence or risk of abuse or family violence is
relevant to whether
the court should grant or refuse the application
(Rule 2.04A
Family Law Rules
14.60 Section 60K of the
Family Law Act
establishes Form 4
as the principal means of triggering procedural obligations on family courts to
accommodate allegations of family
violence and child
In Part F, the applicant
is directed to provide details of, amongst other things, ‘child
abuse’, and the definition in
is set out:
Abuse, in relation to a child, means:
(a) an assault, including a sexual assault, of the child which is an offence
under a law, written or unwritten, in force in the
State or Territory in which
the act constituting the assault occurs; or
(b) a person involving the child in a sexual activity with that person or
another person in which the child is used, directly or
indirectly, as a sexual
object by the first-mentioned person or the other person, and where there is
unequal power in the relationship
between the child and the first-mentioned
14.61 There is no current requirement that parties in proceedings under the
Family Law Act
disclose whether state or territory child protection
agencies have been in contact with the children in the proceedings. This
information
could indicate to the federal family court that the relevant agency
has, or may, commence child protection proceedings.
14.62 Part G of the Form 4 concerns ‘family violence’. Chapter 8
notes that there is no designated space on the form for
a party to list any
relevant protection orders which have been obtained, or an obligation to do
14.63 The Family Law Council considered that Form 4 should remain the key
means of notification of child abuse issues in family law
proceedings. The
Council recommended with some amendments to Form 4 to make it more
user-friendly.
In addition, the
Council recommended that:
The Attorney-General propose an amendment to the [
Family Law Act
place a positive obligation on the parties to inform the court about any
relevant orders or arrangements in place under child
14.64 Kelly and Fehlberg argue, however, that the notification of involvement
in other jurisdictions should not be left to the parties—parties
to disclose through ignorance, neglect or malice. Instead, there should be
greater communication between the relevant courts
and child protection
14.65 Chisholm also considered the process for identifying family violence
and child abuse matters, and, rather than simply amending
the forms, preferred a
general screening of cases for family violence and child abuse issues:
Experience has shown that this system is not working. This Report suggests that
because of this, and because issues of family violence
and other risk factors
are so common in parenting cases brought to the courts, it would be better to
have a system of risk identification
and assessment that applies to all
parenting cases. This approach would reflect the best available thinking about
these issues, and
would reinforce a lot of measures that are already being taken
by the courts to identify and deal with issues of violence as early
Commissions’ views
14.66 Forms
. A federal family court should not make parenting
orders without knowing whether there are child protection proceedings on foot or
care orders have been made with respect to the child. Federal family courts
should make the forms clear and straightforward for parties
to complete. It is
in the interests of the courts to know from an early stage whether parenting
proceedings ought to be adjourned
or terminated. Any reform which improves
disclosure of multiple proceedings independently of the parties—who should
obliged to disclose in the forms—would be a constructive
development.
Initiating Application (Family Law)
provides an early
opportunity for the parties to family law proceedings to inform the court of the
issues relevant to the proceeding.
However, as the Chisholm Review identified,
the parties have tended not to report child maltreatment and protection issues
family courts.
14.68 In preliminary consultations the Commissions have heard that the
Initiating Application (Family Law)
could be improved to make it clearer
to parties that the court needs to know, and they have a duty to disclose,
whether there are
child protection proceedings on foot, and whether there is a
current care order in relation to the child. It has been suggested that
reference to ‘child welfare issues’ in Part F of the
Application (Family Law)
is too opaque, and may lead parties to overlook the
function of the form in eliciting information about state or territory child
proceedings and orders.
14.69 A question which targets significant concerns or fears the party has
for their safety, or for the safety of their child, may
elicit more detailed
information. The purpose of a question with this focus is twofold. First, it
would clearly signal to the court
the possibility that there are current child
protection or family violence concerns in the proceeding which require
investigation
and assessment. Secondly, the focus on ‘significant
concerns’ raises the bar to approximate state and territory child
protection thresholds, so that if an affirmative answer were given, the court
has a prima facie trigger at an early stage to inform
the relevant child
protection agency in relation to child safety concerns, and a longer lead time
to enable the concerns to be investigated.
This would also facilitate
appropriate intervention in the proceedings by the state.
14.70 Part F of the
Initiating Application
(Family Law)
should be drafted to encourage parties to identify whether
there are or have been child protection concerns as early as possible in
proceedings. To that end, it may assist parties to be presented with a question
which focuses on their safety or their child’s
safety or wellbeing, rather
than upon the notion of ‘child abuse’ which is the current focus of
Form 4. The Commissions
are interested in hearing about the practical changes
that could be made to the
Initiating Application (Family Law)
clearer that parties are required to disclose current or prior child protection
proceedings and current child protection
orders. Further, the Commissions seek
suggestions as to other ways that child safety concerns may be revealed at the
commencement
of proceedings under the
Family Law Act
so that they may be
drawn to the attention of child protection agencies.
Proposal 14–1
To ensure appropriate disclosure of safety
concerns for children, the
Initiating Application (Family Law)
should be amended by adding an additional part headed ‘Concerns about
safety’ which should include a question along
the lines of ‘Do you
have any significant fears for the safety of you or your child(ren) that the
court should know about?’.
What other practical changes to the applications forms for
initiating proceedings in federal family courts and the Family Court of
Australia would make it clear to parties that they are required to disclose
current or prior child protection proceedings
and current child protection
Question 14–7
In what other ways can family law
processes be improved to ensure that any child safety concerns that may need to
be drawn to the
attention of child protection agencies are highlighted
appropriately upon commencement of proceedings under the
Family Law Act 1975
14.71 Risk assessment
. The Commissions understand that the
Australian Government is currently considering options for implementing a family
violence screening
Screening frameworks are routinely used by family dispute resolution
practitioners and by other agencies in the family law
Multiple screening
processes may be burdensome for parties, which raises a general question of
where and when screening should take
place and how courts and other agencies can
respond appropriately to screening carried out by another agency.
14.72 The Commissions’ preliminary view is that state and territory
child protection agencies should contribute to any screening
framework for
family violence and child maltreatment. Early and active involvement by child
protection agencies provides an opportunity
for participants in both systems to
better understand their respective roles and
responsibilities.
14.73 This may best occur if a representative of the child protection agency
is actively involved in the screening process. A direct
role means that the
child protection system would have an immediate stake in dealing with the case.
The common family violence risk
assessment and risk management tool developed by
the Victorian Government may provide useful guidance for this
Proposal 14–2
Screening and risk assessment frameworks developed
for federal family courts should closely involve state and territory child
Information
14.74 Communicating information about child maltreatment between the family
law system and the relevant child protection system may
be required by statute
or occur through administrative arrangement. Statutory mechanisms for
communication are considered first,
followed by the administrative arrangements
between the systems that facilitate the communication.
Information from the family law system to
child protection system
Family Law Act
contains two provisions obliging family
courts to notify child protection agencies in certain circumstances. First, if a
Form 4, discussed
filed, the Registry Manager of the court must ‘as soon as practicable,
notify a prescribed child welfare
authority’.
where an officer or professional in a family court
has reasonable grounds for suspecting that a child has been abused, or is at
risk of being abused, the person must, as soon as practicable,
prescribed child welfare authority of his or her suspicion and the basis for the
14.76 Another provision provides that a person may notify child protection
agencies where the person
has reasonable grounds for suspecting that a child:
(a) has been ill treated, or is at risk of being ill treated; or
(b) has been exposed, or subjected, or is at risk of being exposed or subjected,
to behaviour which psychologically harms the
14.77 Chisholm has suggested that, while notifications by the court are
mandatory under
, the effect of the notice has less weight than
notifications by professionals under
Family Law Act
comes to a child protection agency deciding whether to investigate an
allegation.
14.78 The threshold for taking action and the particular focus of the
relevant jurisdiction determines the child protection agency’s
As noted above, in child protection proceedings the focus is on determining
whether, as a matter of fact, the child is
in current need of care, at risk, or
in need of protection. The difference in focus was commented upon in the Wood
Inquiry in the
context of explaining why allegations of child abuse in family
law proceedings do not always trigger investigation by a child protection
While evidence of a
parent’s past abusive behaviour may be relevant in family law proceedings,
that evidence does not necessarily
assist the child protection agency in
determining whether the child is currently at risk of harm:
The Inquiry understands and accepts that notifications arising out of family law
disputes are generally reports of concern about
the safety of a child in a
family setting, and that this does not necessarily mean that DoCS needs to
investigate each notification
in order to fulfil its statutory function. There
are a number of very valid reasons why DoCS may not investigate a notification
from a family law court. First, the report may not be sufficiently
serious to justify its intervention. The question in family law
proceedings is
usually about the competing claims of each parent in relation to where the child
will live and with whom they will
spend time. These are not the same questions
that arise in child protection proceedings.
Secondly, the information provided by the notifier may not disclose sufficient
reason to believe the child is at risk of the abuse
alleged. While the notifier
may have a belief to that effect, the evidence to support that belief may be
insufficient.
Thirdly, the reported concern may relate to events some time in the past or the
child may currently be in a situation where he or
she is no longer exposed to
the risk disclosed in the report. The Care Act, at least in relation to its
reporting requirements, includes
the standard of ‘current concerns.’
Thus historic matters, while relevant to family law proceedings, are not
to attract the intervention of the child protection system. ...
In addition, the
Family Law Act
requires the reporting of many incidents
which are not reportable under the Care Act. Under the
Family Law Act
the threshold for making a notification is that the child to whom the
proceedings relate has been abused or is at risk of being
abused. As indicated
above, it does not require there to be any current concerns about the safety and
welfare of the child, as is
provided in the Care Act.
Of particular note is the fact that, in the event that the parents have
separated and the child can be protected adequately through
orders made in
family court proceedings, which deny or restrict contact between the offending
parent and the child, there will be
no need for DoCS to intervene. In other
words, if there is a viable carer and the child is in his or her care, then the
not be in need of intervention under the Care
Information from the child protection system
to the family law system
14.79 How do family courts obtain evidence about child protection issues
apart from notification by the parties or screening? In child
protection cases,
the child protection agency initiates proceedings by taking protective action in
a court. The responsibility for
obtaining evidence falls to the child protection
agency. In family law proceedings, in the absence of intervention from a child
agency—considered below—the court may not have relevant
evidence relating to the alleged maltreatment of a child. The
Family Law Act
includes mechanisms for seeking such information from child protection
authorities in the relevant jurisdiction—by subpoena
and a power to seek
information and documents from child protection agencies.
14.80 Subpoenas may be issued under
Family Law Rules
The power of a federal family court to compel production of documents from a
child protection agency under a subpoena was examined
by the High Court in
Northern Territory of Australia v
The specific issue was
whether under the former
Family Law Rules 1984
(Cth) O 28 r 1
the court may compel production of documents which are the subject of a
‘public interest’ privilege under
s 97(3) of the
Welfare Act
14.81 A majority of the court held that the subpoena issued by the Family
Court in relation to the best interests of the child could
not defeat state and
territory confidentiality provisions because the best interests principle under
Family Law Act
only applies when the evidence is complete and a
decision is to be made.
power to compel production under a subpoena arises as a question ‘anterior
to any question of the admissibility of
Orders to produce documents or information
Section 69ZW
Family Law Act
provides that the court may
make an order in child-related proceedings requiring a prescribed state or
territory agency to provide
the court with the documents or information
specified. These must be documents recording, or information about, one or more
(a) any notifications to the agency of suspected abuse of a child to whom the
proceedings relate or of suspected family violence
affecting the child;
(b) any assessments by the agency of investigations into a notification of that
kind or the findings or outcomes of those investigations;
(c) any reports commissioned by the agency in the course of investigating a
notification.
14.83 An order under
overrides any inconsistent state and territory
but the agency does not
have to comply with the order in relation to:
(a) documents or information not in the possession or control of the agency;
(b) documents or information that include the identity of the person who made a
notification.
14.84 Once information is provided in response to the order, the court must
admit into evidence any such information on which it intends
There is qualified
protection for the identity of the person who made the notification—if the
person does not consent, the
court can only disclose their identity if satisfied
that it ‘is critically important to the proceedings and that failure to
make disclosure would prejudice the proper administration of
14.85 Each state and territory child protection law contains provisions for
protecting the confidentiality of information collected
by child protection
agencies or for precluding such information from being admissible in another
proceeding.
Commissions’ views
14.86 The Commissions have heard that state and territory child protection
agencies provide very little information voluntarily to
family courts. They also
frequently challenge subpoenas issued by federal family courts. The Commissions
understand from preliminary
consultations that a number of child protection
agencies regard the decision in
Northern Territory of Australia v
as supporting a view that they cannot be compelled to answer subpoenas
from a federal family court. This view, which also apparently
affects the
attitude of some jurisdictions to the exercise of the court’s power under
Family Law Act
—even to the extent of suggesting that
the power is
unconstitutional
constitute a serious systemic problem because of the number of state and
territory laws which may impact upon the sharing
of child protection information
between jurisdictions.
In what ways can cooperation between child protection agencies
and family courts be improved with respect to compliance with subpoenas
Family Law Act 1975
Child protection interventions in family law
proceedings
14.87 A child protection agency may be involved in family law proceedings in
three principal ways: a relevant agency may intervene
as a party; parental
responsibility may be conferred on the child protection agency; and child
protection orders may be registered
Family Law Act
addition, a child protection agency may be involved through the Magellan
project, which is considered below.
Securing intervention
Family Law Act
contains provisions concerning intervention
in proceedings.
sets out the general rule that, apart from
proceedings for divorce or validity of marriage, ‘any person may apply for
to intervene’.
Sections 91B
specifically address intervention where child maltreatment
concerns arise.
14.89 By virtue of
, a prescribed welfare authority is entitled to
intervene in proceedings where it is alleged that a child has been abused or is
risk of being abused.
Section 91B
enables a family court to request
intervention by a child protection officer in a matter involving a child’s
welfare. An officer
who agrees to intervene is deemed to be a party to the
proceedings. An officer may also decline to
14.90 The combined effect of these provisions is that a child protection
agency is entitled to intervene—where child abuse,
or a risk of it, is
alleged; may request to intervene; or be requested to intervene. In all cases,
once a child protection agency
intervenes, it is, ‘unless the court
otherwise orders, to be taken to be a party to the proceedings with all the
rights, duties
and liabilities of a
This includes
liability for costs orders—a disincentive for child protection
14.91 The matter of securing intervention in such cases has attracted
considerable comment.
for intervention are regularly declined. For example, when told Families South
Australia ‘respectfully’ declined
the court’s request to
intervene in
Denny & Purdy
, Burr J commented that:
That is not a new experience for the court. I can’t remember the last time
the department ever did intervene. However I can
only request and you always say
14.92 Burr J compared the request under
with other powers, such as that
there are a number of ways we can approach it. The first is we try the softly,
softly approach of a request under 91B. We know what
the answer is always going
to be, regrettably. ...
I acknowledge that the standard 91B request made at the beginning of all these
Magellan proceedings
perhaps inappropriate and we ought to abandon doing that; but it was I thought
also on the understanding that if I then subsequently
made a 91B request, the
department would understand I meant it and that it was serious and it needed to
be considered more than just
the reflex response of, ‘We don’t want
to get involved’. Now, the other thing I can do of course, I’ve got
section 69ZW
power to order various reports if I want to. I can subpoena you
to come along and give evidence irrespective of whether or not you’re
intervening. You would then be a witness, of course, not a party.
I’d much prefer the cooperative approach that we’ve been able to
establish over the last four or five years through the
Magellan project. That
certainly could evidence itself in a number of forms. It could be a conference
with the independent children’s
lawyer and indeed with the parties. You
could, I think, have perhaps a family case conference in the matter to try and
see your way
clear, because there are some complex issues here.
14.93 A child protection agency may decline to intervene in family law
proceedings for a range of reasons. The Wood Inquiry identified
four reasons why
child protection agencies may decide not to intervene in family law
proceedings:
the evidence may not justify intervention;
the evidence relates to past or future, rather than current
the threshold for notifications of abuse under care and protection
legislation are higher than the
Family Law Act
a party in proceedings for a parenting order under the
may be deemed by a child protection agency to have taken sufficient
protective action in relation to a
14.94 Child protection agencies may also be dissuaded from
taking protective action in a federal family court because, as parties,
become liable to costs
Commissions’ views
14.95 The best outcome for a child at significant risk of harm is for: the
judge to be made aware of any concerns at an early stage;
the relevant state or
territory child protection agency to be informed of the concern and take timely
investigative action; and the
relevant state or territory child protection
agency to seek care orders if need be.
14.96 The worst outcome for the child is where protective action is not taken
when required. This may arise where, for example, a
judicial officer under the
Family Law Act
determines on the evidence that there are safety concerns
in relation to the child, that neither parent is a viable carer, and where
child protection agency, having been previously notified of the safety concern,
decides not to intervene in the parenting proceedings.
In that instance, the
judge may determine that it is not in the child’s best interests to make a
parenting order in favour
of either parent, but the problem of who should have
parental responsibility for that child remains. That was the position Benjamin
Ray v Males
, considered below.
14.97 In practical terms, the courts can only draw the safety needs of the
child to the attention of the child protection agency.
As has been discussed
above, it can do this under
Family Law Act
where a Form 4
has been filed. The concerns expressed by Burr J in
suggest that the court’s powers to subpoena documents under the
Family Law Rules
and require the production of documents and
information by the child protection agency under s 69ZW, and to request that a
protection agency intervene in the proceedings under s 91B, are not
working well.
14.98 Arguably the powers federal family courts have to encourage or initiate
‘cooperation’ from child protection agencies
should be exercised
with some temperance. Stakeholders have suggested that a circuit-breaker option
should be explored. The Commissions
consider that formalising the process by
which the court can invite the relevant agency or Minister to consent to a
parenting order
being made in the agency’s favour, may be one way to
encourage engagement by child protection agencies.
14.99 Another option may be to empower family courts to join parties to
parenting proceedings where the parents are found not to be
viable carers for a
such as other people
or agencies.
14.100 The Commissions’ preliminary view is that the Australian
Government should encourage the development of protocols and
MOUs between
federal family courts and child protection agencies that deal with the following
the election by a child protection agency to commence proceedings in
a federal family court or a state or territory court;
a process for dealing consistently with making and responding to
orders for s 69ZW reports from child protection agencies;
subpoenas addressed to child protection agencies; and
a process which would permit a court to invite a child protection
agency to consent to an order being made which allocates parental
responsibility
in its favour, in circumstances where the court determines that no order should
be made in favour of either parent,
or grandparent, in the absence of being
required to become a party.
Conferring parental responsibility
on a child protection agency
14.101 What happens if the child protection agency declines to intervene? The
judicial officer may consider that neither parent should
have parental
responsibility for the child or children. Can a family court confer parental
responsibility on the relevant child welfare
authority, in the absence of
intervention in the proceedings? These questions arose in
in which it was
alleged that neither parent was being protective of the child and that both
parents’ households presented a
risk to the child. Benjamin J issued a
request for intervention under s 91B, but this was declined.
14.102 Benjamin J held that parental responsibility should vest in the child
welfare agency, notwithstanding that it had declined
to intervene and be joined
as a party.
However, in the present case, the welfare jurisdiction of the Court is not being
relied upon to contravene any such scheme, rather
it is being used to enforce
the existing statutory obligation placed upon the Secretary to provide care and
protection for children
who are at risk as set out in the
Children, Young
Persons and Their Families Act 1997
... If none of the present parties are
found to be able to be responsible for the children or one of them, it could not
be the case
that this Court would simply wash its hands of a child in the hope
that the Secretary would change his view and commence proceedings
State Welfare laws. It must be that when all else fails courts exercising
responsibility in a delegate of a
State Government to make that officer responsible for the child.
I do not accept that it is for the Secretary alone to determine which children
need protection. There must exist powers for either
courts exercising
responsible for children in the
absence of responsible
14.103 Benjamin J determined that the Family Court had jurisdiction to make
an order vesting parental responsibility for the child
in the child protection
This welfare jurisdiction is in addition to any other jurisdiction that the
Court has under Pt
in relation to children. It confers upon the Court the
equivalent of the
parens patriae
powers of the Supreme Courts.
It also gives the Family Court, exercising its welfare
to protect the welfare of a child. The High Court in
case] considered the scope of this power and held:
While there are limits on the Family Court’s welfare jurisdiction, the
scope of the jurisdiction is nevertheless very wide.
So long as an order of the
Family Court is constitutional there can be no limitation on the Court’s
powers emanating from the
need to preserve the scope of the State legislative
14.104 This decision is currently being appealed.
14.105 In the absence of clear cooperative arrangements between state and
territory child protection agencies and family courts, akin
to those developed
as part of the Magellan
—considered
below—the power of a family court to compel cooperation and information
from state and territory agencies
is limited. The limitations are illustrated by
the research of Fehlberg and Kelly which found that of the 62 cases tracked in
Family Court where the Victorian Department of Human Services encouraged a
carer to initiate family law proceedings, the Department
appeared in only six
cases, three times appearing
amicus curiae
. In the remaining 56 cases,
the Department played no formal role in the Family Court
proceedings.
This would not
necessarily matter if comprehensive information were made available to courts
exercising jurisdiction under the
Family Law Act
. However, it
appears to be the case that little or no information is provided.
14.106 Where a child protection agency is a party to family law proceedings,
an issue arises as to how a family court should evaluate
whether the agency
should have parental responsibility. In
Tran v Ferguson—
federal family court made parenting orders in favour of a child protection
agency, having determined that neither parent was
a viable carer for the
child—Rose J considered that he was required to apply
Family Law Act
in determining the child’s best interests:
The Intervenor’s policy is not to identify and assess potential long-term
carers for a child until such time as a final parenting
Order is made. There are
practical considerations that have driven that policy which I completely
understand. They include applying
resources to identify such a carer, creating
the possibility of that carer having the child live with him or her, a potential
then no longer being available to be considered for the care of another
child, against the possibility that ultimately an order as
sought by the
Intervenor may not be made.
It seems to me that such a policy, whilst understandable, is really tailored by
bearing in mind the proceedings that are otherwise
instituted and determined in
accordance with state legislation which does not have the considerations which
the Act requires to be
undertaken pursuant to Pt.VII. As I pointed out to
counsel for the Intervenor at the commencement of the trial, I am required, in
effect, to make findings of fact in relation to a range of matters which
underpin both the primary and additional considerations,
the subject of s 60CC,
for the purpose of ultimately making a parenting order which is in the best
interests of the child being the
paramount consideration. Those considerations
in s 60CC lie at the heart of arriving at that ultimate conclusion in accordance
s 60CA. There are obvious difficulties in following that approach which I
am required to follow, when none of the relevant findings
of fact can be made in
respect of unknown potential long-term carers who cannot as yet even be
identified.
Commissions’ views
14.107 The difficulties faced by federal family courts in obtaining
sufficient information from state and territory agencies to inform
decision making is a matter of concern. For example, a response from an agency
indicating that the matter was investigated
and found not to be substantiated
does at least provide some evaluation of the allegation, even if there is little
detail. A response
which states that no further action was required is filled
with ambiguity, for it may indicate nothing more than a conclusion that
matter could be resolved by orders made under the
Family Law Act
favour of a viable carer. To appropriately take into account child protection
concerns in making decisions about the allocation
of parental responsibility for
children, family courts require all relevant information. The family courts do
not have an investigative
arm and must rely on the information provided by the
parties and any information obtained from child protection agencies.
14.108 The Commissions seek submissions about the role that child protection
agencies should play in family law proceedings and, in
particular, whether
family courts should have additional powers to require their intervention. The
Commissions are also interested
to hear whether any amendments are necessary to
Family Law Act
in consequence—for example, whether the Act
should provide that a family court may, upon finding that none of the parties to
the proceedings is a viable carer, on its own motion join a child protection
agency or some other person (such as a grandparent)
as a party to
proceedings.
What role should child protection agencies play in family law
proceedings?
Question 14–10
Are amendments to the
(Cth) and state and territory child protection legislation required
to encourage prompt and effective intervention by child protection
agencies in
family law proceedings? For example, should the
Family Law Act
to provide that the court may, upon finding that none of the parties to the
proceedings is a viable carer, on its own
motion join a child protection agency
or some other person (for example, a grandparent) as a party to proceedings?
Should federal
family courts have additional powers to ensure that intervention
by the child protection system occurs when necessary in the interests
safety of children?
Enforcement of child protection orders in
family law courts
14.109 One mechanism for bridging the gap between the child protection and
family law systems is
Family Law Act
which enables the
registration of ‘State child orders’—orders dealing with
matters concerning residence and
Section 70D
a similar mechanism for the registration of a child order made in another state.
A registered order ‘has the same
force and effect as if it were an order
made by that court’—that is, as if it were a family court
The operation of this
provision with respect to orders of the NSW Children’s Court has been
described as follows:
if a New South Wales Children’s Court made an order that a child live with
X, that order could be registered in the Family
Court of Australia or the
Federal Magistrates Court, in New South Wales or elsewhere, and then enforced as
if it were an order of
that court. The same applies to an order that a child
should spend time with X (orders of the kind formerly referred to in the
Family Law Act
as ‘contact’ or ‘access’
14.110 To register a relevant child protection order, a sealed copy of the
order is filed in a family court
The effect of the
registration is to invoke the enforcement mechanisms of the
Chisholm considered
the operation of the registration provision and suggested that ‘there
would be no difficulty in [a child
protection agency] making application for any
of these various forms of enforcement of a Children’s Court order
in a family law
14.111 With regard to s 67ZK of the
Family Law Act
, Chisholm suggests
that, even where a child protection order is registered, family courts may make
orders in relation to children
in the care of child protection authorities only
if the state child welfare officer has given written consent to the institution
or continuation of the proceedings. This raises a practical difficulty in the
interaction of the provisions with respect to NSW:
Such written consent could, of course, be given as part of the documentation of
the application [for the registration of the order].
The only difficulty here
derives from the absence of delegated power to give
Commissions’ views
14.112 The Commissions are interested in hearing whether the registration of
relevant children’s court orders is a useful strategy
that enhances the
safety of children, and the circumstances in which child protection agencies
would consider its use.
14.113 As the giving of consent by a child welfare officer requires specific
written authority,
is no delegated power then the consent required by s 67ZK may not effectively be
given with the registration. The Commissions
are interested in hearing how the
interaction of these provisions operates in practice.
What are the advantages of registration of state and territory
child protection orders under
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth)? What are the interactions in practice of the registration provisions
and s 67ZK of the
What the family courts can do with
information about child maltreatment
14.114 Where a family court receives information about child maltreatment it
can only prevent contact between the person responsible
for maltreating the
child and the child.
14.115 The assessment of child maltreatment in parenting proceedings in
family courts does not necessarily raise any questions of
interaction with child
protection laws. The approach taken in such cases does, however, illustrate the
different focus of the systems
in relation to assessing the best interests of
children which can, in turn, lead to the possibility of children falling into
between the two systems. The approach of the family courts is considered
first, followed by a consideration of the problem of safety
concerns not being
dealt with by either system.
14.116 The protection of children from abuse, neglect or family violence is a
primary consideration in determining what is in the
child’s best interests
in the context of making parenting
The test for
assessing the protection needs of a child was considered by the High Court in
, a case on child sexual
It remains ‘the
most authoritative statement of the
14.117 In this case the mother had custody of her daughter and the father had
The mother sought to
have the access suspended or discharged on the grounds that the father had
sexually abused his daughter and
that her welfare would be put at further risk
if the father’s access to the child continued. The father denied that
sexual abuse. Although the medical examination was inconclusive, a
clinical psychologist and a police officer gave opinions suggesting
been abuse. The trial judge was neither satisfied that the father had, or had
not, abused his child. As the judge considered
that there was a possibility of
abuse, it was in the interests of the child that the risk should be eliminated
by denying the father
access—even if
supervised.
The majority of
the Full Court dismissed the father’s appeal; and the High Court
unanimously agreed.
14.118 The father argued that the court had to determine first, on the
balance of probabilities, whether the father had abused the
child; and,
secondly, whether there was a risk of sexual abuse occurring, if parenting
orders were made in favour of the
The High Court
rejected this argument:
The basic flaw in the [father’s] argument is to identify the allegation of
sexual abuse as the paramount issue for determination
by the court. ... [The]
ultimate and paramount issue to be decided in proceedings for custody of, or
access to, a child is whether
the making of the order sought is in the interests
of the welfare of the child. The fact that the proceedings involve an allegation
that the child has been sexually abused by the parent who seeks custody or
access does not alter the paramount and ultimate issue
which the court has to
determine, though the court’s findings on the disputed allegation of
sexual abuse will naturally have
an important, perhaps a decisive, impact on the
resolution of that issue.
14.119 The court distinguished the nature of the task in the federal family
court from that in criminal proceedings:
[I]t is a mistake to think that the Family Court is under the same duty to
resolve in a definitive way the disputed allegation of
sexual abuse as a court
exercising criminal jurisdiction would be if it were trying the party for a
criminal offence. Proceedings
for custody or access are not disputes
in the ordinary sense of that expression. ... The court is concerned
to make such an order for custody or access which will in the
opinion of the
court best promote and protect the interests of the child. In deciding what
order it should make the court will give
very great weight to the importance of
maintaining parental ties, not so much because parents have a right to custody
but because it is prima face in a child’s interests to maintain
the filial relationship with both parents.
Viewed in this setting, the resolution of an allegation of sexual abuse against
a parent is subservient and ancillary to the court’s
determination of what
is in the best interests of the
14.120 A central issue was whether it was necessary to find that a person had
sexually abused the child. The court stated:
No doubt there will be some cases in which the court is able to come to a
positive finding that the allegation is well founded ...
there will be cases
also in which the court has no hesitation in rejecting the allegation as
groundless. Again, in the nature of
things there will be very many cases, such
as the present case, in which the court cannot confidently make a finding that
abuse has taken place. And there are strong practical family reasons why
the court should refrain from making a positive finding
that sexual abuse has
actually taken place unless it is impelled by the particular circumstances of
the case to do so.
14.121 The High Court proceeded to lay down the test for assessing the risk
to the child in evaluating the child’s best interests,
in terms of
‘unacceptable risk’:
In resolving the wider issue the court must determine whether on the evidence
there is risk of sexual abuse occurring if custody
or access be granted and
assess the magnitude of that risk. After all, in deciding what is in the best
interests of a child, the
Family Court is frequently called upon to assess and
evaluate the likelihood or possibility of events or occurrences which, if they
come about, will have a detrimental impact on the child’s welfare. The
existence and magnitude of the risk of sexual abuse,
as with other risks of harm
to the welfare of a child, is a fundamental matter to be taken into account in
deciding issues of custody
14.122 Having referred to earlier attempts to formulate an appropriate test,
the court concluded that:
In devising these tests the courts have endeavoured, in their efforts to protect
the child’s paramount interests, to achieve
a balance between the risk of
detriment to the child from sexual abuse and the possibility of benefit to the
child from parental
access. To achieve a proper balance, the test is best
expressed by saying that a court will not grant custody or access to a parent
that custody or access would expose the child to an unacceptable risk of sexual
14.123 The decision has been the subject of subsequent judicial consideration
and academic comment.
example, in 1999 Professor Patrick Parkinson argued that while the High Court in
discouraged trial judges from making findings of fact in relation
to the abuse itself, the judge’s decision must nonetheless
be based upon
findings of fact in relation to matters that, cumulatively, justify a conclusion
of unacceptable risk.
14.124 Chisholm analysed the decision and its subsequent impact in family
court decisions, particularly in the light of changes to
in the meantime,
and concluded:
Assessing whether to make orders for children to spend time with a person in
cases involving allegations of abuse by that person
remains, of course, an
agonising matter. It is arguable that the authorities and the legislation itself
give more emphasis than previously
to the value of involvement by both parents,
and would thus tend towards orders favouring children spending time with the
other parent,
supervised if necessary. However there is no reason to think that
the need to protect children is any less than it ever was ... Ultimately
court must try to work out what is in the best interests of the particular
child, and the need to have regard to the child’s
safety gets as much
emphasis in the Act as the importance of continuing parental involvement. In
cases where the child believes that
he or she has been abused, I hope that
careful consideration will be given to the child’s understanding of the
situation, and
emotional well-being, in circumstances where the child is
required to spend time, supervised or not, with the person the child believes
her abuser.
14.125 The discussion above illustrates the manner in which allegations of
child abuse may arise within the context of family law
proceedings and that
there may never be an investigation of such allegations leading to any child
protection or criminal consequences.
The focus of the investigation, and the
relevance of the various pieces of information is different in criminal justice,
child protection,
family violence protection and family law contexts. While the
criminal justice response is focused on incidents—past
occurrences—the
family law and family violence protection response is
based on the relationship and the assessment of risk for the future and on
increasing understanding of the nature and dynamics of risk in family violence
and sexual assault.
14.126 In an evaluation of the case management model for serious child abuse
cases known as the ‘Magellan project’, considered
below, Dr Daryl
Higgins of the Australian Institute of Family Studies pointed out that:
The only agency with responsibility for working out whether past abuse has
happened is the criminal courts, based on evidence from
police/forensic
interviewers. It is not the Family Court’s, nor the statutory child
protection department’s statutory
role. The former is responsible for
overall determining children’s best interests, and the latter has a narrow
remit of intervening
to ensure the protection of children from harm.
The fact that evidence for abuse
may not be strong enough for the Director of Public Prosecutions to lay charges,
or for the child
protection department to substantiate (or even if evidence of
past abuse is strong, the presence of a protective parent may prevent
department from substantiating risk of harm) does not mean abuse did not occur.
Given the High Court’s finding in
, even the focus of the
Family Court’s decisions is not about determining whether past abuse
actually happened, but about whether
there is a risk to the child in the future,
which may therefore make a particular parenting arrangement not to be in the
best interests
of the child.
In this context, the Family Court should not be seen as a forum for
investigating abuse allegations or determining the historical
accuracy of one or
both parents’ allegations. It is not within their mandate to do so, even
within the Magellan case-management
model. However, the limitations of the
broader child welfare and justice system are that unless good information from
those who have
conducted forensic interviews is presented to the Family Court
(ie, via the ‘Magellan Report’)—about not only the
allegations, but their views on the safety of the child (a) in the current
arrangements; and (b) if there was any alteration
arrangement—decisions will be made about the child’s living
arrangement that do not fully account for all of the
risks and what is in their
best interests.
14.127 The Family Law Council considered the family courts’ inability
to investigate allegations of abuse in 2002. The Council
recommended that the
federal government should establish a ‘Child Protection Service’,
the objectives of which would
1. To investigate child protection concerns and provide information arising from
such investigation to courts exercising jurisdiction
2. To ensure, in the course of its work, that children and families are not
subjected to unnecessary investigation, assessment or
3. To avoid unnecessary duplication of resources and effort in the investigation
and determination of matters involving both family
law and child welfare law
4. To promote the development of a co-operative approach between State and
Federal agencies in responding to concerns about child
14.128 The recommendation would have provided a dedicated risk assessment and
investigative resource for federal family courts, as
an alternative to, and in
the absence of, information from state and territory child protection agencies.
This recommendation was
not adopted.
14.129 Other strategies for dealing with allegations of serious abuse have
been developed, in particular through case management,
such as the Magellan
project, considered below. In the absence of such strategies, and given the
different focus of family law and
family violence protection proceedings, child
protection proceedings and criminal proceedings, there is a danger that concerns
a child’s safety may fall into gaps between the systems.
Falling into gaps
between the systems
14.130 Research by Higgins and Dr Rae Kaspiew has shown that responses to
child abuse and maltreatment in the family law system involve
interaction between various
14.131 Despite the differences between family law and child protection
systems, they share positive obligations to consider the child’s
However, the emphasis given to the child’s welfare at a given point in
time—whether as a protection issue or
an issue of parental
responsibility—is largely a function of which court is engaged and when.
14.132 When the child protection system is initially engaged, there may be no
orders made by courts in either
If parenting
orders under the
Family Law Act
are made first, those orders
have legal effect subject to the overriding effect of any order under child
protection legislation.
If allegations of child abuse are made in the family law
proceeding, the relevant child protection agency must be notified of this
court so it can then decide whether to intervene in the family law proceeding
and seek appropriate orders with respect to
parental responsibility in that
court. The child protection agency could alternatively commence child protection
proceedings in the
children’s court if it determines that the
child’s welfare requires it. A further option is to seek a family violence
protection order for a child and/or a parent, if a protection order has not
already been made.
14.133 If the
children’s court’s care and protection jurisdiction is engaged after
parenting orders have been made under
Family Law Act
, the child
protection agency may seek orders that have the effect of overriding or
suspending any pre-existing parenting orders made
in a federal family
If orders of this kind
are subsequently made by a children’s court, the federal family court
needs to be notified so it can
give effect to
and adjourn or terminate
the parenting proceedings. While state and territory child protection systems
take precedence over the family
law system when a child is in the care of a
child protection agency, proceedings may still be commenced in both
one of the jurisdictions may be more appropriate than
14.134 In coming to a view about whether the evidence justifies intervention,
child protection agencies conduct a risk assessment
based on a mix of
professional judgment and ‘actuarial decision making
frameworks’.
assessment is shaped by the principle that the best protection for children is
within their family, unless no parent is able
or willing to protect the child.
Victoria, Queensland, South Australia, Tasmania, and the ACT have specific
provisions requiring
the state to support the family wherever possible to
protect the child.
encourage child protection agencies to decide against
intervention.
That view may
also be entrenched in relation to family law cases since, even though violence
and abuse are alleged in an increasing
proportion of family law cases, in many
instances supporting evidence is not provided or claims sufficiently
substantiated.
14.135 Child protection agencies may also expect that where parenting
proceedings are on foot in a family court, and evidence which
suggests child
abuse is available to the court—for example, a ‘Form 4’ has
been filed—the court will give
appropriate weight to the evidence and make
parenting orders which give effect to the child’s protection and best
This expectation may create a gap between the two systems into which
a child’s case might fall. An illustration of this possibility
provided in the Family Violence Online Forum:
State agencies are not routinely investigating child abuse allegations when they
are raised as matters in the Family Court because
they assume the Family Court
will do the necessary investigations and be child protective. The Family Court
assume that if the State
agency has not acted on any notification regarding
child abuse where the matter was in the Family Court, this implies to the Court
that there was ‘no cause’ to investigate it, i.e. it was a
allegation’.
14.136 The potential to fall into the gap is evident in this further example
from the Online Forum:
Neither the State child court nor the Family Court took much notice of each
others’ orders, even when making new orders. Each
expected the other had
been seized of the case, and each did not follow the technically
spelt-out-by-legislation path. ... Altogether,
some courts and several state
government departments have the opportunity to play a role, yet, which
combination of those entities
will cause the least confusion, the most
justifiable action and be the most fact focusing, of the possible
combinations?
14.137 These comments underscore what can happen where there is an absence of
effective communication between courts. Courts must
rely on the advice of legal
representatives—if a party is represented—or the parties themselves
to disclose proceedings
in other jurisdictions.
14.138 There appears to be little statistical information available about the
number of cases transferred between family law and child
However, research in
this area and consultations undertaken in this Inquiry indicate that sometimes
child protection agencies act
on the assumption that the family law system can
protect children without their assistance where a viable carer is identified who
anticipates or has commenced proceedings in a federal family court. This may be
a reason why child protection agencies move matters
from state and territory
courts to a federal family
For example, in their
study of such cases in Victoria, Kelly and Fehlberg found that in two thirds of
the cases studied, the child
protection agency withdrew its application to the
children’s court because a ‘viable carer’ had been identified
for the child, and the carer had or was going to apply for parenting orders in a
federal family court.
14.139 In five jurisdictions, the statutory threshold for child protection
intervention provides that child protection agencies should
only intervene when
the child’s parents are unable or unwilling to protect the
This criterion may
mean that some children are not being protected from maltreatment by either
system. Kelly and Fehlberg noted that
they were unable to track 27
Children’s Court cases in Victoria in the Family Court. In 17 of these
cases, this inability was
due to the fact that the viable carer had failed or
refused to commence Family Court
proceedings.
14.140 Kelly and Fehlberg raise several other reasons for the transfer of
cases from state and territory child protection courts to
the Family Court.
First, there was a belief among child protection officers that Family Court
orders were more permanent and easier
to obtain. For example, in South Australia
orders relating to the custody and guardianship of children do not generally
period of 12 months.
Secondly, there was a belief that cases may be resolved more quickly in the
Family Court. Thirdly, the child protection agency could
take a far more
secondary role when matters were transferred to the Family Court.
14.141 State and territory child protection laws may contain other provisions
which lead state and territory child protection agencies
to conclude that
proceedings involving allegations of child maltreatment should be dealt with in
the Family Court. For example, in
Queensland it is only possible to make an
order placing a child in the custody or guardianship of someone other than a
14.142 The Family Law Council has noted that the fact that litigation is
initiated under the
Family Law Act
does not mean that a child will be
protected. The case may be withdrawn or finalised by
In other cases, a
matter may never reach the family law system. Current research indicates that
while Indigenous children are over-represented
in the child protection
relatively few
Indigenous parents appear to use the family law
Commissions’ views
14.143 The responsibility to investigate allegations of child
maltreatment—where its level of seriousness accords with the relevant
statutory intervention threshold—lies principally with child protection
agencies or the criminal justice system. It is easy
to lose sight of this
starting point because of differences between the way federal family courts and
child protection agencies receive
and assess allegations in the
‘protection’ area. Federal family courts need to play a more active
role in engaging and
assisting child protection agencies to understand how child
protection concerns arise in family law proceedings.
14.144 This section reveals some serious deficiencies in the system of
protection directly relevant to the Terms of Reference. The
Commissions have
formed the preliminary view that in order to protect children in both
family law jurisdiction may be
empowered to provide material filed and findings made to the relevant child
protection agency. This
may assist the agency to understand the child protection
concerns and encourage them to take appropriate
14.145 The Commissions are interested in hearing how, in practice,
information exchange can best be facilitated between family courts
protection agencies.
How, in practice, can information exchange best be facilitated
between family courts and child protection agencies to ensure the safety
children? Are changes to the
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) necessary to
achieve this?
[back to top]
Administrative
arrangements
14.146 A number of the problems identified in the area of child protection
are caused by a lack of communication and coordination
between the child
protection and family law systems. The sections above focused on the legislative
provisions and frameworks governing
interaction between the two systems. This
section considers the administrative arrangements in place to facilitate
communication
and coordination between the systems.
14.147 The ALRC considered information flow in its 1981 report,
situation in which criminal proceedings against a parent were heard in one state
court while care proceedings were heard in another
state court was found to
produce potentially unsatisfactory results, if there was no effective liaison
between the two courts.
ALRC recommended that:
a procedure should be devised to secure liaison with regard to related
proceedings ... Such liaison should not depend, as it presently
intelligence or ‘the grapevine’, but should be achieved by way of
formal, routine exchange of information
by the registries of the
14.148 State and territory courts dealing with family violence legislation
should be involved in any exchange of information. The
next section considers
protocols and MOUs that have been developed to improve communication between the
two systems and dedicated
case management programs.
and memorandums of understanding
14.149 Some states and territory child protection agencies have protocols and
MOUs with the Family Court and the
These govern the
handling of child protection matters and are designed to ‘assist
cooperation, clarify procedures and improve
decision-making in cases that may
occur in either or both Commonwealth, state and territory
documents ‘represent deliberate statements of policy and agreed
procedures, but do not in any way change the
14.150 The table below sets out the MOUs and protocols in place throughout
Australia to facilitate the exchange of information between
child protection
agencies and the family law system. At the time of writing, Families South
Australia and the Family Court are believed
to be finalising an MOU. The
Commissions also understand that the Family Court is negotiating in similar
terms with the Department
of Health and Human Services in Tasmania and the
Victorian Department of Human Services.
Information sharing protocols and memorandums of understanding
Protocol between Legal Aid NSW and DoCS—dealings with independent
children’s lawyers in family law matters;
MOU between the Family Court and DoCS;
MOU between DoCS and the FMC;
Protocol between DoCS and the FMC.
Unsigned draft
although the Department of Human Services are currently in discussion with the
Family Court and Victoria Legal Aid regarding
dealings with independent
children’s lawyers in family law matters.
MOU between federal family courts and the Department of Child Safety.
Western Australia
MOU between the Family Court of Western Australia, Department of Child
Protection and Legal Aid WA.
South Australia
Draft protocol.
No formalised protocol.
MOU between Department of Disability, Housing and Community Services,
Department of Education and Training, ACT Health and the Department
and Community Safety.
Northern Territory
14.151 The majority of the MOUs examined aim to meet the protective needs of
children. The Western Australian MOU takes a more expansive
approach and aims
‘to provide the best possible outcomes for
of this distinction is examined below.
14.152 As Higgins has observed, the mere fact that an MOU is in place does
not necessarily lead to a more cooperative approach to
the exchange of
information between child protection agencies and the federal family courts, and
other courts including specialist
family violence protection
14.153 In its report in 2002, the Family Law Council noted that the
principles and procedures in the existing protocols were at times
difficult to
translate into practice. While the protocols are ‘an important part of
providing better coordination between the
courts exercising jurisdiction under
Family Law Act
and the state and territory child protection
agencies,’ they are not a ‘panacea for addressing all the problems
with the interaction between the State and Federal systems concerned
with the resolution of child protection
commentators agree that the protocols are insufficient to develop a seamless
connection between the state and territory child
protection systems and federal
family courts.
14.154 Procedures set out in the MOUs and protocols may not always be
followed by the parties. For example, in 1998 it was noted that
the Victorian
child protection agency did not adhere to the reporting timelines set out in the
Victorian protocol, and that the time
taken by the agency to produce reports
exceeded the time agreed upon in the reports by a number of
One issue is that the
form and content of the protocols are different in each state and territory. It
has been noted that this is
largely a reflection of the differences in the state
and territory child protection
Commissions’
14.155 Stakeholders have told the Commissions that MOUs and protocols between
the federal family courts and child protection agencies
work well in the
They shape the
parties’ expectations as to what each will do, and in what circumstances.
Such agreements are absent—or
subject to final agreement—in some
Denny & Purdy
South Australia) and
Ray v Males
(in Tasmania) have
arisen—discussed above. This suggests a correlation between the absence of
formal arrangements between the
federal family courts and state and territory
child protection systems and incidents of children’s cases falling into
between the two systems. As such, nationally uniform or consistent
approaches to information sharing between child protection agencies
and federal
family courts appear appropriate and desirable.
14.156 The Commissions’ preliminary view is that all jurisdictions
should have MOUs and protocols—as appropriate—to
govern key elements
of these relationships. They establish the basics for dealing with cases where
family law proceedings require
action or intervention by a state or territory
child protection system. It is particularly important that where provisions in
Family Law Act
provide a power to request information or
assistance from a child protection agency, that the basis for the court’s
these powers be set out clearly and be readily available to judicial
officers, parties, legal advisers and other courts.
14.157 The Commissions are interested to hear whether the variation in the
protocols across the jurisdictions causes any difficulties
in relation to
information flow and also as to how knowledge of the MOUs and protocols can be
Proposal 14–3
All states and territories should develop a
Memorandum of Understanding or Protocol to govern the relationship between
federal family
courts and child protection agencies.
Does the variation in the content of the protocols cause any
difficulties and, if so, what changes should be made to facilitate the
information between the family courts and child protection agencies? What
measures should be taken to ensure that the protocols
are effective in
Question 14–14
How could the Memorandums of
Understanding and Protocols for exchange of information between federal family
courts, child protection
agencies and legal aid commissions be better known
within courts, and beyond them?
Cooperative case
The Magellan project
14.158 The Magellan project is a case management approach to address the
needs of children and families where serious allegations
of sexual abuse or
physical abuse are raised during parenting disputes in the Family
14.159 The Magellan project involves special management of cases where
serious allegations of sexual or physical abuse of children
are made. Once a
case is identified as suitable for the Magellan pathway, it is dealt with by a
small, designated team of judges,
registrars and family consultants. The
Magellan project relies on a collaborative and highly coordinated set of
processes and procedures,
with significant resources directed to each case in
the early stages.
aspect is strong inter-agency coordination, in particular with state and
territory child protection agencies, which ensures
that problems are dealt with
efficiently and that information sharing is of high quality. An independent
children’s lawyer
is appointed to every Magellan case. Formal protocols
for information sharing between child protection agencies and federal family
courts apply.
14.160 A pilot program of 100 cases was conducted in Victoria from June 1998
to December 2000, involving a consortium of
after which the
project was rolled out by the Family Court in all states and territories, except
Western Australia.
14.161 The Magellan approach commences when a Form 4 is filed with an
application for parenting orders. The application is referred
to the Family
Court Magellan Registrar to be considered for inclusion in the Magellan
If the Court is made
aware of allegations of sexual or physical abuse that it deems
‘serious’, it can request the intervention
of the relevant child
protection agency as a party under
Family Law Act
. The state
or territory agency then assesses the allegations of abuse and reports its
findings to the Family Court. This report (the
Magellan report) is the key
mechanism for sharing information and includes information about the history of
abuse in the family,
any previous notifications, and subsequent action by the
child protection agency. It is a significant factor in encouraging parties
settle matters, as such reports either support or contradict a party’s
assertion of abuse.
non-Magellan cases, the child protection agency does not make a report, and
merely proffers information it has in respect of the
14.162 A team of Magellan judges, registrars and family consultants at each
family law registry manages the cases. Generally, the
aim is to complete
Magellan cases within six months from the case being listed. Early steps in a
Magellan case include:
making appropriate interim orders to protect the child until the
matter comes on for trial;
ordering a Magellan report from the respective state or territory
child protection agency including whether it intends to intervene
in the Family
Court proceedings, whether it has previously investigated these or other
allegations, the conclusion and the reasons
for the conclusion of the
investigation, and any recommendations or other relevant information;
ordering a subpoena of the child protection agency file;
ordering the appointment of an independent children’s lawyer;
ordering a detailed family report, where appropriate, analysing the
family dynamics and the needs of the
Reviews of the Magellan
14.163 The Magellan project was reviewed in 2001 and 2007. Both reviews noted
the information-sharing and cooperative arrangements
between government agencies
and the courts significantly reduced frictions between the child protection and
family law systems.
14.164 The 2001 review found:
difficulties in the child protection services and family court
interface were much improved—the time taken by the child protection
service to submit a report fell from an average of 42 days to 32 days, meaning
that the reports were undertaken well within the time
framework set up for their
completion;
the substantiation rate by child protection staff rose from 23% to
disputes were resolved far more quickly, with the average time being
taken falling from 17.5 months to 8.7 months;
the average number of court events fell from an average of five to
three events;
far fewer cases proceeded to a judicial determination—only 13%
proceeded this far compared with 30% previously;
court orders broke down less frequently—previously some 37% of
final orders broke down while 5% broke down in the new program;
the amount Victoria Legal Aid spent on all parties per case averaged
over all cases in the pilot program was $13,770 per case—well
cap allowed for legal aid expenditure on family law cases and compared to the
$19,867 in the non-Magellan comparison group
the proportion of highly distressed children fell from 28% to 4%;
the parental and legal practitioner levels of satisfaction were
2007 review also concluded that the Magellan project encourages a greater
involvement of child protection agencies in the
In particular,
• Magellan cases
were investigated by child protection agencies in 80% of cases compared to 26.3%
of non-Magellan cases; and
the child protection agency planned to give evidence at trial in
22.5% of cases compared to 1.3% of non-Magellan
14.166 Both
reviews indicate that the interactions of the family law and child protection
systems have improved as a result of the
project and its method of intensive and
coordinated case management of child abuse cases.
14.167 Higgins found that the child protection agency’s compliance with
subpoenas in Magellan cases was generally high, and
that this was a result of
the funded role of independent children’s lawyers in:
gathering information about the proceedings and facilitated
discussions between parents where appropriate;
procuring funding for Family Reports in cases where the Family
Court’s internal family consultants were not used;
approaching relevant experts to give evidence in proceedings,
ascertaining their availability to give evidence and providing them
documentation relating to the matter; and
liaising between the parties to ensure that experts selected were
relation to documents under subpoena, independent children’s lawyers are
now the only representatives able to view
or listen to, and obtain copies of,
recorded interviews between children and
Previously all
parties were able to do this, but incidents where disgruntled parents had
chastised children about making adverse
disclosures to police, resulted in
access to those interviews being limited to independent children’s
14.169 Higgins highlighted the difficulties of complying with subpoenas in
serious child maltreatment cases in the Brisbane registry
of the Family Court.
In that registry, instead of the child protection agency having responsibility
for compiling a Magellan report,
the independent children’s lawyer was
required to subpoena the entire child protection file on a particular child and
submissions according to the subpoenaed
It was noted in
the review that this procedure was problematic as Magellan reports produced by
agencies were apt to focus attention
on the salient issues of a case and were
‘value added’ as they were reports by reflective and experienced
agency officials.
reports produced by child protection agencies do not merely present all
information relating to the child, detail the agency’s
Independent
children’s lawyers in Queensland are required to perform similar
adjudicatory and investigatory functions which
they may be ill-equipped and
ill-resourced to perform. This provides further evidence of the real value of
ensuring a concerted and
focused response from child protection agencies in
family law proceedings as discussed above.
Federal Magistrates Court
14.170 The FMC has no current involvement with the Magellan project as the
Magellan project is a Family Court initiative.
14.171 With the implementation of a common registry for the Family Court of
Australia and the FMC, the transfer of matters between
courts appears to have
become less of an issue for complex child abuse cases which are part of the
Magellan project. Neither of the
annual reports of the two courts for
2008–09 raises this as an issue.
14.172 The FMC has adopted provisions for the transfer of more complex
matters (which include matters identified for the Magellan
list) that are filed
in the FMC to the Family Court. The court has adopted a benchmark of two days as
the primary indicator for hearing
a family law matter itself or transferring the
proceedings to the Family Court.
14.173 The FMC has argued that, with the introduction of the common registry,
the Magellan project should be extended to include that
Commissions’ views
14.174 The Commissions’ preliminary view is that the Magellan project
should be extended to all qualifying cases, whether in
the Family Court, FMC or
other federal court structure for family cases. Unlike children’s courts,
federal family courts do
not have the ability to investigate allegations of
abuse for the purposes of establishing whether someone is a viable carer or not.
That is the responsibility of state and territory child protection agencies.
However, child protection agencies cannot investigate
every allegation that
arises in a family law proceeding. The scale of the problem is illustrated by
the observation that most child
abuse allegations in the family law system are
made without any evidence to support
Collaborative
relationships between all of the agencies involved in family law and child
protection must be strong in order to ensure
that child abuse is identified and
responded to appropriately. The Magellan project appears to be an effective
model for collaboration
between family courts and child protection agencies.
14.175 Other options for ensuring an effective response in child protection
cases in the family law system have been proposed. Submissions
to the 2002
Family Law Council inquiry indicated that systemic failure could have the most
serious and damaging consequences for
The problem that
neither system operates alone to receive, collate, interpret and act upon all
relevant evidence is of profound importance
to the welfare of children in highly
conflicted family law and child protection proceedings. The Family Law Council
recommended the
establishment of a national child protection service to
investigate every allegation of child maltreatment that emerges from family
proceedings, because child protection agencies are insufficiently resourced to
do that work.
14.176 A further option is for an early decision to be made about which court
can best handle a particular case. Family court parenting
orders may confer
parental responsibility on persons other than the parents. In child protection,
the child protection agency has
a controlling influence in according parental
responsibility or guardianship in relation to a child. In some cases a decision
be made early as to whether the matter should proceed under the
or under child protection law. This view was previously expressed by
the Family Law Council as the ‘one court
principle’,
endorsed by the Wood Inquiry.
14.177 The Commissions are interested in responses to these proposals and to
hear views as to what changes to law and practice are
required to prevent
children from ‘falling through the cracks’ between the child
protection and family law systems.
Proposal 14–4
The Australian Government should encourage all
and territory child protection agencies which include procedures:
(a) for electing the jurisdiction in which to commence proceedings;
(b) for dealing with requests for documents and information under
Family Law Act 1975
(c) for responding to subpoenas issued by federal family courts; and
(d) which permit a federal family court to invite a child protection agency
to consent to an order being made which allocates parental
responsibility in the
child protection agency’s favour, in circumstances where it determines
that no order should be made in
favour of either parent.
In what ways can the principles of the Magellan project be
applied in the Federal Magistrates Court?
Question 14–16
changes to law and practice are required to prevent children falling through the
gaps between the child protection and family
law systems?
Can the problems of the interactions in practice between family
law and child protection systems be resolved by collaborative arrangements
as the Magellan project? Are legal changes necessary to prevent systemic
problems and harm to children, and, if so, what are
T Brown, R Sheehan, M Frederico and L
Resolving Family Violence to Children: An Evaluation of Project
Magellan, A Pilot Project for Managing Family Court Residence and
Disputes when Allegations of Child Abuse Have Been Made
Dispute resolution in the context of
child protection is discussed in
International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights
, 16 December 1966,
[1980] ATS 23
, (entered into
force generally on 23 March 1976), art 27;
Convention on the Rights of the
, 20 November 1989,
[1991] ATS 4
, (entered into force generally on 2
September 1990), art 30. See Ch 2.
Family Law Act 1975
Children and Young Persons
(Care and Protection) Act 1998
Children, Youth and Families
Child Protection Act 1999
and Community Services Act 2004
Children’s Protection
Children, Young Persons and their Families Act
Children and Young People Act 2008
Care and Protection of Children Act 2007
In 2009, compliance
with the principle by states and territories ranged from about 85% (NSW) to 25%
(Tasmania): Australian Institute
of Health and Welfare,
Child Protection
Australia 2008–09
(2010), 47.
Family Law Council,
Family Law and Child Protection—Final Report
Family Law Council,
Improving Responses to Family Violence in the Family Law System: An Advice on
the Intersection of Family Violence and Family Law Issues
Australian Law Reform Commission
and Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission,
Seen and Heard: Priority
for Children in the Legal Process
, ALRC 84 (1997),
R Chisholm,
Family Courts
Violence Review
For example,
Ombudsman Victoria,
Own Motion Investigation into the Department of Human
Services Child Protection Program
(2009); J Wood,
Report of the Special
Commission of Inquiry into Child Protection Services in NSW
Family Law Pathways Advisory
Out of the Maze: Pathways to the Future for Families Experiencing
(2001), 75; House of Representatives Standing Committee on Family
and Community Affairs—Parliament of Australia,
Every Picture Tells a
Story: Report on the Inquiry into Child Custody Arrangements in the Event of
Family Separation
F Kelly and B Fehlberg, ‘Australia’s Fragmented Family Law System:
Protection’
International Journal of Law, Policy and the Family
; J Seymour,
‘The Role of the Family Court of Australia in Child Welfare Matters’
Federal Law Review
; T Brown, M Frederico, L Hewitt and R
Problems and Solutions in the Management of Child Abuse Allegations
in Custody and Access Disputes Before the Family Court of Australia
Re Karen and
[1995] FamCA 87
(1995) 19 Fam LR 528.
Council of Australian
Governments,
Protecting Children is Everyone’s Business—A
National Framework for Protecting Australia’s Children 2009–20
(2009); R McClelland (Attorney-General),
Family Violence in Focus Conference,
21 August 2009
(2009) <www.attorneygeneral.gov.au> at 16 April
See Ch 12 and Part B.
P Parkinson, ‘Family Law and
Parent-Child Contact: Assessing the Risk of Sexual Abuse’
[1999] MelbULawRw 15
Melbourne University Law Review
A Nicholson, ‘The Approach of
the Family Court of Australia to Child Abuse Matters’ (Paper presented at
12th International
Congress on Child Abuse and Neglect, Auckland, 1 September
1998), cited in P Parkinson, ‘Family Law and Parent-Child Contact:
Assessing the Risk of Sexual Abuse’
[1999] MelbULawRw 15
Melbourne University Law
Frederico, L Hewitt and R Sheehan,
Problems and Solutions in the Management
of Child Abuse Allegations in Custody and Access Disputes Before the Family
Court of Australia
(1998), 431.
Brown, M Frederico, L Hewitt and R Sheehan, ‘Child Abuse and the Family
Court’ (1998) 91
Australian Institute of Criminology Trends and Issues
in Crime and Criminal Justice
L Moloney and others,
Allegations of Family Violence and Child Abuse in Family Law Children’s
Proceedings: A Pre-reform Exploratory Study
(2007) Australian Institute of
Family Studies.
Commonwealth
(1937) 50 CLR 618.
R v Lambert
[1980] HCA 52
(1980) 146 CLR 447.
See further Ch 2; A Dickey,
(5th ed, 2007), 28–31. The
language of ‘custody’ and ‘access’ was changed in 1995
to ‘residence’
and ‘contact’:
Family Law Reform Act
The child must be
under care, not simply the subject of concern or ‘known’ to the
relevant child protection agency:
R v Lambert
[1980] HCA 52
(1980) 146 CLR
Family Law Act
s 69ZK(1)(b)
has no application in South Australia because there
has been no proclamation by the Governor-General declaring that all the child
welfare provisions in
apply there under
This has the effect
of modifying
so as to exclude the jurisdiction of a court under the
Family Law Act
to make an order in relation to the maintenance of a child
under a child protection law.
Family Law Regulations 1984
It appears that some relevant
legislation from a number of jurisdictions has not been prescribed as required
Family Law Act 1975
Family Law Regulations 1984
(Cth) reg 12B(2), sch 5. See also
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
The Commissions note that as at 9 February 2010, the list of prescribed laws
incorrectly prescribes: (item 6)
Children and Young Persons Act 1989
(Vic), rather than the
Children, Youth and Families Act 2005
(Vic); (item 28)
Community Welfare Act
(NT) rather than the
Protection of Children Act
(NT); (item 32)
Children and Young People Act 1999
(ACT), rather than the
Children and Young People Act 2008
In Western Australia and South
Australia, the provision in s 69ZK(1) enabling a child welfare officer to give
consent to proceedings
is inoperative until a relevant proclamation is made
under s 69ZF: see A Dickey,
(5th ed, 2007),
Ford & Department of Child
[2007] FamCA 811
Protecting Children—The Family Law Interface
Now known as ‘Community
Services’: NSW Government Department for Human Services, Community
<www.community.nsw.gov.au/welcome_to_community_services.html> at
14 April 2010.
That is, an order
requiring a person to return the child, and authorising the police or others to
assist if necessary: see Ch 9.
Protecting Children—The Family Law Interface
(1988) 166 CLR
Australian Institute of Health and
Child Protection Australia 2008–09
(2010), 88–91.
See also Ch 12.
the Special Commission of Inquiry into Child Protection Services in NSW
Legislation (Wood Inquiry Recommendations) Act 2009 (NSW)
sch 1 cl 24, which
inserts a new subsection (1A) into s 86. Under the amendments, the
Children’s Court could still stipulate
minimum arrangements for contact.
It may also require that contact be supervised, subject to the consent of the
parent and the proposed
supervisor. There are numerous possibilities relating to
the duration and frequency of contact, including increasing contact over
The winding back of the Children’s Court’s power to make final
in 1998 following a major
review of the previous legislation: NSW Department of Community Services
Review of the
Children (Care and Protection) Act 1987
: Recommendations for Law
(1997), 90, 96.
Law Act 1975
See also A Dickey,
ed, 2007), 273.
(5th ed, 2007), 257.
Law Act 1975
The exception is proceedings under the
Family Law Act 1975
for leave for a prescribed adopting parent to commence proceedings for the
adoption of a child.
exercise interim or
Re Wakim; Ex parte
(1999) 198 CLR 511. See Ch
Family Law Act 1975
The powers of magistrates to vary or suspend existing contact orders
under div 11 of the
Family Law Act
are discussed in Ch
Australian Law Reform Commission
and Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission,
Seen and Heard: Priority
for Children in the Legal Process
, ALRC 84 (1997),
Ibid, Rec 122. This proposal
was repeated by the Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Review of Family
Violence Laws: Report
(2006). Recommendation 77 stated that the Child, Youth
and Families Bill 2005 should be amended to declare the Children’s Court
court of summary jurisdiction, so the court can exercise powers under the
Family Law Act
to make, vary, discharge or alter a family law child
Children, Young Persons and their Families Act
(Tas) s 48(2);
Children and Young People Act 2008
The Best Interests of the Child? The Interaction of Public and
Private Law in Australia—Discussion Paper
(2000), 5 and 29–30.
See also Ch 20.
Family Law Council,
Family Law and Child Protection—Final Report
(2002), Rec
See Australian Law Reform
Commission and Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission,
Seen and Heard:
Priority for Children in the Legal Process
, ALRC 84 (1997), ch
Ibid. See also Family Law Council,
The Best Interests of the Child? The Interaction of Public and Private Law in
Australia—Discussion Paper
Re Wakim; Ex parte
(1999) 198 CLR 511.
Law Council,
Improving Responses to Family Violence in the Family Law System:
An Advice on the Intersection of Family Violence and Family Law Issues
(2009), Rec 7.
P Murphy and L Pike,
‘The Columbus Pilot Project: Developing a Model for Cost-Outcome Analysis
on Violence and Child Abuse
Cases in the Family Court of Western
Australia’ (2003) 9(2)
Journal of Family Studies
Australian Law Reform
Commission and Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission,
Seen and Heard:
Priority for Children in the Legal Process
, ALRC 84 (1997), ch
Family Law Council,
and Child Protection—Final Report
(2002), 85–86. See Rec
Children and Young Persons
(Care and Protection) Act 1998
NSW Department of Community
Discussion Paper for Review: Statutory Child Protection in
NSW—Issues and Options for Reform
Australian Law Reform
Commission and Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission,
Seen and Heard:
Priority for Children in the Legal Process
, ALRC 84 (1997),
This is quite different from
the family courts not having jurisdiction to make a parenting order for a child
in care under child
protection laws:
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) s 67ZK,
discussed above.
Family Law Rules
(Cth) r 2.01.
v Cadogen (No 2)
[2009] FMCAfam
F Kelly and B Fehlberg,
‘Australia’s Fragmented Family Law System: Jurisdictional Overlap in
the Area of Child Protection’
International Journal of Law,
Policy and the Family
Family Court of Australia,
Initiating Application (Family Law)
<www.familycourt.gov.au/> at 9 February 2010, 6. See also the
discussion in Ch 8.
(Cth) r 2.01.
Court of Australia,
Form 4—Notice of Child Abuse or Family Violence
<www.familylawcourts.
gov.au> at 9 February 2010. This is also discussed in Ch
Strategies for informing family
courts about allegations of family violence and child abuse are discussed in
Family Law Council,
Improving Responses to Family Violence in the Family Law System: An Advice on
the Intersection of Family Violence and Family Law Issues
F Kelly and B Fehlberg,
‘Australia’s Fragmented Family Law System: Jurisdictional Overlap in
the Area of Child Protection’
International Journal of Law,
Policy and the Family
R Chisholm,
Courts Violence Review
(2009), Recs 2.3,
When considering the cost of
implementation, it may be necessary to assume that every case that comes to a
court will need to be
Research in the United Kingdom
indicates that allegations of abuse in family law proceedings may be overlooked
or downgraded in
the child protection system because of contextual and
interaction issues relating to perceptions of role and task: see L Trinder,
Firth and C Jenks, ‘“So Presumably Things Have Moved On Since
Then?” The Management of Risk Allegations in Child
Resolution’
(2010) 24(1)
International Journal of Law, Policy and the
Victorian Department of
Human Services,
Family Violence Risk Assessment and Risk Management
(2007). This is also discussed in Ch
See also Ch
Family Law Act 1975
‘Registry Manager’ is defined in
to mean: (a) in
relation to the Family Court—the Registry Manager of the Registry of the
Court; and (b) in relation to the
Family Court of Western Australia—the
Principal Registrar, a Registrar or a Deputy Registrar, of the court; and (c) in
to any other court—the principal officer of that court’.
Chisholm notes that this requires notification ‘whether
or not there is
plausible supporting evidence’: R Chisholm,
Children—The Family Law Interface
Family Law Act 1975
Section 67ZA(1)
sets out the list of relevant court staff and
professionals affected by the
obligation.
relevant person is aware that the authority has previously been notified about
the abuse or risk in either case, the person
need not notify, but may still do
R Chisholm,
Protecting Children—The Family Law Interface
(2009), 23.
Report of the Special
Commission of Inquiry into Child Protection Services in NSW
Northern Territory of
Australia v GPAO
(1999) 196 CLR
The ‘public interest
privilege’ of the executive government is discussed in
[1978] HCA 43
Northern Territory of
Australia v GPAO
(1999) 196 CLR 553. This means that the best interests of
the child are the paramount consideration only where the judicial officer
received all relevant information and is preparing to make a decision. It is not
engaged either at the stage a subpoena is being
answered or when evidence is
being tendered.
Family Law Act
must be notified and given an opportunity to respond in such circumstances:
Children and Young Persons
(Care and Protection) Act 1998
Children, Youth and Families
Child Protection Act 1999
Children and Community Services Act 2004
Children’s Protection Act 1993
Children, Young Persons and their Families Act 1997
(Tas) ss 16,
Children and Young People Act 2008
Care and Protection of Children Act 2007
See A Dickey,
(5th ed, 2007), 304–305. The Queensland Government has also previously
raised issues concerning its operation, although it
did not go so far as to
argue it was beyond the power of the Commonwealth. See Senate Standing Committee
on Legal and Constitutional
Affairs—Parliament of Australia,
into the Provisions of the
Family Law Amendment (Shared Parental Responsibility)
[3.183]–[3.185].
(5th ed, 2007), 274. Dickey argues that a court has no power to take initiative
and order a person to intervene in proceedings under
Family Law Act
Denny & Purdy
[2009] FamCA
The Magellan project is
considered below.
[2009] FamCA 547
Report of the Special Commission of Inquiry into Child Protection
Services in NSW
Accordingly, the
state, through its child protection agency, has no authority or mandate to
intervene because a parent is considered
to be properly able to care for the
child. Parental responsibility therefore remains with the
It is arguable that, where
a judicial officer, in the exercise of his or her power under the
, makes findings on the evidence the child was ‘in need of
protection’ under the relevant child protection legislation,
and the child
protection agency refused to become a party, the question of costs may be
Supreme Court
(Tas) r 184(1).
Ray v Males
[2009] FamCA
Ibid, [79],
The Columbus
Project is the equivalent in Western
F Kelly and B Fehlberg,
‘Australia’s Fragmented Family Law System: Jurisdictional Overlap in
the Area of Child Protection’
International Journal of Law,
Policy and the Family
Tran v Ferguson
[2009] FamCA 1026
[246]–[247].
The definition of ‘State child order’
includes orders determining with whom a child under 18 years of age is to live
or spend time with, or that provides for contact, access or
R Chisholm,
Children—The Family Law Interface
Family Law Rules 2004
(Cth) r 23.01A.
The enforcement of
orders under the
Family Law Act
is considered in Ch
R Chisholm,
Children—The Family Law Interface
See definition of ‘child
welfare officer’ in
Family Law Act 1975
(1988) 166 CLR
R Chisholm,
Reflections on
Child Protection in Today’s Family Law
(2009) College of Law,
As previously noted the language
of ‘custody’ and ‘access’ has been replaced by residence
and contact.
R Chisholm,
Reflections on Child Protection in Today’s Family Law
College of Law gives an excellent summary of the cases as well as a list of
academic commentary: 1, n 3. Academic consideration
includes, eg, P Parkinson,
‘Family Law and Parent-Child Contact: Assessing the Risk of Sexual
[1999] MelbULawRw 15
Melbourne University Law Review
; J Fogarty,
‘Unacceptable Risk–A Return to Basics’
Journal of Family Law
Parkinson, ‘Family Law and Parent-Child Contact: Assessing the Risk of
Sexual Abuse’
[1999] MelbULawRw 15
Melbourne University Law Review
Including, eg, the changes
introduced by the
Family Law Reform Act 1995
(Cth) and the
Amendment (Shared Parenting Responsibility) Act 2006
R Chisholm,
Reflections
on Child Protection in Today’s Family Law
(2009) College of Law,
Co-operation and Coordination—An Evaluation of the Family Court of
Australia’s Magellan Case Management Model
Family Law Council,
Law and Child Protection—Final Report
(2002), Recs 2,
D Higgins and R Kaspiew,
‘“Mind the Gap…”: Protecting Children in Family Law
Australian Journal of Family Law
It is more likely that an
interim or final family violence protection order would have been made, given
the statistically significant
correlation between family violence and child
maltreatment proceedings.
ability to vary parenting orders in the context of protection orders under state
and territory family violence legislation is
considered in Ch
D Higgins and R Kaspiew,
‘“Mind the Gap…”: Protecting Children in Family Law
Australian Journal of Family Law
Children, Youth and Families
Child Protection Act 1999
Children’s Protection Act 1993
Children, Young Persons
and their Families Act 1997
Children and Young People Act
Higgins and R Kaspiew, ‘“Mind the Gap…”: Protecting
Children in Family Law Cases’
Australian Journal of Family
Comment on ALRC Family Violence Online Forum: Women’s Legal Service
F Kelly and B Fehlberg,
‘Australia’s Fragmented Family Law System: Jurisdictional Overlap in
the Area of Child Protection’
International Journal of Law,
Policy and the Family
The researchers commented that methodologies are
based on the physical review and comparison of court files and documents held by
child protection agencies which has proven to be a significant obstacle to
research in this area.
Ibid, 47; T
Brown, M Frederico, L Hewitt and R Sheehan,
Problems and Solutions in the
Management of Child Abuse Allegations in Custody and Access Disputes Before the
Family Court of Australia
F Kelly and B
Fehlberg, ‘Australia’s Fragmented Family Law System: Jurisdictional
Overlap in the Area of Child Protection’
International
Journal of Law, Policy and the Family
Children, Youth and Families
Child Protection Act 1999
Children’s Protection Act 1993
(SA) ss 4, 6(2)(b) and (c);
Children, Young Persons and their Families Act 1997
4(1)(c)(iii), 8;
Children and Young People Act 2008
F Kelly and B Fehlberg,
‘Australia’s Fragmented Family Law System: Jurisdictional Overlap in
the Area of Child Protection’
International Journal of Law,
Policy and the Family
Children’s Protection Act 1993
Child Protection Act
Family Law Council,
Family Law and Child Protection—Final Report
(2002), [3.39]. The decision‑making chain which may flow from
parenting orders finalised by consent is discussed in
For example, Northern
Territory Board of Inquiry into the Protection of Aboriginal Children from
Sexual Abuse,
Little Children are Sacred: Report of the Northern Territory
Board of Inquiry into the Protection of Aboriginal Children from Sexual
(2007); Australian Institute of Health and Welfare,
Protection Australia 2008–09
C Cunneen and M Schwartz,
The Family and Civil Law Needs of Aboriginal People in New South Wales: Final
affidavits of the parties, expert reports and family
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Child Welfare
Protocol between the
Family Court of Australia and the NSW Department of Community
Services (1 June 2005); Memorandum of Understanding
between the
Federal Magistrates Court of Australia and the NSW Department of Community
Services (1 October 2007); Protocol between
the Federal Magistrates Court of
Australia and the NSW Department of Community Services
(3 August 2007); Protocol between the Family
Court of Australia and
the Federal Magistrates Court of Australia, the Department of Child Safety
Queensland (1 October 2007); Memorandum
of Understanding between the Family
Court of Western Australia, the Department for Child Protection, Legal Aid
Western Australia
(Revised June
Family Law Council,
Best Interests of the Child? The Interaction of Public and Private Law in
Australia—Discussion Paper
R Chisholm,
Children—The Family Law Interface
Protocol between Victorian
Department of Human Services and Family Court of Australia (unsigned, dated 19
April 1995).
Family Court of
Western Australia and others,
Information Sharing Protocols between the
Family Court of Western Australia, Magistrates Court of Western Australia,
Department of
the Attorney-General, Department of Corrective Services and Legal
Aid Western Australia in Matters Involving Family Violence
Co-operation
and Coordination—An Evaluation of the Family Court of Australia’s
Magellan Case Management Model
Family Law Council,
Family Law and Child Protection—Final Report
T Brown, R Sheehan, M
Frederico and L Hewitt,
Resolving Family Violence to Children: An Evaluation
of Project Magellan, A Pilot Project for Managing Family Court Residence and
See D Higgins,
Co-operation and Coordination—An Evaluation of the Family Court of
Australia’s Magellan Case Management Model
For example, Legal Aid
Commissions,
Consultation
, Sydney, 10 September
It was initiated by Nicholson
CJ of the Family Court and Dessau J: D Higgins,
Co-operation and
Coordination—An Evaluation of the Family Court of Australia’s
Magellan Case Management Model
T Brown, R Sheehan, M Frederico
and L Hewitt,
Resolving Family Violence to Children: An Evaluation of Project
Magellan, A Pilot Project for Managing Family Court Residence and
Disputes when Allegations of Child Abuse Have Been Made
The Federal Magistrates
Court is not included in the Magellan
Family Court of Australia,
Fact Sheet—Magellan Program
<www.familycourt.gov.au> at 17
October 2009.
Co-operation and Coordination—An Evaluation of the Family Court of
Australia’s Magellan Case Management Model
T Brown, R Sheehan, M
Frederico and L and Hewitt,
Resolving Violence to Children: An Evaluation of
Project Magellan
(2001), 132.
Co-operation and Coordination—An Evaluation of the Family
Court of Australia’s Magellan Case Management Model
Ibid, 70 (table 5.10) and 214
(table 8.3).
Ibid, 78, 107.
Federal Magistrates Court,
Consultation
, Sydney, 3 February
Australian Institute of
Family Studies,
Evaluation of the 2006 Family Law Reforms
Family Law Council,
Law and Child Protection—Final Report
Report of the
Special Commission of Inquiry into Child Protection Services in NSW
ALRC CP1 Family Violence � Improving Legal Frameworks
Sexual Assault and Family Violence
Introduction
Chapter outline
Terminology
The prevalence of sexual violence
A limited picture
A snapshot of sexual violence
Sexual assault in the family violence context
Multiple forms of sexual violence
Repetition of sexual violence
Coexistence with other forms of violence and abuse
Indigenous communities
History of activism and legal change
Historical approaches to sexual violence
The nature of sexual offences
Balancing rights?
Focus of reform
Other legal responses
Law is not the only response
The implementation gap
Judicial and legal education
Sexual Assault and Family Violence
Introduction
15.1 This part of the Consultation Paper concerns the second Term of
Reference of the Inquiry. This requires the Commissions to focus
on the impact
of inconsistent interpretation or application of laws in cases of sexual assault
occurring in a family violence context,
including rules of evidence, on victims
of such violence.
15.2 This chapter outlines key background understandings of sexual assault in
a family violence context, its nature and prevalence,
and the response of the
criminal justice system and other areas of law.
15.3 Chapter 16 describes the range of existing sexual offences and
identifies inconsistencies in relation to elements of these offences,
relation to the issue of consent. It also discusses the role that guiding
principles and objects clauses can play in attempting
to mitigate the impact of
laws on victims of sexual assault in a family violence context.
15.4 Chapters 17 and 18 highlight ways in which particular laws and
procedures operate for victims of sexual assault. Where it is
possible to
identify certain approaches as more promising and progressive than others, the
Commissions propose that Commonwealth,
state and territory governments should
implement consistent measures based on the best model. Uniformity is not, of
itself, a goal,
but rather consistency with respect to identified best
15.5 For simplicity, the Commissions’ proposals are most often worded
to propose that ‘Commonwealth, state and territory’
legislation
should provide for certain matters, notwithstanding that:
Commonwealth criminal law does not provide for ordinary sexual
and, in practice, only a
small number of criminal and quasi-criminal matters are heard in federal
one or more jurisdictions may already have enacted legislation that
fits the criteria proposed by the Commissions.
15.6 This chapter canvasses what is known about the prevalence of sexual
assault in the family violence context and situates the experience
assault as part of family violence more generally. It highlights aspects of
family violence that are important in understanding
and responding to this
category of sexual violence—for example, the many types of sexual violence
experienced by women and
children, its repetition within the family violence
context, its cumulative impact and coexistence with other forms of family
Sexual assault by current and former intimate partners, for instance,
requires responses that understand and take account of these
interrelated
contexts and acknowledge the distinct experience of sexual violence by an
intimate partner.
15.7 The chapter then introduces the response of the criminal justice
system—an examination that is expanded in Chapters 16
to 18. It outlines
some of the unique features of sexual assault and the legal response, as well as
the myths about women, children
and sexual assault that continue to hold some
sway in the community and in the legal system. The chapter introduces the
substantial
reform of law and procedure that has been undertaken in this area
over the last three decades to provide more appropriate criminal
responses to sexual assault.
15.8 The chapter briefly discusses other areas of the law which also respond
to sexual assault (including protection orders, family
law, statutory
compensation and tort law). This discussion recognises that the criminal justice
system is not the only legal response,
nor is it simply the law that is (or
should be) called on to respond to and reduce sexual violence.
15.9 Finally, the chapter discusses the ‘implementation
gap’—the gap between written law and its practice—that
despite extensive changes to law and procedure related to sexual assault.
Terminology
15.10 In this chapter the Commissions use two terms to signify different
aspects of sexual violence in a family violence context.
First, the term
‘sexual violence’ is used to describe the full range of sexually
coercive or unwanted acts that many
women and children experience, not all of
which are against the law. Secondly, the terms ‘sexual assault’ or
offence’ are used to refer to those acts that are proscribed
in the various Australian criminal laws (for example, sexual intercourse
consent, or rape, indecent assault, offences against children and people with a
cognitive impairment).
approach recognises both ‘experience-based’ and
‘offence-based’ definitions of sexual violence. The
distinction was
explored in recent work by the Australian Bureau of Statistics
and used in the National
Council to Reduce Violence Against Women and Children (the National Council)
Time for Action: The National Council’s Plan for Australia to
Reduce Violence Against Women and their Children
15.11 The ABS provides the following experience-based definition of sexual
Sexual assault is unwanted behaviour of a sexual nature directed towards a
• which makes that person feel uncomfortable, distressed, frightened or
threatened, or which results in harm or injury to that
• to which that person has not freely agreed or given consent, or to which
that person is not capable of giving consent;
• in which another person uses physical, emotional, psychological or
verbal force or (other) coercive behaviour against that
Sexual assault may be located on a continuum of behaviours from sexual
harassment to life-threatening rape. These behaviours may
include lewdness,
stalking, indecent assault, date rape, drug-assisted sexual assault, child
sexual abuse, incest, exposure of a
person to pornography, use of a person in
pornography, and threats or attempts to sexually
15.12 Offence-based definitions are directly linked to the elements of the
offences prescribed by the criminal law including, for
example: penetration,
absence of consent and the circumstances that negate consent (as defined in
15.13 An understanding of both definitions is important in recognising the
continuum of unwanted sexual behaviours that may exist
in the family violence
context. It is also important in ensuring appropriate responses, including
service delivery and support for
people who have experienced sexual violence
that is not necessarily addressed by the criminal
[back to top]
The prevalence of
sexual violence
15.14 Information about the nature and prevalence of sexual assault is
limited. This is due to a range of factors including lack of
generally, and under-reporting due to the methodologies and definitions employed
in the various surveys or data
15.15 Moreover, many sexual assaults remain unreported to anyone, let alone
to the police. For example, the 1996 ABS
Women’s Safety Survey
found that one in five women who had been sexually assaulted did not tell anyone
Survey found that 80% of women
did not report the most recent incident to the
Similarly, the
Australian Component of the International Violence Against Women Survey (IVAWS)
found that only 15% of women who experienced
physical or sexual violence from an
intimate partner reported that incident to the
In 2007, the Australian
Institute of Criminology (AIC) estimated that less than 30% of sexual assaults
and related offences are reported
15.16 Some forms of sexual violence may be less likely to be reported than
others. Notably, incidents (whether sexual or physical)
perpetrated by current
or former intimate partners are less likely to be reported than those incidents
perpetrated by strangers.
has particular significance for an understanding of sexual violence in a family
15.17 Women and children may not report or disclose the sexual violence that
they have experienced for a range of
including because: they
have not identified the act as sexual violence, let alone as a criminal offence;
they do not consider the
incident serious enough to warrant
they are ashamed,
fearful of the perpetrator, do not think that they will be believed, fear how
they will be treated by the criminal
justice system, and may consider that they
can handle it themselves.
15.18 The failure to recognise or identify an act as sexual violence, or more
specifically as a sexual assault, may be a ‘survival
strategy’ for
some women, particularly those who have been sexually assaulted by an intimate
partner. As Debra Parkinson reported
in her 2008 research report:
If they had recognised it as rape, they could not have managed their situation.
Some excused the behaviour of their partners—even
the most brutal
rapes—as a consequence of being married to him, ‘it was his
right’. As a result, the way women
complete surveys would be
inaccurate.
… women told us that it was not until they were no longer in the
relationship and sometimes not until many years later that
they had the
perspective to recognise they were being raped within their relationship. While
they were in the relationship, they
struggled to make sense of what was
happening to them, and were caught in our society’s demand to make the
marriage work. Whilst
in the relationship, they minimised the rapes, they blamed
themselves, or they feared even worse consequences if they didn’t
15.19 Different surveys or data sources report different findings about the
extent of sexual violence in Australia, including because
different definitions
of sexual violence or sexual assault are relied
Unsurprisingly, narrower
offence-based definitions tend to result in lower levels of sexual violence
being recorded.
Under-reporting,
and under-estimates of prevalence, may also be caused by the mode of survey
delivery. For example, surveys conducted
via the telephone may mean that certain
groups of women, particularly those who are more vulnerable to
may not be captured in
the survey.
Some survey
instruments may be better designed to enhance disclosure, for example, through
the use of multiple opportunities for
disclosure, or open-ended questions that
allow participants to talk about experiences that might not neatly fit within
the categories
set by survey
Other methodological
variations include whether interpreters are available to assist in the
administration of the survey, whether
the criteria for inclusion are
age-specific and so on. Results also vary depending on participants’
perceptions of whether
certain conduct constitutes sexual violence or a
15.20 There is general agreement that, given these methodological problems
(and direct evidence of under-reporting of sexual assault),
the available survey
data are likely to underestimate the incidence and prevalence of sexual
15.21 Understanding that sexual assault is under-reported is crucial
background when considering the response of the criminal justice
system. The
vast majority of incidents of sexual assault do not come to the attention of the
legal system. The problem is exacerbated
in the family violence context.
Therefore, an important part of the law reform focus should be on measures that
might promote reporting
and challenge community attitudes to sexual assault that
continue to reinforce its
invisibility.
A snapshot of sexual
15.22 This section presents a snapshot of the statistics available about the
experience of sexual assault and sexual violence in Australia.
Where possible,
statistics on sexual assault within the family violence context are
highlighted.
15.23 Sexual violence is strongly gendered with many more women experiencing
sexual violence than men.
women and children are sexually assaulted, the perpetrator is likely to be
someone well known to them, a current or former partner
While all women and
children may be at risk of sexual violence, some are more vulnerable than
others, including young women, Indigenous
women, women from culturally and
linguistically diverse backgrounds (CALD), and women with disabilities.
15.24 There are limited available data about the extent of sexual violence
against children. Available data come from crime statistics
or child protection
notifications. In 2003, it was estimated that 187 per 100,000 children aged
0–14 years were victims of
Rates of sexual assault
were higher for children aged 10–14 and ‘three-quarters of reported
victims were girls’.
There are no national data on how rates of reported physical and sexual assault
vary across population groups. There is limited evidence
suggesting that child
sexual assault is more prevalent in rural and remote areas than in urban areas
and is associated with social
disadvantage. Information available from New South
Wales and the AIHW National Child Protection Data Collection indicates that
and Torres Strait Islander children are over-represented among
victims of physical and sexual
Young women
15.25 Young women are overrepresented as victims of sexual assault. The
Australian component of the IVAWS found that younger women
(aged 18–24)
were more likely than other women to have reported experiencing sexual violence
in the 12 months prior to the
In a study on
non-reporting and the hidden reporting of sexual assault, it was noted that
women in the ‘15–19 age group
report the highest rates of sexual
assault, at 495 per 100,000 compared to the total rate for all females of 139
per 100,000’.
over-representation of young women as victims of sexual violence was found in
Personal Safety Survey—
30.7% of women who reported sexual
violence in the 12 months prior to the survey were aged 18–24, and a
further 29.8% were aged
Indigenous women
15.26 Various surveys and police statistics generally confirm higher rates of
sexual violence perpetrated against Indigenous women
compared to the
non-Indigenous population:
The Australian component of the IVAWS found that Indigenous women
reported experiencing higher levels of all kinds of violence, with
three times
as many Indigenous women compared to non-Indigenous women reporting sexual
violence in the 12 months prior to the
2008 recorded crime statistics found that the Indigenous
victimisation rate for sexual assaults in NSW was nearly 3.5 times the rate
the non-Indigenous population.
In South Australia and the Northern Territory the victimisation rate was over
three times that for the non-Indigenous
population.
A NSW study on Aboriginal women in prison found that over three
quarters had experienced child sexual assault, just under half had
been sexually
assaulted as adults, and almost 80% had experienced family
from culturally and linguistically diverse communities
15.27 There is limited information available on the prevalence of sexual
violence against women from CALD backgrounds. Not all surveys
have adopted
measures to assist in eliciting information from CALD women, and even when they
have, there may be other limitations
15.28 The Australian component of the IVAWS found that non-English speaking
background and English speaking women reported similar
levels of sexual violence
in the preceding 12 months, but that English speaking women reported higher
levels of all kinds of violence
over their lifetimes. The IVAWS notes that while
this might indicate that violence against non-English speaking women is
prevalent’, it is influenced by cultural perceptions and
understandings about what is
15.29 In addition, some women and children in CALD communities may face
barriers that limit their choices in making disclosures or
reporting to the
It is important to
recognise, however, that the CALD community is not a homogenous group, and
includes women from a wide range of
different backgrounds and experiences. There
is variation in the extent to which women have knowledge about the law, ability
access the Australian legal system, willingness to engage with the police and
other institutional actors, and knowledge about what
unwanted sexual acts are
against the law (for example, whether rape in marriage is
Women with disabilities
15.30 Many studies have documented the increased vulnerability to physical
and sexual violence of people with disabilities. As for
other groups of women
there is a dearth of statistics that document the extent of sexual violence.
This may be linked to the failure
of services, including the police, to record
whether the victim has a
disability.
However, one study
has found that 90% of women with intellectual disabilities have been sexually
abused; and 68% of women with an
intellectual disability will be subjected to
sexual abuse before they reach 18 years of
This prevalence is
consistent with overseas
[back to top]
Sexual assault in
the family violence context
15.31 The important features of sexual assault in a family violence context
include: multiple forms of sexual violence; a likelihood
of repetition; and the
fact that sexual violence is likely to be accompanied by other forms of
forms of sexual violence
15.32 While this Inquiry is primarily concerned with sexual acts that are
against the law, a range of unwanted or coercive sexual
acts are experienced by
many women and children in the context of their
relationships.
Recognising the
broader range is contextually important to understanding women’s and
children’s experiences of sexual
violence—and family violence more
15.33 The findings of the Australian component of the IVAWS emphasise the
importance of acknowledging this context. The ‘most
frequent type of
sexual violence reported’ by women who participated in that survey was
‘unwanted sexual touching’.
However, ‘few women reported
experiencing attempted forced sexual intercourse or actual forced sexual
intercourse’ over
15.34 The ABS
Personal Safety Survey
also documented the range of
unwanted sexual experiences of men and women. 32.5% of women reported that since
they were aged 15,
they had experienced inappropriate comments about their body
or sex life, compared to only 11.7% of men. In addition, just over a
women reported that they had experienced unwanted sexual touching, compared to
9.9% of men.
15.35 Research has found that some women who experience family violence may
also be subject to indecent assaults or unwanted touching.
They may be exposed
to pornography, have sexually explicit photographs taken without their
permission, subjected to degrading comments
performance, or called sexually demeaning names. They may be constantly
questioned about sexual activities
with other people and placed under
surveillance, or forced to engage in sexual activity without the protection of a
Repetition of sexual
15.36 It is also important to recognise the extent to which sexual violence
perpetrated in a family violence context is repeated and
that this has
‘cumulative
Unlike stranger
sexual assault, which is far more likely to be a single incident, sexual
violence within a relationship is likely
to be repeated given the ongoing nature
of the relationship and the opportunity this provides for continued
perpetration.
For victims who
are unable to escape such violence, the prospects of self-criticism and
acquiescence are enhanced, as is the ‘normalisation’
15.37 The US National Violence Against Women Survey found that:
Approximately half (51.2 percent) of the women raped by an intimate and
two-thirds (65.5 percent) of the women physically abused
by an intimate said
that they were victimized multiple times by the same partner … Overall,
female rape victims averaged 4.5
rapes by the same partner, and female assault
victims averaged 6.9 assaults. Among women who were victimized multiple times by
same partner, 62.6 percent of the rape victims and 69.5 percent of the
assault victims said that their victimization lasted a year
or more. On average,
women who were raped multiple times said their victimization occurred over 3.8
years, and women who were physically
assaulted multiple times said their
victimization occurred over 4.5
15.38 In a recent New Zealand study on pathways to recovery from sexual
assault, over two thirds
participants who had been sexually assaulted by a current or former intimate
partner or family or whānau (extended family)
reported that they had
been sexually assaulted by that person before. The experience of repeat sexual
assaults was highest for those
reporting sexual assault by a former intimate
partner (80%), followed by assaults by a current intimate partner (69%) and a
or whānau member
Coexistence with
other forms of violence and abuse
15.39 Various research reports and studies have documented the extent to
which women and children experience multiple forms of violence
in a family
violence context.
Health Organisation in its multi-country study on domestic violence and
women’s health found ‘substantial overlap’
between the
experience of physical violence and sexual violence by an intimate partner.
In all sites, more than half of the women who reported partner violence reported
either physical violence only or physical violence
accompanied by sexual
violence. In most sites between 30% and 56% of women who had ever experienced
any violence, reported both physical
communities
15.40 Time for Action
emphasises that ‘there is no
“one-size fits all” approach’ to the problem of family
violence against women
and children and acknowledges that different responses
are needed for a range of vulnerable groups, including Indigenous
15.41 The fact sexual violence affects Indigenous communities
disproportionately is noted above. In essence, ‘sexual violence
Indigenous communities occurs at rates that far exceed those for non-Indigenous
Australians’
‘reported to be at crisis
A more complete
picture recognises the ‘wider issue of violence that occurs in Aboriginal
communities’, the ‘diversity
of peoples within and across Indigenous
communities’ and the variation ‘between communities in their current
in terms of
The lack of
reported and analysed data in relation to the experience of family violence by
Indigenous women and children, including
in relation to the effectiveness of
measures to reduce such violence, is a serious limitation to building an
understanding of how
to prevent and address
15.42 The access to justice issues for Indigenous women and their children
are two-fold: first, a number of obstacles impede Indigenous
women from seeking
assistance; secondly, services do not adequately recognise and respond to
Indigenous experiences of family violence.
15.43 Obstacles which continue to prevent Indigenous women from reporting
sexual assault include: ‘intimidation by authority
figures and white
people in general; closeness of communities leading to fear of reprisals or
shame; the relationship of the survivor
to the perpetrator; unfamiliarity with
legal process; … a fear that the perpetrator will be sent to
‘difficulty in communicating and a belief that both authorities and
mainstream sexual assault services will not respond
appropriately’.
15.44 In addition, tensions may exist between mainstream approaches and those
of Indigenous women and communities to understanding
and responding to violence.
Mainstream approaches are said to have
relied more heavily on feminist analyses of violence, seek responses to the
‘crime’ of family violence that advance the
rights of women to be
socially, legally and economically supported should they decide to leave their
violence partners.
15.45 Indigenous community members may feel that this approach ‘can
exacerbate an already volatile
situation’:
Indigenous community members have consistently criticised [the approach to
violence that largely criminalises violence and relies
institutionalisation of the offender to protect the victim] as being irrelevant,
discriminatory and a repeat of the kinds
of violence inherent in policies and
practises of colonisation. Indigenous experiences with these approaches have
found them to be
disempowering and processes by which methods of power and
contract can be reinforced.
15.46 Any proposed solutions to Indigenous family violence must take into
account the realities of Indigenous communities. For example,
Dr Kyllie Cripps
and Hannah McGlade consider that the causes of Indigenous family violence are
‘a multitude of inter-related
factors’ which can usefully be
understood by categorising them into two groups:
Group 1 factors include colonisation: policies and practices; dispossession and
cultural dislocation; and dislocation of families
through removal. Group 2
factors include: marginalisation as a minority; direct and indirect racism;
unemployment; welfare dependency;
past history of abuse; poverty; destructive
coping behaviours; addictions; health and mental health issues; and low
self-esteem and
powerlessness.
15.47 In addition, the 2004 Report,
From Shame to Pride: Access to Sexual
Assault Services for Indigenous Peoples,
identified the following areas as
critical to understanding sexual assault in Indigenous communities:
• The issue is widespread and ‘endemic’
• Very few victims report the issue to police or seek assistance
• Child sexual abuse is still very much hidden
• There is a ‘normalisation’ of sexual violence that is now
becoming intergenerational
• The issues have to be addressed in a holistic way if any real outcomes
are to be achieved.
15.48 The literature and reports which consider the interface between
Indigenous family violence, child abuse and the criminal
focus on enhanced service
delivery and exploring approaches that ‘attend to needs of all members of
the community’ including
restorative
[back to top]
History of activism
and legal change
15.49 This section briefly canvasses the last three decades of legislative
and procedural change to improve responses to sexual offences,
reporting and to reduce the negative experience of complainants in sexual
assault proceedings. The changes made to the law
and procedures have variously
been intended to
take greater account of the realities of rape and sexual abuse, to make the
trial process less daunting for complainants and to encourage
proportion of victims of sexual assault to report these crimes to the
15.50 Since the 1970s there has been considerable change to the law relating
to sexual offences across Australia, as has been the
case in many other
countries. These developments were brought about by a number of factors
including: growing community awareness
the manner in which complainants were historically treated by the legal system;
and activism of the women’s movement in this
and growing awareness
legal system.
approaches to sexual violence
15.51 Feminist research and advocacy from the 1970s argued that the law
addressed sexual assault in discriminatory ways, including
the way in which it
viewed and assessed women and children as complainants. This work drew attention
to a range of myths and misconceptions
that underpinned the approach of not only
the laws on sexual assault, but the approaches of key legal players (police,
prosecutors,
defence lawyers and judicial officers). This work highlighted the
way in which the law in this area has largely been defined and
implemented by
men and presents particular historical ideas about women, children, men, sexual
violence, and sexual relationships
more generally.
Myths and misconceptions
15.52 A range of myths and misconceptions about women, children and sexual
assault have underpinned the legal and evidential rules
in sexual assault
proceedings. They have been the subject of extensive commentary in the
literature and the site of considerable
law reform in order to counter their
resilience. Key myths and misconceptions (frequently inter-related) include:
That women and children are inherently unreliable and lie about sexual
15.53 The idea that women and children are inherently unreliable and lie
of women and
children generally, particularly when they complain about sexual
It is clearly
demonstrated in the emphasis on corroboration of women’s and
children’s evidence in sexual assault trials.
While corroboration is no
longer required, remnants of this myth can be discerned in various common law
directions to the jury that
remain in currency despite successive restrictions
in legislation around Australia. Judicial warnings are discussed in detail in
Chapter 18.
That the accusation of rape is easily made, but difficult to challenge
15.54 This view is clearly reflected in the oft-quoted assertion by the 17th
century English jurist Sir Matthew Hale that ‘rape
is an accusation easily
to be made, hard to be proved, and harder yet to be defended by the party
accused, tho’ never so
The belief is
connected with the emphasis on corroboration and ideas about what a
‘real’ rape looks
It is a powerful notion
not only in positioning women and children as potential liars, but feeds into
other conceptions of particular
women as vindictive or vengeful—for
example, a woman who makes allegations against a former spouse might be
characterised in
this way; and wanting to hide their sexual behaviour—the
suggestion that some young women, in order to hide their sexual activities
their parents, ‘cry
It is one basis for
the ever present concern about ‘false’ allegations.
That sexual assault is most likely to be committed by a stranger
15.55 Most sexual assaults are actually perpetrated by someone known to the
victim and often known very closely. This fact conflicts
with popular ideas of
who is a rapist, and who is a ‘real victim’. This myth connects with
a range of other myths—for
example, the assumption that victims of rape
report without delay, while this may be a more complex process of recognition
and decision
for those who are raped by an intimate partner or family
That women cannot be sexually assaulted by their spouse
15.56 This was the situation under common law—although significantly
not the reality for many women—until the 1980s, when
all Australian
possible for a man to be charged with, and
prosecuted for, raping his wife or,
in some cases, de facto partner.
The marital rape immunity was based on historical notions that women became
men’s property on marriage, and that through marriage
women consent, on a
continuing basis, to sex with their spouse. It is the articulation of this
notion by Sir Matthew Hale that is
most often quoted:
[T]he husband cannot be guilty of rape committed by himself upon his lawful
wife, for by their mutual matrimonial consent and contract
the wife hath given
up herself in this kind unto her husband, which she cannot
15.57 While this no longer holds true in the law across Australia, and in
numerous overseas jurisdictions,
it continues to hold some sway in community understandings about what is sexual
This influences the
extent to which these cases continue to be less likely to be reported,
prosecuted and result in conviction.
That some sexual assaults are more serious and damaging than others
15.58 Earlier studies revealed disparities in sentencing sexual assault
offenders depending on their relationship to the victim—with
spousal rapes
traditionally being seen as less serious than stranger sexual assault—and
the characteristics of the victim,
with sexual assaults of sex workers, for
example, either being seen as ‘not possible’ or less serious, given
provision of sex is part of her
occupation.
That non-consent is verbally articulated, evidenced by struggle and
results in physical injuries
15.59 Many people still believe that a ‘true’ sexual assault
involves the use of physical violence and that there will
be physical injuries
that provide independent verification of the complainant’s story.
Research, however, indicates that very
few cases of sexual assault and/or rape
have such physical evidence.
Women’s Safety Survey
found that only 26% of women who had
been sexually assaulted since the age of 15 had sustained physical
It is worth reflecting
here on the other ‘injuries’ and impacts sustained by women who have
been sexually assaulted,
including ongoing psychological impacts, fear, guilt,
shame and depression.
what many may assume, women who are raped by their partner may be more likely to
sustain serious injuries than those raped
Considerable
legislative change in the definition of consent and in directions to the jury,
specifically seek to counter ideas about
silence and the absence of physical
That a ‘true’ or ‘genuine’ victim of sexual
assault does not delay in reporting
15.60 Many people still think that a person who has been sexually assaulted
would report without delay, and that the failure to do
so is suggestive of
fabrication. Again this connects to the dominant idea that women and children
lie about sexual assault. Given
what we know about the fact that so few acts of
sexual assault are reported in the first place, the resilience of this myth as
indicator of truth stands counter to the evidence. Despite legislation that
requires a judge to explain to the jury that there may
reasons’ why a victim of sexual assault may delay in reporting to the
women and children can
still expect to be cross-examined at length on this point.
15.61 There are other myths and misconceptions, including that men have
uncontrollable sexual urges,
related to this, that women have a responsibility to monitor and curtail their
own behaviour (dress, intoxication, flirtation)
in order to avoid sexual
15.62 The various myths and misconceptions about sexual violence, women and
children, have been challenged and addressed over time.
There remain ongoing
connections, however, between these historical notions demonstrated in
prevailing community attitudes and in
the application of the law in some
instances, which is a key focus of this Inquiry. These connections are raised
where appropriate
in Chapters 16 to 18.
The nature of sexual
15.63 Research on legal responses to sexual assault highlights the unique
features of these offences and their treatment by the legal
system. These
features include: the nature of the crime for the victim, the nature of the
crime in terms of the elements that need
to be proved and what this means for
the content of the evidence that has to be elicited from the victim, the focus
on credibility,
the focus on consent in adult sexual assault matters, the length
and nature of cross-examination, and the likelihood that there is
relationship between the complainant and the victim (as current or former
intimate partners or family members).
15.64 Two key empirical studies published in the mid-1990s highlighted the
traumatic experience of the sexual assault trial, particularly
for adult women
In 2003, the Victorian
Law Reform Commission (VLRC) commented:
During the late 1980s and early 1990s substantial reforms were made to procedure
and evidence in sexual offence cases. The outcomes
of our research and
consultations suggest that these reforms have had limited success in improving
the experience of complainants
in sexual offence
15.65 In fact, the experience of the sexual assault trial has often been
characterised by victims as being a re-traumatising experience,
and in some
instances like being sexually assaulted
One focus of the
Commissions’ work is to examine to what extent changes made since those
landmark reports have served to address
and limit that traumatic experience.
The ‘nature of the crime’ for the
15.66 There are particular dimensions of sexual offences that distinguish
victims’ experiences from those of other victims of
crime. These
dimensions are linked to the relationship between the victim and the offender,
the nature of the harm and its longstanding
The crime experienced by sexual violence victims is more than an assault. The
sexual nature of the act adds an additional and highly
complex dimension ... not
only is the victim assaulted, but the private and protected physical and
psychological boundaries of the
person are intrusively invaded ...
The very nature of crime evokes certain emotions in all victims ... The crime of
sexual violence is no exception ... the sexual violence
victim is often
confronted with a range of additional feelings resulting from the social stigma
and physical invasiveness of the
incident. These feelings can include shame,
guilt, embarrassment, confusion, feeling dirty and used. Feelings of self-blame
and self-recrimination
are particularly common among sexual violence
Consent and credibility
15.67 The vast majority of adult sexual offence cases rest on the issue of
consent. More often than not there is no physical evidence
of the assault or
witnesses to the assault. Therefore, the focus of the trial is on the competing
evidence of the complainant and
the defendant about whether the sexual activity
was consensual. The Rape Law Reform Evaluation Project (RLREP) conducted in
found that in 30% of rape trials conducted in 1992–93, the
defendant’s main argument was that the complainant had consented
sexual intercourse. In a further 23% the ‘main line of defence was either
that the accused believed the complainant
had consented, or a defence which
involved a combination of consent and the accused’s belief that the
complainant
consented’.
15.68 The focus on consent, and the way in which consent is constructed in
law, have been the subject of considerable criticism. It
is seen as the key way
in which the focus of the trial is placed on the complainant, her actions and
behaviour—rather than
on the behaviour of the accused. The focus on
consent, therefore, is inextricably linked to the focus on credibility, where
and children—particularly when they raise allegations about sexual
violence—have generally been seen as less credible.
15.69 In both adult and child sexual assault cases the key aim of defence
questioning is to challenge and undermine the credibility
of the complainant.
For adult complainants this is intertwined with the issue of whether the
activity was consensual. For children
(as well as adults) it is about whether
their evidence can be believed.
Elements of the offence
15.70 In sexual offence proceedings, a complainant may be required to discuss
elements of the offence, such as penetration or other
genital or anal
South Wales Law Reform Commission
(NSWLRC), giving this type of intimate and
graphic evidence can be very ‘humiliating and distressing’ for all
of sexual assault, and may be particularly difficult for ‘women
who are from different cultural backgrounds in which such matters
conventionally discussed in front of
Cross-examination
15.71 In addition to having to discuss in detail the elements of the offence
in evidence-in-chief and in cross-examination, there
is the experience of
cross-examination itself. As one of the key strategies of the defence is to
challenge the credibility of the
complainant, cross-examination may take on
particularly personal dimensions that may not be seen in other criminal
proceedings. Research
has found that, on average, cross-examination is longer in
duration in a sexual assault trial when compared to other assault
15.72 Possible changes to the law and procedure relating to sexual assault
invariably raise questions and concerns about the need
to balance the rights of
the accused and the rights of the
complainant.
It is important to
recognise that these are not necessarily rights in contest (although they are
commonly positioned this way), but
rather they both occupy important, related
positions in the administration of the criminal justice system.
15.73 The VLRC in its sexual offences report articulated these positions as
The criminal justice system must be, and be seen to be, fair to the accused.
People accused of sexual offences are entitled to the
presumption of innocence.
Conviction for a sexual offence has very serious consequences for an accused,
which may include a lengthy
prison sentence and life-long stigma. It is vital to
ensure that any conviction is based on reliable evidence.
However, the criminal justice system must also take account of the needs of
complainants who have a direct interest in the outcome
of the prosecution, and
of the community interest in encouraging people to report alleged offences and
in convicting perpetrators
... [C]urrent deficiencies in the system contribute
to substantial under-reporting of sexual offences and discourage people who
they have been assaulted from giving evidence at committal or trial.
Criminal procedures that discourage reporting or which stigmatise
and traumatise
witnesses in sexual assault cases may result in some offenders escaping
apprehension, which may put more members of
the community at
15.74 In the present Inquiry, the Commissions are similarly mindful of the
rights of the accused, and the rights of the complainant,
in discussing possible
changes to the law and procedure relating to sexual offences. The Commissions
recognise the very serious consequences
of being charged with a sexual offence
for an accused, and the need to be able to effectively test the evidence that is
in the case against the accused.
15.75 The ‘rights of the accused’, in essence, entail that they
are not to be convicted except following the conduct of
a fair trial according
to the law.
The International
Convention on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) provides some further detail
15.76 The concept of a fair trial has not historically incorporated the
rights of the complainant—instead the focus is on the
Crown acting on
behalf of the community.
However, the experience and role of victims in the criminal justice system has
changed in recent times with greater recognition of
the rights of victims, as
evidenced by various charters of victims’ rights, and in the reception of
victim impact statements
protection by the law and its processes are also articulated in various
international conventions and declarations to which
Australia is a
15.77 The ‘rights of the accused’ are frequently raised as a
powerful rhetorical tool to limit possible changes in law
and procedure which
aim to ameliorate some of the more negative experiences for complainants of
sexual offence proceedings. Measures
that might assist complainants are
sometimes opposed by lawyers on the basis of perceived incursions into the
rights of the accused
without an appreciation of exactly what the measure is,
what it is designed to do, and how it
15.78 The focus of reform that aims to reduce the traumatic experience of
complainants in sexual offence proceedings should not be
misconceived as merely
aimed at increasing the rate of conviction (although this is important), but
rather at improving the operation
of the legal system and its response to
serious criminal offences. Reform efforts to date have focused on challenging
the myths that
have underpinned the law’s responses to sexual assault and
arguably continue to resonate with some current practices and attitudes.
myths bear no relationship to reality and hence do not concern the accused and
the right to a fair trial, but rather foster
implicit prejudices to raise
‘doubts’ about the complainant’s credibility generally, and
specifically credibility
as a ‘true’ victim of sexual assault.
15.79 A good example of this process of interrogating what is a ‘right
of the accused’ in a criminal proceeding is provided
by recent legislative
prohibitions on the accused conducting personal cross-examination of the
complainant in sexual offence
proceedings.
In introducing
these measures there was a need to maintain the ‘fundamental rule of
natural justice that people on trial for
criminal offences have the right to
test the evidence against them’ while addressing the ‘highly
distressing’ situation
of a complainant being cross-examined by their
alleged attacker.
bodies that have considered this issue in detail have drawn a clear distinction
between the right to test the evidence,
and any perceived right to conduct
cross-examination in any manner or format.
15.80 A related theme can be characterised as the ‘spectre of false
complaints’—that is, that false complaints of
sexual assault are
commonly made. The extent of false complaints of sexual assault is difficult to
establish. However, the available
evidence suggests that it is small. A
Victorian study, which analysed 850 rapes reported to the police over the period
found that only 2.1% of reports were designated as false by the
police. In these cases, the alleged victim was either charged or
told that she
would be charged unless she dropped the complaint. While this only represents a
fraction of the sample, there was a
much larger proportion of cases where police
were confident, or reasonably confident, that the allegations were false, but
was no attempt to institute charges against the alleged
15.81 Despite these data, concern about lying and fabrication has been a
central feature of the sexual assault trial. Research has
indicated that many
complainants are asked about lying in cross examination. In the
Heroines of
study, for example, 84% of complainants were asked questions about
lying, one complainant was asked 98 questions about lying in cross
examination.
In addition,
women are questioned about their motives for reporting, seeking revenge, and
whether they made a report simply to access
victims compensation—one-third
of complainants in the
study were asked about
[back to top]
15.82 The present Inquiry follows an extensive body of work by law reform
commissions
government bodies
of the law and procedure relating to sexual offences. Since the 1970s, there
have been successive rounds of legislative
and procedural change across
Australian jurisdictions.
Focus of reform
15.83 In relation to the substance of sexual offences, reform has focused, at
different times and in different jurisdictions, on the
following issues:
Terminology
Some Australian
sexual assault.
generally seen as a way to move away from the emphasis on sexual elements, to
focus instead on sexual assault as an assault—that
is, as an act of
violence. Other jurisdictions have retained the language of
. Since the 1990s there has been a move to
define consent in legislation. All Australian jurisdictions, with the exception
ACT, now have a legislative definition of
These definitions
are based on a communicative model of consent.
Definition of sexual assault
. Definitions of what
constitutes a sexual assault have been broadened, so that, for example,
penetrative sexual offences includes
penetration by a penis, object, part of a
body or mouth.
Gender neutral laws
All jurisdictions amended
the laws relating to sexual assault or rape so that they are gender neutral.
Before this, rape had been
specifically defined as an offence perpetrated by a
man against a woman.
Graded sexual offences
. Some jurisdictions introduced
graded sexual offences– that is, a range of sexual offences with different
penalties attached.
This differentiation usually takes account of the presence
of physical violence or other aggravating
circumstances.
approach again intended to focus on sexual assault as an act of violence.
Removal of the marital immunity
. All jurisdictions
legislated to remove the marital
Age of criminal responsibility
. With the exception of
Tasmania, all jurisdictions removed notions that a person was not capable,
simply on the basis of their age,
of having or intending to have sexual
intercourse.
15.84 In relation to criminal procedure and evidence law, reform
has focused on:
Evidence of sexual reputation and experience
Legislation was enacted to restrict the cross-examination of complainants and
the admission of evidence of complainants’ sexual
reputation and prior
sexual experience.
Protecting counselling communications
. Legislation was
enacted to protect confidential counselling communications from being disclosed
or used in sexual offence
proceedings.
Jury warnings
. Legislation was enacted restricting or
providing greater guidance to judicial officers, on warnings to the jury
regarding unreliable
evidence and
corroboration
implications of delay in
Giving evidence
. Legislation was enacted to restrict
or provide limits on inappropriate and offensive questioning in
cross-examination;
enable access to other modes of giving evidence, particularly for children and
people with a cognitive
impairment.
This has included
the use of pre-recorded evidence, the use of closed circuit television or
screens and enabling complainants to
give evidence accompanied by a support
the same time, changes have occurred in relation to police and prosecutorial
practices and procedure. For example, as discussed
in Chapter 17, there
have been moves towards more specialised and integrated police responses to
sexual violence, aimed in part at
ensuring that complainants receive appropriate
support at the outset from the criminal justice system. Prosecutorial guidelines
the interests of victims to be taken into account in various ways.
Recent work
15.86 A number of important projects and law reform initiatives intended to
address continuing concerns with how the criminal justice
system responds to
allegations of sexual assault have taken place since 2003. These have included
NSW Criminal Justice Sexual Offences
VLRC sexual offences
Queensland Crime and Misconduct Commission inquiry into the handling
of sexual offences;
Western Australian government Inquiry into the Prosecution of
Assaults and Sexual
South Australian Review of Rape and Sexual Assault
ACT Sexual Assault Response
Northern Territory Board of Inquiry into the Protection of
Aboriginal Children from Child
initiatives
15.87 There are several relevant inquiries and investigations currently being
undertaken. These include:
NSWLRC and Queensland Law Reform Commission inquiries examining jury
directions;
the Tasmania Law Reform Institute inquiry examining tendency and
coincidence
addition, there is work being undertaken by the Standing Committee of Attorneys
General (SCAG). SCAG is currently looking
at provisions relating to vulnerable
witnesses and protection for counselling communications. The ALRC has been
specifically directed
not to duplicate this
legal responses
15.89 As noted at the beginning of this chapter, sexual assault does not only
appear in the criminal justice system—it is raised
in, and seeks a
response from, a range of different legal areas, often arising from the same
incident. These include:
Protection orders
. In most jurisdictions, sexual
assault is nominated as one of the forms of violence that may ground an
application for a civil protection
Such allegations may
be contained in the actual complaint or raised in oral evidence before the
court. There is little research available
violence is included within protection order proceedings. It has, however, been
suggested that sexual
violence is rarely referred to expressly in protection
order complaints.
the potential to render this form of violence invisible in these proceedings
and, in those cases where it has taken place—but
not been referred
to—provides an inadequate picture in which to assess the need for
protection. Protection orders and the relationship
between protection orders and
criminal law proceedings are discussed in Chapter 6.
. Sexual violence may be raised in family
law proceedings, including in relation to decisions about parenting or property
Child sexual assault and the family law system is specifically discussed
in Chapter 14. In relation to adult sexual assault in family
law proceedings,
again research suggests that it is raised in few
It has been
suggested that sexual violence may be less visible than other forms of family
violence due to the reluctance of lawyers,
and other professionals, to ask
specifically about sexual
There may be a lack
of understanding about how sexual violence is a risk factor in the future
seriousness and repetition of family
violence and, therefore, how it should be
taken into account in any family law determinations. As with civil protection
the experience of sexual violence as part of family violence is
important in understanding the risk faced by a victim, and in considering
ways in which it might have an impact on determinations about whether and how
are interested in hearing
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) to better assess the
risk created by family violence, including sexual assault, and how that combined
experience impacts on
questions concerning parenting orders.
Crimes compensation schemes
Compensation for victims of sexual assault may be available through the
various state and territory crimes compensation schemes. For
example, in NSW,
persons injured by an act of violence, including a sexual assault, are eligible
for an award of compensation between
In recent years
there have been changes to criminal injuries compensation schemes, in some
violence and sexual assault are dealt
with, and flexibility around the time limits within which applications must be
lodged. An area
of concern for sexual assault victims is the manner in which
related acts are defined and dealt with under the various statutory
This is a particular issue given that family violence, including sexual assault,
is the ‘quintessential repeat
Often these
provisions mean that acts perpetrated around the same time, by the same
perpetrator, and in similar circumstances, may
be treated as related
acts—limiting the claim to a single
Law of torts
. The acts comprising sexual assault or
domestic violence also constitute a civil wrong, known as a tort. In particular,
of battery, assault and negligence are possible sources of redress for
victims of family violence. Bringing an action in tort for
assaults and
batteries that took place as part of family violence is rare when compared to
claims made under the various state and
territory compensation schemes. This is
because there are a number of barriers that plaintiffs encounter, including: the
bringing such an action; the limited prospect of recovery, even if
successful; the effect of limitation periods; the difficulty in
proving the
case, particularly if the events took place some time ago; and the adversarial
nature of these proceedings (particularly
when compared to the process available
under crimes compensation
each of these areas questions may be raised about the visibility of sexual
assault and whether the response of the legal
system is adequate. The
Commissions are interested in comment on whether any of these areas should be
examined in more detail in
the final report.
Law is not the only
15.91 The law (criminal and civil) is not the only mechanism available to
respond to the problem of sexual assault. A range of legal
and non-legal
measures is required in order to substantially reduce sexual violence. This need
is particularly clear given the very
small number of cases that come to the
attention of the criminal justice system. The VLRC recognised this reality,
noting that:
An adequate response to the harm of sexual assault must go beyond the criminal
justice process and include other mechanisms for assisting
people who have been
sexually assaulted such as access to information, provision of counselling and
support services ... and
compensation.
15.92 While the Commissions recognise that non-legal measures are vital in
developing an appropriately integrated response to sexual
assault, the main
focus in this part of the Inquiry is on the interpretation and application of
criminal law and procedure. In this
context it is important to recognise the
process of feedback between the legal system and the community. On the one hand,
attitudes inform the legal system’s responses to sexual assault;
on the other, the law—how it defines and responds to
assault—plays a key symbolic role in forming community perceptions of
sexual violence. As such, the law is a critical
mechanism through which
understandings of appropriate sexual relationships—based on notions of
autonomy and freedom of choice—can
be fostered.
[back to top]
The implementation
15.93 Despite extensive changes to law and procedure, research continues to
highlight a gap between written law and its practice—referred
‘implementation gap’. This gap highlights the resistance to change
evident in the legal system through its legal
players who may still hold views
commentators question the over-reliance
on, or confidence in, legislative change
alone to bring about substantive changes for women and children as complainants
15.94 The VLRC reflected on this problem in its report on sexual offences,
noting that:
The changes to procedure and evidence laws which are recommended in this Report
are unlikely to be effective unless they are also
accompanied by changes to the
culture of the criminal justice
15.95 The likely continued disjunction between the purpose and intention of
legislation and its application in practice without extensive
cultural change
needs to be borne in mind.
15.96 The disjunction is not confined to Australia. Commentators in other
countries have also noted the limits of focusing on changes
to legislation alone
to bring about substantive change to sexual assault trials, the experience of
complainants in those trials,
the rates of conviction and acquittal, and the
need instead to focus on attitudinal and cultural
Cultural change
requires general community education, education of police officers, lawyers and
judicial officers, as well as changes
to policies and procedures.
15.97 Time for Action
noted that ‘enhanced community awareness
and education programs are needed to change violence-supportive
attitudes’.
recommended a range of measures to strengthen community leadership, awareness
and understanding of sexual assault and
family violence; and to promote positive
male behaviours.
15.98 Community attitudes also determine the legal system’s response to
sexual assault complaints. The key players in the legal
system—police,
lawyers, judicial officers, jury members—are also members of the general
community, frequently sharing
the same attitudes and beliefs about sexual
assault, who perpetrates it, and who can be a victim. While there has been great
in community attitudes about violence against women—including
sexual assault—there are still a number of resilient myths
in currency. If
key legal players also subscribe to some of these community attitudes and myths,
the implementation of reform is
15.99 Time for Action
included recommendations intended to ensure that
judicial officers, law enforcement personnel and other professionals within the
legal system have appropriate knowledge and expertise. These included the
development and implementation of:
a national education and professional development framework that recognises the
specific roles and functions of police; prosecutors;
defence counsel; family and
migration lawyers; legal advisers; court staff and the
Judicial and legal
15.100 The National Council also recommended the production of a model Bench
Book, in consultation with jurisdictions, and as part
of a national professional
development program for judicial officers on sexual assault and domestic and
family violence. This Bench
Book would ‘provide a social context analysis
and case law to complement existing resources and enhance the application of
Specialist sexual
assault bench books have been developed by the Judicial Commission of New South
and the Judicial
College of Victoria.
15.101 The need for judicial education in relation to dealing with sexual
assault cases is highlighted in different contexts in the
following chapters.
For example, judicial and practitioner education on the ‘nature of sexual
assault, including the context
in which sexual offences typically occur, and the
emotional, psychological and social impact of sexual
may be needed
in relation to decisions about jury warnings on the effect of delay on the
credibility of complainants. Similarly,
there may be a need for guidance on
expert opinion about children’s responses to sexual abuse and their
reliability as witnesses;
and the admission of evidence about a
complainant’s prior sexual
15.102 More generally, the need for a ‘common knowledge base’ of
family violence has been identified by the Family Law
For this purpose,
the Council has recommended that an expert panel be established that
‘considers research, distils accepted
opinions, and agrees on information
that should be included in the common knowledge
centralisation of information attached to a specific judicial education or other
body (such as the Australian Institute of
Family Studies) could support
consistency and improved legal responses. Judicial officers, prosecutors,
defence lawyers, police and
others involved in the criminal justice response to
sexual assault in the family violence context might all be better informed.
As opposed to sexual offences such as
those relating to child sex tourism:
Crimes Act 1914
rape or sexual violence in the context of war or as a crime against humanity:
Criminal Code
(Cth) ss 268.14, 268.19, 268.59, 268.64. See also
Crimes Legislation Amendment (Sexual Offences Against Children) Act 2010
Rather, the Australian Parliament
chooses to rely heavily on the state and territory courts to adjudicate
proceedings with respect
to federal offences in order to avoid the financial and
administrative costs associated with establishing a separate system of federal
criminal courts. The use of state courts was made possible by ss 71
and 77(iii) of the
Constitution
Judiciary Act
invests state courts with federal jurisdiction in
both civil and criminal matters, subject to certain limitations and exceptions.
Judiciary Act 1903
state and territory procedural and evidence laws are applied to federal
prosecutions in state and territory
Ch 16 summarises the range
of sexual offences in Australia.
Australian Bureau of Statistics,
Sexual Assault in Australia: A Statistical
(2004), 8. For a more detailed discussion of this
conceptualisation, see Australian Bureau of Statistics,
Sexual Assault
Information Development Framework: Information Paper
, Cat No 4518.0 (2003),
National Council to Reduce
Violence against Women and their Children,
Time for Action: The National
Council’s Plan for Australia to Reduce Violence against Women and their
(2009). See also The National Council to Reduce Violence
against Women and their Children,
Background Paper to Time for Action: The
National Council’s Plan to Reduce Violence against Women and their
Children, 2009–2021
Australian Bureau of
Statistics,
Sexual Assault in Australia: A Statistical Overview
Ibid, 9. There is variation across the
defined: See Ch 16.
For a discussion of the limitations of
various data sources, eg, police statistics, crime surveys and victim surveys,
see B Cook,
F David and A Grant,
Sexual Violence in Australia: Australian
Institute of Criminology Research and Public Policy Series
, 36 (2001),
Australian Bureau of
Statistics,
Sexual Assault in Australia: A Statistical Overview
J Mouzos and T Makkai,
Women’s Experiences of Male Violence: Findings of the Australian
Component of the International Violence Against Women Survey
Australian Institute of Criminology,
Australian Institute of
Criminology, ‘Guilty Outcomes in Reported Sexual Assault and Related
Offence Incidents’ (Press
Release, 18 December
J Mouzos and T Makkai,
Women’s Experiences of Male Violence: Findings of the Australian
Component of the International Violence Against Women Survey
Australian Institute of Criminology, 92,
The perceived seriousness
of an event has been identified as a critical determinant in whether a person
reports an incident to the
police (seriousness includes such factors as whether
the victim had been detained in some way, injured, or threatened, and the
relationship
with the perpetrator): Ibid,
See Ibid, 97–99,
105–106. See also L Kelly, ‘Promising Practices Addressing Sexual
Violence’ (Paper presented
at Violence Against Women: Good Practices in
Combating and Eliminating Violence Against Women Expert Group Meeting, Vienna,
May 2005), Box 1, 5.
D Parkinson,
Partner: A Research Report
(2008), 18. Parkinson suggests that this may
explain the disparity in some surveys between the number of women who disclose
assault by a current partner when compared to the number who disclose
sexual assault by a former partner. For example, data in Australia
Statistics,
Personal Safety
Survey, 4906.0 (2005) show that of women who
had experienced violence since the age of 15, 2.1% reported sexual violence by a
partner, compared to 21.7% by a previous partner: D Parkinson,
by a Partner: A Research Report
(2008), 18,
D Parkinson,
Partner: A Research Report
J Mouzos and T Makkai,
Women’s Experiences of Male Violence: Findings of the Australian
Component of the International Violence Against Women Survey
Australian Institute of Criminology, 24; Australian Bureau of Statistics,
Sexual Assault in Australia: A Statistical Overview
See Australian Bureau of
Statistics,
Sexual Assault in Australia: A Statistical Overview
For example, those with
unstable housing, Indigenous women particularly those living in rural and remote
areas, women with limited
or no English, women in custody, young women, or women
in group homes or in institutional
The National Council to Reduce
Violence against Women and their Children,
Background Paper to Time for
Action: The National Council’s Plan to Reduce Violence against Women and
their Children, 2009–2021
See discussion in M Schwartz,
‘Methodological Issues in the Use of Survey Data for Measuring and
Characterizing’ (2000)
Violence Against Women
815, 820–821;
W DeKeseredy, ‘Current Controversies on Defining Nonlethal Violence
Against Women in Intimate Heterosexual
Relationships’ (2000) 6
Against Women
discussion about methodology and design in H Johnson, ‘Assessing the
Prevalence of Violence Against Women in Canada ’
(Paper presented at A
Statistical Overview, Challenges and Gaps in Data Collection and Methodology and
Approaches for Overcoming
Them: Expert Group Meeting, UN Division for the
Advancement of Women, Violence Against Women, Geneva, 11–14 April 2005);
Tjaden, ‘Defining and Measuring Violence Against Women: Background,
Issues and Recommendations’ (Paper presented at A
Statistical Overview,
Challenges and Gaps in Data Collection and Methodology and Approaches for
Overcoming Them: Expert Group Meeting
UN Division for the Advancement of Women,
Violence Against Women, Geneva, 11–14 April 2005); S Walby,
‘Improving the
Statistics on Violence Against Women ’ (Paper
presented at A Statistical Overview, Challenges and Gaps in Data Collection and
Methodology and Approaches for Overcoming Them: Expert Group Meeting, UN
Division for the Advancement of Women, Violence Against
Women, Geneva,
11–14 April 2005).
See similar
discussion in Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Sexual Offences: Discussion
(2001), [1.11].
Australian Bureau of Statistics,
Personal Safety Survey
, 4906.0 (2005),
Tables 3, 5.
See Ibid, Table 19 in
relation to women.
Australian Institute of
Health and Welfare,
A Picture of Australia’s Children 2009
J Mouzos and T Makkai,
Women’s Experiences of Male Violence: Findings of the Australian
Component of the International Violence Against Women Survey
Australian Institute of Criminology,
Non-Reporting and
Hidden Recording of Sexual Assault: An International Review—Report
prepared for the Commonwealth Office of
the Status of Women
Australian Institute of Criminology, 7.
Australian Bureau of Statistics,
Personal Safety Survey
, 4906.0 (2005),
J Mouzos and T Makkai,
Women’s Experiences of Male Violence: Findings of the Australian
Component of the International Violence Against Women Survey
Australian Institute of Criminology, 29. Note that Mouzos and Makkai emphasise
that these result should be ‘viewed with
caution due to the high relative
standard error’: 30.
Bureau of Statistics,
Recorded Crime—Victims
, Catalogue No 4510.0
(2008), 22. The ABS only reported on Indigenous victimisation for NSW, South
Australia and the Northern Territory.
It did not report on Indigenous
victimisation for other jurisdictions given limitations in the quality of the
data: 22. This ABS
publication reports on selected offences recorded by the
police for the 2008 calendar year: 53.
Ibid, 48, 51. See also N Taylor and J Putt,
Adult Sexual Violence in
Indigenous and Culturally and Linguistically Diverse Communities in
N Taylor and J Putt,
Sexual Violence in Indigenous and Culturally and Linguistically Diverse
Communities in Australia
See discussion in A Neame and M Heenan,
What Lies Behind the Hidden Figure
of Sexual Assault: Issues of Prevalence and Disclosure
, Australian Centre
for the Study of Sexual Assault Briefing (September
J Mouzos and T Makkai,
Women’s Experiences of Male Violence: Findings of the Australian
Component of the International Violence Against Women Survey
Australian Institute of Criminology,
See discussion in A Neame and M
What Lies Behind the Hidden Figure of Sexual Assault: Issues of
Prevalence and Disclosure
, Australian Centre for the Study of Sexual Assault
Briefing (September 2003).
discussion in N Taylor and J Putt,
Adult Sexual Violence in Indigenous and
Culturally and Linguistically Diverse Communities in Australia
S Salthouse and C Frohmader,
‘Double the Odds: Domestic Violence and Women with Disabilities’
(Paper presented at Home
Truths Conference, Melbourne, 15–17 September
L Kelly, ‘Promising
Practices Addressing Sexual Violence’ (Paper presented at Violence Against
Women: Good Practices
in Combating and Eliminating Violence Against Women Expert
Group Meeting, Vienna, 17–20 May
J Mouzos and T Makkai,
Women’s Experiences of Male Violence: Findings of the Australian
Component of the International Violence Against Women Survey
Australian Institute of Criminology, 25.
Australian Bureau of Statistics,
Personal Safety Survey
See types of behaviour
detailed in K Basile and L Saltzman,
Sexual Violence Surveillance: Uniform
Definitions and Recommended Data Elements
(2009), 9–10. See also D
Raped by a Partner: A Research Report
(2008), 27–37; E
Coercive Control: How Men Entrap Women in Personal Life
L Kelly, ‘Promising
Practices Addressing Sexual Violence’ (Paper presented at Violence Against
Women: Good Practices
in Combating and Eliminating Violence Against Women Expert
Group Meeting, Vienna, 17–20 May
L McOrmond-Plummer,
Considering the Differences: Intimate Partner Sexual Violence in Sexual
Assault and Domestic Violence Discourse
(2009), 2; E Stark,
Control: How Men Entrap Women in Personal Life
(2007), 388; D Lievore,
Non-Reporting and Hidden Recording of Sexual Assault: An International
Review—Report prepared for the Commonwealth Office of
the Status of
(2003) Australian Institute of Criminology, 8. The vast majority of
case studies presented in Parkinson’s study of partner
rape document
multiple rapes experienced by the women who participated in that study:
D Parkinson,
Raped by a Partner: A Research Report
P Tjaden and N Thoennes,
Extent, Nature and Consequences of Intimate Partner Violence: Findings from
the National Violence Against Women Survey Research Report
V Kingi and J Jordan,
Responding to Sexual Violence: Pathways to Recovery
(2009), 48. 59% of
the people in this study indicated that they had been sexually assaulted in a
family violence context (ie, by
a current/former intimate partner or by a
family/whānau member). Only 8% were described as stranger
L Schafran, S Lopez-Boy and M
Making Marital Rape a Crime: A Long Road Travelled, A Long Way to
(2009); E Stark,
Coercive Control: How Men Entrap Women in Personal
(2007), 388.
García-Moreno and others,
WHO Multi-Country Study on Women’s
Health and Domestic Violence Against Women: Initial Results on Prevalence,
Health Outcomes
and Women’s Responses
(2005), 32. See also L Kelly,
Surviving Sexual Violence
(1988), 53,
National Council to
Reduce Violence against Women and their Children,
Time for Action: The
National Council’s Plan for Australia to Reduce Violence against Women and
their Children,
(2009), 14.
Non-Reporting and Hidden Recording of Sexual Assault: An
International Review—Report prepared for the Commonwealth Office of
Status of Women
(2003) Australian Institute of Criminology,
Family Violence and
Sexual Assault in Indigenous Communities: “Walking the Talk”
Ibid, 5. See, also,
Queensland Police Service,
Statistical Comparisons 2002–2003
(2003); H Blagg, D Ray, R Murphy and E Macarthy,
Crisis Intervention in
Aboriginal Family Violence: Strategies and Models for Western Australia
See, eg, National Council to
Reduce Violence against Women and their Children,
Time for Action: The
National Council’s Plan for Australia to Reduce Violence against Women and
their Children, 2009–2021
(2009), 54 (Strategies 1.5.2, 1.5.3);
Northern Territory Board of Inquiry into the Protection of Aboriginal Children
from Sexual
Little Children are Sacred: Report of the Northern
Territory Board of Inquiry into the Protection of Aboriginal Children from
Supporting Research; Australian Institute of
Health and Welfare,
Family Violence Among Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander Peoples
Violence and Sexual Assault in Indigenous Communities: “Walking the
L Thorpe, R
Solomon and M Dimopoulos,
From Shame to Pride: Access to Sexual Assault
Services for Indigenous People
Family Violence and Sexual
Assault in Indigenous Communities: “Walking the Talk”
K Cripps and H McGlade,
‘Indigenous Family Violence and Sexual Abuse: Considering Pathways
Forward’ (2008) 14
Journal of Family Studies
L Thorpe, R Solomon and M Dimopoulos,
From Shame to Pride: Access to Sexual Assault Services for Indigenous
(2004), 21.
Cripps and H McGlade, ‘Indigenous Family Violence and Sexual Abuse:
Considering Pathways Forward’ (2008)
Journal of Family Studies
240; Northern Territory Board of Inquiry into the Protection of Aboriginal
Children from Sexual Abuse,
Little Children are Sacred: Report of the
Northern Territory Board of Inquiry into the Protection of Aboriginal Children
from Sexual
(2007); Aboriginal Child Sexual Assault Taskforce (NSW),
Breaking the Silence: Creating the Future. Addressing Child Sexual Assault in
Aboriginal communities in NSW
(2006); M Keel,
Family Violence and Sexual
Assault in Indigenous Communities: “Walking the Talk”
Gordon, K Hallahan and D Henry,
Putting the Picture Together, Inquiry
into Response by Government Agencies to Complaints of Family Violence and Child
Abuse in Aboriginal
Communities
Family Violence
and Sexual Assault in Indigenous Communities: “Walking the Talk”
(2004). Restorative justice is discussed in
Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Sexual Offences: Discussion Paper
Model Criminal Code Officers
Committee of the Standing Committee of Attorneys-General,
Model Criminal
Code—Chapter 5 Sexual Offences Against the Person
(1999), 1; Victorian
Law Reform Commission,
Sexual Offences: Discussion Paper
See C Taylor,
Court Licensed
Abuse: Patriarchal Lore and the Legal Response to Intrafamilial Sexual Abuse of
(2004), 30; K Mack, ‘“You Should Scrutinise Her
Evidence With Great Care”: Corroboration of Women’s Testimony
Sexual Assault’ in P Easteal (ed)
Balancing the Scales: Rape, Law
Reform and Australian Culture
As quoted in L Schafran,
S Lopez-Boy and M Davis,
Making Marital Rape a Crime: A Long Road Travelled,
A Long Way to Go
(2009), 15.
‘Real rape’ is rape perpetrated by a stranger in a dark alley
against a ‘good’ woman, as opposed to ‘not
where the women is assaulted by someone she knows in circumstances where there
are questions about her behaviour,
eg, in terms of sexual experience and drug
and alcohol use: see S Estrich, ‘Rape’
, 1088. The VLRC drew a distinction between the
‘classic’ rape scenario and its reality: Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Sexual Offences: Discussion Paper
See discussion in S Doyle and
C Barbato, ‘Justice Delayed Is Justice Denied: The Experiences of Women in
Court as Victims
of Sexual Assault’ in J Breckenridge and L Laing (eds),
Challenging Silence: Innovative Responses to Sexual and Domestic Violence
(1999) 50, 50.
There were exceptions
to this general approach: P Easteal, ‘Rape in Marriage: Has the Licence
Lapsed?’ in P Easteal
Balancing the Scales: Rape, Law Reform and
Australian Culture
(1998) 107, 111.
As quoted in P Easteal and C Feerick, ‘Sexual Assault by Male Partners:
Is the Licence Still Valid?’
[2005] FlinJlLawRfm 10
Flinders Journal of Law Reform
, 186, n 6.
For a brief
discussion of the different treatment of marital rape and the removal of this
defence in various US jurisdictions see
L Schafran, S Lopez-Boy and M Davis,
Making Marital Rape a Crime: A Long Road Travelled, A Long Way to Go
(2009), 12–13.
N Taylor and J
Adult Sexual Violence in Indigenous and Culturally and Linguistically
Diverse Communities in Australia
(2007), 2–3 found that some CALD
women do not know that rape by their spouse is against the law in
See discussion in R Graycar
and J Morgan,
The Hidden Gender of Law
(2nd ed, 2002),
M Heenan and H
The Crimes Rape Act 1991: An Evaluation Report
(1997), 44 as
cited in Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Sexual Offences: Interim Report
(2003), 309.
Australian Bureau of
Statistics,
Women’s Safety Australia
(1996), Table
See discussion in Victorian Law
Reform Commission,
Sexual Offences: Discussion Paper
P Tjaden and N Thoennes,
Extent, Nature and Consequences of Intimate Partner Violence: Findings from
the National Violence Against Women Survey Research Report
Crimes Act 1958
s 61(1)(b). See Ch 18 on jury
While much of the mythology
in this area is in the form of negative perceptions of women it is worth
reflecting on this rather narrow
negative perception of men and their sexuality.
As Heath notes, some of the traditional ideas about rape and marriage leave
room for male sexualities that are respectful rather than
possessory, and little space for female sexualities that are autonomous
than submissive, there-to-be-possessed’:
M Heath, ‘Disputed
Truths: Australian Reform of the Sexual Conduct Elements of Common Law
Rape’ in P Easteal (ed)
Balancing the Scales: Rape, Law Reform and
Australian Culture
(1998) 13, 16.
Heroines of Fortitude: The Experiences of Women in Court as
Victims of Sexual Assault, Gender Bias and the Law Project
(1996); M Heenan
and H McKelvie,
The Crimes Rape Act 1991: An Evaluation Report
This was the second report of the Rape Law Reform Evaluation Project (RLREP)
overseen by the Victorian Attorney General’s
Department. See discussion of
the work of the RLREP in Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Sexual Offences:
Discussion Paper
[2.19]–[2.12].
Victorian Law
Reform Commission,
Sexual Offences: Interim Report
Legislative Council Standing
Committee on Social Issues—Parliament of NSW,
Sexual Violence: The
Hidden Crime—Inquiry into the Incidence of Sexual Offences in New South
, Part 1 (1993),
[1.1.1]–[1.1.2].
As discussed in
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Sexual Offences: Discussion Paper
(2001), [5.19].
New South Wales Law
Reform Commission,
Questioning of Complainants by Unrepresented Accused in
Sexual Offence Trials
, Report No 101 (2003),
D Brereton, ‘How
Different are Rape Trials? A Comparison of the Cross Examination of Complainants
in Rape and Assault Trials’
British Journal of Criminology
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Sexual Offences: Final Report
87–90; New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Questioning of
Complainants by Unrepresented Accused in Sexual Offence Trials
, Report No
101 (2003), [1.7]–[1.9].
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Sexual Offences: Final Report
[1.9]–[1.10].
[1992] HCA 57
(1992) 177 CLR 292
Including: the
presumption of innocence, guilt determined according to law, adequate time to
prepare defence and brief lawyer of
own choosing, being brought to trial in a
timely manner, being tried in his or her presence, having access to an
interpreter if required
and being able to effectively test the evidence
presented against him or her:
International Covenant on Civil and Political
, 16 December 1966,
[1980] ATS 23
, (entered into force generally
on 23 March 1976), art 14.
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Sexual Offences: Discussion Paper
(2001), [4.6].
For example,
Victims’ Rights Act 1996
Victims’ Charter Act
For example, under
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
, 18 December 1979,
[1983] ATS 9
, (entered into force generally on
3 September 1981);
Convention on the Rights of the Child
, 20 November
[1991] ATS 4
, (entered into force generally on 2 September 1990). See
Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Sexual Offences: Interim Report
New South Wales Law Reform
Commission,
Questioning of Complainants by Unrepresented Accused in Sexual
Offence Trials
, Report No 101 (2003),
Victorian Government
Statewide Steering Committee to Reduce Sexual Assault,
Study of Reported
Rapes in Victoria 2000–2003: Summary Research Report
summarised in:
Z Morrison,
‘What is the Outcome of Reporting Rape to the Police?’ (2008) (17)
Australian Centre for the Study of Sexual Assault Newsletter
S Doyle and C Barbato,
‘Justice Delayed Is Justice Denied: The Experiences of Women in Court as
Victims of Sexual Assault’
in J Breckenridge and L Laing (eds),
Challenging Silence: Innovative Responses to Sexual and Domestic Violence
(1999) 50, 50.
See, eg: New South
Wales Law Reform Commission,
Questioning of Complainants by Unrepresented
Accused in Sexual Offence Trials
, Report No 101 (2003); New South Wales Law
Reform Commission,
Review of Section 409B of the
Crimes Act 1900
Report 87 (1998); Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Sexual Offences: Final
(2004); Queensland Law Reform Commission,
Reform of the Law of
, Report 21 (1976); Tasmania Law Reform Institute,
Warnings in Sexual
Offences Cases Relating to Delay in Complaint
, Final Report No 8 (2006); ACT
Law Reform Commission,
Sexual Assault
, Report No 18 (2001); Northern
Territory Law Reform Committee,
Report on the Laws Relating to the
Investigation and Prosecution of Sexual Assault in the Northern Territory
For example, at the
national level, see Model Criminal Code Officers Committee of the Standing
Committee of Attorneys-General,
Model Criminal Code—Chapter 5 Sexual
Offences Against the Person
(1999). In NSW: Criminal Justice Sexual Offences
Taskforce (NSW),
Responding to Sexual Assault: The Way Forward
Legislative Council Standing Committee on Law and Justice—Parliament
of New South Wales,
Report on Child Sexual Assault Prosecutions
No 22 (2002); J Bargen,
Heroines of Fortitude: The Experiences of Women in
Court as Victims of Sexual Assault, Gender Bias and the Law Project
In Victoria: Crime Prevention Committee—Parliament of Victoria,
Combating Child Sexual Assault: An Integrated Model
(1995); the work of
the RLREP, eg, M Heenan and H McKelvie,
The Crimes Rape Act 1991: An
Evaluation Report
(1997). In Queensland: Crime and Misconduct Commission
Seeking Justice: An Inquiry into How Sexual Offences are Handled by
the Queensland Criminal Justice System
(2003). In Tasmania: Task Force on
Sexual Assault and Rape in Tasmania,
Report of the Task Force on Sexual
Assault and Rape in Tasmania
(1998). In South Australia: see L Chapman,
Review of South Australia Rape and Sexual Assault Law: Discussion Paper
(2006). In WA: Western Australian Community Development and Justice Standing
Inquiry into the Prosecution of Assaults and Sexual Offences
In NSW, WA, ACT and NT, the
offence of sexual penetration or sexual intercourse without consent is
articulated as one of a number
of sexual assault offences: see
Criminal Code
(WA) s 325;
Crimes Act 1900
Criminal Code
Crimes Act 1958
Criminal Code
(Qld) s 349;
Criminal Law Consolidation Act
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 185. All jurisdictions,
whether they call the penetrative offence ‘rape’ or ‘sexual
intercourse without
consent’, have broadened the offence beyond the common
law offence of rape which was penile penetration of a women without
her consent
(or against her will). There are still debates about what is the best approach
and most appropriate language to employ:
see discussion in M Heath,
‘Disputed Truths: Australian Reform of the Sexual Conduct Elements of
Common Law Rape’ in
P Easteal (ed)
Balancing the Scales: Rape, Law
Reform and Australian Culture
(1998) 13, 23–24. Professor Reg Graycar
has observed that, while some jurisdictions have done away with the language of
the ‘phenomenon that women fear is still [called] rape’:
R Graycar, ‘Frozen Chooks Revisited: The Challenge of
Law/s’ in R Hunter and M Keyes (eds),
Changing Law: Rights, Regulation
and Reconciliation
(2005) 49, 55. See also discussion in J Bargen and E
Sexual Assault Law Reform: A National Perspective
Crimes Act 1900
Crimes Act 1958
Criminal Code
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
(Tas) s 2A;
Crimes Act 1900
Criminal Code
(NT) s 192. This issue is discussed in detail in
number of commentators thought that the move to gender neutrality might lead to
improvements in the way that the law dealt with
sexual offences as now men would
have a ‘stake in making the law of rape work better’: M Heath,
‘Disputed Truths:
Australian Reform of the Sexual Conduct Elements of
Common Law Rape’ in P Easteal (ed)
Balancing the Scales: Rape, Law
Reform and Australian Culture
(1998) 13, 15. However, other commentators
pointed out that gender neutrality obscures ‘who is doing what to
failing to make explicit the fact that while men can, and are,
sexually assaulted, women and girls are overwhelmingly the victims
of these acts
(that is to say, that it is a particularly gendered crime: see discussion in S
Bronitt and B McSherry,
Principles of Criminal Law
(2nd ed, 2005), 559; R
Graycar and J Morgan,
The Hidden Gender of Law
(2nd ed, 2002),
364–365. Graycar and Morgan note that one of the ways in which the
gendered nature of sexual assault can be
recognised is through an objects, or
guiding principles, clause: 365. This has been done in Victoria, see discussion
For a discussion of
arguments in favour and those against graded approaches see Heath in P Easteal
Balancing the Scales: Rape, Law Reform and Australian Culture
(1998), 22.
For express statutory
provisions see
Crimes Act 1900
Crimes Act 1958
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
Crimes Act 1900
The remaining jurisdictions have removed
the immunity by inference.
Crimes Act 1900
Crimes Act 1958
Criminal Code
(Qld) s 29;
Criminal Code
Criminal Law
Consolidation Act 1935
Crimes Act 1900
Criminal Code
(NT) s 38. In Tasmania a male child under the age of seven
is presumed to be incapable of having sexual intercourse:
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 18(3).
Procedure Act 2009
Criminal Law (Sexual Offences) Act
Evidence Act 1906
Evidence Act
Evidence Act 2001
Evidence (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1991
Offences (Evidence and Procedure) Act 1983
For current provisions see:
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
(Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1958
Evidence Act
Evidence Act 1929
Evidence Act 2001
Evidence (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Evidence Act 1939
Queensland has not engaged specific legislation protecting sexual assault
counselling communications.
Evidence Act 1995
Evidence Act 1995
Evidence Act 2008
Criminal Code
(Qld) s 632(2);
Evidence Act 1906
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 136;
Evidence Act 2001
Evidence (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1991
Uniform Evidence
Acts, s 165B;
Evidence Act 1929
Uniform Evidence Acts,
Evidence Act 1977
Evidence Act
Evidence Act 2001
Evidence Act 1939
For example, in relation to the
use of pre-recorded evidence:
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
Evidence Act 1977
(Qld) div 4, 4A;
Evidence Act
Evidence Act 1929
Evidence (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1991
(ACT) div 4.2B;
issues of criminal procedure and evidence law are discussed in
Justice Sexual Offences Taskforce (NSW),
Responding to Sexual Assault: The
Way Forward
Law Reform Commission,
Sexual Offences: Final Report
Crime and Misconduct
Commission (Qld),
Seeking Justice: An Inquiry into How Sexual Offences are
Handled by the Queensland Criminal Justice System
Western Australian
Community Development and Justice Standing Committee,
Inquiry into the
Prosecution of Assaults and Sexual Offences
L Chapman (for Government
of South Australia),
Review of South Australian Rape and Sexual Assault
Law—Discussion Paper
Office of the Director of
Public Prosecutions (ACT) and Australian Federal Police,
Responding to Sexual
Assault: The Challenge of Change
Northern Territory Board of
Inquiry into the Protection of Aboriginal Children from Sexual Abuse,
Children are Sacred: Report of the Northern Territory Board of Inquiry into the
Protection of Aboriginal Children from Sexual
New South Wales Law Reform
Commission,
Jury Directions
, CP 4 (2008); Queensland Law Reform
Commission,
A Review of Jury Directions
Tasmania Law Reform
Evidence Act 2001
Sections 97
and Hoch’s Case:
Admissibility of Tendency and Coincidence Evidence in Sexual Assault Cases with
Multiple Complainants
, Issues Paper 15
The Terms of Reference are
set out at the front of this Consultation
The main exception is
Western Australia which does not specifically refer to sexual offences under the
Criminal Code
(WA). Queensland includes ‘indecent behaviour without
consent’—which could potentially include a range of unwanted
In NSW, see J Wangmann,
‘“She Said …” “He said …” : Cross
Applications in NSW Apprehended
Domestic Violence Order Proceedings’,
, University of Sydney, 2009,
L Moloney and
Allegations of Family Violence and Child Abuse in Family Law
Children’s Proceedings: A Pre-reform Exploratory Study
Australian Institute of Family Studies, 69,
Women’s Legal
Services NSW,
Consultation
, Sydney, 23 September
Victims Support
and Rehabilitation Act 1996
R Felson and A Cares,
‘Gender and Seriousness of Assaults on Intimate Partners and Other
Victims’ (2005) 67
Journal of Marriage and the Family
See, eg, the procedural
Moore v Victims Compensation Fund Corporation
[2009] NSWSC
Notwithstanding such
difficulties, women have successfully brought such actions for physical and
sexual abuse perpetrated as part
of family violence. See, eg,
Karunaratne
[2009] NSWDC 346
Giller v Procopets
[2008] VSCA 236
(2008) 40 Fam LR
Varmedja v Varmedja
[2008] NSWCA
Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Sexual Offences: Final Report
See, eg, R Graycar,
‘Frozen Chooks Revisited: The Challenge of Changing Law/s’ in R
Hunter and M Keyes (eds),
Changing Law: Rights, Regulation and
Reconciliation
(2005) 49; J Stubbs, ‘Sexual Assault, Criminal Justice
and Law and Order’ (2003) 14
Women Against Violence
Bargen and E Fishwick,
Sexual Assault Law Reform: A National
Perspective
(1995), 7–8.
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Sexual Offences: Final Report
In South Africa, see C van
der Bijl and P Rumney, ‘Attitudes, Rape and Law Reform in South
Journal of Criminal Law
In the UK, see J
Temkin and B Kráhe,
Sexual Assault and the Justice Gap: A Question of
(2008); P Rumney, ‘The Review of Sex Offences and Rape Law
Reform: Another False Dawn’
Modern Law Review
Canada, see M Randall, ‘Sexual Assault in Spousal
Relationships,“Continuous Consent” and the Law, Honest but
Judicial Beliefs’’ (2008) 32
University of Manitoba Law Journal
National Council to Reduce
Violence against Women and their Children,
Time for Action: The National
Council’s Plan for Australia to Reduce Violence against Women and their
(2009), 49.
Ibid, 50–51.
In its final
report the VLRC noted that some police ‘are influenced by common myths
surrounding sexual assault and the behaviour
of victims’: Victorian Law
Reform Commission,
Sexual Offences: Final Report
National Council to Reduce
Violence against Women and their Children,
Time for Action: The National
Council’s Plan for Australia to Reduce Violence against Women and their
(2009), 121.
Judicial Commission of New
South Wales,
Sexual Assault Handbook
(2009) <www.judcom.nsw.
gov.au/publications/benchbks/sexual_assault/index.html> at 14 April
Judicial College of Victoria,
Sexual Assault Manual
(2008) <www.judicialcollege.vic.edu.au/
publications/sexual-assault-manual> at 21 February
See Australian Law Reform
Commission, New South Wales Law Reform Commission and Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Uniform Evidence Law
, ALRC 102, NSWLRC Report 112, VLRC FR
(2005), [18.173].
Family Law Council,
Improving Responses to Family Violence in the Family Law System: An Advice on
the Intersection of Family Violence and Family Law Issues
(2009), 38. The
principal recommendations are noted in
ALRC CP1 Family Violence � Improving Legal Frameworks
16. Sexual Offences
Introduction
Overview of sexual offences
Legislative framework
‘Rape’: the penetrative sexual offence
Sexual offences against children and young people
Sexual offences against people with cognitive impairment
Statutory definition of consent
Circumstances that negate consent
Reconstructing the offence to remove ‘consent’
The mental element
Jury directions about consent
Guiding principles and objects clauses
16. Sexual Offences
Introduction
16.1 This chapter summarises the range of existing sexual offences and
identifies inconsistencies in relation to elements of these
offences, notably in
relation to the issue of consent. It also discusses the role that guiding
principles and objects clauses can
play in explaining the reality of sexual
16.2 The summary of offences is not comprehensive, but focuses on those
sexual offences that are most likely to be perpetrated by
a current or former
intimate partner or family member. For example, sexual offences proscribed in
the Commonwealth criminal law such
as those relating to child sex
or rape or sexual violence
in the context of war or as a crime against
16.3 The purpose of summarising these offences is to illustrate the range of
sexually coercive behaviour that is proscribed in various
criminal laws, and in
some instances to point to promising approaches to counter such conduct. This
outline also assists in understanding
the context of other key developments in
law reform and their position in relation to the way the legal system responds
assault—for example, in its construction of consent, which is
not an element of sexual offences against children.
[back to top]
Overview of sexual
16.4 Extensive reforms of the laws relating to sexual offences over the last
25 years have resulted in a new range of sexual offences
As discussed in
Chapter 15, key areas of law reform included a move away from the language of
‘rape’ to that of ‘sexual
assault’ as a way of
emphasising sexual offences as acts of violence. Related to this was the grading
of sexual offences to
take account of different circumstances and aggravating
factors. These changes are reflected in the following summary of the relevant
Legislative
16.5 Each Australian jurisdiction has its own set of substantive and
procedural criminal laws. The main point of divergence between
the jurisdictions
is whether the criminal law is codified or remains guided by the common law.
Within that distinction, there is
a further differentiation as to whether the
16.6 In the criminal code jurisdictions—Queensland, Western Australia,
Tasmania and the Northern Territory—statutes comprehensively
set out the
criminal law such that ‘all crimes now exist in statutory form as defined
by the various Codes which have specifically
supplanted common law
In the common law
legislation is ‘interpreted in
the light of common law precepts unless
Parliament has expressly, or by necessary implication, evinced a clear intention
to displace
the common law’.
the penetrative sexual offence
16.7 Statutory extensions and modifications to the common law crime of rape
have been made in all jurisdictions to varying
At common law, rape was
defined as carnal knowledge of a woman against her will. In all jurisdictions,
the conception of the offence
has been expanded. The penetrative sexual offence
is no longer gender specific, and generally includes penetration of
by a penis, object, part
of a body or mouth.
A number of
in sexual penetration.
addition, common law understandings of consent, and the conditions or
circumstances that are seen as negating consent, have been
considerably
16.8 The penetrative sexual offence is described as: ‘rape’ in
Queensland,
assault’ in NSW;
‘sexual intercourse without consent’ in the ACT and the Northern
and as ‘sexual
penetration without consent’ in Western
The offence includes
the continuation of sexual intercourse after penetration in order to address
cases where consent has subsequently
16.9 The penalty for sexual intercourse without consent ranges from 12
imprisonment,
depending on the
16.10 In all jurisdictions the prosecution must prove that sexual penetration
took place without the consent of the complainant. These
are the physical
elements of the offence. In the common law jurisdictions—NSW, Victoria,
South Australia and the ACT—the
prosecution must also prove that the
accused knew that the victim was not consenting or was reckless about whether
there was such
This is known as the mental element of the offence, or
provisions apply in the Northern
By contrast, in the
Code jurisdictions—Queensland, Western Australia and Tasmania—the
prosecution need only prove
16.11 Until recently, in all the common law jurisdictions, a defendant who
could prove an honest albeit unreasonable belief in consent
would be acquitted
of the offence. In the code jurisdictions, a defendant may raise the defence of
reasonable belief in consent. Key changes in relation to
the definition of consent and the mental element relating to consent are
discussed later in this chapter.
sexual assaults
16.12 Each jurisdiction provides in some way for aggravating factors for the
penetrative offence (as well as for other sexual offences).
These may be
outlined in a definition
articulated as a
separate aggravating offence,
a subsection of the substantive
or as an entirely
separate offence.
Criminal Code provides for increased penalties for all sexual offences when
certain aggravating factors are
16.13 Factors that are commonly nominated as aggravating include: causing
injury; using a weapon; detaining the victim; the victim’s
age; if the
victim had a disability or cognitive impairment; or where the accused was in a
position of authority in relation to the
16.14 For example, the penetrative sexual offence is supplemented with the
separate crimes of ‘aggravated sexual assault’
‘aggravated sexual penetration without consent’ in Western
These carry a higher
maximum penalty than the basic offence. One of a range of aggravating factors
must be proved including, for
example, the infliction of harm, the use of a
weapon or being in company with
16.15 In the Northern Territory, the maximum
punishment for the basic offence increases where there are aggravating
factors—defined
as where ‘harm’ or ‘serious harm’
In the ACT, the law
provides for different offences ranging from sexual assault in the first degree
(the most serious) to sexual
assault in the third degree, depending on the
existence of aggravating
Indecent assault and acts of
16.16 Indecent assault covers sexual acts that do not constitute rape.
Indecent assault is an offence in all the
For example, in
Victoria, a person commits indecent assault if ‘he or she assaults another
person in indecent
circumstances’;
the offence applies where any person ‘assaults another person and …
commits an act of indecency on or in the
presence of the other
To establish this
offence there must be an assault (actual or threatened) in addition to
indecency. Some jurisdictions also have
offences for aggravated indecent
16.17 The territories have adopted a different approach. The ACT has an
offence for ‘acts of indecency without
which does not
require an assault. Other jurisdictions also proscribe acts of
including in
aggravated circumstances.
Northern Territory, instead of an offence of indecent assault, the legislation
increases the maximum penalty for assault where
the victim is assaulted in an
16.18 Indecency is not defined in any of the legislative schemes. It is
considered a word of ‘ordinary meaning’ for the
jury to assess in
the circumstances of the case and according to the standards of the
Assaults with intent to commit sexual
16.19 In addition to crimes of sexual assault and indecent assault, some
intent to commit
sexual acts.
These offences
apply where the accused uses violence or threatens to use violence in order to
facilitate a sexual act.
16.20 The idea behind such offences was to ‘place primary emphasis on
the violence factor in sexual assault, rather than on
the element of sexual
example, in NSW, it is an offence ‘with intent to have sexual intercourse
with another person’
to inflict or threaten
to inflict ‘actual bodily harm on the other person
or a third person
who is present or nearby’.
16.21 Some jurisdictions also provide for offences where drugs or other
substances have been administered to the victim in order to
render that person
unable to resist the sexual
Do significant gaps or inconsistencies arise among Australian
(a) definition of sexual intercourse or penetration;
(b) recognition
of aggravating factors;
(c) penalties applicable if an offence is found
(d) offences relating to attempts; or
(e) definitions of indecency
Question 16–2
Do these gaps or inconsistencies have a
disproportionate impact on victims of sexual assault occurring in a family
violence context?
If so, how?
offences against children and young people
16.22 Each jurisdiction provides a range of offences concerning sexual
conduct with children. For example: sexual
intercourse;
attempts to have
sexual intercourse;
procuring or grooming
a child for ‘unlawful sexual
and abducting a
child with the intention of engaging in unlawful sexual
Absence of consent is
generally not an element of these
16.23 Offences against children are commonly articulated in terms of the age
of the victim. For example, offences against young children
(under the age of
10, 12 or 13, depending on the
and offences
against older children (generally under the age of
but in some cases
and in Queensland, in
relation to sodomy, 18 years).
This gradation generally reflects the seriousness of offences against very young
children. Accordingly, the sentences attached to
those offences are higher than
for those against older children. For example, in NSW, different penalties are
provided where the
child is under ten years of age (25 years imprisonment);
between 10 and 14 years of age (16 years imprisonment); and between 14 and
years of age (10 years
imprisonment).
As for offences
against adults, aggravating factors are also applicable to offences against
16.24 There is inconsistency in the age of consent—the age at which
young people are considered able to consent to sexual activity—across
of sexual offending and to the availability of
Crimes Legislation Amendment (Sexual Offences Against Children)
(Cth), concerning child sex tourism offences, sets the age of
consent at 16 years of age. According to the Explanatory Memorandum,
‘strikes the appropriate balance between the need to protect vulnerable
persons from sexual exploitation, and the need
to allow for sexual
The Commissions
agree with this approach.
Proposal 16–1
Commonwealth, state and territory sexual offences
legislation should provide that the age of consent for all sexual offences is 16
How should ‘similarity in age’ of the complainant and
the accused be dealt with? Should it be a defence, or should lack
of consent be
included as an element of the offence in these circumstances?
At what age should a defendant be able to raise an honest and
reasonable belief that a person was over a certain age?
Offences by a family member
16.26 State and territory jurisdictions provide for a range of incest
where the victim and
the accused are closely related. For example, Victorian law provides that a
person must not take part in an
act of sexual penetration with a person whom he
or she knows to be: his or her child or other lineal descendant or his or her
the child or other lineal descendant or the stepchild of his or her
de facto spouse; his or her father or mother or other lineal
ancestor or his or
her stepfather or stepmother; his or her sister, half-sister, brother or
half-brother.
16.27 In some jurisdictions these offences apply to all age groups—that
is, children and adults.
others, general offences in respect of children are applicable, and the incest
offence relates to cases where the victim is over
16 years of
Offences where the accused is in a position
of trust or authority
16.28 A number of jurisdictions have introduced offences that apply to an
accused who has a special relationship with the victim as
a result of the
accused’s position or authority, or the care that he or she provides to
the child—for example, as a teacher,
religious guide, doctor, employer or
sports coach.
The Model Criminal
Code Officers Committee (MCCOC) recommended offences of this kind in relation to
sexual penetration, indecent
touching, and indecent acts directed at a young
person by a person in a position of trust or authority and considered that young
people up to two years over the age of consent may be vulnerable in this
Persistent sexual abuse of a
16.29 All jurisdictions have introduced offences in relation to the
‘persistent sexual abuse of a
‘maintaining
a sexual relationship with a young
‘persistent sexual exploitation of a
16.30 The impetus for the enactment of these offences was the recognition of
the practical difficulties encountered in successfully
prosecuting child sex
offences. The requirement of particularity in child sexual offences—that
is, precise details around single
incidents—fails to capture the multiple,
repetitive experiences of many children, particularly in the context of sexual
by family members.
NSW Attorney General Jeff Shaw explained in the second reading speech for the
Crimes Legislation (Child Sexual Offences)
children are often unable to give precise details of offences, particularly
where the alleged sexual assaults took place over many
years, involved numerous
occasions of abuse, and the accused was in a position of trust or authority.
… [I]f the prosecution
is unable to prove particulars of the time, date
and place of an allegation of child sexual abuse, then the accused cannot be
prosecuted.
… The Government is of the firm view that the time has come to
introduce legislation to better protect children. This bill
accomplishes that
purpose. By creating the offence of persistent sexual abuse of a child, we
recognise the reality of continuing
or prolonged child sexual
16.31 Generally these offences capture a number of unlawful sexual
—not necessarily of
the same kind—against a child within the one indictment. The provisions
clearly stipulate that ‘it
is not necessary to specify or to prove the
dates and exact circumstances of the alleged occasions on which the conduct
constituting
the offence
reasonable particularity for the period during which the offences are alleged to
have taken place is required and there
must be a description of the
‘nature of the separate offences alleged to have been committed by the
accused during that
16.32 The maximum penalty for the offences is relatively similar across the
to 20 years
imprisonment in Western
The higher penalties
imposed for persistent sexual abuse or maintaining a sexual relationship make it
likely that ‘the offence
of persistent sexual abuse may be more readily
prosecuted than incest or offences pertaining to sexual penetration by persons
authority’.
Has the offence of ‘persistent sexual abuse’ or
‘maintaining a relationship’ achieved its aims in assisting
prosecution of sexual offences against children in the family context, where
there are frequently multiple unlawful acts? If
not, what further changes are
offences against people with cognitive impairment
16.33 Specific offences have been enacted to address the particular
vulnerabilities to sexual assault of people with a cognitive
impairment.
These specific
offences may supplement other sexual offences where offending against a victim
with a cognitive impairment is an aggravating
factor. The offences often
regulate people in a particular position, for example those who have a role in
caring for the person,
providers of medical or therapeutic
In some jurisdictions,
where the accused is a person responsible for the care of the person with the
cognitive impairment, or where
sexual intercourse was conducted with the
intention of taking advantage of that person, consent is not a defence to the
[back to top]
16.34 Liability for sexual
offences against adults generally requires that the victim did not consent. In
some cases the defendant
will deny that sexual activity took place, but in the
majority of cases the defendant admits sexual activity but asserts that it
consensual. Where the complainant and the defendant know each other,
particularly in the context of a previous or current intimate
relationship, the
issue of consent is particularly complex. For these reasons, consent is the key
issue in many adult sexual assault
16.35 Defining consent in legislation and, importantly, identifying what
circumstances vitiate consent—that is, in what circumstances
should it be
presumed that consent has not been given—has been a key site of law
reform. Previous reforms have attempted to
articulate a communicative model of
consent that acknowledges a person’s freedom and autonomy to make
decisions about engaging
in sexual activity. These legislative efforts have been
important steps in attempting to ‘displace ... powerful myths’
women and sexual assault,
‘provide a legislative statement of appropriate standards of sexual
interaction’.
16.36 The report of the National Council to Reduce Violence Against Women and
their Children,
Time for Action
, noted variations across Australia in
the definition of consent;
the conditions or circumstances that are seen as negating consent;
the way in which an accused’s ‘honest belief’ in
consent is dealt with; and
the use of judicial directions as a way in which to inform and
educate the jury about what amounts (or does not amount) to
16.37 These variations, their practical impact and whether further
legislative change is required are examined below.
Statutory definition
16.38 With the exception of the
every Australian
three approaches:
free agreement;
free and voluntary
consent freely and voluntarily
legislation of all jurisdictions—except Queensland—also specifically
addresses the continuation of sexual intercourse
after consent has been
16.40 In the United Kingdom, the definition of consent also explicitly
requires agreement: ‘a person consents if he agrees by
choice, and has the
freedom and capacity to make that
This model was
initially recommended by the NSW Criminal Law Review Division and included in
its consultation draft bill.
16.41 Definitions of consent seek to provide legal clarity, make clear that
resistance and injury are not required to prove lack of
consent; and educate the
general community ‘about the boundaries of proscribed sexual
behaviour’.
The Australian
definitions also accord with the recommendation of the United Nations Division
for the Advancement of Women that legislation
should approach consent as
‘unequivocal and voluntary agreement’ and that the accused should be
required to prove the
steps taken to ‘ascertain whether the
complainant/survivor was
consenting’.
Commissions’ views
16.42 The Commissions support the adoption of a statutory definition of
consent across all Australian jurisdictions. In taking this
Commissions are informed by the discussion by the MCCOC of the relative merits
of a statutory or common law definition
16.43 The Commissions’ view is that the preferred statutory definition
of consent is ‘free and voluntary agreement’.
This definition is
consistent with the Model Criminal Code, and has been adopted by the
Commonwealth, NSW, South Australia and the
Northern Territory. The Commissions
agree with the view of the MCCOC that including the term ‘agreement’
reinforces positive
and communicative understandings of consent and suggests
Proposal 16–2
Commonwealth, state and territory sexual offences
legislation should provide statutory definitions of consent based on ‘free
and voluntary agreement’.
Circumstances
that negate consent
16.44 Legislation in every Australian jurisdiction provides a non-exhaustive
list of circumstances that negate or vitiate consent.
If the prosecution proves
a negating factor or vitiating circumstance in a particular case, consent will
not be a fact in issue at
In addition, some jurisdictions provide for particular offences for which there
is no defence of consent.
16.45 Many of the negating factors are common to all Australian
and approach.
Some of the negating factors prescribed by legislation merely codify the
position at common law;
others go beyond the common law position—rectifying anomalies,
deficiencies or gaps.
Use of force and threat of the use of
16.46 In all jurisdictions, there is no consent where force is used or
threatened to be used against the complainant or another
The inclusion of the
use of force or threatened use of force against another person is of particular
relevance to the family violence
context—for example, force or threats of
force may be made to children in order to force the mother to agree to sexual
intercourse.
16.47 Similarly, in some jurisdictions, consent may be negated in
circumstances of ‘fear of harm of any
bodily harm’,
‘threats of
‘reasonable fear of
South Australia
specifically provides that a ‘threat of the application of force’
may be express or implied.
Intimidation, extortion, deceit or
16.48 In a small number of jurisdictions, consent is negated, or may be
negated, where agreement to engage in the sexual activity
is obtained by
intimidation,
Other threats
16.49 The ACT provides that consent is negated where it is caused ‘by a
threat to publicly humiliate or disgrace, or to physically
or mentally harass,
the person or another
Similarly, in
South Australia, consent is not freely and voluntarily given when it is obtained
because of ‘an express or implied
threat to degrade, humiliate, disgrace
or harass the person or some other
16.50 Broader provisions that identify threats ‘that do not involve a
threat of force’
‘of harm of any
or harm ‘of
apply in some
circumstances which negate consent.
Asleep, unconscious or affected by drugs
16.51 In NSW, Victoria, South Australia, Tasmania and the Northern Territory,
there is no consent when the complainant is asleep or
unconscious.
16.52 In Victoria, South Australia, Tasmania and the Northern Territory,
consent is not given where the complainant is so affected
by alcohol or other
drugs ‘to be incapable of freely agreeing’ to the sexual
In the ACT, the
effect of alcohol or other drugs is not so qualified; consent is negated if it
is caused by ‘the effect of
intoxicating liquor, a drug or
anaesthetic’.
the fact that a complainant was ‘substantially intoxicated by alcohol or
any drug’ may negate
The NSW provision
adopts the view expressed in the report of the Criminal Justice Sexual Offences
Taskforce that the degree of intoxication
and whether it was such that a person
was ‘unable to consent’ are matters for the
Mistaken identity
16.53 In all jurisdictions—except Western
—there is no
consent where the complainant is mistaken as to the identity of the person with
whom she has engaged in sexual
In addition, NSW
provides that there is no consent where the complainant mistakenly believed that
she was married to the
Mistaken about the sexual nature of the
16.54 In Victoria, South Australia, Tasmania and the Northern Territory there
is no consent where the person agreed or submitted to
sexual activity being
mistaken about the sexual nature of the
Other more specific
vitiating factors in this category include:
in NSW, Victoria and the Northern Territory—mistaken belief
that sexual intercourse is for medical or hygienic
in NSW and Queensland—agreeing or submitting to an act because
of false or fraudulent representations about the nature or purposes
Capacity to understand nature of
16.55 Most jurisdictions prescribe that there is no consent where the person
who has agreed or submitted to the sexual act does not
have the capacity to
understand the sexual nature of the
The question of capacity
is part of the Queensland definition of
Abuse of position of authority or
16.56 Consent is negated when the accused person is in a position of
authority or trust over the complainant in Queensland, Tasmania
‘may’ be negated when the accused has abused a ‘position of
authority or trust’ in
In addition, the
Crimes Act 1900
(NSW) specifies that consent is not a defence to a range
of sexual offences occurring within relationships of authority or trust.
example, it is an offence for a person who is ‘responsible for the
care’ of a person with a cognitive impairment
to have sexual intercourse
with that person, and consent is not a
Unlawful detention
16.57 In most jurisdictions a person unlawfully detained does not consent to
sexual activity.
Communicating consent
16.58 Tasmania is the only jurisdiction in which the absence of verbal or
physical communication as to free agreement negates
are dealt with by directions to the
Commissions’ views
16.59 The approach to factors which negate consent varies across Australia.
The ACT identifies the most vitiating circumstances and
Western Australia the
least. The Victorian approach is similar to that recommended by the
NSW, which lists
circumstances where there is no consent, where consent is vitiated and where
consent may be vitiated (which is a
question for the jury to
is unique in
providing legislative recognition to circumstances which may negate consent in
the circumstances of a case.
16.60 One of the concerns of law reform has been identifying the
circumstances that ought to be statutorily recognised as negating
consent and
the circumstances that ought to be statutorily recognised factors which the jury
may consider negate consent in a particular
16.61 The Commissions consider that it is desirable that such lists be
non-exhaustive, as is the case in all Australian jurisdictions.
This allows
juries to find, on the evidence, that there was no consent even if a case does
not fall within one of the listed
circumstances.
In addition,
to move towards a model where all the possible factors that may negate consent
are deemed to do so would represent a
‘significant shift in legal
16.62 The Commissions are interested in comment about how the various
vitiating provisions relate to complainants who have experienced
sexual assault
in a family violence context. Issues may arise, for example, in relation to
whether longstanding and pervasive family
violence creates a coercive,
intimidating or threatening environment (whether or not there are threats of
physical force); and as
a corollary, whether such a family violence context may
negate consent to sexual activity. Do actual threats or coercive behaviours
to be immediately present to vitiate consent?
16.63 A useful case study was presented by a Women’s Legal Service
solicitor in the Family Violence Online Forum. The case study
raises some issues
sexual assaults perpetrated in
a family violence context:
I accompanied a client through the process of making a statement to the police
included rape. There was one
particular incident we flagged for the police because it was so
abhorrent—he had punched her in
the mouth splitting her lip. She had to go
to the hospital at 1:00am to get it stitched up. When she got home from the
hospital exhausted
and in pain, he forced her to have sex with him.
have no trouble pressing the general assault charges—medical records, her
friend who drove her to the hospital, her
daughter who cleaned up the blood in
the living room, … but the police have told us they are keeping the
accusation of sexual
assault in her statement but will not pursue a charge of
sexual assault because (a) it is her word against his, and (b) there is
I believe that intelligent interrogation could lead to admissions
that sexual intercourse took place, leaving only the consent issue.
to me that there is space for a presumption in law of non-consent where sex
follows an incident of extreme violence. This
could at least catch some
intimate partner rapes and prevent any defence that it was ‘make up’
sex. This incident was
a prime example of how, although there was no
physical resistance from our client, the power imbalance and fear totally
negated any
possibility of genuine
16.64 Only NSW identifies ‘coercive conduct’ as a behaviour that
may negate consent.
be a useful factor in recognising the absence of consent in the context of
sexual assault perpetrated in a family violence
Proposal 16–3
Commonwealth, state and territory sexual offences
legislation should prescribe a non-exhaustive list of circumstances where there
is no consent to sexual activity, or where consent is vitiated. These need not
automatically negate consent, but the circumstances
must in some way be
recognised as potentially vitiating consent. At a minimum, the non-exhaustive
list of vitiating factors should
(a) lack of capacity to consent, including because a person is asleep or
unconscious, or so affected by alcohol or other drugs as
to be unable to
(b) the actual use of force, threatened use of force against the complainant
or another person, which need not involve physical violence
or physical
(c) unlawful detention;
(d) mistaken identity and mistakes as to the nature of the act (including
mistakes generated by the fraud or deceit of the accused);
(e) any position of authority or power, intimidation or coercive
To what extent are the circumstances vitiating consent set out in
current legislation appropriate to sexual assaults committed in
violence context? Are any amendments required to draw attention to the coercive
environment created by family violence,
or are the current provisions
sufficient?
Reconstructing
the offence to remove ‘consent’
16.65 There are alternative approaches to the construction of the penetrative
sexual offence which seek to refocus the offence away
from issues of consent and
instead focus on the circumstances under which penetration took place. These
include the so-called ‘Michigan
model’ and the ‘Young and
Rush’ proposal.
16.66 The Michigan model is based on the
Criminal Sexual Conduct Act
, enacted in Michigan, USA. This abolished the offence of rape and
established a single offence of ‘criminal sexual conduct’
into four degrees.
offence requires the ‘prosecution to prove that sexual penetration
occurred in ‘coercive
circumstances’
removes the word ‘consent’ from the definition of the offence. The
benefits and limitations of this model are canvassed
literature.
Evaluations of
these reforms have found that it has not been successful in removing the
emphasis on consent, and that consent ‘has
continued to play a significant
role in the prosecution and there was only a limited effect on reporting rates,
prosecution practices
16.67 Another approach has been proposed by Professor Alison Young and Dr
Peter Rush.
They proposed
that the offence of rape be reconceptualised as ‘Rape: Causing Injury with
Sexual Penetration’. The model
seeks to focus on the harm caused by the
accused and the victim’s injury. The Victorian Law Reform Commission
(VLRC) discussed
this proposal in detail in its Interim Report on sexual
and concluded that
the proposed offence is unlikely to reduce the stress of the trial process for
complainants, the ‘victimisation
of complainants through the trial
process’, or ‘marginalise consent as a determinative factor in rape
16.68 A detailed consideration of such alternative formulations of the
penetrative sexual offence is beyond the scope of the current
mental element
16.69 In all jurisdictions, the prosecution must prove that sexual
penetration took place without the consent of the complainant.
These are the
physical elements of the offence. In a number of jurisdictions a further
element, the mental element, must also be
proved in relation to consent. The
mental element is the ‘state of mind of the accused which must be
established beyond reasonable
doubt before the accused can be
convicted’.
16.70 It is this mental element which has raised the most contentious
questions for law reform and reveals the most striking differences
between the
16.71 In the common law jurisdictions, and the Northern Territory (a Code
knew that the
complainant was not consenting, or the defendant was reckless as to that
In the remaining
mental state for rape is satisfied by a mere intention to have
intercourse’.
consent, they do not have to prove that the
defendant knew the complainant was
not consenting or was reckless as to consent.
16.72 In all jurisdictions the defendant may raise a defence that he or she
honestly believed that the complainant was consenting.
Again, there is a clear
difference of approach between most of the common law jurisdictions and the Code
law jurisdictions, with the exception of NSW, this
honest belief in consent need not be
reasonable.
However, in the
Code jurisdictions, and in NSW (a common law jurisdiction), this belief must be
both honest
reasonable.
16.73 There has been considerable legislative change in NSW, Victoria and
South Australia—in terms of knowledge, recklessness,
the defence of an
honest or mistaken belief in consent, and the requirement in some instances to
consider the steps taken by the
defendant to ascertain whether consent
These are important
developments that seek to introduce more objective assessments of the state of
mind of the accused and place
a positive responsibility on people to actively
ascertain whether consent exists.
Recklessness
16.74 The NSW, Victorian and South Australian conceptions of
‘recklessness’ differ substantially. Significantly, South
has modified the subjective element of recklessness by requiring the trier of
fact to have regard to an objective consideration—that
is, whether the
accused failed to ‘take reasonable steps to ascertain whether the other
person does in fact consent, or has
in fact withdrawn consent, to the act before
deciding to
In NSW, a person who is reckless as to whether the other
person consents to the sexual intercourse is guilty of sexual assault without
consent. Recklessness is not defined in the NSW legislation but may be
established where the accused:
‘realised the possibility that the complainant was not
consenting’ but went ahead
regardless;
‘failed to consider whether or not the complainant was
consenting … notwithstanding the risk that the complainant was
consenting would have been obvious to someone with the accused’s mental
capacity if they had turned his or her mind to
16.76 Both of these kinds of recklessness—‘advertent’ or
‘non-advertent’ recklessness respectively—are
subjective’.
16.77 By criminalising ‘non-advertent’ recklessness, the NSW is
said to ‘go further’ than other
reasons why non-advertent recklessness should be included were expressed by
R v Kitchener
To criminalise conscious advertence to the possibility of non-consent, but to
excuse the reckless failure of the accused to give
a moment’s thought to
that possibility, is self-evidently unacceptable. In the hierarchy of
wrong-doing, such total indifference
to the consent of a person to have sexual
intercourse is plainly reckless, at least in our society today … Such a
simply reaffirm the view that our criminal law, at crucial moments,
fails to provide principled protection to the victims of unwanted
intercourse, most of whom are
16.78 In Victoria, a person who did not give ‘any thought’ as to
whether or not the complainant was consenting is guilty
of the offence of
This provision
addresses the position in
R v Ev Costa
, where it was held that
recklessness required conscious advertence to the question of whether the
complainant was
consenting.
16.79 In South Australia, a person who is ‘recklessly
indifferent’ to the fact that the complainant was not consenting
withdrawn consent is guilty of the offence of
indifference’ is defined in the following way:
a person is
recklessly indifferent
to the fact that another person
does not consent to an act, or has withdrawn consent to an act, if he or
(a) is aware of the possibility that the other person might not be consenting
to the act, or has withdrawn consent to the act, but
decides to proceed
regardless of that possibility; or
(b) is aware of the possibility that the other person might not be consenting
to the act, or has withdrawn consent to the act, but
fails to take reasonable
steps to ascertain whether the other person does in fact consent, or has in fact
withdrawn consent, to the
act before deciding to proceed; or
(c) does not give any thought as to whether or not the other person is
consenting to the act, or has withdrawn consent to the act
before deciding to
16.80 In the ACT and the Northern Territory, a person who engages in sexual
intercourse with another person and who is reckless as
to whether that other
person consents to the sexual intercourse is guilty of the offence of sexual
intercourse without consent. This
position is similar to the NSW
16.81 The common law defences of ‘honest belief’ and
‘honest and reasonable belief’ that the complainant was
consenting,
available in the criminal code jurisdictions and NSW respectively, are discussed
Defence of ‘honest
16.82 That an accused may be acquitted on the basis of an honest, but
unreasonable, belief or mistake in consent was established by
the House of Lords
DPP v Morgan
that case three men were told by the husband of the complainant that they could
have sexual intercourse with her and that any
resistance (physical or verbal)
she made was pretence, with the husband suggesting that his wife found such
behaviour exciting. The
men proceeded to have intercourse with the woman and
were subsequently charged with and found guilty of rape. The men appealed on
basis that they held an honest belief that the woman was consenting. The
convictions were ultimately upheld on the basis that
a jury ‘would have
been extremely unlikely … [to have] accepted this defence on the facts of
16.83 The significance of
is that a majority of the House of
Lords held that where the accused held an honest, albeit unreasonable belief,
that the complainant
was consenting to the sexual intercourse, the offence of
rape was not committed:
to insist that a belief must be reasonable to excuse it is to insist that the
accused is to be found guilty of intending to do that
which in truth he did not
intend to do, or that his state of mind although innocent of evil intent, can
convict him if it be honest
16.84 The decision in
was controversial and generated
considerable debate. It led to the creation in 1975 of an Advisory Group on the
Law of Rape,
which concluded
that the test was correct but that there should be clarification of the
significance of ‘reasonableness’
legislation.
16.85 The defence of honest belief is currently available to accused persons
in Victoria, South Australia, and the ACT in respect
of the offence of rape or
sexual intercourse without
In Victoria, judges
must direct juries to consider whether an accused’s belief was reasonable
in all the circumstances, including
reference to ‘whether the accused took
any steps to ascertain whether the complainant was
consenting’.
Defence of ‘honest and reasonable
16.86 Generally, in the criminal code jurisdictions, the question of whether
a defence of honest and reasonable belief is available
to an accused is answered
by a two-stage inquiry: (a) did the accused believe that the complainant was
consenting, and (b) if so,
was that belief
reasonable?
16.87 The Tasmanian
Criminal Code
, however, articulates a defence
specific to mistake as to consent. This defence articulates that an
accused’s mistaken belief
reasonable if the accused:
(a) was in a state of self-induced intoxication and the mistake was not one
which the accused would have made if not intoxicated;
(b) was reckless as to whether or not the complainant consented; or
(c) did not take reasonable steps, in the circumstances known to him or her at
the time of the offence, to ascertain that the complainant
was consenting to the
16.88 Until recently, the defence of honest belief that the complainant
consented was available in NSW (a common law jurisdiction).
Substantive changes
in relation to consent were enacted in
Section 61HA(3)
Crimes Act 1900
(NSW) now provides that an accused knows that the other
person does not consent if the accused has ‘no reasonable grounds for
believing that the other person consents to the sexual
intercourse’.
of fact is required to have regard to ‘any steps taken by the [accused] to
ascertain whether the other person consents
to the sexual intercourse’
other than any ‘self-induced intoxication’ of the
Subjective and objective mental
16.89 Focusing on subjective mental states emphasises the perspective of a
particular defendant. Objective elements focus on ‘the
actual consequences
of an accused’s conduct or the actual circumstances under which the
conduct occurred rather than on the
accused’s mental state during the
performance of the
context, ‘honest and reasonable belief’ incorporates a subjective
element (honest belief)
an objective element (reasonable belief).
16.90 The arguments for and against subjective fault or mental elements have
been canvassed in reports by the MCCOC and the
The main arguments in
mental elements include the following:
Consistency with fundamental notions of criminal
responsibility—for example, the notion that the criminal law, particularly
in relation to serious offences, should not impose guilt where the person did
not knowingly transgress the
Avoidance of the practical difficulties of formulating objective
standards—for example, the ‘reasonable person’
test raises
issues in relation to whether the jury ought to consider what they would have
done in the situation or whether the standard
is that of a ‘reasonable
man’. In addition, questions arise in relation to the qualities and
attitudes about men and
women that are ascribed to a ‘reasonable
The view that the trier of fact in determining whether a subjective
mental state existed may take into account the reasonableness
of the mental
In respect of a defendant’s mistaken belief, which is the
focus of only a small number of rape trials, an objective element
‘jeopardise the principles of criminal responsibility without ensuring
that a higher proportion of people who are actually
guilty of rape are
convicted’.
main arguments in support of
mental elements include the
Subjective mental elements reinforce myths about men, women and
children and sexuality—in particular as to whether sexual access
available and expectations about how consent is
That an objective test is in accordance with the communicative model
of consent established in the definitional
frameworks.
A defendant should not ‘be able to avoid culpability’ on
the basis that ‘he did not give any thought at all as
to whether the
complainant was consenting or
That the law ‘ought to impose a higher standard of care in
sexual circumstances’,
because ‘it is possible for a man to ascertain whether a woman is
consenting or not with minimal
and to have
sexual intercourse with a woman without her consent is ‘to do her great
That subjective tests are difficult because they contain a
‘double subjective element’: that is, both the complainant’s
(was she consenting?) and defendant’s (did he know she was not
consenting?) states of mind.
This difficulty is compounded because the jury often must make its decision on
the basis of the competing evidence of the complainant
Commissions’
16.92 The law’s treatment of honest and mistaken belief remains an
issue of ‘continuing
controversy’.
availability of the defence is potentially an important issue for complainants
who have, or have had, an intimate relationship
with the accused and, therefore,
is of particular relevance to the family violence context of this Inquiry. The
intimate partner
context may enable accused persons to raise a belief in consent
based on past consensual activities or ways of agreeing to sexual
encounters.
16.93 The VLRC has argued that a purely subjective approach to an
accused’s mental state ‘does nothing to discourage the
of consent in ambiguous
situations’.
‘honest belief’ is rarely the main or predominant issue in sexual
offence proceedings, the VLRC argued that the
centrality of consent to sexual
assault trials means that it invariably plays some role in how the legal system,
its key players
and jury members, understand and approach
For these and other
reasons, the VLRC recommended that the mental element should be changed to
ensure that an accused takes reasonable
steps to ascertain that the complainant
was consenting. In addition, the VLRC recommended that a mandatory jury
direction on consent
should be required by
legislation.
Only the latter
of these recommendations has been
implemented.
16.94 In contrast, the MCCOC recommended that criminal liability for sexual
offences should be determined on the basis of the subjective
mental state of the
accused. That is, that an accused should not be found guilty of sexual
penetration without consent ‘unless
the prosecution proves’ that the
knew that the victim was not consenting;
was ‘reckless to the absence of consent’; or
‘failed to give any thought to the question of
such, the MCCOC approach permits an accused to rely on an honest, albeit
unreasonable, belief in consent. Its reasons for
doing so were based on the fact
that the extent to which such a belief is unreasonable goes to the question of
whether it has been
established as a genuine or honest belief in consent. The
MCCOC, like the VLRC, recommended that juries be directed in relation to
the mistake or belief in consent was reasonable in all the
circumstances.
16.96 The Commissions’ preliminary view is that the issues are best
addressed by adopting the current NSW formulation of honest
and reasonable
belief. In addition, legislation should require that judges direct juries in
relation to the evidence presented about
that belief and whether the accused
took any steps to ascertain whether consent was indeed present. Jury directions
of this kind
are discussed in the next section of this chapter.
16.97 The insertion of an objective element, or the modification of the
subjective element by requiring reasonable steps to ascertain
consent, has also
been adopted by various overseas jurisdictions, for example in New
In the United Kingdom
it is simply provided that a person commits rape when ‘A does not
reasonably believe that B
the basic position in the Australian criminal code
16.98 The Commissions are also concerned that ambiguity in relation to honest
belief may be more likely to arise in the context of
sexual assault occurring in
a longstanding sexual relationship. This is likely to create difficulties at
trial for such cases. For
example, where the accused and complainant have an
ongoing relationship, the defence of honest and mistaken belief and its
nature may permit accused persons to concoct a mistaken belief,
making the prosecution’s task of disproving the belief very
difficult. The
Commissions are interested in comment on how the defence of honest belief
affects decisions made by the police and
prosecutors about the likely prospects
of a successful prosecution.
Proposal 16–4
Commonwealth, state and territory sexual offences
legislation should provide that a person who performs a sexual act with another
person, without the consent of the other person, knows that the other person
does not consent to the act if the person has no reasonable
grounds for
believing that the other person consents. For the purpose of making any such
finding, the trier of fact must have regard
to all the circumstances of the case
including any steps taken by the person to ascertain whether the other person
consents, but
not including any self-induced intoxication of the person.
Is an honest belief in consent more likely to be raised in cases
where the complainant has or has had an intimate relationship with
the accused?
If so, will the insertion of an objective element assist in these cases? Are
other measures required to clarify or restrict
the defence of honest belief in
these cases?
Jury directions
16.99 Judicial directions to the jury on consent can provide an important
mechanism for addressing the fact that some ‘jurors
and judges continue to
bring to bear stereotypical views of sexual roles in their assessment of
directions have been considered to be an important mechanism to reinforce the
communicative model of consent, and to directly
respond to continuing myths and
misconceptions about sexual violence—for example, that lack of consent is
conveyed by physical
resistance and that ‘true victims’ sustain
injuries. As the VLRC stated:
The jury direction performs an educative function by clarifying the law and
establishing standards of behaviour for sexual relations
which are based on
principles of communication and
16.100 Jury directions on consent have been legislated in Victoria and the
Northern Territory. The MCCOC also recommended mandatory
jury directions on
consent in relevant
16.101 The Victorian model, introduced in 1991 and subsequently amended on a
number of occasions,
referred to as ‘the most significant and progressive
In Victoria,
the judge must direct the jury on consent only where it is ‘relevant to
the facts in issue in a
proceeding’.
must relate any such direction to ‘the facts in issue in the
proceeding’ and the ‘elements of the offence
being tried ... so as
to aid the jury’s comprehension of the
direction’.
The matters
agreement) and the circumstances that
vitiate consent, as well as:
(d) the fact that the person did not say or do anything to indicate free
agreement to a sexual act at the time which the act took
place is enough to show
that the act took place without that person’s free agreement;
(e) that the jury is not to regard a person as having freely agreed to a sexual
act just because—
(i) she or he did not protest or physically resist; or
(ii) she or he did not sustain physical injury; or
(iii) on that or an earlier occasion, she or he freely agreed to engage in
another sexual act (whether or not of the same type)
with that person, or a
sexual act with another
16.102 The Victorian model is, however, the subject of considerable
controversy in the literature and the case
Concerns include that
the directions may be seen to usurp the function of the jury in deciding the
factual issue of consent, that
they present an inaccurate picture of sexual
activity and how people agree to such activity, that they are convoluted and
and in some cases may contradict other aspects of the law—for
example, in terms of the subjective test for an honest belief
in consent.
16.103 The Northern Territory approach is similar, but of more limited scope.
The judge must give a direction in a relevant case that
a person is not to be
taken as having consented to sexual intercourse simply because the person:
(a) did not protest or physically resist;
(b) did not sustain physical injury; or
(c) had, on that or an earlier occasion, consented to:
(i) sexual intercourse; or
(ii) an act of gross indecency,
whether or not of the same type, with the
16.104 The legislation of some other jurisdictions states that the absence of
physical resistance by a victim is not to be regarded,
on its own, as consent to
sexual intercourse although it does not require a specific direction to the jury
in this regard.
16.105 The Victorian legislation also mandatorily requires a judge to direct
juries about the accused’s knowledge and awareness
consent where the defence raises in evidence, or asserts that, the accused
believed that the victim was consenting
to the sexual
In such circumstances,
the judge must direct the jury that:
in considering whether the offence has been proved beyond reasonable doubt that
the accused was aware that the complainant was not
consenting, the jury must
(a) any evidence of that belief; and
(b) whether that belief was reasonable in all the relevant circumstances having
(i) [in a case where one of the circumstances that vitiate consent exists]
whether the accused was aware that that circumstance
existed in relation to the
complainant; and
(ii) whether the accused took any steps to ascertain whether the complainant
was consenting or might not be consenting, and if so,
the nature of those steps;
(iii) any other relevant
16.106 The Queensland Taskforce on Women and the Criminal Code did not favour
‘compulsory’ jury directions. It did, however,
follow the Victorian
model to the extent of recommending that the jury should be directed to consider
the steps taken by the accused
to ensure that the complainant was consenting, in
cases where honest and reasonable belief in consent had been
16.107 The MCCOC recommended a provision which follows the Victorian model,
except for a significant amendment to the first
This provision
(1) … the judge must, in a relevant case, direct the jury (if any) that a
person is not to be regarded as having consented
to a sexual act just
(a) The person did not say or do anything to indicate that she or he did not
consent; or
(b) The person did not protest or physically resist; or
(c) The person did not sustain physical injury; or
(d) On that or an earlier occasion, the person consented to engage in a sexual
act (whether or not of the same type) with that person,
or a sexual act with
another person.
(2) …the judge must, in a relevant case, direct the jury (if any) that in
determining whether the accused was under a mistaken
belief that a person
consented to a sexual act the jury may consider whether the mistaken belief was
reasonable in the
circumstances.
16.108 Most of the submissions received by the MCCOC generally supported its
approach. Some considered the Victorian model should
be followed more
Commissions’ views
16.109 Research indicates that jurors find consent a difficult concept to
understand and apply, and that jurors’ pre-existing
attitudes have been
found to influence their judgments
the facts of the case and
the manner in which the evidence was
For this reason, the
Commissions provisionally support enacting positive directions on consent: what
it is, when it is absent, and
injury. Such directions may assist to reinforce the communicative model of
and provide positive messages to the community about standards of sexual
behaviour. In addition, they may operate as potentially
powerful tools of
cultural change for those involved in the prosecution of sexual offences.
16.110 Three models to achieve these policy objectives have been outlined
above: the Victorian, Northern Territory and MCCOC models.
Commissions’ preliminary view is in favour of the Victorian model because
it is the most comprehensive approach and more
detailed than that advocated by
the MCCOC—particularly in relation to the defence of an honest belief in
State and territory legislation should provide that a direction
must be made to the jury on consent in sexual offence proceedings
where it is
relevant to a fact in issue. Such directions must be related to the facts in
issue and the elements of the offence and
expressed in such a way as to aid the
comprehension of the jury. Such directions should cover:
(a) the meaning of consent (as defined in the legislation);
(b) the circumstances that vitiate consent, and that if the jury finds
beyond reasonable doubt that one of these circumstances exists
complainant was not consenting;
(c) the fact that the person did not say or do anything to indicate free
agreement to a sexual act when the act took place is enough
to show that the act
took place without that person’s free agreement; and
(d) that the jury is not
to regard a person as having freely agreed to a sexual act just because she or
he did not protest or physically
resist, did not sustain physical injury, or
freely agreed to engage in another sexual act (whether or not of the same type)
that person, or a sexual act with another person, on an earlier
Where the defence asserts that the accused believed that the complainant was
consenting to the sexual act then the judge must direct
the jury to
(e) any evidence of that belief; and
(f) whether that belief was reasonable in all the relevant circumstances
having regard to (in a case where one of the circumstances
that vitiate consent
exists) whether the accused was aware that that circumstance existed in relation
to the complainant;
(g) whether the accused took any steps to ascertain whether the complainant
was consenting or might not be consenting, and if so,
the nature of those steps;
(h) any other relevant matters.
[back to top]
Guiding principles
and objects clauses
16.111 The report,
Time for Action
, drew attention to the important
role that guiding principles can play in the interpretation of the law relating
to sexual offences
and in the application of the rules of evidence in sexual
offence proceedings.
is the only Australian jurisdiction which provides an objects statement and
guiding principles in relation to sexual offences
and related procedural and
evidential matters.
Crimes Act 1958
(Vic) provides that the objectives of its
sexual offences provisions are:
(a) to uphold the fundamental right of every person to make decisions about his
or her sexual behaviour and to choose not to engage
in sexual activity;
(b) to protect children and persons with a cognitive impairment from sexual
exploitation.
16.113 In addition, guiding principles were included within the legislation,
which set out the facts that the court should have regard
to when interpreting
the various sexual offences in that Act. These are that:
(a) there is a high incidence of sexual violence within society; and
(b) sexual offences are significantly under-reported; and
(c) a significant number of sexual offences are committed against women,
children and other vulnerable persons including persons
with a cognitive
impairment; and
(d) sexual offenders are commonly known to their victims; and
(e) sexual offences often occur in circumstances where there is unlikely to be
any physical signs of an offence having
16.114 An identical provision is to be found in the
(Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1958
(Vic) to assist the court when
interpreting the provisions relating to confidential
communications,
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
(Vic) to assist the court when interpreting
the provisions relating in whole or in part to sexual offences.
16.115 These objects statements and guiding principles were introduced
following the recommendations of the
The VLRC saw such
provisions as an important educative tool, addressing the need for cultural
change and the implementation gap discussed
in Chapter 15. The VLRC articulated
three main arguments for including guiding principles:
The criminal law has both a regulatory and an educative function. It should
emphasise that people have a right to make decisions
and to choose not to engage in sexual activity. The interpretation clause will
ensure that the provisions
of sexual offences laws are interpreted consistently
with the goals of the legislation.
A statement of principles of interpretation will give added weight to any
directions or instructions that a judge gives to the jury.
The judge and jury
can refer to the principles to shed light on where any ambiguity may exist in
the interpretation of particular
Sexual assault continues to be under-reported, and the serious social harm of
sexual assault has only recently begun to be given
the recognition that it
deserves. The unique nature and context of sexual assault should be clearly
stated by the legislature, so
that this underwrites the interpretation of the
particular provisions in the
legislation.
16.116 Some states and territories have also incorporated objects clauses or
guiding principles in their family violence protection
order legislation. This
is discussed in Chapters 3 and 4. While there is some question about the
extent to which such provisions
have been effective in
such principles may
provide an important symbolic statement about the nature of such violence, the
community’s lack of tolerance
for such violence, and the response of the
16.117 The Commissions agree that these statements can perform an important
symbolic and educative role in the application and interpretation
of the law, as
well as for the general community. While much more is required than simply a
statement of guiding principles to change
culture, it does provide an important
opportunity for governments and legal players to articulate their understanding
of sexual violence
and a benchmark against which to assess the implementation of
the law and procedure.
16.118 The objectives and principles articulated in the Victorian legislation
are an instructive starting point for similar provisions
in other jurisdictions.
Other matters mentioned in
Time for Action
could be incorporated to
provide a focus on particularly vulnerable groups of women and give sexual
assault visibility as a form of
family violence.
Time for Action
recommended that Indigenous women and women with intellectual disabilities
should be specifically recognised as victims of sexual
violence, and that there
should be specific acknowledgement that sexual violence constitutes family
violence—as it is precisely
these cases that criminal justice systems deal
with least effectively.
State and territory sexual offences legislation should include a
statement that the objectives of the legislation are to:
(a) uphold the fundamental right of every person to make decisions about
his or her sexual behaviour and to choose not to engage
in sexual activity;
(b) protect children and persons with a cognitive impairment from sexual
exploitation.
Proposal 16–7
State and territory sexual offences, criminal
procedure or evidence legislation, should provide for guiding principles, to
which courts
should have regard when interpreting provisions relating to sexual
offences. At a minimum, these guiding principles should refer
(a) there is a high incidence of sexual violence within society;
(b) sexual offences are significantly under-reported;
(c) a significant number of sexual offences are committed against women,
children and other vulnerable persons, including persons
with a cognitive
impairment;
(d) sexual offenders are commonly known to their victims; and
(e) sexual offences often occur in circumstances where there are unlikely to
be any physical signs of an offence having occurred.
Should such a statement of guiding principles make reference to
any other factors, such as recognising vulnerable groups of women,
specifically acknowledging that sexual violence constitutes a form of family
Crimes Act 1914
Criminal Code
ss 268.14, 268.19, 268.59, 268.64.
Crimes Legislation Amendment (Sexual Offences Against Children) Act
See ThomsonReuters,
The Laws of Australia
(2010), vol 10,
Criminal Offences
10.3, [10].
The uniform Evidence Acts
Evidence Act 1995
Evidence Act 1995
Evidence Act 2001
Evidence Act 2004
(NI). See Ch 18.
M Bagaric and K
Criminal Laws in Australia: Cases and Materials
(2nd ed, 2007),
See ThomsonReuters,
The Laws of
(2010), vol 10,
Criminal Offences
In some jurisdictions it is
specified as penetration of the vagina or anus: eg,
Crimes Act 1900
For example, in NSW, it
includes ‘sexual connection occasioned by the penetration to any extent of
the genitalia … of
a female person or the anus of any person’ by
‘any part of the body of another person, or any object manipulated by
Crimes Act 1900
See also the
definition of sexual penetration in the Model Criminal Code: Model Criminal Code
Officers Committee of the Standing
Committee of Attorneys-General,
Criminal Code—Chapter 5 Sexual Offences Against the Person
app 2, cl 5.2.1.
Crimes Act 1958
(Vic) s 38A. See also Model Criminal Code Officers
Committee of the Standing Committee of Attorneys-General,
Model Criminal
Code—Chapter 5 Sexual Offences Against the Person
(1999), app 2,
Crimes Act 1958
Criminal Code
Criminal Law
Consolidation Act 1935
Criminal Code
Crimes Act 1900
Criminal Code
Criminal Code
Crimes Act 1900
s 61H(1)(d)
Criminal Code
(WA) s 319(1);
Criminal Law
Consolidation Act 1935
Criminal Code
Criminal Code
refers to the failure to withdraw after becoming
aware that a person is not consenting.
Crimes Act 1900
Criminal Code
(Qld) s 349(1);
Criminal Law Consolidation Act
Criminal Code
Under the Model
Criminal Code it is proposed that the penalty would be imprisonment for a
maximum of 15 years which would increase
to 20 years if aggravating factors were
present: Model Criminal Code Officers Committee of the Standing Committee of
Attorneys-General,
Model Criminal Code—Chapter 5 Sexual Offences
Against the Person
(1999), app 2, cl
Crimes Act 1900
Crimes Act 1958
Criminal Law
Consolidation Act 1935
Crimes Act 1900
Criminal Code
s 192(3)(b).
ThomsonReuters,
The Laws of Australia
, 10.3, [320].
Criminal Code
(WA) s 319.
Crimes Act 1900
, aggravated sexual assault.
Crimes Act 1900
which combines sexual assault
perpetrated in company with another aggravating factor;
Crimes Act 1958
(Vic) s 60A, sexual offence while armed with an offensive weapon;
Criminal Code
(WA) s 326, aggravated sexual penetration without
, sexual penetration of a child under
Criminal Code
s 330, which creates an offence of having sexual intercourse with persons,
other than children, incapable of consent.
Model Criminal Code Officers
Committee of the Standing Committee of Attorneys-General,
Model Criminal
Code—Chapter 5 Sexual Offences Against the Person
(1999), app 2,
pt 5.2, div 7.
Criminal Code
(WA) s 326. A number of
these circumstances, eg, where
the victim has a cognitive impairment or where
the accused is in a position of authority in relation to the victim—these
discussed later in this chapter.
Crimes Act 1900
Criminal Code
In NSW, there is also a
separate offence of aggravated sexual assault in company, which carries a
maximum penalty of life imprisonment:
Crimes Act 1900
Criminal Code
s 192(7)–(8).
Crimes Act 1900
(NSW) s 61L;
Crimes Act 1958
(Qld) s 352;
Criminal Code
(WA) s 323;
Criminal Law
Consolidation Act 1935
Criminal Code
Crimes Act 1958
(NSW) s 61L.
Criminal Code
(WA) s 324;
Criminal Code
(NSW) s 61N(2);
Criminal Code
(Qld) s 227;
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 137.
Crimes Act 1900
(NSW) s 61O(1A): aggravating circumstances include where
the act is performed in company; s 61O(3): where the accused is in a position
of authority over the victim, or where the victim has a physical disability or
cognitive impairment. As for sexual intercourse without
consent, in relation to
acts of indecency without consent the ACT provides for three further offences
that relate to circumstances
of aggravation, first, second and third degree:
Crimes Act 1900
Criminal Code
Criminal Code
ThomsonReuters,
Laws of Australia
(2010), vol 10,
Criminal Offences
Crimes Act 1958
(Qld) s 351.
ThomsonReuters,
The Laws of Australia
(2010), vol 10,
, 10.3, [780].
Crimes Act 1958
(Vic) s 53;
Criminal Code
s 218(1)(c). See also
Crimes Act 1900
general offence relating to ‘drink
under 10 years of age;
aged between 10 and
16. Victoria:
Crimes Act 1958
under the age of 16.
Queensland: offences of ‘carnal knowledge of a child’—
Criminal Code
(Qld) s 215, relating to children under 16 years of age,
Criminal Code
(Qld) s 208(1) sodomy relating to children under
18 years of age. WA:
Criminal Code
(WA) s 320(2) children under 13; s
321(2) children aged between 13 and 16. SA:
Criminal Law Consolidation Act
under the age of 14 years;
under the age of
17 years. Tasmania:
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 124 under the age of 17. ACT:
Crimes Act 1900
under the age of 10 years;
the age of 16 years. Northern Territory:
Criminal Code
(NT) s 127 under
the age of 16 years.
Crimes Act 1958
Criminal Code
s 210—indecent treatment of a child under 16 (this includes
procuring, exposure, exposure to pornography, taking indecent
photographs of the
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
gross indecency;
Criminal Code
s 320(4)—indecently
dealing with a child under the age of 13, s 321(4)—indecently dealing
with a child aged 13 to 16;
Criminal Code
Crimes Act 1900
Criminal Code
s 127—gross indecency, s 132—indecent dealing with a
Crimes Act 1900
Crimes Act 1958
(Vic) s 58;
Criminal Code
(Qld) s 217—procuring child for carnal knowledge;
(Qld) s 218A—using the internet to procure children;
(WA) ss 320(3), 320(5), 321(3), 321(5);
Criminal Code
Criminal Code
(NT) s 131. Western Australia also has an
offence of using electronic communication to procure or expose a child to
indecent material:
Criminal Code
Crimes Act 1958
Criminal Code
(NT) s 201. See also Queensland which has
an offence of ‘taking a child for immoral purposes’:
(Qld) s 219.
Except, eg, in
Tasmania where the victim is 15 years and over and the defendant is not more
than five years older or where the victim
is 12 years or over and the defendant
is not more than three years older:
Criminal Code
A similar approach was
recommended under the MCCOC which recognised that consent may play a role in
situations where the victim and
the accused are close in age. Under the MCCOC
this is specified as the accused being not more than two years older than the
complainant
(where the child is over the no defence age), or where the accused
was not more than two years younger than the complainant (where
the complainant
is over the no defence age): see MCCOC, cl 5.2.17. A different approach is
taken in South Australia, which also recognises
similarity in age. See
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
, under which it is
a defence to an offence of sexual penetration where the victim is over 16 and
the accused is under 17 years of
age. If sexual intercourse takes place without
consent then the accused would be charged under the adult
provisions.
Under the age of 10:
Crimes Act 1900
Crimes Act 1958
Crimes Act 1900
Under 12 years of age: see
Criminal Code
(Qld) s 215(3). Under the age of 13:
Criminal Code
(WA) s 320.
NSW creates two
age groups, victims between the age of 10 and 14:
Crimes Act 1900
, and between 14 and 16 years:
Crimes Act 1900
Crimes Act 1958
Criminal Code
Crimes Act 1900
It is under the age of 16
in the Northern Territory: eg, see
Criminal Code
In South Australia, the various
sexual offences against children tend to be divided between those perpetrated
against children under
the age of 14, and under the age of 17: see
Law Consolidation Act 1935
Tasmania also has sexual
offences against children under the age of 17: see
Criminal Code
Criminal Code
Crimes Act 1900
(5) aggravating factors for sexual intercourse
offences; s 61O(1) aggravated acts of
Explanatory Memorandum,
Crimes Legislation Amendment (Sexual Offences Against Children) Bill 2010
See, Model Criminal Code
Officers Committee of the Standing Committee of Attorneys-General,
Criminal Code—Chapter 5 Sexual Offences Against the Person
Part 5.2, Div 6. There is considerable debate about the use of the term incest:
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Sexual Offences: Interim Report
[8.3]–[8.4]. Note that, in Western Australia, this offence is referred to
as sexual offences by a ‘relative and
Criminal Code
(WA) s 329.
Crimes Act 1958
Criminal Code
(Qld) s 222;
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 133;
Crimes Act 1900
Criminal Code
(NT) s 134. This last section also provides for
harsher penalties where the victim is a child under the age of 10, or between 10
16 years of age. See also Model Criminal Code Officers Committee of the
Standing Committee of Attorneys-General,
Model Criminal Code—Chapter 5
Sexual Offences Against the Person
Crimes Act 1900
The relationships included vary
across the jurisdictions, see, eg,
Crimes Act 1958
(Vic) s 49(4);
(NSW) s 73(3);
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
Criminal Code
Model Criminal Code
Officers Committee of the Standing Committee of Attorneys-General,
Criminal Code—Chapter 5 Sexual Offences Against the Person
app 2, pt 5.2, div 4, cl 5.2.21. See also, L Kelly, ‘Promising
Practices Addressing Sexual Violence’ (Paper presented
at Violence Against
Women: Good Practices in Combating and Eliminating Violence Against Women Expert
Group Meeting, Vienna, 17–20
May 2005), 4: ‘promising practices in
legal reform’ include measures designed to address ‘capacity to
consent for
people with major disabilities and breach of trust offences
committed by professionals and those in positions of authority and
Crimes Act 1900
Crimes Act 1958
(Vic) s 47A;
Criminal Code
321A. See also Model Criminal Code Officers Committee of the Standing Committee
of Attorneys-General,
Model Criminal Code—Chapter 5 Sexual Offences
Against the Person
Criminal Code
(Qld) s 229B;
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 125A;
Crimes Act 1900
Criminal Code
(NT) s 131A, maintaining a
relationship of a sexual nature.
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
See, eg, Model Criminal Code
Officers Committee of the Standing Committee of Attorneys-General,
Criminal Code—Chapter 5 Sexual Offences Against the Person
133–137. See also,
S v The Queen
[1989] HCA 66
(1989) 168 CLR
New South Wales,
Parliamentary
, Legislative Council, 20 October 1998, 8541 (J Shaw
QC—Attorney General.
three or more, although in Queensland and South Australia it is simply more than
one unlawful act:
Criminal Code
(Qld) s 229B(2);
Criminal Law
Consolidation Act 1935
Crimes Act 1900
Crimes Act 1958
(Vic) s 47A(3);
Criminal Code
(Qld) s 229B(4);
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
Criminal Code
(WA) s 321A(5)(b);
Criminal Code
125A(4)(a);
Crimes Act 1900
Criminal Code
Crimes Act 1900
Criminal Code
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
Criminal Code
(WA) s 321A(4).
ThomsonReuters,
The Laws of Australia
(2010), vol 10,
Criminal Offences
10.3, [370].
Crimes Act 1900
Crimes Act 1958
(Vic) ss 51–52;
Criminal Code
(Qld) s 216;
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
Criminal Code
(WA) s 330;
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 126;
(NT) s 130. See also Model Criminal Code Officers Committee of the
Standing Committee of Attorneys-General,
Model Criminal Code—Chapter 5
Sexual Offences Against the Person
(1999), pt 5.2, div
Crimes Act 1900
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 126.
Crimes Act 1958
Criminal Code
(NT) s 130.
Crimes Act 1958
(Vic) ss 52–52;
Criminal Code
For a discussion of
these myths, see Ch 15.
Law Reform Commission,
Sexual Offences: Interim Report
National Council to Reduce
Violence against Women and their Children,
Time for Action: The National
Council’s Plan for Australia to Reduce Violence against Women and their
Children, 2009–2021
Crimes Act 1900
(ACT) only lists a range of factors that negate consent.
In 2001 the ACT Law Reform Commission recommended the enactment of a statutory
definition, which was supported by the ACT Government: ACT Law Reform
Commission,
Sexual Offences
, Report No 17 (2001), 71.
Crimes Act 1958
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 2A(1).
Crimes Act 1900
Criminal Law Consolidation Act
Criminal Code
(Cth) s 192(1). See also
(Cth) ss 268.14, 268.19, 268.59, 268.64, 268.82, 268.87. As these are
all sexual violence or rape offences in the context of war crimes
against humanity, they are not discussed in this
Criminal Code
Criminal Code
(WA) s 319(2). Section 348(1) of the
(Qld) further provides that consent means ‘consent freely and
voluntarily given by a person with the cognitive capacity to give
consent’. See also
Michael v Western Australia
[2008] WASCA 66
(2008) 183 A Crim R
for a discussion of the statutory definitions of consent and the role of
deceit and fraud.
While continuation
is not specifically addressed in Queensland legislation it is suggested that the
‘weight of authority supports
treating the continuation of sexual
intercourse as satisfying the physical act required for a charge of rape’:
ThomsonReuters,
The Laws of Australia
(2010), vol 10,
, 10.3, [190].
Offences Act 2003
Criminal Law Review Division, NSW Attorney General’s Department,
Law of Consent and Sexual Assault,
Discussion Paper (2007),
Model Criminal Code Officers
Committee of the Standing Committee of Attorneys-General,
Model Criminal
Code—Chapter 5 Sexual Offences Against the Person
(1999), 33, 35. See
also arguments in favour of inserting a definition of consent in NSW in NSW
Criminal Justice Sexual Offences
Responding to Sexual Assault: The
Way Forward
(2005), 34. It should be noted that a definition of consent was
subsequently inserted in the NSW
legislation.
United Nations Department
of Economic and Social Affairs Division for the Advancement of Women,
Handbook for Legislation on Violence Against Women
, 1 July 2009, 27. See
also discussion of this approach in
Time for Action
, 108, n 183 referring
to earlier work by the Division of the Advancement of Women. The latter
component of this definition regarding
the steps taken by the accused is
discussed below.
Model Criminal Code
Officers Committee of the Standing Committee of Attorneys-General,
Criminal Code—Chapter 5 Sexual Offences Against the Person
The MCCOC had suggested,
in its discussion paper, that consent be defined as that which is freely and
voluntarily given, this position
was changed to free and voluntary agreement in
the final report: Ibid, 43.
Crimes Act 1900
Criminal Code Officers Committee of the Standing Committee of Attorneys-General,
Model Criminal Code—Chapter 5 Sexual Offences Against the Person
See, eg, the discussion
in Criminal Justice Sexual Offences Taskforce (NSW),
Responding to Sexual
Assault: The Way Forward
(2005), 36; Model Criminal Code Officers Committee
of the Standing Committee of Attorneys-General,
Model Criminal
Code—Chapter 5 Sexual Offences Against the Person
(1999), 43–49.
For a general discussion of the common law’s resistance to recognising
that consent may be vitiated by
fraud or mistake and hence the introduction of
legislative provisions see Criminal Justice Sexual Offences Taskforce (NSW),
Responding to Sexual Assault: The Way Forward
Crimes Act 1900
s 61HA(4)(c)
Crimes Act 1958
Criminal Code
(Qld) s 348(2)(a);
Criminal Code
(WA) s 319(2)(a);
Law Consolidation (Rape and Sexual Offences) Amendment Act 2008 (SA)
46(3)(a)(i);
Criminal Code
(Tas) 2A(2)(b);
Crimes Act 1900
Criminal Code
(NT) s 192 (2)(a). In the ACT, this
other person is required to be ‘present or nearby’—no other
this qualification around the use or threat of the use of force
to a person other than the complainant. See also Model Criminal Code
Committee of the Standing Committee of Attorneys-General,
Model Criminal
Code—Chapter 5 Sexual Offences Against the Person
(1999), 38,
app 2, cl 5.2.3.
Criminal Code
(NT) s 192(2)(a). See also
Criminal Code
(Qld) s 348(2)(c) which includes ‘fear of
bodily’ harm.
(Qld) s 348(2)(c).
Crimes Act 1900
61HA(4)(c).
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 2A(2)(b).
Law Consolidation (Rape and Sexual Offences) Amendment Act 2008
46(3)(a)(i).
Criminal Code
(Qld) s 348(2)(b);
Criminal Code
319(2)(a). See also
Crimes Act 1900
s 61HA(6)(b)
person has sexual intercourse because of intimidatory or coercive conduct, or
other threat, that does not involve a
including extortion against another
Criminal Code
Ibid s 319(2)(a);
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 2A(f);
Crimes Act 1900
Crimes Act 1900
s 67(1)(d).
Criminal Law
Consolidation (Rape and Sexual Offences) Amendment Act 2008
46(3)(a)(ii).
s 61HA(6)(b).
Crimes Act 1958
this covers a threat against another
Criminal Code
(NT) s 192(2)(a). See also
Criminal Code
(Qld) s 348(2)(c) which includes ‘fear of bodily’
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 2A(2)(c).
circumstance that negates consent:
Crimes Act 1900
s 61HA(4)(b)
Criminal Law Consolidation (Rape and Sexual Offences)
Amendment Act 2008
(SA) s 46(3)(c). These two jurisdictions deal with the
lack of consent in the context of the effect or alcohol and other drugs
separately.
Other jurisdictions specify being asleep or unconscious along with
the effect of alcohol and other drugs:
Crimes Act 1958
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 2A(h);
Criminal Code
(NT) s 192(2)(c).
See also Model Criminal Code Officers Committee of the Standing Committee of
Attorneys-General,
Model Criminal Code—Chapter 5 Sexual Offences
Against the Person
(1999), cl 5.2.3,
Crimes Act 1958
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 2A(2)(h);
Criminal Code
(NT) s 192(2)(c).
See also Model Criminal Code Officers Committee of the Standing Committee of
Attorneys-General,
Model Criminal Code—Chapter 5 Sexual Offences
Against the Person
(1999), 38, app 2, cl
Crimes Act 1900
s 67(1)(e).
Crimes Act 1900
s 61HA(6)(a).
Justice Sexual Offences Taskforce (NSW),
Responding to Sexual Assault: The
Way Forward
(2005), 37.
Western Australia does however
specify that consent is negated where it has been obtained by ‘deceit, or
any fraudulent means’:
Criminal Code
Crimes Act 1900
s 61HA(5)(b)
Crimes Act 1958
Criminal Code
(Qld) s 348(2)(f);
Criminal Law Consolidation Act
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 2A(2)(g);
Crimes Act 1900
Criminal Code
Crimes Act 1900
s 61HA(5)(b).
Criminal Code
(Qld) s 348(2)(f) which
specifies that there is no consent where the person agrees to the sexual
activity when they had the ‘mistaken
belief induced by the accused that
they were sexual partners’.
Crimes Act 1958
Criminal Law Consolidation Act
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 2A(g), where the
complainant must have been ‘reasonably mistaken about the nature or
purpose of the act’;
Criminal Code
(NT) s 192(2)(e). See also Model
Criminal Code Officers Committee of the Standing Committee of Attorneys-General,
Model Criminal Code—Chapter 5 Sexual Offences Against the Person
(1999), cl 5.2.3, 38.
(5)(c). See also
Crimes Act 1958
Criminal Code
s 192(1)(f).
Criminal Code
(Qld) s 348(2)(e). See also
Crimes Act 1900
61HA(5)(c).
Crimes Act 1900
s 61HA(4)(a)
Crimes Act 1958
Criminal Law
Consolidation Act 1935
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 2A(2)(i);
Crimes Act 1900
Criminal Code
(NT) s 192(2)(d).
See also MCCOC, cl 5.2.3, 38.
Note that the
Crimes Act 1900
s 61HA(4)(a)
specifically provides that a person does not consent to sexual
intercourse where that person ‘does not have the capacity to
the sexual intercourse, including because of age or cognitive capacity’.
Criminal Code
Ibid s 348(2)(d);
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 2A(2)(e);
Crimes Act 1900
Crimes Act 1900
s 61HA(6)(c).
(5). The penalty applicable for this offence, a maximum of 10 years
imprisonment, is less than that for sexual assault without consent
Ibid 61HA(4)(d);
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 2a(2)(d);
Crimes Act 1900
Criminal Code
(NT) s 192(2(b). See also Model Criminal
Code Officers Committee of the Standing Committee of Attorneys-General,
Criminal Code—Chapter 5 Sexual Offences Against the Person
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 2A(2)(a).
(Vic) s 37AA.
Model Criminal Code Officers Committee of the Standing Committee of
Attorneys-General,
Model Criminal Code—Chapter 5 Sexual Offences
Against the Person
(1999), 49. However, since the MCCOC report, NSW has
legislated in a different way from other jurisdictions, as discussed
Crimes Act 1900
discussion in Model Criminal Code Officers Committee of the Standing Committee
of Attorneys-General,
Model Criminal Code—Chapter 5 Sexual Offences
Against the Person
(1999), 49. The MCCOC referred approvingly to the
arguments made by Jennifer Temkin based around sexual choice and the recognition
that some circumstances there remains choice, albeit unpalatable ones:
T Temkin, ‘Towards a Modern Law of Rape’
Criminal Code Officers Committee of the Standing Committee of Attorneys-General,
Model Criminal Code—Chapter 5 Sexual Offences Against the Person
(1999), 41.
Criminal Justice Sexual
Offences Taskforce (NSW Attorney General’s Department),
Responding to
Sexual Assault: The Way Forward
Comment on ALRC Family
Violence Online Forum: Women’s Legal Service
s 61HA(6)(b).
Bronitt and B McSherry,
Principles of Criminal Law
(2nd ed, 2005), 561;
Model Criminal Code Officers Committee of the Standing Committee of
Attorneys-General,
Model Criminal Code—Chapter 5 Sexual Offences
Against the Person
(1999), 25; Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Offences: Interim Report
(2003), [7.9]. For another example of this approach
see the recommendation made by the South African Law Reform Commission,
Report on Sexual Offences
, Project 107 (2002),
Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Sexual Offences: Interim Report
S Bronitt and B McSherry,
Principles of Criminal Law
(2nd ed, 2005), 561–562; Model Criminal
Code Officers Committee of the Standing Committee of Attorneys-General,
Criminal Code—Chapter 5 Sexual Offences Against the Person
25–27; Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Sexual Offences: Interim
(2003), [7.9]–[7.10]; S Bronitt, ‘Rape and Lack of
Criminal Law Journal
, 307–310. See
also J Marsh, A Geist and N Caplan,
Rape and the Limits of Law Reform
(1982), 50–52; S Caringella-MacDonald, ‘The Comparability in Sexual
and Nonsexual Assault Case Treatment: Did Statute
Change Meet the
Objective?’ (1985) 2
Crime and Delinquency
Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Sexual Offences: Interim Report
(2003), [7.10] (references
The Young and Rush
proposal was submitted to MCCOC: Model Criminal Code Officers Committee of the
Standing Committee of Attorneys-General,
Model Criminal Code—Chapter 5
Sexual Offences Against the Person
(1999), 27–29. Young and Rush
reformulated their proposal and also submitted it in response to the VLRC
Discussion Paper: Victorian
Law Reform Commission,
Sexual Offences:
Discussion Paper
(2001), Submission
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Sexual Offences: Interim Report
[7.11]–[7.48].
[7.46]–[7.48].
Victorian Law
Reform Commission,
Sexual Offences: Final Report
See, eg, Model Criminal Code
Officers Committee of the Standing Committee of Attorneys-General,
Criminal Code—Chapter 5 Sexual Offences Against the Person
(1999), 67;
Criminal Justice Sexual Offences Taskforce (NSW),
Responding to Sexual
Assault: The Way Forward
(2005), 42–52; Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Sexual Offences: Final Report
(2004), [8.6]–[8.36];
Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions (ACT) and Australian Federal
Responding to Sexual Assault: The Challenge of Change
Crimes Act 1958
Criminal Law
Consolidation Act 1935
Crimes Act 1900
also Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Sexual Offences: Final Report
(2004), 408 n 1060: ‘In the ‘common law’ States of Vic, SA,
the ACT and NSW, the
of rape is now statutorily defined,
although it is broadly consistent with the common law as stated in
Criminal Code
(Qld) s 349;
Criminal Code
Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Sexual Offences: Final Report
DPP v Morgan
[1975] UKHL 3
Criminal Code
Criminal Code
(WA) s 24. See also Tasmania which has included
recklessness within its treatment of a mistaken belief:
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 14A(1)(b). See discussion in Model Criminal Code Officers Committee
of the Standing Committee of Attorneys-General,
Model Criminal
Code—Chapter 5 Sexual Offences Against the Person
(1999), 71; and
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Sexual Offences: Final Report
In NSW, the question of the
steps taken by the defendant relates to the issue of the defendant’s
knowledge, recklessness or
reasonable belief:
Crimes Act 1900
In South Australia, it relates to assessing reckless
indifference:
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
Victoria, steps taken by the defendant are not part of the definition of
consent, but are a factor in jury directions on whether
the ‘accused was
aware’ that the complainant was not consenting’:
(Vic) s 37AA.
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
Criminal Justice Sexual Offences
Taskforce (NSW),
Responding to Sexual Assault: The Way Forward
R v Hemsley
(1988) 36 A Crim R 334
(1987) 11 NSWLR 12
Criminal Justice Sexual Offences Taskforce (NSW),
Responding to Sexual
Assault: The Way Forward
(2005), 43. See
R v Kitchener
(1995) 37 NSWLR 660
NSWCCA 124.
Criminal Justice Sexual
Offences Taskforce (NSW),
Responding to Sexual Assault: The Way Forward
(2005), 43. See also
Banditt v The Queen
[2004] HCA 47
(2005) 219 CLR
ThomsonReuters,
The Laws of
(2010), vol 10,
Criminal Offences
R v Kitchener
29 NSWLR 696
, 697 (Kirby P). See also
(1995) 37 NSWLR
Crimes Act 1958
This legislation is not consistent with the recommendations of Victorian
Law Reform Commission,
Sexual Offences: Final Report
(2004). See also, D
Smith, ‘Reckless Rape in Victoria’
[2008] MelbULawRw 31
Melbourne University
[1996] VSC 27.
R v Kitchener
(1993) 29 NSWLR 696
complete failure to consider or avert to consent was held sufficient to
constitute recklessness.
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
This legislation was
enacted in 2008 pursuant to the
Criminal Law Consolidation (Rape and Sexual
Offences) Amendment Act 2008
Criminal Law Consolidation
For a discussion of the significance of the accused
being aware of the ‘possibility’ as opposed to the
‘probability’
that the other person might not be consenting to the
act or has withdrawn consent to the act, see
(1985) 15 A Crim R
Crimes Act 1900
Criminal Code
(NT) s 192(3). See also,
DPP Reference No 1 of
[2002] NTCCA 11;
Crimes Act 1900
DPP v Morgan
[1975] UKHL 3
In the Australian common law jurisdictions see
10 SASR 139
Banditt v The Queen
[2004] HCA 47
(2005) 219 CLR 43.
However, it is
important to note that the decision in
was made before the most
recent legislative change in NSW which has introduced an objective element.
does not apply in the Code
Model Criminal Code
Officers Committee of the Standing Committee of Attorneys-General,
Criminal Code—Chapter 5 Sexual Offences Against the Person
(1999), 73.
DPP v Morgan
[1975] UKHL 3
[1976] AC 182
210 (Hailsham LJ).
The Advisory
Group became known as the Heilbron
This recommendation was
implemented in 1976 and substantially superseded by later extensive reform of
the law in the UK.
[1975] 10 SASR 139
(decided before Morgan but reaching the same
Banditt v The Queen
[2004] HCA 47
(2005) 219 CLR 43.
However, it is
important to note that the decision in
was made before the most
recent legislative change in NSW which has introduced an objective element.
does not apply in the Code
(Vic) s 37AA. This approach was also recommended by Model Criminal
Code Officers Committee of the Standing Committee of Attorneys-General,
Criminal Code—Chapter 5 Sexual Offences Against the Person
Model Criminal Code Officers
Committee of the Standing Committee of Attorneys-General,
Model Criminal
Code—Chapter 5 Sexual Offences Against the Person
(1999), 73.
Criminal Code
Crimes Amendment
(Consent—Sexual Assault Offences) Act 2007
Crimes Act 1900
s 61HA(3)(c).
M Findlay, S
Odgers and S Yeo,
Australian Criminal Justice
(2005), 15.
DPP v Morgan
[1975] UKHL 3
, in relation to the classification of honest belief in consent as a
subjective test.
Model Criminal
Code Officers Committee of the Standing Committee of Attorneys-General,
Criminal Code—Chapter 5 Sexual Offences Against the Person
77–83; Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Sexual Offences: Final
(2004), ch 8.
Model Criminal Code Officers Committee of the Standing Committee of
Attorneys-General,
Model Criminal Code—Chapter 5 Sexual Offences
Against the Person
(1999), 83.
Ibid 77. See also S Bronitt, ‘Rape and Lack of Consent’
Criminal Law Journal
Model Criminal Code Officers
Committee of the Standing Committee of Attorneys-General,
Model Criminal
Code—Chapter 5 Sexual Offences Against the Person
(1999), 71. See
Report of the Advisory Group on the Law of Rape
HMSO, London
Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Sexual Offences: Interim Report
(2003), [7.91].
See discussion in Model Criminal
Code Officers Committee of the Standing Committee of Attorneys-General,
Criminal Code—Chapter 5 Sexual Offences Against the Person
In respect of the defence of
honest belief, it ‘supports the attitude that a person is entitled to have
sex, unless the other
person actively indicates they do not wish to do so. This
places the onus on a person approached for sex to indicate lack of consent,
instead of requiring the initiator to ascertain whether the other person is
consenting’: Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Sexual Offences: Final
(2004), [8.7].
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Sexual Offences: Interim Report
Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Sexual Offences: Final Report
(2004), [8.11]. See, eg, the
Victorian decision of
R v Ev Costa
[1996] VSC 27
, compared to the
position in NSW stated in
R v Kitchener
(1993) 29 NSWLR 696
, which found
that failure to consider or advert to consent at all is
Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Sexual Offences: Interim Report
J Tempkin, ‘The
Limits of Reckless Rape’
Criminal Law Review
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Sexual Offences: Interim Report
Model Criminal Code Officers
Committee of the Standing Committee of Attorneys-General,
Model Criminal
Code—Chapter 5 Sexual Offences Against the Person
See, eg, discussion in M
Randall, ‘Sexual Assault in Spousal Relationships,“Continuous
Consent” and the Law, Honest
but Mistaken Judicial Beliefs’’
University of Manitoba Law Journal
Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Sexual Offences: Final Report
(2004), [8.15] (emphasis in
[8.22]–[8.25].
(Vic) s 37AA. This approach was also recommended by Model Criminal
Code Officers Committee of the Standing Committee of Attorneys-General,
Criminal Code—Chapter 5 Sexual Offences Against the Person
M King, ‘Reckless Rape in
[2008] MelbULawRw 31
Melbourne University Law Review
Model Criminal Code Officers
Committee of the Standing Committee of Attorneys-General,
Model Criminal
Code—Chapter 5 Sexual Offences Against the Person
Crimes Act 1961
Sexual Offences Act
(UK) s 1. See also s 75(1).
Criminal Code RSC 1985 C-46 s 273.2 However, see discussion of the
effectiveness of these provisions in the context of sexual assault
by a current
or former intimate partner in M Randall, ‘Sexual Assault in Spousal
Relationships,“Continuous Consent”
and the Law, Honest but Mistaken
Judicial Beliefs’’ (2008) 32
University of Manitoba Law Journal
Sexual Offences Act
See discussion
in Criminal Justice Sexual Offences Taskforce (NSW),
Responding to Sexual
Assault: The Way Forward
(2005), 49.
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Sexual Offences: Interim Report
Ibid, [7.61].
See discussion in Model Criminal
Code Officers Committee of the Standing Committee of Attorneys-General,
Criminal Code—Chapter 5 Sexual Offences Against the Person
Between 2001 and
2004 the VLRC reviewed the law concerning sexual offences and recommended
further reform of jury directions about
consent. These recommendations were
subsequently enacted, see
Crimes (Sexual Offences) Act 2006
S Bronitt and B McSherry,
Principles of Criminal Law
(2nd ed, 2005),
Crimes Act 1958
See discussion in J Willis,
‘Legislatively Mandated Jury Directions in Sexual Offence Cases’
Criminal Law Journal
Criminal Code
192A. This was introduced in the Northern Territory in
Crimes Act 1900
Criminal Code
(WA) s 319(2);
Crimes Act 1900
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 2A(2)(a) which states that a person
does not freely agree if a person ‘does not say or do anything to
communicate consent’.
Crimes Act 1958
Taskforce on Women and the
Criminal Code (Qld),
Report of the Taskforce on Women and the Criminal
(2000), Rec 64.3.
recommendation was made before the term ‘normally’ was removed from
Crimes Act 1958
s 37(1)(a).
See discussion of problems with
the term ‘normally’ in Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Offences: Interim Report
[7.34]–[7.40].
Model Criminal
Code Officers Committee of the Standing Committee of Attorneys-General,
Criminal Code—Chapter 5 Sexual Offences Against the Person
app 2, cl 5.2.43.
Juror Attitudes
and Biases in Sexual Assault Cases
National Council to
Reduce Violence against Women and their Children,
Time for Action: The
National Council’s Plan for Australia to Reduce Violence against Women and
their Children, 2009–2021
Evidence (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 1958
DPP v Theophanous
[2009] VSC 325
, the Supreme Court of Victoria considered the applicability of
the guiding principles contained in, what was then, the
Evidence Act 1958
(Vic) s 32AB. This case considered, in part, whether the magistrate had
applied those guiding principles when allowing the publication
of certain parts
of the complainant’s evidence given in a committal proceeding. The court
rejected the argument that s 32AB,
and its intention to encourage the
reporting of sexual assault, would necessarily mean that there could be no
publication of evidence
from a sexual assault
proceeding.
Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Sexual Offences: Final Report
(2004), Recs 105, 106,
Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Sexual Offences: Interim Report
(2003), [8.88]. See also
In the family violence
context see J Wangmann, ‘“She Said …” “He said
…” : Cross Applications
in NSW Apprehended Domestic Violence Order
Proceedings’,
, University of Sydney, 2009, 55–56.
In the family violence context see
R Hunter, ‘Women’s Experience in Court: The Implementation of
Feminist Law Reforms
in Civil Proceedings Concerning Domestic Violence’,
, Stanford University, 2006, 64; R Hunter and J Stubbs,
‘Model Laws or Missed Opportunity?’
[1999] AltLawJl 3
Alternative Law
Council to Reduce Violence against Women and their Children,
Time for Action:
The National Council’s Plan for Australia to Reduce Violence against Women
and their Children, 2009–2021
(2009), 112.
ALRC CP1 Family Violence � Improving Legal Frameworks
17. Reporting, Prosecution and
Pre-trial Processes
Introduction
Decision points
Attrition in sexual assault cases
Investigation
Prosecution
Recognising a sexual assault
Reporting to the police
The prosecution phase
Specific provisions in relation to sexual assault
Joint or separate trial
Commissions’ views
Pre-recorded evidence
Commissions’ views
17. Reporting, Prosecution and
Pre-trial Processes
Introduction
17.1 The Terms of Reference for this Inquiry require the Commissions to
inquire and report on ‘the impact of inconsistent interpretation
application of laws in cases of sexual assault occurring in a family/domestic
violence context, including rules of evidence, on
victims of such
17.2 This chapter, and Chapter 18, highlight ways in which particular laws
and procedures operate for victims of sexual assault. Australian
take different approaches to law and procedure in the areas discussed. Both
chapters examine which approaches best
recognise the nature of sexual violence,
and address the negative experience of complainants, particularly children, in
the criminal
justice system. Where it is possible to identify certain approaches
as more promising and progressive than others, the Commissions
propose that
Commonwealth, state and territory governments should implement consistent
measures of these kinds.
17.3 This chapter begins by mapping out the key ‘decision points’
in the prosecution of sexual assault offences. These
decision points extend from
reporting to the police, through the handling of cases by various offices of the
Director of Public Prosecutions
(DPP) and to procedures involved in the trial of
sexual offences. At each of these decision points, cases are filtered out,
because of the demands imposed on complainants. This
process—referred to as ‘attrition’—may lead to offences
not being reported and cases being unnecessarily withdrawn or dismissed.
17.4 This and the following chapter examine selected developments aimed at
reducing attrition and improving the experiences of women
and children who have
suffered a sexual assault. The Commissions are interested in hearing about the
range of positive developments
and innovations that have been instituted and
whether they have been successful in encouraging reporting and reducing
attrition—particularly
in cases of sexual assault perpetrated in a family
violence context.
17.5 This chapter discusses some of the problems that may lead to attrition
of sexual assault cases at the reporting, investigation,
prosecution and other
stages before trial. The following chapter focuses on issues that arise at
trial, notably in relation to the
application of laws of evidence, the giving of
jury warnings and the cross-examination of complainants and other witnesses in
offence proceedings.
17.6 The focus of this aspect of the Inquiry is sexual assault perpetrated in
a family violence context—that is, for those who
have been sexually
assaulted by a current or former intimate partner (spouse, de facto, boyfriend)
or family member. However, most
of issues apply to all sexual assault
proceedings, regardless of the relationship between the complainant and the
perpetrator.
17.7 Many areas of law and procedure relating to sexual offence proceedings
are not addressed. A comprehensive review is not possible
within the time frame
for this Inquiry. The Terms of Reference also have a more specific focus. The
Commissions acknowledge that
reform in this area has been substantial over the
last three decades and, therefore, welcome submissions in regard to any
legislative
or procedural change considered to have improved legal responses to
sexual assault perpetrated in a family violence context, or outcomes
[back to top]
17.8 The way in which complaints of sexual assault move forward within the
criminal justice system is complex and there are multiple
points where decisions
are made, which may result in a complaint not proceeding:
From the point where a victim decides to report a sexual offence to the
police—and the majority never do—various decision
makers exercise
discretion at multiple decision points, based on a range of criteria, so that
only a small proportion of all sex
crimes ever reach trial and conviction
… This filtering of cases begins with police decisions to record and
investigate a complaint
and to charge a suspect with the offence. The exercise
of police discretionary powers means that they are perhaps the most significant
gatekeepers to the criminal justice system.
Once the police charge a suspect, DPP lawyers review the file to determine
whether the case should be prosecuted. Cases that proceed
are subject to
continuous reassessment because the circumstances of the case can change over
time. In addition different evidentiary
standards apply at each decision-making
stage: the police decision to charge is based on the
prima facie
which is a more inclusive standard than the
reasonable prospects
applied by the prosecutor, while the jury’s decision to convict is based
on the stringent standard of
beyond reasonable
17.9 These multiple decision points are summarised in the following diagram
extracted from the 2004 report
Prosecutorial Decisions in Adult Sexual
Assault Cases: An Australian
[back to top]
Attrition in sexual
assault cases
17.10 Research has established that only a small proportion of sexual
assaults enter the criminal justice system and those that do
face a range of
barriers and filtering systems that mean that few result in a charge,
prosecution, or conviction.
steady process of attrition has been the subject of much concern, and is
documented in many reports.
Numerous reforms over the last three decades—including legal and
procedural reforms and policy changes within government agencies—have
intended, at least in part, to address factors and barriers that have
contributed to victims making decisions to withdraw or
key decision-makers
making determinations that cases not proceed.
17.11 The National Council to Reduce Violence Against Women and their
Children (National Council) reported that its consultations,
and the available
evidence base, suggest that, in some jurisdictions, ‘concerns remain that
the criminal law is under-utilised
in cases of domestic and family
The National
Council observed that:
The limited use of the criminal law may serve to undermine the effectiveness
of the formalised procedures, policies and laws. It is
important to recognise
that criminal law should be a practical option in the community’s response
to domestic and family violence
and should work in conjunction with the civil
law reform in different statutory regimes. The factors that operate to
out’ the use of the criminal law should be recognised and
Statistics on attrition rates
17.12 Numerous reports on sexual offences and the legal system have found
that the number of sexual assault cases that reach the point
of adjudication is
Few sexual assaults are
reported to the police. Reporting, and under-reporting, of sexual assault is
discussed in Chapter 15.
17.13 Reports of sexual assault are then subject to a range of decisions
is enough evidence to
sustain a charge and the likelihood of conviction, all of which may serve to
filter cases out. In addition,
the complainant faces decisions about whether to
engage with, or continue to engage with, the legal system. The Victorian Law
Commission (VLRC) found in 2004 that:
less than one in six reports to police of rape and less than one in seven
reports of incest or sexual penetration of a child proceeded
to prosecution.
Even if an offence is reported and the defendant is prosecuted, guilty pleas and
conviction rates are lower than
for other criminal
17.14 Denise Lievore concluded that the available Australian studies, taken
together, indicated that:
case attrition is highest at the police stage, but prosecutors
regularly exercise their discretion to discontinue cases;
in recent years there has been an increase in the numbers of persons
charged with sexual assault, but this is not reflected in conviction
the proportion of defendants pleading guilty to sexual assault is
low relative to other offence types; and
the high proportion of cases proceeding to trial is reflected in
high numbers of acquittals compared to other
17.15 Some of
the published statistics on attrition rates at various points are set out below.
The figures relate to data collection
across different time periods,
Investigation
A 2000–03 Victorian study found that police did not proceed
with more than 60% of sexual assault
investigations.
Offenders were
charged in only 15% of
An Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) report noted that, for
incidents of sexual assault recorded by police in 2002, offenders
were proceeded
against for approximately one in four victims of sexual
New South Wales research showed that only 28% of sexual and indecent
assaults against children and 30% of those against adults, reported
police in 2004 were ‘cleared’ within six
A 2003 South Australian study noted that 40% of child sexual assault
incidents reported in 2000–01 had not been cleared by
police when followed
up a year later; and 23% of cases were cleared other than through a suspect
being apprehended, including because
the victim requested no further
In 2007, the Australian Institute of Criminology (AIC) estimated
that less than 20% of sexual offence incidents which are reported
to the police
result in charges being laid and criminal proceedings being
instigated.
Prosecution
The VLRC concluded that, based on 1997–99 cases, fewer than
one in six reports to police of rape and fewer than one in seven
incest or sexual penetration of a child proceeded to
prosecution.
NSW research found that it was common for incidents to be recorded
as cleared by the police, even though there had been no criminal
proceedings
commenced through the issuing and filing of a court attendance
Among all sexual
offences reported to police, criminal proceedings are initiated in only 15% of
incidents involving child victims
and 19% of incidents involving adult
A 2003 South Australian study found that 27% of reports of child
sexual assault incidents proceeded to
prosecution.
The ABS report, which used a larger sample (1,567 defendants),
reported that, for 2002–03, 60% of sexual assault defendants
guilty plea, 20% pleaded not guilty and were convicted and 19% were
Defendants in higher
criminal courts, with a principal offence of sexual assault and related
offences, were three times more likely
to have an acquittal outcome (20%) than
defendants for all offences
NSW research found that 44% of persons prosecuted for a sexual
offence against a child, and 42% of persons prosecuted for a sexual
against an adult, were found guilty on at least one
South Australian research found that less than 10% of cases
reported to South Australian police in 2000–01 resulted in a conviction
at least one of the offences arising from a reported child sexual assault
17.16 Improved
data collection in relation to the reporting and prosecution of sexual assault,
including in a family violence context,
is clearly desirable. Better statistics
on attrition rates and outcomes in sexual assault cases are critical to
identifying problems,
and designing and monitoring solutions, in relation to how
the criminal justice system deals with sexual assault.
17.17 Bodies like the
Australian Centre for the Study of Sexual Assault (ACSSA) and the AIC, along
with state and territory counterparts,
have an important role to play in this
regard. One of the roles of ACSSA, in particular, is to ‘improve access to
current information
on sexual assault in order to assist policymakers and others
interested in this area to develop evidence-based strategies that respond
and ultimately reduce, the incidence of sexual assault’. Another body, the
Australian Domestic and Family Violence Clearinghouse
plays a role in providing
information about domestic and family violence issues and practice, including
through an online good practice
The Australian Centre for the Study of Sexual Assault, the
Australian Institute of Criminology and similar state and territory agencies
should prioritise the collection of comprehensive data on attrition rates and
outcomes in sexual assault cases, including in relation
to sexual assault
perpetrated in a family violence context.
[back to top]
Recognising a sexual
17.18 The first step in engaging with the criminal justice system involves
the complainant understanding that what happened to them
constitutes a sexual
offence. As discussed in Chapter 15, many women may find it difficult to
recognise what an intimate partner
has done to them as a sexual assault. For
example, some women may continue to think that rape in marriage is not a
criminal offence.
In addition, there is a wide range of acts of sexual violence
that a woman or child may experience as part of family
some of which are
against the various criminal laws, and others which are not.
17.19 Where victims do recognise what happened to them as a criminal offence,
they may decide not to make a report to the police.
Numerous surveys have
documented that few women report sexual assaults to the
The reasons women do not
report sexual assaults to the police include considerations related to: the
relationship that they have
with the perpetrator; fear of the perpetrator; how
serious the victim perceives the assault to be; lack of confidence in the
justice system to assist; and notions of privacy, shame and stigma.
17.20 Where sexual assault occurs in a family violence context, the reasons
for not reporting may include that it is easier to get
a civil protection order
rather than to be involved in a criminal prosecution. Economic dependence and
potential homelessness may
also be factors discouraging the reporting of sexual
assault in a family violence context.
17.21 Certain groups of women may face additional barriers in reporting.
Indigenous women may encounter family and community pressures
speaking out about violence in their community. Indigenous women may also be
reluctant to report to the police due to
mistrust of the police, past
inappropriate police responses, a lack of police available in their community,
the normalisation of
violence which may make it difficult to identify the harm
suffered as a criminal offence, and fear of retribution from the perpetrator
his family.
17.22 Women from culturally and linguistically diverse backgrounds or women
who have come to Australia from other countries may not
be aware of their legal
rights in Australia—for example, that sexual assault by a spouse is
against the law—and may have
a negative perception of the police gained
from their country of origin or fears about their immigration status. Women with
a disability
may lack physical access to the police to make a report or may be
dependent upon the perpetrator for their care, making it very difficult
17.23 More generally, women and other victims of sexual assault may lack
knowledge about the options that they have, and the mechanisms
available to assist them in reporting sexual violence and going on to engage
with the criminal justice system.
[back to top]
Reporting to the
17.24 The next step in engaging with the criminal justice system about a
sexual offence is to make a report to the police, or have
the offence notified
to the police in some way (for example via a parent, teacher, doctor or
neighbour).
17.25 For those sexual assaults that are reported, the response of the police
is vital to decision making about whether a woman or
child will continue to
pursue their complaint—a key hurdle. As the VLRC observed:
How the police are perceived by people who report an assault and the quality
and consistency of their investigative and decision-making
practices will have a
major impact on reporting and prosecution
17.26 It is recognised that, in addition to
investigating complaints of sexual assault and apprehending and prosecuting
the function of police should include protecting and supporting
Complainants should,
for instance, receive appropriate support to enable them to make statements and
obtain forensic medical examinations
and referral to other support services. For
example, when a victim of sexual assaults reports to the NSW Police, they are to
referral to a NSW Health sexual assault
counsellor.
Specialised police responses
17.27 Specialised police responses to sexual assault have developed in
recognition that ‘providing support helped victims recover,
further trauma for them, and gave them greater confidence to participate in
criminal proceedings as
witnesses’.
17.28 Some police services provide ‘a fully integrated environment for
victims of sexual
facilitating
interviews, forensic examinations and the provision of support for victims. For
example, in the ACT, the Sexual Assault
and Child Abuse Team (SACAT) provides
Victims can be medically
examined in a purpose-built suite, which has an en suite attached to it so that
victims can wash after their
examination. A bedroom is provided so that they can
rest if they need to. There is also an interview room, a lounge area, and a
for children, where officers can build rapport with children prior to
interviewing. The investigators’ workspace is separated
from these rooms.
The interview room has equipment for video-recording interviews and is linked to
another room where child protection
officers can observe interviews with child
17.29 SACAT also retains a Sexual Assault Victim Liaison Officer, whose role
is intended to improve the experience of victims in the
criminal justice system.
This role includes keeping victims informed of the progress of the investigation
and any criminal proceedings
and to respond to their concerns about interactions
with police and the criminal justice
17.30 Similar approaches are used in other states and territories—in
part to minimise attrition rates by improving evidence
gathering and the
response of the police to complainants of sexual
Specialised investigation
17.31 Since the late 1980s, policing practices have changed to recognise the
difficulties in investigating sex offences, particularly
those committed by
serial offenders. This has seen the establishment of specialist squads around
Australia to police serial sex offenders,
other types of serious sex offending
and online sex offences. In addition, specialist policing aims to minimise
attrition rates by
improving evidence gathering and the response of police to
victims of sexual assault.
17.32 There can be specialist approaches to investigation with or without
specialist approaches to interviewing and forensically examining
Generally, it appears that police services have two forms of dedicated responses
to the investigation of adult and child
sexual assault: first, the organisation
of police into a squad or team with specialist training to investigate sexual
assault and,
secondly, the creation of dedicated sexual offences units in order
to interview victims and help coordinate police and child protection
17.33 The roles and functions of specialist investigation squads are similar
around Australia. The first specialist policing service
was established in the
ACT in 1988. Its successor unit, SACAT, is responsible for investigating:
serious sexual assaults including those committed by serial
all physical and sexual child abuse committed against a person under
the age of 16 years, including intra-familial offences;
historical sex offences that required a commitment of resources for
a lengthy period of time; and
offences relating to internet crime including child
pornography.
17.34 There are also specialist sex crimes squads
NSW—the Sex Crimes Squad;
Victoria—the Sexual Crimes Squad;
Western Australia—the Sex Crime Division; and
South Australia—the Sexual Crime Investigation Branch.
17.35 All the specialist police squads in Australia share protocols
for policing sex offences and each police department administers
the Australian
National Child Offender Register in order to track the whereabouts and
activities of registered sex offenders. Each
specialist squad also has an
important function in tracking those who use and disseminate child pornography
on the internet as well
as those offenders who attempt to groom children over
the internet via chatrooms.
17.36 Most specialist police squads appear to be more focused on, and
dedicated to, the offences of extra-familial offenders rather
than those that
occur in a family violence context. The extent to which specialist police squads
alone can increase the policing
and apprehension of sex offenders is difficult
to assess. Police have indicated that reform must be linked to providing
training and
Have specialist police squads for sex crimes increased the
policing and apprehension of sexual assault offenders, including in a family
violence context?
Question 17–2
To what extent is the work of
specialist police hampered by lack of training and resources? In what ways can
improvements be made?
Police and integrated agency responses
17.37 Specialised police units also have roles in integrating police
responses with those of other government agencies involved in
protection.
17.38 For example, NSW Police has recently established the Child Wellbeing
Unit, which commenced operation in January
The role of the Child
Wellbeing Unit is to help police officers identify whether or not a child is at
risk of harm and needs to be
referred to the Department of Community Services.
If not, the Unit advises police how to help the child and their family gain
to the services they
17.39 Previously, the NSW Child Protection and Sex Crimes Squad included the
Joint Investigative Review Teams (JIRTs), but these are
now under a separate
command. These teams include trained staff from police and the Departments of
Health and Community Services.
JIRTs investigate most child sexual abuse cases
and cases involving serious physical abuse and neglect.
17.40 Victoria Police has a Sexual Offences and Child Abuse Coordination
Office which collaborates with government and non-government
agencies in
relation to coordinated approaches to family violence, sexual assault and child
abuse. In January 2007, Sexual Offences
and Child Abuse Investigation Teams
(SOCITs) and Multidisciplinary Centres (MDCs) were established to improve
government and police
responses to sexual
17.41 The SOCITs are staffed by specialist police investigators and
specialist sexual assault counsellors. The SOCIT is a victim-centred
delivery and investigative
which aims to enhance the
chances of prosecution and victim satisfaction with the handling of cases. It
was developed by Victoria
Police in response to the VLRC’s 2004 report on
sexual offences.
17.42 The SOCIT approach may be particularly instructive in relation to
dealing with intra-familial sexual abuse because it works
with the non-offending
parent, provides counselling support to the family during the emotional turmoil
of a police investigation,
and refers the family to other services and long-term
counselling. This is important where the police investigation results in an
offending parent being charged or imprisoned or subject to non-contact orders
which can result in loss of income for the family.
In addition, the SOCIT is
able to work proactively with schools, counsellors and other agencies before
interviewing the victim to
improve the experience and outcome for the
17.43 In Western Australia, the Child Assessment and Interview Team (CAIT)
has similar functions. The CAITs are staffed by Department
of Child Protection
caseworkers and specialist police officers who jointly interview child abuse
Commissions’ views
17.44 The Commissions have heard that specialised police responses to sexual
assault are important for complainants. Police services
should provide
specialised training for investigators of sexual assault aimed at, for example,
increasing awareness of the concerns
and needs of victims, and on evidence
collection.
17.45 The nature of the specialised police roles in relation to family
violence generally, in each jurisdiction, are summarised in
Chapter 20. In that
chapter, the Commissions propose that each state and territory police force
should ensure that: victims have
access to a primary contact person within the
police, who specialises in, and is trained in, family violence issues; a police
is designated as a primary point of contact for government and
non-government agencies involved in the family violence system; specially
trained police have responsibility for supervising, monitoring or assuring the
quality of police responses to family violence incidents,
and providing advice
and guidance to operational police in this regard; and there is a central forum
or unit responsible for policy
and strategy concerning family violence within
the police.
The co-location of
sexual assault and family violence police units may also be desirable.
Co-location may ensure exchange of information
and facilitate multiple responses
(criminal and civil) to family violence.
17.46 However, not all sexual assault offences are dealt with by specialist
police or units and considerable barriers may exist for
complainants of sexual
assault, particularly in rural, remote and Indigenous communities, including
problems with access to police
and forensic examination facilities.
Are specialised police and integrated agency responses effective
in reducing the attrition of sexual assault cases during the police
investigation phase? If not, what further measures should be taken?
Question 17–4
What impact are specialised police units having on
improving collection of admissible evidence and support for victims of sexual
in a family violence context?
Question 17–5
specialised sexual assault police units be established in jurisdictions that do
not have them?
[back to top]
The prosecution
17.47 The decision whether to commence or continue prosecution of sexual
assault offences is a significant aspect of the criminal
justice process. The
DPPs in each of the Commonwealth, states and territories exercise considerable
discretion in deciding both
whether to prosecute alleged offenders and how any
such prosecution should proceed. This discretion is subject to prosecution
or guidelines in each jurisdiction. The exercise of prosecutorial
discretion has nevertheless been characterised as ‘one of
important but least understood aspects of the administration of criminal
The decision to prosecute
17.48 Each of the Australian jurisdictions has adopted similar criteria for
the exercise of the discretion to prosecute an alleged
offender. While there is
variation between policies, prosecutorial discretion is guided by two primary
considerations: first, the
sufficiency of the evidence and, secondly, the public
17.49 The first consideration informing the decision is whether the evidence
is sufficient to justify the institution or continuation
of a prosecution. There
must be enough admissible, substantial and reliable evidence not only to support
a prima facie case but also
to provide a reasonable prospect of a conviction
being secured.
17.50 An evaluation as to whether there is a reasonable prospect of
conviction requires an assessment of a number of factors including:
availability, competence, credibility and reliability of witnesses; the likely
impression that the witnesses will make on the
judge or jury; the admissibility
of evidence such as a confession by the accused; and any lines of defence open
to the accused.
17.51 Once the prosecutor is satisfied that the evidence is sufficient to
justify the institution or continuation of a prosecution,
the second key
consideration is whether it is in the public interest to pursue the
prosecution.
The factors which
are taken into account in determining the public interest are multifaceted and
non-exhaustive. These include: the
seriousness or triviality of the alleged
offence; mitigating or aggravating circumstances impacting upon the
appropriateness of the
prosecution; the age, mental state, physical health or
vulnerability of the alleged offender or victim; the period of time elapsed
since the offence; the background and prior convictions of the alleged offender;
the attitude of the victim of the alleged offence
to the prosecution; the actual
or potential harm occasioned by the alleged offence; the length and expense of a
trial; and the necessity
to maintain public confidence in the administration of
17.52 Guidelines also specify a number of factors that must not influence a
decision to prosecute. These include: the race, religion,
sex or beliefs of the
alleged offender; personal feelings concerning the alleged offender or victim;
possible political advantage
to the Government or a political group; or the
possible personal or professional effect of the decision to prosecute on those
that decision.
17.53 While the attrition of sexual assault cases is ‘highest at the
police stage ... prosecutors regularly exercise their discretion
to discontinue
The exercise of
prosecutorial discretion is one of the key points of attrition for sexual
assault cases. DPPs are regularly subject
to criticism for the exercise of their
discretion in adult and child sexual assault matters. This has often been due to
of public transparency in how these decisions are made.
Prosecution of sexual offences
17.54 In recent years considerable attention has been focused on the way in
which sexual offences are
prosecuted.
In particular, an
important quantitative study by Lievore on the exercise of prosecutorial
discretion in adult sexual assault cases
across the Australian jurisdictions was
published in 2004.
17.55 The Lievore study analysed 141 case files from five jurisdictions in
which the primary charge was rape or the equivalent sexual
assault offence. This
involved 148 victims and 152 defendants. Overwhelmingly the victims in this
study were women (99%).
been sexually assaulted by someone known to them (76%) with 15% having been
assaulted by a current partner, 15% by a family
member, 11% by a former partner
and 35% by another known
17.56 Fifty-three of the cases in this study were withdrawn (38 prior to
indictment; 15 after indictment). These involved 21 defendants
known to the
victim, 11 current partners, nine ex-partners, seven strangers and five family
members. Almost half of the cases (24)
were withdrawn because the victim did not
wish to proceed, and in the remaining 29 cases the decision was based on
prosecutorial
assessment of the prospect of conviction and victim credibility.
17.57 Importantly the files indicated that ‘the prosecutors believed
that the victims who chose to withdraw from prosecution
were telling the
Some of the
reasons why particular victims sought to withdraw included:
• Two indigenous victims who alleged that they were assaulted by family
members withdrew because their families had dealt with
the matter. It is not
clear what this means.
• A woman who was afraid of her partner refused to testify against
• The victim did not want her partner to go to jail; she simply wanted
an apprehended violence order.
• A woman who was allegedly sexually assaulted by her partner felt sick
at the thought of giving evidence at the committal hearing.
The file contained a
note that there was little prospect of success.
• A woman did not want to face the emotional trauma of giving evidence
against her ex partner.
• The victim was terrified of her ex partner and there was a history of
domestic violence in the relationship. She could not
go through with the trial
despite being informed about protective measures available.
• The victim alleged that she was sexually assaulted and threatened
with a knife by her ex-partner when he visited her house
to see their children.
She was terrified of the defendant and changed her story, saying that she
consented to sex.
17.58 There were significant differences between the cases that were
withdrawn and those that proceeded. In those that proceeded,
the victim was more
likely to have been injured, to have expressed non-consent either in words or
through resistance, the assault
was more severe in some way (for example, it
involved a weapon), additional evidence was available, the defendant used force,
defendant was
‘non-Caucasian’,
the defendant was a
17.59 In terms of outcomes, 33% of cases were finalised by guilty plea (half
of these pleas were entered after negotiations which
resulted in the level of
the charges or number of charges being reduced); and 29% of cases proceeded to
trial (38% of which resulted
in a guilty
Importantly, for the
purposes of this Inquiry, cases ‘involving strangers and other known
defendants were more likely than
cases involving intimate or family
relationships to proceed through the criminal justice process and to end in
conviction’.
17.60 Some of the conclusions of the Lievore study are particularly relevant
to cases involving sexual assault in a family violence
context and to the range
of evidence law and other issues discussed in Chapter 18.
There is ample empirical evidence, including the results of this study, that
attrition of sexual assault cases at the prosecution
stage is usually related to
evidentiary matters, which are most complex in cases where the victim and the
defendant are acquainted.
These cases usually come down to word against word,
with little or no corroborating evidence. The defence usually centres on consent
or the defendant’s mistaken belief in consent, which is more likely to
succeed if there has been prior consensual sex. Cases
involving current or
former partners are often discontinued due to victim withdrawals and
insufficient prospects of conviction. It
is understandable then that experienced
prosecutors, who are mindful of the limits imposed by the substantive, evidence
and procedure
laws of sexual assault, would assess the prospects of conviction
by considering prior relationship in combination with other factors,
such as the
strength of the evidence. At the same time, it is also clear that cultural
assumptions about consensual sex impact on
legal definitions of consent and the
conduct of trials.
Charge and fact bargaining
17.61 While the police make initial decisions about what charges are to be
laid against a person, the prosecution also has the discretion
to lay additional
charges and amend the charges in a number of ways, including by reducing them in
terms of the number of charges
and the seriousness of the charges.
17.62 While the critical question generally centres on what charges the
evidence can support, there may also be negotiation between
the defence and the
prosecution known as ‘charge and fact bargaining’ whereby the number
and level of charges may be
reduced in return for the defendant entering a
guilty plea to some or all
Such bargaining may
also involve the prosecution agreeing to present a recommendation for sentence,
including on the basis of an
agreed summary of what happened.
17.63 Lievore found that half of the guilty pleas in her study (33% of cases
in her study were finalised this way) resulted through
negotiations to reduce
the level or number of the
Interviews with Crown
Prosecutors revealed that they ‘routinely look for opportunities to
negotiate charges rather than risk
acquittal’.
17.64 While charge and fact bargaining may be criticised as placing the
interests of expediency over those of justice, these processes
can also be seen
as vital to the administration of the legal system.
Charge negotiations are a legitimate means of resolving criminal litigation. The
process is widely viewed as fundamental to the efficient
operation of an
under-resourced system and comprises a relatively informal process that
incorporates both adversarial and cooperative
aspects. In a situation of
uncertainty, the prosecution and defence exchange risks and benefits to achieve
mutually satisfactory
goals. Prosecutors avoid a costly trial and the risk of an
acquittal, while the defendant avoids the risk of additional charges or
maximum sentence.
17.65 Some victims express dissatisfaction about charge negotiation and fact
bargaining, often because they are not consulted about
the process or the
outcome. As discussed in more detail below, while it may be desirable for the
prosecution to seek the views of
a complainant before charge or fact bargaining,
this is not always required.
example of how charge bargaining may be perceived by victims was provided, in
the course of the present Inquiry, by a women’s
legal service
coordinator.
[There was] one case where [a young] Indigenous … woman went through the
whole process of providing evidence against her ex-partner
for assaulting her.
There were eight charges pending and each involved a serious domestic violence
incident. The matter was resolved
by the prosecution doing a deal with the
defence. They agreed to dropping five charges and three were downgraded so that
the ex-partner
ended up with only a four month suspended sentence. The victim
was not consulted and neither were we as the victim’s advocate
matter. To have something like that happen sends a negative message not only to
that particular woman but to all other women.
Essentially, although the law may
in essence appear to be colour blind, in practice it is not always colour blind.
Before an Indigenous
or Culturally and Linguistically Diverse woman can even get
her matter to trial she needs to convince the police to proceed with
and then she needs to navigate the complicated pre-trial processes. This is all
before the matter proceeds to trial where
the woman may have to counter
issues/stereotypes that intersect between racism and sexism. On top of this,
their access to justice
is also hampered by the lack of suitable interpreters
and by the general lack of cultural sensitivity and awareness of professionals
within system.
The views of victims
17.66 Prosecutorial
guidelines take into account the interests of victims in various ways. There is
some variation across jurisdictions
in relation to the extent to which regard
must be had to the wishes of victims in instituting or continuing the
prosecution of an
alleged offender, or in charge and fact bargaining.
17.67 The guidelines in each jurisdiction stipulate that one of the factors
that may be relevant in determining whether the public
interest requires a
prosecution, includes the attitude of the alleged victim to a
prosecution.
Most jurisdictions
have additional guidelines stipulating requirements to engage witnesses in
decision-making processes. For example:
The Commonwealth guidelines state that the views of victims may be
taken into account where they are available and where it is appropriate
determining whether it is in the public interest to commence or discontinue a
prosecution, agree to a charge negotiation or decline
to proceed with a
prosecution after
The NSW guidelines state that the victim must be advised whenever
the DPP is considering whether or not to discontinue a prosecution
victim’s views must be sought. The victim should also be consulted where
the DPP is considering whether to reduce
a charge in scope or severity, where
charge negotiations are undertaken, or where a statement of agreed facts is
being prepared.
The views of the victim about the acceptance of a plea of guilty
and the contents of a statement of agreed facts will be taken into
before final decisions are made but those views are not alone
determinative.
The Victorian legislation and guidelines state that the DPP is
obliged to have regard to the need to ensure that the prosecutorial
system gives
appropriate consideration to the concerns of the victims of
In exercising the power
to discontinue a prosecution, the views of the victim or, where appropriate, the
relatives of the victim
are sought. Their views are taken into account but are
determinative.
provisions in relation to sexual assault
17.68 Some DPP policies and guidelines contain specific provisions in
relation to victims of sexual assault.
17.69 The NSW guidelines provide that requests by victims of sexual offences
to discontinue proceedings, where freely made, should
be accorded significant
weight. The guidelines note, however, that the expressed wishes of victims may
not coincide with the general
public interest. In such cases, particularly where
there is other evidence implicating the accused person, there is a history of
similar offending or where the gravity of the alleged offence requires it, the
general public interest must
17.70 The Victorian guidelines provide that in the great majority of cases
involving allegations of sexual offences, the public interest
will strongly
suggest that the prosecution should
The guidelines also
specify that careful attention must be given to the public interest test in
‘boyfriend/girlfriend’
cases involving sexual
In these cases, the
guidelines note that, although the evidence indicates that ‘an offence has
technically been committed’,
the objective circumstances of the offence in
combination with the personal circumstances of the complainant and offender do
satisfy the ‘public interest
17.71 The Queensland guidelines contain a range of provisions dealing with
sexual offences, including child sex offences. Where there
is sufficient
reliable evidence to warrant a prosecution, the guidelines provide that there
will seldom be any doubt that the prosecution
is in the public
17.72 The Northern Territory guidelines note that prosecutions that involve
offences committed in the context of family violence,
including sexual assault,
require special attention. The guidelines cover the procedures which must be
followed where a victim indicates
that they do not wish to give
The guidelines note
that suitable prosecutions should proceed without the evidence of an unwilling
Information and assistance
17.73 Australian jurisdictions all recognise that victims of crimes are
entitled to receive information about the prosecution of the
alleged offender.
Services are in place to keep victims and witnesses informed and to assist them
with navigating the criminal justice
process. In each state and territory,
witness and victim support services offer some or all of the following
assisting clients to understand the legal process and court
procedures;
offering tours of court to familiarise clients;
providing information on the status and progress of prosecution
proceedings;
accompanying clients to court and while they are waiting to give
explaining the responsibility and rights of witnesses/victims;
liaising between clients and prosecutors or police;
referring clients to appropriate welfare, health, counselling and
other support services or providing such services directly;
assisting with victims’ compensation claims; and
assisting with the preparation of victim impact
statements.
17.74 The Commonwealth Victims of Crime Policy provides
that victims should, on request, be kept informed in a timely manner about
progress of a prosecution.
a victim is required to give evidence, any inconvenience to the victim should be
minimised as far as possible and victims should
be advised about their role as a
17.75 New South Wales guidelines provide that victims, whether witnesses or
not, should have explained to them, at an early stage
of proceedings, the
prosecution process and their role in
The New South Wales Charter
of Victims’ Rights, contained within the
Victims’ Rights Act
(NSW), provides for numerous safeguards to be afforded to victims.
Victims are to be informed about the investigation of the alleged
prosecution of the accused, the outcome of any bail applications, and their role
as a witness in the
Although a victim is
entitled to make a formal complaint if the Charter is not complied with,
non-compliance does not give victims
any civil cause of action or legal
17.76 The NSW DPP is required to seek the services of the Witness Assistance
Service as early as possible in cases involving sexual
assault, domestic
violence or child victims and witnesses. The Service can assist with providing
information, identifying special
needs of victims and witnesses, referring
victims for counselling and support, providing court preparation and
coordinating court
17.77 In 2006, the Victorian Government passed the
Victims’ Charter Act
(Vic), which sets out principles governing how participants in the
criminal justice system, including the OPP, should respond to
The Charter principles
set out the rights of the victim to be informed of the progress of any
investigation, prosecution or bail
application involving the alleged
In addition, the
Charter provides that victims should be provided with information about the
court process, their role as a witness
and their entitlements to support
services. While the Act does not create legal rights or give rise to any civil
cause of action,
victims can complain to the OPP if the Charter principles have
not been upheld.
17.78 The Victorian OPP has a Witness Assistance Service which is available
to all prosecution witnesses and victims of crime who
are involved in cases
handled by the OPP. This service provides information and support, and is
staffed by professionals experienced
in witness and victim support. The role of
the service is to ensure that witnesses have been made aware of their rights and
processes they are likely to experience, and to ensure they are kept aware
of the progress of their
Commissions’ views
17.79 The available data appear to indicate that substantial numbers of
sexual assault cases are discontinued by prosecutors—both
before and after
indictment. Many of these, perhaps up to half, are withdrawn because of the
attitude of the victim. While some of
these cases would also have encountered
evidentiary issues—and hence may have been subject to ‘subtle’
encouragement
to withdraw—others feared re-victimisation from the
defendant or the court process, and it is likely many withdraw in the
ongoing family violence.
17.80 This suggests that it may be possible, and desirable, to reduce
attrition rates at the prosecution stage by providing additional
support and
information to victims. Lievore identified a number of measures that could be
implemented to benefit prosecutors and
complainants. These include:
inter-sectoral training between prosecution agencies, victim support
services, and forensic services;
lens, so that they understand why cases are discontinued, as well
prosecutors to remember that most people do not think in a legal manner;
greater education of the community about not delaying reporting, not
showering, and having a medical examination immediately after
the attack;
witness assistance services and sexual assault centres to take on
greater advocacy, training and educational
Commissions are interested in comments on whether these, or other, steps should
be taken to reduce the attrition of sexual
assault cases during the prosecution
phase, including in relation to sexual assault perpetrated in a family violence
17.82 In addition, it may be possible to identify best practice in the
policies and guidelines of DPPs in dealing with sexual assault
cases, including,
for example, in relation to referral of victims and witnesses to relevant
support services; consultation with victims
in relation to prosecutorial
decisions; and the provision of information and assistance more generally.
17.83 The Commissions are especially interested to learn whether any
policies, practices or guidelines should be introduced to deal
with sexual
assault perpetrated in a family violence context.
Proposal 17–2
Commonwealth, state and territory Directors of
Public Prosecution should ensure that prosecutorial guidelines and policies:
(a) facilitate the referral of victims and witnesses of sexual assault to
appropriate welfare, health, counselling and other support
(b) require consultation with victims of sexual assault about key
prosecutorial decisions including whether to prosecute, discontinue
prosecution or agree to a charge or fact bargain;
(c) require the ongoing provision of information to victims of sexual
assault about the status and progress of proceedings;
(d) facilitate the provision of assistance to victims and witnesses of
sexual assault in understanding the legal and court process;
(e) ensure that family violence protection orders or stalking intervention
orders are sought in all relevant circumstances; and
(f) require referral of victims and witnesses of sexual assault of victims
to providers of personal legal advice in related areas,
such as family law and
victims’ compensation.
What measures should be taken to reduce the attrition of sexual
assault cases during the prosecution phase, including in relation
assault committed in a family violence context?
Are there any further prosecutorial guidelines and policies that
could be introduced to reduce the attrition of cases of sexual assault
in a family violence context?
[back to top]
17.84 Before an adult charged with an indictable sexual offence can be sent
for trial, a committal hearing may be
Committal hearings or
proceedings are a preliminary examination of the evidence by a magistrate or
other judicial officer. Where
the judicial officer finds there is sufficient
evidence to support a conviction, the accused is committed to stand trial in a
17.85 At the committal stage, the defendant may apply to have witnesses
produced for cross-examination. In many cases a committal
hearing will be
determined on the basis of documentary evidence alone, which is referred to as a
‘paper’ or ‘hand-up’
17.86 The purposes of committal proceedings include ensuring the defendant
knows the case against him or her and that a trial is
The process has also
come to provide an opportunity for the parties to: test evidence; filter out
weak cases; refute evidence; identify
early pleas; clarify issues before trial;
and refine charges.
17.87 Four key issues for complainants in sexual offence proceedings have
been identified as arising from the committal process:
• The victim is required to give evidence not once but twice and be
subject to cross-examination at both committal and trial,
exacerbating the
stress of the court proceedings.
• Cross-examination of complainants at committal is often more rigorous
and intimidating because there is no jury present.
• The experience of cross-examination at committal often leads
complainants to seek to have the proceedings discontinued.
• The final disposition of the proceeding is
17.88 The following discussion considers options for reform to minimise the
impact of cross-examination at committal on victims of
sexual assault.
Cross-examination at committal
17.89 All state and territory jurisdictions place restrictions on the right
to cross-examine witnesses at committal
17.90 Committal proceedings in NSW for all indictable offences proceed by way
of tendering the written statements of adult prosecution
witnesses, unless the
magistrate directs the witness to attend the committal
The magistrate must be
satisfied that there are ‘substantial reasons’ for the witness to
attend (unless the other party
agreed to the witness attending). Regardless of
whether a written statement or recording has been made and can be tendered, a
complainant
in a sexual offence who has a cognitive impairment or was under 16
years at the time of the alleged acts or who is under the age
of 18 years at the
time of the trial cannot be directed to attend the committal
proceedings.
17.91 In Victoria, leave to cross-examine in a committal for a sexual offence
will not be granted where the complainant is a child
or person with a cognitive
impairment and they made a written or recorded statement which was served in the
hand-up brief. Other
witnesses, including adult complainants of sexual assault,
may only be cross-examined with the court’s leave. Before leave
granted, the defence must identify the issue on which they want the witness to
be cross-examined and provide a reason why
the evidence of the witness is
relevant to that issue. The court must then be satisfied of those matters and
that the cross-examination
of the witness on that issue is justified having
regard to a list of factors.
Special mentions are held for this purpose.
17.92 The Queensland
Northern Territory
Governments
have both recently expressed an intention to enact further restrictions on the
attendance of complainants at committal
hearings, in accordance with review
recommendations.
Commissions’ views
17.93 The Commissions agree that there is ‘little or no benefit in
requiring that complainants give evidence
There should be a
complete prohibition in all states and territories on complainants in sexual
offence proceedings being required
to attend committal hearings in person. This
conclusion is consistent with the recommendations in
Seen and Heard: Priority
for Children in the Legal Process
(ALRC 84). In ALRC 84, the ALRC and
the Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission (HREOC) recommended that child
witnesses should
not give evidence in person at any committal
The rationale in
support of the prohibition on children attending applies equally to adult
complainants.
Proposal 17–3
State and territory legislation should prohibit
any complainant in sexual assault proceedings from being required to attend to
evidence at committal proceedings. Alternatively, child complainants should
not be required to attend committal proceedings and,
for adult complainants, the
court should be satisfied that there are special reasons for the complainant to
[back to top]
Joint or separate
17.94 Sexual assault cases—especially those within a family violence
context— commonly involve multiple incidents and
multiple complainants.
The following discussion deals with situations where there are two or more
complainants who have allegedly
been sexually assaulted by the same
defendant—for example, in a family context, a number of siblings may
allege that a parent
has sexually abused them.
17.95 In such situations, the prosecution is likely to make a pre-trial
application to have the counts against the defendant heard
in a joint trial,
rather than separate trials. The defence, in contrast, is more likely to apply
for separate trials for each offence.
The power to order a joint trial is
discretionary and is exercised in order to prevent prejudice to the
There is no limit
to the circumstances which will justify separate trials. However, two factors
which have received detailed consideration
by the High Court are: charges where
evidence in relation to one count is not admissible in relation to another, but
is prejudicial;
and where the charges are for sexual
17.96 The threshold question for holding a joint trial is whether or not each
complainant’s evidence will be admissible in respect
of the charges
involving the other complainant or complainants (that is, whether such evidence
is cross-admissible). Laws of evidence
affecting the admissibility of tendency
or coincidence evidence (under the uniform Evidence Acts), and as propensity or
similar fact
evidence at common law, are relevant in this context. The nature
and admissibility of these kinds of evidence is discussed in detail
17.97 Decisions to hold separate trials or refuse to admit relevant tendency
or propensity evidence about a defendant’s sexual
behaviour are
considerable barriers to the successful prosecution of sex
Implications of
joint and separate trials
17.98 When deciding whether to order joint or separate trials, a trial judge
needs to determine whether each complainant’s evidence
cross-admissible. The Tasmania Law Reform Institute (TLRI) and the VLRC have
noted the possibility of prejudice to defendants
arising from joint trials,
because jurors ‘might use evidence relating to an offence charged in one
count to decide that the
person has also committed a different offence, even
though there may be insufficient evidence to support a conviction for the second
commonly believed that jurors will:
assume that past behaviour is an accurate guide to contemporary conduct, and
knowledge of other misconduct may cause the jury to be
biased against the
accused. In regard to some offences, such as sexual offences committed against
children, the nature of the offence
is said to heighten the potential for
prejudice to … the accused by admitting propensity
17.99 This view needs to be balanced against the research on juries that
shows that a significant proportion of both jurors and jury-eligible
believe in various myths and hold a range of prejudices and misconceptions about
women and children who report sexual assault.
These include the beliefs that:
delay in complaint is evidence of fabrication; sexual assault will result in
physical evidence and
injury; a rape victim would scream and shout; a rape
victim would be visibly upset in court; children are easily manipulated into
giving false reports of sexual abuse; and a victim of sexual abuse will avoid
the offender.
17.100 Coupled with this is evidence from a study, by Dr Suzanne Blackwell,
which found that ‘92 percent of defence counsel
… utilized one or
more of the misconceptions about child sexual assault as the platform for the
defence case during cross-examination
of the child complainant and in opening or
closing addresses to the
Blackwell also
reported that the jurors in her New Zealand study did not regard the
child’s evidence-in-chief as ‘evidence’
and ‘require[d]
a high threshold of corroborative evidence to convict even if they believed the
child complainant’.
17.101 The evidence from Blackwell’s study and other jury studies
suggests that child sexual assault complainants are at a considerable
disadvantage as witnesses in criminal trials. Because of low conviction rates in
sexual assault trials, juror beliefs about sexual
assault and adults’
experiences as complainants in sexual assault
adult complainants
are likely to be similarly disadvantaged.
17.102 Separate trials create an artificial individualised context in which
the charges relating to each complainant are heard separately
rather than in
context. This is particularly the case where complainants come from the same
family. The jury may not know that other
children in the family have also made
similar complaints. The prosecution case ‘will be considerably
trials are said, therefore, to ‘confer a significant tactical advantage on
the accused’.
The defendant will be able to conduct his defence in each trial in isolation
from the other charges and will be able to more convincingly
argue that each
complainant has fabricated her/his evidence due to lack of corroborating
evidence from other victims, thus increasing
the likelihood of
A presumption of
joint trial?
17.103 In 1997, Victoria established a presumption in favour of joint trial
in sexual offence cases. At the same time, Victoria introduced
intended to overcome the test for admissibility of propensity evidence at common
presumption is now located in
Criminal Procedure Act
(Vic) and provides that:
(2) … if in accordance with this Act 2 or more charges for sexual
offences are joined in the same indictment, it is presumed
that those charges
are to be tried together.
(3) The presumption created by subsection (2) is not rebutted merely because
evidence on one charge is inadmissible on another charge.
17.104 In 2008, South Australia introduced a similar provision. Section
278(2a) of the
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
(SA) states:
(2a) if, in accordance with this Act, 2 or more counts charging sexual
offences involving different alleged victims
are joined in
the same information,
the following provisions apply:
(a) subject to paragraph (b), those counts are to be tried together;
(b) the judge
may order a separate trial of a count relating to a particular alleged victim
if (and only if) evidence relating to
that count is not admissible in relation
to each other count relating to a different alleged victim;
17.105 The South Australian provision modifies rules for the admissibility of
evidence in sexual offence cases, in response to common
law restrictions on
propensity and similar fact evidence. These modifications, and those in other
more detail in Chapter 18.
17.106 NSW and Queensland have considered, but specifically recommended
against, the adoption of a presumption of joint trial due
to concerns that
juries may improperly use evidence in relation to one count when considering
another count.
different views on the extent to which this concern may be able to be addressed
through appropriate directions to the jury.
17.107 The Victorian reforms were evaluated by the VLRC in its 2004
report. The VLRC reported that the new legislation had made it
easier for sexual offence matters involving multiple complainants
to be heard
The Victorian Court
of Appeal had recognised that the ‘mischief’ to which the new
provisions were directed is ‘the
rule of practice that had developed
whereby severance was almost automatically granted’ and now started from
the presumption
that such matters will be heard
Commissions’ views
17.108 Judges are placed in a difficult position when they make decisions
If the judge rules in
favour of a joint trial which results in one or more convictions, it is said to
be ‘almost inevitable’
that there will be an appeal against both the
joinder and the trial judge’s decision to admit the tendency, propensity
fact evidence.
the appeal is successful, this ‘will result in re-trials with all the
attendant emotional costs to the complainants and
financial costs to the State
and the defendant’.
17.109 In ALRC 84, the ALRC and HREOC noted that ‘when the
complainant’s credibility is attacked’ in a separate
evidence that would support his or her credibility is disallowed and the jury
are kept in ignorance of the fact that there are multiple
allegations of abuse
against the accused. As one submission noted, ‘[this] is a situation which
would appear to offend common
sense and experience, and has the potential to
injustice’.
17.110 Further, if separate trials are held, children involved may have to
give evidence numerous times in their own trial, as well
as in other trials, a
process which can multiply the emotional stress experienced by child and
adolescent complainants.
Child complainants may have protection as complainants, which may not be
extended to them as witnesses in separate trials, despite
facing the same
Adult victims of
sexual offences in a family violence context also face additional trauma,
especially as the pattern of offending
is often long term rather than centred on
one specific incident.
17.111 The Commissions consider that, in order to reduce trauma for
complainants in sexual assault cases, there should be legislation
presumption in favour of joint trial of multiple allegations against the same
defendant, based on the Victorian provisions.
Proposal 17–4
Commonwealth, state and territory legislation
(a) create a presumption that when two or more charges for sexual offences
are joined in the same indictment, it is presumed that
those charges are to be
tried together; and
(b) state that this presumption is not rebutted merely because evidence on
one charge is inadmissible on another charge.
Consent and joint
17.112 The High Court’s decision in
Phillips v The
is considered to have application to all sexual assault trials where there are
multiple complaints of sexual assault against the
same defendant and where
consent is a fact in issue.
In such a situation, the issue raised by
is whether the evidence
of the other complainants are
to whether or not the first
complainant consented to sexual relations with the defendant.
17.113 If not, arguably multiple complaints of sexual assault can never be
heard in a joint trial where consent is a fact in issue.
involved a joint trial with six complainants. The High Court held that the
evidence of each complainant was not cross-admissible
in relation to the counts
involving the other complainants on the grounds of lack of relevance. Phillips
was a serial offender who
was later convicted of other counts of sexual assault
while awaiting the outcome of his High Court
17.114 The TLRI and the National Child Sexual Assault Reform
have both reviewed
the impact of the decision in
decision has also been the subject of academic
17.115 There is some case law to show that
is being applied
to prevent joint trials being held in relation to multiple allegations of sexual
assaults against the same
What impact has
Phillips v The Queen
prosecution of sexual assaults where there are multiple complaints against the
same defendant and consent is a fact in
Is there a need to introduce reforms to overturn the decision in
Phillips v The Queen
[back to top]
Pre-recorded
17.116 The focus of the Commission’s interest in pre-trial processes in
sexual assault proceedings is on reform to reduce the
trauma caused to
complainants of sexual assault. In this context, one key process is the use of
pre-recorded evidence, which may
lessen or eliminate the need for complainants
to give evidence in person at the trial. Pre-recorded evidence is recorded
trial but the use of the evidence in court is part of the trial
process and is an aspect of vulnerable witness protection. Vulnerable
protection, in the specific context of cross-examination, is discussed in
Chapter 18.
17.117 Pre-recorded evidence used in criminal proceedings can be categorised
into two distinct forms:
the initial interview between police and the witness admitted as
evidence-in-chief;
the entirety of the witness’s evidence, including
cross-examination.
17.118 Commonwealth,
state and territory legislation provides for the use of pre-recorded evidence in
criminal hearings and trials.
The legislation generally applies to sexual offence proceedings, but may extend
to other criminal proceedings. The use of pre-recorded
evidence generally
applies to child witnesses and witnesses who are ‘cognitively’ or
‘intellectually’ impaired.
The provisions sometimes extend to any
‘special’ witness who, in the court’s opinion, requires
protection. A key
issue for this Inquiry is whether such provisions should be
extended to cover all adult complainants of sexual assault.
Evidence of
17.119 One form of pre-recorded evidence involves audiovisual recording of an
interview with the victim, which is typically done shortly
after the initial
disclosure. The person is interviewed by police or child protection workers, the
interview is recorded, and the
videotape of the interview is played at the
hearing or trial as the person’s evidence-in-chief.
17.120 This method of taking pre-recorded evidence applies, for example,
under Commonwealth, NSW and Victorian
legislation.
The Commonwealth
legislation states that
(1) A video recording of an interview of a child witness in a proceeding
may be admitted as evidence in chief if:
(a) a constable, or a person of a kind specified in the regulations,
conducted the interview; and
(b) the court gives
17.121 In NSW, the
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
(NSW) provides
(1) A vulnerable person is entitled to give, and may give, evidence in chief
of a previous representation to which this Division applies
made by the person
wholly or partly in the form of a recording made by an investigating official of
the interview in the course of
which the previous representation was made and
that is viewed or heard, or both, by the court
17.122 Similarly, in Victoria, legislation provides that a ‘witness may
give evidence-in-chief (wholly or partly) in the form
of an audio or audiovisual
recording of the witness answering questions’ put to him or her by a
member of Victoria Police,
or other person authorised in writing by the Chief
Commissioner of Police who has successfully completed a training course on the
relevant procedures.
17.123 These provisions do not apply to complainants in sexual offence
proceedings generally. The Commonwealth provisions apply only
witnesses, and the NSW and Victorian provisions to children and cognitively
impaired witnesses.
Pre-recording other evidence
17.124 The second form of pre-recorded evidence involves the pre-recording of
the entirety of a witness’s evidence. At a pre-trial
hearing the witness
gives evidence via closed-circuit television from a remote room. The judge,
prosecutor, defence lawyer and accused
are all in the courtroom. There is no
jury. The witness gives evidence and is cross-examined and re-examined, and this
is videotaped.
Some months later the trial is held. The witness does not attend
the trial, and the jury is played the videotape of the witness’s
17.125 This method of taking pre-recorded evidence applies, for example,
under Victorian, Queensland, Western Australian, South Australian,
Northern Territory
legislation.
17.126 Notably, in Victoria, the whole of the evidence (including
cross-examination and re-examination) of
or cognitively impaired
complainants in sexual offence proceedings must be given at a special hearing,
recorded as an audiovisual
recording; and presented to the court in the form of
that recording.
become known as the ‘VATE’ process (video or audio taping of
17.127 At the special hearing, the accused and his or her legal practitioner
are to be present in the courtroom, but the accused is
not to be in the same
room as the complainant when the complainant’s evidence is being taken.
Rather, the accused is entitled
to see and hear the complainant while the
complainant is giving evidence (using closed-circuit television or other
facilities) and
to have at all times the means of communicating with his or her
legal practitioner.
17.128 The VATE recording is admissible in evidence as if its contents were
the direct testimony of the complainant in the proceeding;
and unless the
relevant court otherwise orders, in any new trial of, or appeal from, the
proceeding; or another proceeding in the
same court for the charge for a sexual
offence or a charge for a related
17.129 Some legislation deals with both forms of pre-recorded
evidence—pre-recorded evidence of interview; and other evidence.
example, in the ACT, audiovisual recordings of a witness answering questions of
a ‘prescribed person in relation to the
investigation of a sexual or
violent offence’ may be admitted as
In addition,
prosecution witnesses in relation to sexual offence proceedings may give
evidence in chief at a pre-trial hearing and
an audiovisual recording of this
evidence may be admitted as the witness’s evidence at the
17.130 While the Victorian VATE provisions apply only to young or cognitively
impaired complainants in sexual offence proceedings,
in other jurisdictions,
adult complainants of sexual assault may also be covered in some
circumstances.
For example,
the Queensland provisions apply to any ‘special witness’, defined to
include any person who in the court’s
(i) would, as a result of a mental, intellectual or physical impairment or
a relevant matter, be likely to be disadvantaged as a
witness; or
(ii) would be likely to suffer severe emotional trauma; or
(iii) would be likely to be so intimidated as to be disadvantaged as a
if required to give evidence in accordance with the usual rules and practice
of the court.
17.131 Similarly, in South Australia, pre-recorded evidence may be used in
relation to the evidence of:
(c) a witness who is the alleged victim
of an offence to which the proceedings relate—
(i) where the offence is a serious offence against the person; or
(ii) in any other case—where, because of the circumstances of the
witness or the circumstances of the case, the witness would,
in the opinion of
be specially disadvantaged if not treated as a vulnerable witness; or
(d) a witness who—
(i) has been subjected to threats of violence or retribution in
connection with the proceedings; or
(ii) has reasonable grounds to fear violence or retribution in connection
with the proceedings;
(ii) has reasonable grounds to fear violence or retribution in connection
with the proceedings
Benefits and drawbacks
17.132 Pre-recorded evidence has been described as offering the following
improving the quality of evidence;
facilitating pre-trial decisions by the prosecution and the
minimising system abuse of child
drawbacks to pre-trial pre-recorded testimony are said to include that:
it is unfair to require the defence to cross-examine the main
prosecution witness before the formal trial has begun;
defence lawyers are concerned that they cannot prepare to
cross-examine the most important prosecution witness until shortly before
trial is scheduled;
video technology lacks the immediacy and persuasiveness of a
child’s live-in-court testimony; and
there can be problems with the
technology.
17.134 Appropriate
training of interviewers is essential if the benefits of pre-recorded evidence
are to be obtained. This is highlighted
by one case study, provided by a
respondent to an
ALRC Family Violence Inquiry E-newsletter
My son at age three years made clear disclosures to me of sexual abuse
(digital penetration, ejaculation) after an ‘access’
visit with his
father, ordered by the Family Court. This had been going on before he was verbal
enough to make disclosures. The [police
response] team were not at all skilled
with a child as young as him. I was asked to leave the room; my son was
first asked the standard
question, ‘Do you know the difference between
lies and truth?’. A video camera on a tripod was in a small room in front
of him and a tape recorder placed on a table in front of him. Not surprisingly,
he was terrified. He couldn’t answer any questions
and simply screamed
hysterically until I was asked to return. We were both very shaken by the
experience. My son told me he thought
they were going to ‘do
something’ to him. I felt terrible for my son and this was our only chance
to validate his experiences.
Under the circumstances the team made it even more
unlikely that my son could speak out. He should have been interviewed by a child
therapist, given time to form a relationship, the interviewer should have been
the opposite gender; and any recording devices should
have been hidden. The
interview should be focused on his needs—not adult needs. I feel that
everything possible was done to
prevent disclosure. This child may have
been filmed by the ‘father’ while being abused—how would this
feel with a video camera put in front of him and then left by his
mother with strangers?
The policeman and woman were well intentioned good people. I had the
impression they were just going through the motions—the
process itself was
intended to fail—it was so cruel and
Commissions’ views
17.135 The majority of states and territories have enacted regimes for the
comprehensive pre-recording of evidence for child victims
of sexual assault (and
those who are cognitively or intellectually impaired).
17.136 In the Commissions’ view, all Australian jurisdictions should
adopt comprehensive provisions dealing with pre-recorded
evidence in sexual
offence proceedings. These provisions should allow the tendering of audiovisual
records of interview between police
and complainants of sexual assault as the
complainant’s evidence-in-chief and apply to all victims of sexual assault
and children).
17.137 In addition, child victims of sexual assault and victims of sexual
assault who are vulnerable as a result of mental or physical
impairment should
be allowed to provide an audiovisual record of evidence at a pre-trial hearing
attended by the judge, the prosecutor,
the defence lawyer, the defendant and any
other person the court deems appropriate.
17.138 Adult victims of sexual assault should also be permitted to provide
evidence in this way, by order of the court. Audiovisual
evidence should be
recorded and replayed at the trial as the witness’s evidence in chief.
Recorded evidence should be available
for use at any re-trial following an
appeal or in other proceedings in appropriate circumstances.
17.139 The Commissions note that such legislation should be supported by
investment in up-to-date technology and a comprehensive training
program for
interviewers. All participants in the criminal justice system should receive
training in relation to the new provisions,
including the rationale for
Proposal 17–5
Commonwealth, state and territory legislation
should allow the tendering of pre-recorded audiovisual material of interview
investigators and a sexual assault complainant as the
complainant’s evidence-in-chief.
Proposal 17–6
Commonwealth, state and territory legislation
should permit child victims of sexual assault and victims of sexual assault who
vulnerable as a result of mental or physical impairment to provide an
audiovisual record of evidence at a pre-trial hearing attended
by the judge, the
prosecutor, the defence lawyer, the defendant and any other person the court
deems appropriate. Adult victims of
sexual assault should also be permitted to
provide evidence in this way, by order of the court. Audiovisual evidence should
be replayed
at the trial as the witness’s evidence. Recorded evidence
should be available for use at any re-trial following an appeal or
proceedings in appropriate circumstances.
Proposal 17–7
Commonwealth, state and territory governments
should ensure that participants in the criminal justice system receive
comprehensive
education about legislation authorising the use of pre-recorded
evidence in sexual assault proceedings, and training in relation
to interviewing
victims of sexual assault and creating pre-recorded evidence.
Prosecutorial Decisions in
Adult Sexual Assault Cases: An Australian Study
(2004), 5 (references
omitted, emphasis in original).
Criminal Justice Sexual Offences
Taskforce (NSW Attorney General’s Department),
Responding to Sexual
Assault: The Way Forward
See, eg, Ibid, 8–17; National Council to Reduce Violence against Women
and their Children,
Time for Action: The National Council’s Plan for
Australia to Reduce Violence against Women and their Children,
(2009), 37–43.
National Council to Reduce Violence against Women and their Children,
for Action: The National Council’s Plan for Australia to Reduce Violence
against Women and their Children, 2009–2021
See, eg, Australian Bureau of
Statistics,
Sexual Assault in Australia: A Statistical Overview
Mouzos and T Makkai,
Women’s Experiences of Male Violence: Findings of
the Australian Component of the International Violence Against Women Survey
(2004) Australian Institute of Criminology, 102.57 citing the findings of the
2002 National Crime and Safety Survey; Australian Institute
of Criminology,
‘Guilty Outcomes in Reported Sexual Assault and Related Offence
Incidents’ (Press Release, 18 December
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Sexual Offences: Final Report
Prosecutorial
Decisions in Adult Sexual Assault Cases: An Australian Study
Of these cases, 15% of rape
complaints were withdrawn; and 46% resulted in no further police action:
Victorian Government Statewide
Steering Committee to Reduce Sexual Assault,
Study of Reported Rapes in Victoria 2000–2003: Summary Research
(2006), 5. Offenders were proportionately more likely to be a current
or former partner of the victim in cases where the complaint
was subsequently
withdrawn compared to cases where charges were
Measured at six months from the date
the incident became known to the police: Australian Bureau of Statistics,
Sexual Assault in Australia: A Statistical Overview
J Fitzgerald, ‘The Attrition
of Sexual Offences from the New South Wales Criminal Justice System’
Crime and Justice Bulletin
3, 3. A cleared criminal incident is
one that police are no longer investigating, either because they have commenced
criminal proceedings
against a suspect or the complaint has been withdrawn.
Incidents that are not cleared are unlikely to proceed any
J Wundersitz,
Child Sexual
Assault: Tracking from Police Incident Report to Finalisation in Court
(2003) Office of Crime Statistics and Research,
Australian Institute of
Criminology, ‘Guilty Outcomes in Reported Sexual Assault and Related
Offence Incidents’ (Press
Release, 18 December
Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Sexual Offences: Final Report
Within 180 days of reporting,
criminal proceedings had been commenced against a person of interest in 53% of
cleared incidents involving
a child victim and in 59% of incidents involving and
adult victim: J Fitzgerald, ‘The Attrition of Sexual Offences from the
South Wales Criminal Justice System’ (2006) 92
Crime and Justice
Ibid. The odds of
criminal proceedings being commenced were higher where: the victim was aged over
five years; reporting of the incident
occurred within ten years of its
occurrence; the offender was known to the victim; the victim was female; and
aggravating circumstances
were present: J Fitzgerald, ‘The Attrition of
Sexual Offences from the New South Wales Criminal Justice System’ (2006)
Crime and Justice Bulletin
J Wundersitz,
Child Sexual
Assault: Tracking from Police Incident Report to Finalisation in Court
(2003) Office of Crime Statistics and Research,
Australian Bureau of Statistics,
Sexual Assault in Australia: A Statistical Overview
J Fitzgerald, ‘The Attrition
of Sexual Offences from the New South Wales Criminal Justice System’
Crime and Justice Bulletin
J Wundersitz,
Child Sexual
Assault: Tracking from Police Incident Report to Finalisation in Court
(2003) Office of Crime Statistics and Research,
See discussion of the continuum of
sexual violence in Ch 15.
eg, Australian Bureau of Statistics,
Sexual Assault in Australia: A
Statistical Overview
(2004), 57; J Mouzos and T Makkai,
Experiences of Male Violence: Findings of the Australian Component of the
International Violence Against Women Survey
(2004) Australian Institute of
Criminology, 102.
See National Council
to Reduce Violence against Women and their Children,
Time for Action: The
National Council’s Plan for Australia to Reduce Violence against Women and
their Children, 2009–2021
See discussion in Ibid,
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Sexual Offences: Final Report
See, eg, Queensland Police
Reporting to Police
<www.police.qld.gov.au/programs/crimePrevention/adultassault/report/> at
21 January 2010.
NSW Police Force,
Adult Sexual Assault
<www.police.nsw.gov.au> at 17 March 2010.
Other aspects of victim support and liaison are discussed in
Office of the
Director of Public Prosecutions (ACT) and Australian Federal Police,
Responding to Sexual Assault: The Challenge of Change
(2005), 14. Before
the establishment of a specialised ACT Sexual Assault Unit ‘a lack of
specialisation, training and sensitivity
towards victims of sexual offences had
led to poor responses on the part of the police’: Office of the Director
of Public Prosecutions
(ACT) and Australian Federal Police,
Responding to
Sexual Assault: The Challenge of Change
Office of the Director of Public
Prosecutions (ACT) and Australian Federal Police,
Responding to Sexual
Assault: The Challenge of Change
ACT Policing,
Consultation
, Canberra, 22 December
These integrated agency
responses to child protection are discussed in
The unit is part of
PoliceLink, the former Police Assistance
NSW Police Force,
Children—Sex Crimes Squad
<www.police.nsw.gov.au/community_issues/children> at 14 March
The MDC is a specialist program
that includes specialist police investigators, SOCITs, Child Protection, Centres
Against Sexual
Assault and the Victorian Institute of Forensic Medicine
‘to provide an integrated response to victims of sexual assault’:
Government of Victoria Department of Human Services,
Good Practice: A
Statewide Snapshot 2009
Victoria Police,
Living Free from Violence—Upholding the Right:
Victoria Police Strategy to Reduce Violence Against Women and Children
(2009), 19.
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Sexual Offences: Final Report
See Proposal
Prosecutorial Decisions in Adult Sexual Assault Cases: An Australian
Office of the
Director of Public Prosecutions (Cth),
Prosecution Policy for the
Commonwealth: Guidelines for the Making of Decisions in the Prosecution
, cls 2.4–2.5; Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions
Prosecution Guidelines
, cl 4(2); Office of the Director of Public
Prosecutions (Vic),
Prosecution Policies and Guidelines
, cl 2.1.3; Office
of the Director of Public Prosecutions (Qld),
, cl 4(i); Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions (SA),
Prosecution Policy
, 3; Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions
Statement of Prosecution Policy and Guidelines
(2005), cl 24;
Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions (Tas),
Prosecution
; Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions (ACT),
Prosecution Policy
, cl 2.3; Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions
Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions (Cth),
Prosecution Policy for
the Commonwealth: Guidelines for the Making of Decisions in the Prosecution
, cls 2.6–2.7; Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions
Prosecution Guidelines
, cl 4(2); Office of the Director of Public
Prosecutions (Vic),
Prosecution Policies and Guidelines
2.1.4–2.1.5; Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions (Qld),
Director’s Guidelines
, cl 4(i); Office of the Director of Public
Prosecutions (SA),
Prosecution Policy
, 3; Office of the Director of
Public Prosecutions (WA),
Statement of Prosecution Policy and Guidelines
(2005), cl 29; Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions (Tas),
Prosecution Guidelines
; Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions
Prosecution Policy
, cl 2.4; Office of the Director of Public
Prosecutions (NT),
Office of the Director of Public
Prosecutions (Cth),
Prosecution Policy for the Commonwealth: Guidelines for
the Making of Decisions in the Prosecution Process
, cl 2.8; Office of the
Director of Public Prosecutions (NSW),
Prosecution Guidelines
Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions (Vic),
Prosecution Policies and
, cl 2.1.6; Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions (Qld),
Director’s Guidelines
, cl 4(ii); Office of the Director of Public
Prosecutions (WA),
Statement of Prosecution Policy and Guidelines
cl 23; Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions (SA),
Prosecution
, 4; Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions (Tas),
Prosecution Guidelines
; Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions
Prosecution Policy
, cl 2.5; Office of the Director of Public
Prosecutions (NT),
, cl 2.1. Note that the guidelines for
Queensland, Western Australia and the Northern Territory somewhat conflate the
two tests, in
that the question of whether a prosecution is in the public
interest is informed by inquiring into whether there is a reasonable
prospect of
conviction. Nevertheless, notwithstanding the order of the inquiry, the
considerations which inform the exercise of the
prosecutor’s discretion
are substantially similar across the
Office of the Director
of Public Prosecutions (Cth),
Prosecution Policy for the Commonwealth:
Guidelines for the Making of Decisions in the Prosecution Process
2.9–2.10; Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions (NSW),
Prosecution Guidelines
, cl 4(3); Office of the Director of Public
Prosecutions (Vic),
Prosecution Policies and Guidelines
, cl 2.1.10;
Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions (Qld),
, cl 4(ii); Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions (WA),
Statement of Prosecution Policy and Guidelines
(2005), cl 31; Office of
the Director of Public Prosecutions (SA),
Prosecution Policy
, 4; Office
of the Director of Public Prosecutions (Tas),
Prosecution Guidelines
Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions (ACT),
Prosecution Policy
cl 2.5; Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions (NT),
Office of the Director of
Public Prosecutions (Cth),
Prosecution Policy for the Commonwealth:
Guidelines for the Making of Decisions in the Prosecution Process
Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions (NSW),
Prosecution
, cls 4(i)–(v); Office of the Director of Public
Prosecutions (Vic),
Prosecution Policies and Guidelines
, cl 2.1.12;
Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions (Qld),
, cl 4(iii); Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions (WA),
Statement of Prosecution Policy and Guidelines
(2005), cl 33; Office of
the Director of Public Prosecutions (SA),
Prosecution Policy
, 6; Office
of the Director of Public Prosecutions (Tas),
Prosecution Guidelines
Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions (ACT),
Prosecution Policy
cl 2.7; Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions (NT),
Prosecutorial
Decisions in Adult Sexual Assault Cases: An Australian Study
See, eg, Western Australian
Community Development and Justice Standing Committee,
Inquiry into the
Prosecution of Assaults and Sexual Offences
(2008); Office of the Director
of Public Prosecutions (ACT) and Australian Federal Police,
Responding to
Sexual Assault: The Challenge of Change
(2005); D Lievore,
Prosecutorial
Decisions in Adult Sexual Assault Cases: An Australian Study
(2004); Crime
and Misconduct Commission (Qld),
Seeking Justice: An Inquiry into How Sexual
Offences are Handled by the Queensland Criminal Justice System
Review of the New South Wales Director of Public Prosecutions’
Policy and Guidelines for Charge Bargaining and Tendering of
Agreed Facts
Prosecutorial
Decisions in Adult Sexual Assault Cases: An Australian Study
‘This finding should be
considered in the light of the large proportions of Indigenous defendants in the
Northern Territory
and Western Australian samples’: Ibid,
See discussion in Ibid,
9–10; G Samuels,
Review of the New South Wales Director of Public
Prosecutions’ Policy and Guidelines for Charge Bargaining and Tendering of
Agreed Facts
Prosecutorial Decisions in Adult Sexual Assault Cases: An Australian
See G Samuels,
Review of the New
South Wales Director of Public Prosecutions’ Policy and Guidelines for
Charge Bargaining and Tendering of
Agreed Facts
Office of the Director of
Public Prosecutions (Cth),
Prosecution Policy for the Commonwealth:
Guidelines for the Making of Decisions in the Prosecution Process
2.10(o); Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions (NSW),
Prosecution
, cls 4(3.20); Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions
Prosecution Policies and Guidelines
, cl 2.1.10(n); Office of the
Director of Public Prosecutions (Qld),
Director’s Guidelines
4(ii)(l); Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions (WA),
Statement of
Prosecution Policy and Guidelines
(2005), cl 31(k); Office of the Director
of Public Prosecutions (SA),
Prosecution Policy
, cl 5(o); Office of
the Director of Public Prosecutions (Tas),
Prosecution Guidelines
of the Director of Public Prosecutions (ACT),
Prosecution Policy
2.5(q); Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions (NT),
cl 2.5(21).
Office of the Director of
Public Prosecutions (Cth),
Prosecution Policy for the Commonwealth:
Guidelines for the Making of Decisions in the Prosecution Process
6.18(l), 6.23. See also cl 5.3.
Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions (NSW),
Prosecution
, cls 7, 9, 19, 20.
Public Prosecutions Act 1994
Office of the Director of
Public Prosecutions (Vic),
Prosecution Policies and Guidelines
2.3.7, 7.1.1.
Office of the Director
of Public Prosecutions (NSW),
Prosecution Guidelines
Office of the Director of Public
Prosecutions (Vic),
Prosecution Policies and Guidelines
Ibid. The guideline provides a
list of factors to which consideration should be given when deciding whether
prosecution is in the
public interest, which relate to the subjective features
of the complainant and the alleged offender and the nature of their
relationship.
Office of the Director
of Public Prosecutions (Qld),
Director’s Guidelines
, cl 5(iv).
Office of the Director of Public
Prosecutions (NT),
Office of the Director
of Public Prosecutions (Cth),
Victims of Crime Policy
(2010), cls
Office of the Director of
Public Prosecutions (NSW),
Prosecution Guidelines
Victims’ Rights Act 1996
Office of the Director of Public
Prosecutions (NSW),
Prosecution Guidelines
Office of the Director of Public
Prosecutions (Vic),
Prosecution Policies and Guidelines
Victims’ Charter Act
of the Director of Public Prosecutions (Vic),
Prosecution Policies and
, cl 7.2.8;
Victims’ Charter Act 2006
Office of the Director
of Public Prosecutions (Vic),
Prosecution Policies and Guidelines
Prosecutorial
Decisions in Adult Sexual Assault Cases: An Australian Study
That is, unless an ex-officio
indictment is presented.
Willis and D Brereton,
The Committal in Australia
Barton v The
[1980] HCA 48
(1980) 147 CLR 75
Grassby v The Queen
[1989] HCA 45
(1989) 168 CLR 1
Queensland Department of Justice
and Attorney-General,
Review of the Civil and Criminal Justice System in
(2008), 162.
the Director of Public Prosecutions (ACT) and Australian Federal Police,
Responding to Sexual Assault: The Challenge of Change
Criminal Procedure Act
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
Evidence (Protection of Children) Amendment Act
(Qld) ss 21AG, 21AI;
Summary Procedure Act 1921 (SA)
Magistrates Court Act 1930
Justices Act 1928
(NT) s 105AA. Western Australia and Tasmania have
effectively abolished committal hearings and committal to the higher court takes
place administratively.
Procedure Act 1986
; ch 3, div
Procedure Act 2009
Procedure Act 1921
(SA) s 106(3), which provides that leave to call a
child under the age of 12 years for oral examination must not be granted unless
the court is satisfied that the interests of justice cannot be adequately served
except by doing so.
Department of Justice and Attorney-General,
Review of the Civil and Criminal
Justice System in Queensland
(2008). Recommendation 45 of that report
recommended restrictions on the right to cross-examine witnesses. The Queensland
has indicated its general agreement with the recommendations in
respect of committals and has expressed its intention to implement
statutory amendment: Queensland Government,
The Queensland Government’s
Response to the Review of the Civil and Criminal Justice System in
(2009), 12–13.
Northern Territory Law Reform Committee,
Report on Committals
, Report 34
(2009). Recommendation 10 favoured a model based on
Criminal Procedure Act
On 10 December 2009, Delia Lawrie, the
Attorney-General of the Northern Territory, announced that the government would
recommendations contained in the report: D Lawrie (NT
Attorney-General), ‘New Process for Committal Hearings’ (Press
Release, 10 December 2009).
the Director of Public Prosecutions (ACT) and Australian Federal Police,
Responding to Sexual Assault: The Challenge of Change
Australian Law Reform
Commission and Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission,
Seen and Heard:
Priority for Children in the Legal Process
, ALRC 84 (1997), 319,
Criminal Procedure
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
Criminal Code
(Qld) s 597A(1AA);
Criminal Procedure
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 326(3);
Crimes Act 1900
Criminal Code
See ThomsonReuters,
The Laws of Australia
(2010), vol 11 Criminal Procedure, 11.7, [39] (as
at 22 March 2010). See, eg,
De Jesus v The Queen
[1986] HCA 65
(1986) 61 ALJR 1
Sutton v The Queen
[1984] HCA 5
(1984) 152 CLR
In NSW, Gallagher and Hickey
compared the outcomes of joint trials with the outcomes from separate trials
involving multiple complainants
against the same accused. They found that
‘the proportion of guilty and not guilty verdicts [was] quite close when
one trial, while for multiple trials, the vast majority result[ed] in
not guilty verdicts’: P Gallagher and J Hickey,
Child Sexual Assault:
An Analysis of Matters Determined in the District Court of New South Wales
during 1994
(1997) Judicial Commission of New South Wales, 20. The study
examined the prosecution of 158 child sex offences in joint trials and
offences in separate trials.
Tasmania Law Reform Institute,
Evidence Act 2001
Sections 97
and Hoch’s Case: Admissibility of Tendency and Coincidence Evidence in
Sexual Assault Cases with Multiple Complainants
, Issues Paper 15 (2009),
[3.3.14]; quoting Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Sexual Offences:
Discussion Paper
(2001), [8.51].
Tasmania Law Reform Institute,
Evidence Act 2001
Sections 97
and Hoch’s Case: Admissibility of Tendency and Coincidence Evidence in
Sexual Assault Cases with Multiple Complainants
, Issues Paper 15 (2009),
[3.3.16]; footnotes omitted.
Taylor and J Joudo,
The Impact of Pre-recorded Video and Closed Circuit
Television Testimony by Adult Sexual Assault Complainants on Jury
Decision-Making:
An Experimental Study
(2005), 59; A Cossins,
‘Children, Sexual Abuse and Suggestibility: What Laypeople Think They Know
and What the Literature Tells
Psychiatry, Psychology and
, 156; A Cossins, J Goodman-Delahunty and K O’Brien,
‘Uncertainty and Misconceptions about Child Sexual Abuse: Implications
the Criminal Justice System’
Psychiatry, Psychology and Law
, 440. See also D Koski, ‘Jury Decisionmaking in Rape Trials: A
Review and Empirical Assessment’
Criminal Law Bulletin
S Blackwell, ‘Child
Sexual Abuse on Trial in New Zealand’ (Paper presented at Criminal Law
Symposium of the New Zealand
Law Society, Wellington, 14 November
See generally J
Heroines of Fortitude: The Experiences of Women in Court as Victims
of Sexual Assault, Gender Bias and the Law Project
(1996); M Heenan and H
The Crimes Rape Act 1991: An Evaluation Report
Fitzgerald, ‘The Attrition of Sexual Offences from the New South Wales
Criminal Justice System’ (2006) 92
Crime and Justice Bulletin
National Child Sexual Assault
Reform Committee,
Alternative Models for Prosecuting Child Sex Offences in
, unpublished (2009),
That is, as applied by the
High Court in
Hoch v The Queen
[1988] HCA 50
(1988) 165 CLR 292
Pfennig v The
[1995] HCA 7
(1995) 182 CLR 461.
Criminal Justice Sexual Offences Taskforce (NSW Attorney General’s
Department),
Responding to Sexual Assault: The Way Forward
(2005), 85;
Queensland Law Reform Commission,
The Receipt of Evidence by Queensland
Courts: The Evidence of Children
, Report No 55 (Part 2) (2000),
Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Sexual Offences: Final Report
National Child Sexual Assault
Reform Committee,
Alternative Models for Prosecuting Child Sex Offences in
, unpublished (2009), 186.
Australian Law Reform
Commission and Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission,
Seen and Heard:
Priority for Children in the Legal Process
, ALRC 84 (1997),
Ibid, 334. For
example, although a complainant’s evidence may be held to be generally
inadmissible in relation to the charges
involving other complainants, portions
of a complainant’s evidence may be admissible for a non-tendency or
non-propensity purpose.
See also Tasmania Law Reform Institute,
Evidence Act
Sections 97
and Hoch’s Case: Admissibility of Tendency
and Coincidence Evidence in Sexual Assault Cases with Multiple Complainants
Issues Paper 15 (2009), [3.2.2],
For example, in relation
to the means of giving evidence or the coverage of vulnerable witness
protections.
Phillips v The
[2006] HCA 4
(2006) 225 CLR 303.
Tasmania Law Reform Institute,
Evidence Act 2001
Sections 97
and Hoch’s Case: Admissibility of Tendency and Coincidence Evidence in
Sexual Assault Cases with Multiple Complainants
, Issues Paper 15 (2009),
; National Child Sexual Assault Reform Committee,
Alternative Models for Prosecuting Child Sex Offences in Australia
unpublished (2009), 231–251.
D Hamer, ‘Similar Fact Reasoning in Phillips: Artificial, Disjointed and
Pernicious’
[2007] UNSWLawJl 36
UNSW Law Journal
The National Child Sexual
Assault Reform Committee was formed in 2000 and comprises Directors of Public
Prosecutions, judges, Children’s
Commissioners, academics, Legal Aid
representatives, senior police officers, Crime Commissioners and others. The
Terms of Reference
of the Committee direct it, in summary, to (i) document the
best practice (or minimum) standards in each Australian jurisdiction
conduct of the child sexual assault trial; (ii) document the outcomes of
prosecuting child sex offences in each Australian
reporting, attrition and conviction rates; and (iii) research and consider
alternative models for prosecuting
child sex offences: National Child Sexual
Assault Reform Committee,
Alternative Models for Prosecuting Child Sex
Offences in Australia
, unpublished (2009),
Tasmania Law Reform
Evidence Act 2001
Sections 97
and Hoch’s Case:
Admissibility of Tendency and Coincidence Evidence in Sexual Assault Cases with
Multiple Complainants
, Issues Paper 15 (2009),
Child Sexual Assault Reform Committee,
Alternative Models for Prosecuting
Child Sex Offences in Australia
, unpublished (2009), 231–251.
See, eg, J Gans, ‘Similar
Facts After Phillips’ (2006)
Criminal Law Journal
224–245; D Hamer, ‘Similar Fact Reasoning in Phillips: Artificial,
Disjointed and Pernicious’
[2007] UNSWLawJl 36
UNSW Law Journal
[2006] QCA 220
Office of the Director of
Public Prosecutions (ACT) and Australian Federal Police,
Responding to Sexual
Assault: The Challenge of Change
(2005), 130. The following description of
pre-recorded evidence is drawn in part from this
Crimes Act 1914
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
Evidence Act 1977
, div 4, 4A;
Evidence Act 1929
Evidence Act 1906
Evidence (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act
, div 4.2A, 4.2B;
Evidence Act 1939
Crimes Act 1914
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
Crimes Act 1914
Criminal Procedure
‘Vulnerable person’ means a child or
a cognitively impaired person:
Criminal Procedure
Criminal Procedure Regulations 2009
The Victorian provision
applies only to witnesses in sexual offence and assault matters:
Procedure Act 2009
, divs 4, 4A;
Evidence Act 1906
Evidence Act 1929
(Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1991
(ACT) div 4.2B;
Evidence Act
age of 18 years.
Procedure Act 2009
. On the application of the
prosecution, the court may direct that the complainant is to give direct
testimony in the proceeding if
the court is satisfied that the complainant is
aware of the right to have his or her evidence taken at a special hearing and is
and wishes to give direct testimony in the proceeding:
(Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1991
(ACT) ss 40E,
Ibid ss 40P, 40Q,
Evidence Act 1977
divs 4, 4A;
Evidence Act 1906
Evidence Act
‘vulnerable
witness’, 13A.
Evidence Act 1977
Where a special witness is to
give or is giving evidence in any proceeding, the court may, among other things,
order that ‘a
video-taped recording of the evidence of the special witness
or any portion of it be made under such conditions as are specified
in the order
and that the video-taped evidence be viewed and heard in the proceeding instead
of the direct testimony of the special
witness’ and such evidence is to be
admissible as if given orally at trial:
Evidence Act 1977
s 21A(2)(e)
, ‘vulnerable
Office of the
Director of Public Prosecutions (ACT) and Australian Federal Police,
Responding to Sexual Assault: The Challenge of Change
response to ALRC Family Violence Inquiry E-newsletter
(January 2010), 13
January 2010.
The cross-examination
of children and other vulnerable witnesses in sexual assault cases is briefly
discussed in Ch 18.
of the Director of Public Prosecutions (ACT) and Australian Federal Police,
Responding to Sexual Assault: The Challenge of Change
(2005), Rec
ALRC CP1 Family Violence � Improving Legal Frameworks
Trial Processes
Introduction
Evidence issues
Sexual reputation and experience
Terminology
Sexual reputation
Sexual experience
Sexual assault communications privilege
Current law
Assisting complainants to invoke the privilege
Expert opinion evidence and children
Reform of the opinion rule
Continuing problems
Reform options
Tendency and coincidence evidence
Current law
Impact in sexual assault trials
Reform options
Relationship evidence
Reform options
Evidence of recent and delayed complaint
Uniform Evidence Acts jurisdictions
Other modifications to the common law
Evidence of delayed complaint
Jury warnings
Warnings about unreliable evidence and corroboration
Warnings about delay in complaint
Cross-examination
Cross-examination of children and vulnerable witnesses
Unrepresented defendants
Other aspects of giving evidence
Evidence on re-trial or appeal
Trial Processes
Introduction
18.1 The previous chapter discussed some of the problems that may lead to
attrition of sexual assault cases at the reporting, investigation,
prosecution
and other stages before cases reach trial. This chapter examines selected issues
that arise in the trial of sexual assault
cases in relation to the application
of the laws of evidence, the giving of jury warnings and the cross-examination
of complainants
and other witnesses in sexual assault proceedings.
18.2 These issues have been selected because the application of law in these
areas has a direct and significant impact on the experiences
in the criminal
justice system of women and children who have suffered sexual assault. The way
in which these aspects of the law
are applied may lead to cases being withdrawn
at a late stage or tried without the full evidentiary picture being before the
The procedures required at trial may make complainants reluctant to
continue to give evidence in sexual assault proceedings.
[back to top]
18.3 Evidence issues of particular concern in the context of sexual offence
proceedings include the law and procedure relating to:
evidence of sexual
reputation and experience; the disclosure of confidential counselling
communications; expert opinion evidence
and children; tendency and coincidence
evidence; relationship evidence; and evidence of recent and delayed
18.4 While these issues may appear disparate, there are some common
themes— notably those relating to consent and credibility.
Evidence issues
often arise where the defence is seeking to adduce evidence to show that sexual
activity was consensual and, in doing
so, to undermine the credibility of the
complainant. This can sometimes result in unjustifiable trauma to complainants.
contexts, the policy challenge is posed by evidence of prior misconduct
by the defendant, which is highly prejudicial and may carry
a risk of wrongful
conviction. At the same time, it can be highly important and probative
18.5 The rules of evidence vary between jurisdictions depending, in
particular, on whether the uniform Evidence Acts apply. In this
Consultation
Paper, the term ‘uniform Evidence Acts’ refers to legislation based
on the Model Uniform Evidence Bill,
which was considered and endorsed by the
Standing Committee of Attorneys-General (SCAG) in July 2007, or on the
Evidence Act 1995
Evidence Act 1995
(NSW). The Model
Uniform Evidence Bill is based on these Acts, with amendments recommended in
Uniform Evidence Law
(ALRC 102).
18.6 The uniform Evidence Acts jurisdictions are the Commonwealth, NSW,
Victoria, Tasmania, the ACT (which applies the Commonwealth
legislation) and
Norfolk Island.
There are minor
differences in the uniform Evidence Acts applying in these
The uniform Evidence
Acts work in conjunction with evidentiary provisions contained in a range of
other Commonwealth, state and territory
legislation.
18.7 As discussed in ALRC 102, the uniform Evidence Acts in their
entirety are not a code of the law of evidence. The enactment of
resulted in substantial changes to the common law in some areas. In other areas
the common law remains an important reference
assisting application of the
uniform Evidence Acts. Stated simply, the uniform Evidence Acts govern
admissibility issues, but reference
to the common law can facilitate an
understanding of underlying concepts and helps to identify the changes brought
18.8 In other jurisdictions, referred to for convenience as ‘common law
evidence jurisdictions’, the common law has also
been modified by statute
in significant and varying ways, including in relation to the admissibility of
evidence in sexual assault
proceedings.
[back to top]
reputation and experience
18.9 In ALRC 102, the ALRC, Victorian Law Reform Commission (VLRC) and
New South Wales Law Reform Commission (NSWLRC) considered the
territory legislation intended to:
prohibit the admission of evidence of a complainant’s sexual
reputation;
prevent the use of sexual history evidence to establish the
complainant as a ‘type’ of person who is more likely to consent
sexual activity; and
exclude the use of a complainant’s sexual history as an
indicator of the complainant’s
truthfulness.
18.10 Those provisions were collectively referred to as ‘rape
shield laws’ in that report. The focus of that discussion
relationship between rape shield laws and the uniform Evidence Acts and whether
the uniform Evidence Acts should be amended
to include specific provisions
dealing with the admission of evidence of sexual reputation or experience. The
ALRC, VLRC and NSWLRC
concluded that the provisions should remain outside the
18.11 Australian jurisdictions vary in relation to the substantive bases upon
which sexual history evidence may be admitted and the
procedure by which
questions of admissibility are determined by the court. The application of these
laws may have an inconsistent
impact on victims of sexual assault. A number of
commentators assert that the experience of testifying at trial may cause
complainants
almost as much trauma as the actual
and the anticipated
admission of sexual history evidence may contribute to the reluctance of many
women to report sexual assaults
The key policy objective of
proposed reforms in this area is to reduce the negative impact of the criminal
justice system on victims
of sexual assault, while not impinging on the rights
of the accused to a fair trial.
18.12 State and territory exclusionary rules generally limit the
cross-examination of complainants and the admission of evidence of
complainant’s sexual reputation and prior sexual history in proceedings in
which a person stands charged with a sexual
The Commonwealth
provisions apply to every child witness in sexual assault
proceedings.
18.13 The exclusionary rules do not, therefore, cover evidence about the
sexual reputation or prior sexual history of the following
in the Commonwealth jurisdiction, adult sexual assault complainants
in sexual assault proceedings;
in all jurisdictions, adult sexual assault victims who are witnesses
but not the complainants in sexual assault proceedings; and
in the state and territory jurisdictions, child witnesses who are
not complainants in a sexual assault proceeding.
Should Commonwealth, state and territory evidence law and
procedural rules limit cross-examination and the admission of evidence about
sexual reputation and prior sexual history of all witnesses in sexual assault
proceedings?
Terminology
18.14 Australian legislation purports to regulate the admission and use of
evidence of each of the following:
the general reputation of the complainant with respect to
sexual reputation;
reputation with respect to sexual
activities;
disposition of the complainant in sexual
or evidence that raises
inferences about a complainant’s general
disposition;
sexual history;
sexual experience
sexual experiences;
experience with respect to sexual
activities,
activities.
18.15 Statutory
and judicial guidance
meaning and boundaries of each of these terms and the kinds of evidence covered
is limited. In practice, the ambiguity
is likely to inhibit the ability of
judicial officers and practitioners to apply and observe the current legislative
provisions.
It is particularly
important that sexual
evidence is clearly distinguishable from
evidence because sexual reputation evidence is
inadmissible in most jurisdictions whereas sexual experience evidence may be
admissible.
18.16 The High Court in
suggested that
‘reputation’ primarily concerns the public estimation and general
opinion that others have of a person’s
tendencies or
propensities.
Some matters that
could be considered as raising the sexual reputation of the complainant include
assertions about a complainant
engaging in prostitution, that a complainant is
believed or known to be promiscuous and other references to the
complainant’s
sexual proclivities asserted to be commonly
18.17 Some jurisdictions refer to evidence of ‘disposition of the
complainant in sexual matters’ and evidence that raises
inferences about a
complainant’s general
disposition.
complainant’s ‘disposition’ differs from their reputation
because disposition refers to tendencies or propensities
that are intrinsic to
the individual which exist independently of public or general opinion. Those
intrinsic tendencies or propensities
are ‘part of the character of the
person so that given a relevant set of conditions or circumstances the person
concerned has
a tendency or propensity to act in a particular
As such, evidence of
‘disposition’ appears to refer to ‘any characteristics of the
complainant which suggest that
he or she is the “kind of person” who
would have engaged in the conduct in
18.18 ‘Sexual history evidence’ is a term only used by the
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
(Vic) and is defined by
of that Act
evidence that relates to or tends to establish the fact that the
complainant—
(a) was accustomed to engaging in sexual activities; or
(b) had freely agreed to engage in sexual activity (other than that to which
the charge relates) with the accused person or another
18.19 Western Australia is the only jurisdiction which uses the plural
‘sexual experiences’, in contrast to the
singular—‘sexual
experience’—which is used by the New
South Wales and Tasmanian legislation. It has been held the use of the plural is
significant because it captures evidence of ‘any occasion or episode of
sexual activity’ rather than evidence that ‘tends
to prove the state
of … [the complainant’s] sexual
experience’.
18.20 That analysis suggests a link or overlap between the concepts of sexual
activity or activities and sexual experience or
experiences.
It may also give
rise to an argument that there is a conceptual difference between evidence of a
complainant’s ‘sexual
activity’ and a complainant’s
‘sexual activities’.
Commissions’ view
18.21 In the Commissions’ view, legislative reform may be required to
better enable the judiciary and practitioners to distinguish
between kinds of
prior sexual history evidence. It is essential that prior sexual history
evidence be correctly identified as being
either of sexual reputation, sexual
disposition or sexual experience because different tests of admissibility apply
in respect of
each. It is important that the relevant test of admissibility is
applied to each kind of prior sexual history so that the public
policy which
informs the legislation is given effect in practice.
18.22 The statutory prohibitions and restrictions in relation to the
admission of evidence regarding a complainant’s sexual
reputation, sexual
disposition and sexual experience have been enacted to curtail reasoning
according to what have been called the
to forbid any chain of ‘reasoning’ that asserts that, because the
complainant has a certain sexual reputation or a certain
disposition in sexual
matters or has had certain sexual experiences, he or she is the ‘kind of
person’ who would be more
likely to consent to the acts the subject of the
charge … [and] to forbid the chain of ‘reasoning’ that asserts
that, because a complainant has a particular sexual reputation or disposition in
sexual matters or has had certain sexual experiences,
he or she is less worthy
of belief than a complainant without those
18.23 Judicial and practitioner education and training is also important to
encourage a consistent approach to the classification
of evidence as
‘sexual reputation’, ‘sexual disposition’ or
‘sexual experience’ evidence, promoting
compliance with existing
legislative regimes. However, education and training about issues arising in
sexual assault trials alone
is likely to be insufficient to prevent
inappropriate admission of evidence about complainants’ prior sexual
How best can judicial officers and legal practitioners be
assisted to develop a consistent approach to the classification of evidence
being either of ‘sexual reputation’, ‘sexual
disposition’ and ‘sexual experience’ (or ‘sexual
activities’)?
18.24 Evidence relating to the complainant’s sexual reputation is
inadmissible in all Australian states and the
No exceptions apply to
these exclusionary rules. Evidence of sexual reputation is excluded on the basis
that, ‘even if relevant
and therefore admissible, [it] is too far removed
from evidence of actual events or circumstances for its admission to be
circumstances’.
18.25 In the Northern Territory, evidence relating to the complainant’s
general reputation as to chastity may be elicited or
led with the leave of the
court. Leave is not granted unless the evidence has substantial relevance to the
facts in issue.
18.26 In Commonwealth legislation, evidence of a child witness or child
complainant’s sexual reputation is admissible in a proceeding
if the court
is satisfied that the evidence is substantially relevant to the facts in
18.27 The key issue in practice in relation to excluding evidence of sexual
reputation is that such evidence is not consistently identified
admitted if inappropriately conceived as evidence of sexual experience. This
issue is addressed in the previous discussion
terminology and the associated proposals for reform.
Commissions’ views
18.28 The policy basis for excluding evidence of sexual reputation is widely
accepted. However, the Commonwealth and Northern Territory
admissibility do not give the policy full effect. The Victorian legislation is
instructive in this regard. Commonwealth,
state and territory legislation
should, in the Commissions’ view, provide that the court must not allow
any questions as to,
or admit any evidence of, the sexual reputation of the
complainant.
Proposal 18–1
Commonwealth, state and territory legislation
should provide that a court must not allow any questions as to, or admit any
of, the sexual reputation of the complainant.
18.29 Australian jurisdictions have adopted different approaches in relation
to the admission of evidence of the complainant’s
activities’, ‘sexual activity’, ‘sexual
experiences’ and ‘sexual experience’.
Mandatory and discretionary
18.30 The most important distinction is between the mandatory model of NSW
and the discretionary models of the other jurisdictions.
In NSW, such evidence
is inadmissible unless it falls within specific statutory exceptions. In the
‘discretionary’ jurisdictions,
admissibility is a matter for the
judicial officer’s discretion, the exercise of which is subject to
legislative conditions.
18.31 Within the ‘discretionary models’ two further distinction
may be drawn, first:
In Victoria, Western Australia, the Northern Territory and Tasmania, the sexual
experience provisions apply (expressly or by implication)
to prior sexual
experience between the complainant and the accused. In the remaining
provisions do not apply to
‘recent’ sexual activity between the complainant and the
18.32 The second distinction is that, of the discretionary models, Victoria
alone introduces and defines the term ‘sexual history
non-discretionary exclusionary rule prohibits the admission of such evidence in
specific circumstances.
Victorian approach to determining and limiting the admissibility of
‘sexual history evidence’ is discussed below.
Commissions’ views
18.33 Whether a mandatory or discretionary model better serves to admit
evidence genuinely relevant to the accused’s defence
and limit the
harassment of victims of sexual assault by cross-examination about their prior
sexual activities is a debate of particular
significance for victims of sexual
assault because of the special problems in relation to the prosecution of sexual
18.34 Concerns about the appropriate model have been canvassed in reports by
the Model Criminal Code Officers Committee of SCAG (MCCOC),
the NSWLRC and
These reports considered
the relative merits of the mandatory and discretionary approaches and whether
the NSW approach is too restrictive—so
that it excludes material relevant
to the accused’s defence. Each report favoured a structured
discretionary model.
18.35 In the Commissions’ view, the relevant issues related to each
approach—for both complainants and accused persons—have
sufficiently canvassed and appropriately evaluated by these earlier reports. The
Commissions agree that a discretionary model
ought to apply to determine the
admissibility of prior sexual activities evidence. The discussion that follows
focuses on identifying
the optimal form of a discretionary model.
18.36 The Commissions would be interested in comment about the practical
application of laws concerning the admission of evidence
of sexual history in
cases involving sexual assault perpetrated in a family violence context.
18.37 In particular, the Commissions would like to know whether evidence of a
complainant’s prior sexual history is admitted
more or less often in
proceedings where the charge arises from a family violence context, as compared
to other proceedings, and why
this might be so. For example, defendants in
family violence contexts may have more knowledge about the previous sexual
of the complainant. This may mean that the admission of evidence of
previous sexual activity has a disproportionate impact on those
sexual assault.
Under discretionary models, is evidence of a complainant’s
prior sexual history admitted more or less often in proceedings concerning
offences perpetrated in a family violence context, as compared to other sexual
assault proceedings?
Scope of general exclusion
18.38 The scope of the exclusionary rules in relation to questioning and
admitting evidence of the complainant’s sexual activities,
complainant’s:
prior sexual activities with the accused and with other persons; and
consensual and non-consensual sexual activities.
18.39 In the ACT, the restriction applies only to evidence about
sexual activity with persons other than the
In Victoria, Western
Australia and Tasmania the sexual experience provisions apply to (expressly or
by implication) prior sexual
experience between the complainant and the
In the remaining
‘recent’ sexual activity
between the complainant and the
18.40 The Victorian legislation is unique in explicitly restricting questions
and evidence as to both the consensual and non-consensual
sexual activities of
the complainant.
Prior to making
explicit the application of the legislative scheme to prior non-consensual
sexual activity evidence, some complainants
were required to give evidence or be
cross-examined about earlier incidents of child sexual abuse or sexual assault
without the court
considering whether the evidence should be admitted on the
grounds set out in the
legislation.
The VLRC noted
in many cases the main purpose of this type of cross-examination is to unsettle
the complainant by suggesting he or she is prone
to lie or is mentally unstable
Many complainants find it difficult to understand why the defence should
be able to cross-examine them about prior abuse when evidence
accused’s prior sexual behaviour is rarely admissible and the accused is
entitled to exercise the right to remain
18.41 In all jurisdictions the sexual experience provisions regulate the
cross-examination of witnesses and adducing and admission
of evidence of a
complainants’ sexual history by any party. The exception is
Western Australia where the provisions apply only
in relation to defence
Commissions’ views
18.42 To adequately safeguard complainants of sexual assault occurring in a
family violence context against irrelevant and harassing
cross-examination—and any distress, humiliation and embarrassment a
complainant may suffer as a result of the admission of
evidence of their sexual
activities—the exclusionary rule in relation to the admission of evidence
of a complainant’s
sexual activities must have a broad application.
18.43 In the Commissions’ view, an exclusionary rule of broad
application to evidence of complainants’ sexual activities
is unlikely to
cause injustice to the accused. Under the discretionary models, any evidence
covered by the exclusionary rule may
be admitted, and the complainant may be
cross-examined as to such evidence, with the leave of the court. The
circumstances in which
the leave of the court may be granted are discussed
18.44 For these reasons, the Commissions support the enactment of legislation
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
(Vic), which
The complainant must not be cross-examined, and the court must not admit any
evidence, as to the sexual activities (whether consensual
or nonconsensual) of
the complainant (other than those to which the charge relates), without the
leave of the court.
18.45 That provision, by implication, applies to evidence of the
complainant’s prior sexual activities both with the accused
and with other
persons, irrespective of whether that activity was recent or otherwise. Any
unfairness to the accused may be overcome
by the court exercising its discretion
to permit questioning about or admit evidence of, for example, recent sexual
activities between
the complainant and the accused if it is satisfied that the
evidence meets the tests for admission.
18.46 The provision applies explicitly to questions and evidence as to both
the consensual and non-consensual sexual activities of
the complainant. This
seems desirable because ‘survivors of sexual abuse should be offered the
same protection from investigation
into their sexual history as other
complainants’.
18.47 The Commissions consider that the statutory restrictions on questions
and evidence concerning the complainant’s sexual
activities should apply
to questioning and the adducing of evidence by any party.
Proposal 18–2
Commonwealth, state and territory legislation
should provide that complainants of sexual assault must not be cross-examined,
court must not admit any evidence, as to the sexual activities (whether
consensual or non-consensual) of the complainant other than
those to which the
charge relates, without the leave of the court.
Test for admission
18.48 In all states and territories, other than NSW, sexual experience
evidence is inadmissible, subject to a judicial officer’s
discretion to
grant leave. Generally the court must be satisfied that the evidence is of
‘substantial relevance to a fact in
issue’ before leave may be
granted to cross-examine or admit evidence as to the complainant’s prior
sexual history.
18.49 In Victoria, the ‘substantial relevance to a fact in issue’
threshold is supplemented by the requirement that the
interests of justice allow
the cross-examination or admission of the evidence having regard to a list of
One such factor is
‘whether the probative value of the evidence outweighs the distress,
humiliation and embarrassment that
the complainant may
experience’.
18.50 Western Australia and Tasmania do not provide a list of factors which
must be considered in the interests of justice but—similar
Victoria—supplement the ‘substantial relevance to a fact in
issue’ criterion with the second criterion that
the ‘probative value
of that evidence outweighs any distress, humiliation or
embarrassment’.
18.51 South Australia is the only jurisdiction which applies a test of
‘substantial probative value’ taking into account
‘principle that alleged victims of sexual offences should not be subjected
to unnecessary distress, humiliation or embarrassment
through the asking of
questions or admission of evidence’, without also requiring the evidence
or cross-examination to have
substantial relevance to a fact in
18.52 The Queensland and ACT legislation also provides that leave to permit
or receive sexual experience evidence—sought to
be elicited or
led—may be granted where the evidence is a ‘proper matter for
cross-examination as to
Despite providing
for the admissibility of sexual experience evidence in this way, Queensland and
the ACT, like most jurisdictions,
provide that sexual history evidence is not
admissible as part of cross-examination about the complainant’s
credibility unless
there are special circumstances that mean ‘it would be
likely to substantially impair confidence’ in the reliability
complainant’s evidence.
addition, the Queensland legislation provides that a complainant is not to be
regarded as a less credible witness only because
the complainant has engaged in
sexual activity.
The Western
Australian and Tasmanian legislation takes a different approach pursuant to
which sexual history evidence is not admissible
for the sole purpose of
cross-examination about the complainant’s
credibility.
18.53 In relation to the admission of evidence relating to the disposition of
the complainant in sexual matters, in the Commonwealth,
Victoria, Queensland,
South Australia and the Northern Territory such evidence must not be regarded as
substantially relevant or
of substantial probative value—as the case may
be—merely because of any inference it may raise about general
disposition.
The Western
Australian legislation provides that such evidence is
inadmissible.
Commissions’ views
Section 349
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
consistent with the recommendations of the VLRC’s 2004 report,
recommendations were largely consistent with a recommendation of the
NSWLRC’s report,
Reform of Section 409B
which was not
implemented.
18.55 The focus of the Commissions is to identify a model governing the
admission of sexual history evidence which adequately safeguards
complainants
against irrelevant and harassing cross-examination, while still allowing
admission of evidence which is relevant to
the case of the defence. Generally,
there appears good reason to follow the similar policy and recommendations of
these prior reports.
18.56 In relation to the threshold test for the admissibility of evidence
evidence should only be admissible where it is of ‘substantial
relevance’ to a fact in
18.57 In the Commissions’ view, however, a preferable approach would be
to provide that such evidence should only be admissible
where, as well as
satisfying a general relevance
the evidence has
significant probative value to a fact in issue. A significant probative value
test is preferred because it is more
consistent with the approach of the uniform
Evidence Acts in relation to exclusionary rules, including those concerning
and coincidence
18.58 The probative
value of the evidence should be weighed against the interests of justice to
allow the cross-examination or to
admit the evidence. Such an approach
appropriately takes account of the needs and rights of both complainants and
accused persons.
18.59 A non-exhaustive list of factors should be provided, which the court
must consider as part of the balancing exercise of weighing
the probative value
of the evidence against the danger of prejudice to the proper administration of
justice. The proposed factors
Criminal Procedure
(Vic), except for the fact the list is
non-exhaustive.
The factors,
which seek to balance the considerations of fairness to the accused with the
need to protect the complainant from distress,
humiliation and embarrassment
resulting from an invasion of his or her sexual privacy, are as follows:
the distress, humiliation, or embarrassment which the complainant
may suffer as a result of the cross-examination or the admission
evidence, in view of the age of the complainant and the number and nature of the
questions that the complainant is likely
to be asked;
the risk that the evidence may arouse in the jury discriminatory
belief or bias, prejudice, sympathy or hostility;
the need to respect the complainant’s personal dignity and
the right of the accused to make a full answer and defence; and
any other factor which the court considers
18.60 Commentators have raised concerns, in the context of
the counselling communication privilege, that it is difficult to imagine
judicial officer who determines that evidence has ‘substantial probative
value’ could exclude the evidence on the
basis that it is outweighed by
interests in favour of protecting the
complainant.
18.61 One response to this criticism is the requirement that leave to admit
evidence of a complainant’s sexual activities not
be given unless its
probative value ‘substantially’ outweighs the danger of unfair
prejudice to the proper administration
of justice. This places a heavy onus on
the party seeking to admit the sexual experience evidence and should ensure that
its admission
will only be justified in a ‘clear
Proposal 18–3
Commonwealth, state and territory legislation
should provide that the court shall not grant leave for complainants of sexual
to be cross-examined about their sexual activities unless it is
satisfied that:
(a) the evidence has significant probative value to a fact in issue; and
(b) the probative value of the evidence substantially outweighs the danger
of unfair prejudice to the proper administration of justice,
taking into account
the matters in Proposal 18–4 below.
Proposal 18–4
Commonwealth, state and territory legislation
should provide that the court, in deciding whether the probative value of the
substantially outweighs the danger of unfair prejudice to the proper
administration of justice, must have regard to:
(a) the distress, humiliation, or embarrassment which the complainant may
suffer as a result of the cross-examination or the admission
of the evidence, in
view of the age of the complainant and the number and nature of the questions
that the complainant is likely
to be asked;
(b) the risk that the evidence may arouse in the jury discriminatory belief
or bias, prejudice, sympathy or hostility;
(c) the need to respect the complainant’s personal dignity and
(d) the right of the accused to make a full answer and defence; and
(e) any other factor which the court considers relevant.
Limitations on admissibility for specific
18.62 Proposals 18–3 and 18–4 do not address the admission of
evidence about a complainant’s sexual experience where
may raise an inference that the complainant is the type of person
who is more likely to have consented to the sexual activity to
which the charge
may raise an inference as to the complainant’s general
disposition; or
relates to the complainant’s credibility as a witness.
18.63 Victorian legislation explicitly addresses these questions of
admissibility in respect of ‘sexual history
The statutory
definition of this term is reproduced above. It encompasses some evidence which
may also be described as evidence of
‘the general reputation of the
complainant with respect to
or evidence as
to the ‘sexual
activities’
complainant.
Section 343
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
(Vic) provides that:
Sexual history evidence is not admissible to support an inference that the
complainant is the type of person who is more likely to
have consented to the
sexual activity to which the charge
Section 352
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
(Vic) provides
Sexual history evidence is not to be regarded—
(a) as having a substantial relevance to the facts in issue by virtue of any
inferences it may raise as to general disposition;
(b) as being proper
matter for cross-examination as to credit unless, because of special
circumstances, it would be likely materially
to impair confidence in the
reliability of the evidence of the complainant.
18.65 The manner in which these provisions restrict the admission of sexual
history evidence clearly gives effect to the policy objective
of forbidding
reasoning according to ‘twin myths’ in respect of sexual assault
complainants.
18.66 Victoria is the only jurisdiction in which a non-discretionary
prohibition on the admission of sexual history evidence to support
an inference
that the complainant is a specific type of person applies.
18.67 In relation to evidence relating to the general disposition of the
complainant, the Victorian approach is typical of the majority
Australia such evidence is not permitted to be adduced or elicited by or on
behalf of an accused.
Tasmania, the admissibility of sexual experience evidence that raises inferences
in sexual matters is determined by the
application of the same test of admissibility as applies to all sexual
experience evidence.
18.68 In relation whether evidence is proper matter for cross-examination as
to credit, Queensland,
and the Northern
each apply the same
test for admission as Victoria. The Western Australian approach is similar,
preventing evidence relating to the
sexual experiences of the complainant from
‘being adduced or elicited by or on behalf of an accused unless leave of
has first been
The Tasmanian
approach is more restrictive, and provides that evidence relevant only to the
complainant’s credibility does
not have direct and substantial relevance
to a fact or matter in issue.
the remaining state and territory jurisdictions the admissibility of sexual
experience evidence which relates to the credibility
of the complainant is
determined by general credibility
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth) takes a different approach, providing that evidence relating to the
credibility of a child witness adduced in cross-examination
of the child is
admissible where it has substantial probative
and then further providing
Without limiting the matters to which the court may have regard in deciding
whether the evidence
has substantial probative value,
it is to have regard to:
(a) whether the evidence
tends to prove that the witness knowingly or recklessly made a false
representation when the witness was
under an obligation to tell the truth; and
(b) the period that has elapsed since the acts or events to which the evidence
relates were done or occurred.
Commissions’ views
18.69 The Commissions are interested to hear views about whether the
admission of sexual history evidence or sexual experience evidence
ought to be
limited in line with the Victorian
18.70 The prohibition on the admission of sexual experience evidence to
support an inference that the complainant is the type of person
who is likely to
have consented to the sexual activity to which the charge relates is likely to
be the most controversial aspect
of such a proposal.
18.71 Evidence law permits tendency reasoning in respect of the accused on
some occasions. Such a provision would prohibit tendency
reasoning in respect of
whether the complainant consented to the alleged sexual activity on all
occasions and ‘expresses the
policy that evidence of prior sexual activity
is not normally relevant to the issue of
Is it necessary
for the legislation to explicitly prohibit such reasoning in respect of
complainants because of the many myths and
misconceptions that underpin
understandings of sexual violence? Would a prohibition on the admission of
sexual experience evidence
where it raises an inference as to general
disposition be sufficient?
18.72 In the Commissions’ view, the admission of evidence about a
complainant’s sexual activity on the grounds that the
evidence has
significant probative value only in relation to the credibility of the
complainant should not be permitted. The admission
of evidence on such grounds
is likely to ‘justify questioning of the complainant on issues which have
little or no relevance
to the question in issue at
However, where
sexual history evidence is genuinely relevant to credibility, and credibility is
a fact in issue, sexual history evidence
may be a proper matter for
cross-examination as to credit. An example of such a circumstance may include
where a complainant has
previously been convicted of perjury regarding some
aspect of her sexual history. For these reasons, the Commissions support the
enactment of a provision pursuant to which such evidence is excluded, subject to
the exercise of the court’s discretion to
allow its admission.
Should Commonwealth, state and territory legislative provide that
‘sexual history evidence’ or sexual experience evidence
(a) admissible to support an inference that the complainant is the type
of person who is more likely to have consented to the sexual
activity to which
the charge relates; and/or
(b) to be regarded as having substantial probative
value by virtue of any inference it may raise as to general
disposition.
Proposal 18–5
Commonwealth, state and territory legislation
should provide that ‘sexual history evidence’ or sexual experience
is not to be regarded as being proper matter for cross-examination as
to credit unless, because of special circumstances, it would
materially to impair confidence in the reliability of the evidence of the
complainant.
Procedural issues
18.73 In all jurisdictions, any question as to the admissibility of sexual
history evidence is decided by the court in the absence
In Victoria, Queensland,
the ACT and the Northern Territory, an application for leave may be heard in the
absence of the complainant
at the accused’s
This approach allows
for the full examination of the nature and purpose of proposed evidence by
counsel for both sides without causing
embarrassment to the
complainant
and may afford a
practical opportunity to limit and frame questions.
18.74 In the Commonwealth, Victorian and ACT jurisdictions, an application
for leave is to be made in
The Victorian
provisions require service of the application on the Office of Public
Prosecutions (OPP) or the informant at least
seven days before summary hearings,
committal hearings and sentencing hearings, and 14 days before trials and
special hearings.
The written
application for leave must set out the initial questions sought to be asked, the
scope of the questioning and as well
as how the evidence sought to be elicited
has substantial relevance to facts in issue or why it is a proper matter for
cross-examination
as to credit.
These procedural controls were imposed after studies showed that the legislation
was having a limited effect on the admission of
prior sexual history
18.75 The Victorian OPP pursued a policy of writing to the defence in sexual
offence matters and informing them of the procedural
requirements imposed under
then s 37A of the
Evidence Act 1958
As at December 2003,
that practice increased the number of written applications for leave but written
applications were still only
being made in approximately half of cases where
they are required.
recommended the OPP continue that
18.76 There is variation across the jurisdictions as to whether the court is
required to record in writing the reasons for granting
Commissions’ views
18.77 Ensuring compliance with relevant legislation regulating the admission
of evidence of complainants’ prior sexual history
18.78 Formalising the procedure by which an application to cross-examine and
adduce evidence of a complainant’s sexual history
is made will encourage
judicial officers and legal practitioners to turn their minds to the
admissibility issues at an early stage
of the proceedings. By requiring an
application for leave in writing, and that the application be given to the
opposing party before
the hearing of the application, the provision proposed
below would require counsel to address whether the evidence is probative of
facts in issue. It also gives the opposing party notice of the application and
allows time to prepare any
counter-arguments.
18.79 The court should be required, as recommended by NSWLRC 87, to give
reasons for its decision whether or not to grant leave, and,
if leave is granted
to question the complainant, to state the nature of the evidence which may be
elicited by that questioning.
The requirement that the court ‘state the nature of the evidence which may
be elicited by that questioning’ is necessary
to prevent questioning of
the complainant beyond the scope of the evidence which has been ruled
admissible.
Proposal 18–6
Commonwealth, state and territory legislation
should require an application for leave to admit or adduce sexual history
evidence to
(a) made in writing; and
(b) filed with the relevant court and served on the informant or the
Director of Public Prosecutions within a prescribed minimum
number of days,
and prescribe:
(a) the required contents of such an application;
(b) the circumstances in which leave may be granted out of time;
(c) the circumstances in which the requirement that an application for leave
be made in writing may be waived; and
(d) that the application is to be determined in the absence of the jury,
and if the accused requests, in the absence of the complainant.
Proposal 18–7
Commonwealth, state and territory legislation
should require a court to give reasons for its decision whether or not to grant
and if leave is granted to question the complainant, to state the nature
of the evidence which may be elicited by that questioning.
Proposal 18–8
Commonwealth, state and territory Directors of
Public Prosecution should introduce and implement a policy of writing to the
in sexual assault matters and informing them of the procedural
application requirements imposed under the relevant legislation in
relation to
admitting and adducing sexual experience evidence.
[back to top]
Sexual assault
communications privilege
18.80 Sexual assault communications are
communications made in the course of a confidential relationship between the
victim of a sexual
assault and a counsellor. The defence may seek access to this
material to assist during their cross-examination of the complainant
18.81 From the mid-1990s, ongoing reform of sexual assault laws and procedure
has included the enactment of legislation to limit the
disclosure and use of
these communications.
state and territory—except Queensland—now has specific legislation
protecting counselling
communications.
18.82 The sexual assault communications
has been considered by a number of law reform bodies, including
and by the ALRC, VLRC
and NSWLRC in ALRC 102.
These reports have generally taken the view that the privilege serves the
important public interest of encouraging people who have
been sexually assaulted
to seek therapy and may also encourage people who are sexually assaulted to
report the crime to the
Current law
18.83 Models of sexual assault communications privilege differ markedly. The
main point of divergence is whether the privilege is
qualified or absolute. A
further differentiation is whether or not the privilege applies in preliminary
criminal proceedings, such
as committal proceedings.
18.84 The privilege for communications to sexual assault counsellors under
Evidence Act 2001
(Tas) provides absolute protection of the
communications unless the complainant consents to their production.
18.85 In New South Wales,
South Australia,
the Northern
there is an absolute
prohibition against requiring the production of counselling communications in
preliminary criminal proceedings
and against the use of counselling
communication in such proceedings. Otherwise, the privilege that applies in all
except Tasmania, is qualified, both in relation to the production
of documents and the use of notes in
18.86 One of the main issues in relation to the scope of the privilege is
that, in many jurisdictions, the current restrictions on
admission of sexual
assault counselling communications do not prevent a defence lawyer from issuing
a subpoena requiring a person
to produce counselling
As a result subpoenas
are frequently used to ‘require counsellors to attend and give evidence or
produce notes’ and ‘[p]rivate
counsellors who are unaware that the
law protects confidential counselling communications may produce records, rather
than appearing
in court to resist a
18.87 Other factors that affect the scope of the privilege, and which are
defined or dealt with inconsistently across the jurisdictions,
the scope of the communications
whether preliminary examination by a judicial officer—to
determine questions of leave to produce or adduce protected confidences—is
a mandatory or discretionary
requirement;
the thresholds of which the court must be satisfied before ordering
production;
the factors the court must take into account for the purposes of the
public interest balancing
the express exemptions to the
reform of sexual assault communications privilege
18.88 As a second phase of evidence law reforms, following on from
ALRC 102, SCAG is developing, through the Evidence Working Group
Parliamentary Counsels’ Committee, proposed amendments to the uniform
Evidence Acts dealing with sexual assault communications
privilege provisions.
Model provisions are expected to be drafted later in 2010.
18.89 The Terms of Reference instruct the ALRC, in undertaking this inquiry,
to be ‘careful not to duplicate … the work
being undertaken through
SCAG on the harmonisation of uniform evidence laws, in particular the
development of model sexual assault
communications immunity provisions’.
For this reason, the following consideration of the sexual assault
communications privilege
is not focused on the harmonisation of these provisions
but on problems with how they operate in practice.
18.90 In particular, there are concerns that, in practice, sexual assault
communications privileges do not achieve the intended policy
objective of
protecting the public interest in maintaining the confidentiality of the
counselling relationship and its therapeutic
18.91 Women’s Legal Services NSW has identified the following
continuing problems for victims of sexual assault and counsellors
pursuant to
existing sexual assault communications privilege provisions:
some counselling services do not inform sexual assault victims that
their counselling notes have been subpoenaed;
some counselling services produce material to the court without
raising an objection or claiming the privilege;
some counselling services give sexual assault victims inaccurate
advice about the privilege;
sexual assault victims may not receive written notice of the
subpoenaed documents;
sexual assault victims have difficulty obtaining legal assistance to
uphold their privilege;
sexual assault victims who seek to uphold their privilege often
require legal representation at short notice and the legal representation
retained may only gain limited access to relevant materials;
judicial officers permit reliance on improperly obtained confidences
to support arguments about admissibility;
the party seeking access to protected confidences re-ventilate
arguments about admissibility before trial judges—after a judicial
presiding at an interlocutory hearing has made a ruling—and trial judges
may overrule the decision;
sexual assault victims have reported feelings of violation due to
the legal processes associated with seeking disclosure of their
counselling
records and seeking to uphold their
of these problems appear to arise because the privilege is legally that of the
sexual assault victim,
the privileged documents sought to be produced and admitted belong to
counselling services or individual counsellors responsible
18.93 A qualified sexual assault communications privilege serves the broader
public interest of ensuring the legal system is fair
both to the accused and the
complainant.
However, sexual
assault victims, who are unrepresented in criminal proceedings, may not be in a
position to claim or seek to enforce
the privilege.
18.94 This difficulty has generated debate about whether victim advocates
should be employed in the criminal justice process to make
submissions as to
rulings on the sexual assault communications
It is beyond the
scope of the current Inquiry to consider that debate, which would require
detailed consideration of difficulties
inherent in reconciling the role of a
separate legal representative with the current constraints of the adversarial
system. The NSW
Criminal Justice Sexual Offences Taskforce observed that:
Whilst there may be some merit to utilising independent legal representation in
matters arising under the sexual assault communications
privilege, as this is a
privilege that belongs to the complainant, the proposal, as it currently stands,
appears to create more problems
than it may
complainants to invoke the privilege
18.95 Implementing some or all of the following measures may assist sexual
assault victims to invoke a sexual assault communications
requiring the party seeking production to provide notice in writing
to each other party and if the sexual assault complainant is
party—the sexual assault complainant;
requiring that any such written notice issued be accompanied by a
pro forma fact sheet on the privilege and providing contact details
assistance;
educating defence counsel about their obligation to identify records
potentially giving rise to the privilege to encourage compliance
with any such
written notice provisions;
providing counsellors with education about the sexual assault
communications privilege and next steps if they are served with a
requiring that subpoenas be issued with a pro forma fact sheet on
the privilege, providing contact details for legal assistance;
improving access to free legal assistance about the sexual assault
communications privilege;
requiring that the court issuing a subpoena provide a copy of all
subpoenas to the prosecution;
educating prosecutors: to identify possible claims of the sexual
assault communications privilege arising out of subpoenas; to inform
of any such possible claims of the sexual assault communications privilege
during the pre-trial processes; where subpoenas
are served at short notice
during a trial, to query short service applications; to inform the court where
documents containing protected
confidences are improperly adduced, admitted or
used in the course of proceedings;
educating defence counsel generally about the sexual assault
communications privilege with a view to limiting the use of improperly
protected confidences;
educating judicial officers about the impact of sexual assault on
complainants, the role of counselling in alleviating victims’
the desirability of encouraging people who have been sexually assaulted to seek
therapy; and
educating judicial officers about complainants’
difficulties—legal and personal—where an application for leave
produce or adduce a sexual assault communication is considered twice—by a
judicial officer at an interlocutory hearing and
again by the trial judge.
18.96 The Commissions are interested in comments on whether any
such measures should be implemented to assist complainants in sexual
proceedings to invoke a sexual assault communications privilege.
In sexual assault proceedings, the sexual assault communications
privilege must generally be invoked by the complainant, who is legally
unrepresented. Assuming complainants continue to be unrepresented in such sexual
assault proceedings, what procedures and services
would best assist them to
invoke the privilege?
[back to top]
Expert opinion
evidence and children
18.97 There is a considerable body of research that shows that jurors and
jury-eligible citizens hold a number of misconceptions about
ability to give truthful evidence and how children react to sexual
The most common
misconceptions include that:
children are easily manipulated into giving false reports of sexual
child sexual abuse will result in physical damage and evidence;
a typical victim would resist, cry out for help or escape the
delay in complaint is uncommon and evidence of lying; and
inconsistencies in a child’s report is evidence of
only published Australian study on juror misconceptions found that fewer than
half of the 659 participants provided accurate
responses to two thirds of the
questions that tested their knowledge about children and child sexual abuse,
‘indicating that
the most critical information about [child sexual abuse]
cases is outside the experience and common knowledge of
laypeople’.
18.99 The key question posed by the literature on jurors’ and
laypeople’s misconceptions about child sexual abuse is whether
witnesses are needed in child sexual assault trials ‘to educate jurors
and reactions to
18.100 Compared to the United States, Australian jurisdictions have had
limited experience with admitting expert witness evidence
The general
approach under the common law opinion rule ‘has been to exclude such
evidence on the grounds that the behaviour
of child sexual abuse victims is
within the common knowledge or ordinary experience of the
18.101 However, many professionals recognise that some of the responses of
children to sexual abuse are counterintuitive from a layperson’s
perspective, such as delay in complaint, secrecy, protecting the offender and
maintaining an emotional bond with the
Rather than the
jury relying on its commonsense or collective experience, it is arguable that
expert testimony about the behaviour
of sexually abused children is necessary
‘to restore a complainant’s credibility from a debit balance because
misapprehension, back to a zero or neutral
where the behaviour in question appears to a jury to be inconsistent with sexual
Reform of the
opinion rule
18.102 There has been a consistent view that legislative reform is needed to
allow the admissibility of expert opinion evidence on
the behavioural patterns
of sexually abused children and children
18.103 The first jurisdiction in Australia to legislate to overcome the
limitations of the common law opinion rule was Tasmania. In
2001, a specific
provision dealing with the admission of expert witness evidence in child sexual
assault trials was included when
Tasmania enacted the
Evidence Act 2001
18.104 In ALRC 102, the ALRC, NSWLRC and VLRC noted wide support for
amending the common law opinion rule to allow the admission of
expert opinion
evidence about children.
report highlighted the main problem with admitting expert opinion evidence about
the development and behaviour of children—that
is, if tendered for a
credibility purpose, the credibility rule as well as exceptions to the
credibility rule, are obstacles to
For this reason,
the ALRC, NSWLRC and VLRC made recommendations to amend
of the uniform
Evidence Acts to facilitate the admission of such evidence and to introduce a
new exception to the credibility
18.105 These amendments were subsequently adopted by the Commonwealth, NSW
and Victoria.
Section 79(2)
of the uniform Evidence Acts confirms that for the purposes
of the expert opinion exception to the opinion rule, ‘specialised
knowledge’ includes ‘specialised knowledge of child development and
child behaviour (including specialised knowledge
of the impact of sexual abuse
on children and their development and behaviour during and following the
Section 108C
of the uniform Evidence Acts provides that the credibility rule does not apply
to evidence given by a person concerning the credibility
of another witness if
the person has specialised knowledge based on the person’s training, study
or experience (including specialised
knowledge of child development and child
behaviour) and the evidence ‘could substantially affect the assessment of
the credibility
of a witness’.
18.106 It has been suggested, however, that these amendments to the uniform
Evidence Acts ‘are a gateway only, rather than a
complete answer to the
problem of correcting juror
misconceptions’.
the gateway represented by
is narrow, because the expert opinion evidence
has to ‘substantially’ affect the assessment of the credibility of
complainant in a child sexual assault trial. This may represent a relatively
high bar and impose ‘a significant limitation
on the admissibility of
expert evidence admitted solely for its credibility
expert opinion evidence can only be admitted with the leave of the court, which
means that the court will need to refer
to the matters listed in
the uniform Evidence Acts before giving leave—and consider defence counsel
objections about unfairness to the accused and
lengthening the
18.107 In addition, while expert opinion evidence on children’s
credibility may be desirable, those seeking to adduce such evidence
practical difficulties with the cost and availability of experts. Crown
prosecutors noted that it may not be possible to call
expert witnesses to give
evidence under
because such witnesses are not available or because
there is no such expert in a particular jurisdiction. For some prosecutors, it
may be too costly to fly an expert from interstate. Even if expert opinion
evidence is admitted, some experts may take a ‘hired
approach’ to the literature and selectively choose research or
misinterpret research to illustrate a particular
18.108 While the uniform Evidence Acts reforms were an attempt to address one
of the barriers to prosecuting child sex offences, the
provisions may be
insufficient to address the problem of jurors’ misconceptions in child
sexual assault trials. For example,
it has been argued that:
the public interest (including the interests of child complainants and their
families) in the appropriate conduct of child sexual
assault trials, means that
it is not enough that law reform measures merely allow for the admission of
expert opinion evidence. Such
measures will need to produce practical outcomes
in the way trials are conducted to ensure that juror misconceptions are not left
unchallenged as a matter of luck or chance, depending upon the individual
decisions of prosecutors to adduce evidence from expert
witnesses or the
availability of appropriately qualified expert witnesses in different
18.109 A number of options for further reform of the operation of the opinion
rule with respect to expert evidence in child sexual
assault trials have been
canvassed. Barriers to the admission of such evidence could be lowered, for
example, by:
removing the word, ‘substantially’, from
s108C(1)(b)(ii)
of the uniform Evidence Acts; or
making some categories of expert opinion evidence admissible without
leave of the courts, as currently required.
18.110 The National
Child Sexual Assault Reform Committee has suggested that, because the
prosecution may be unable to lead evidence
from an expert witness about
children’s responses to sexual abuse and their reliability as witnesses,
or a trial judge may
refuse to give leave for such evidence to be admitted, a
mandatory judicial direction, containing the same information that would
given by an expert witness, should be introduced into all Australian
and serve as an
alternative to calling expert
Alternatively,
such information might be incorporated in a Bench Book for judicial officers
dealing with sexual assault
18.111 On one view, it is clearly to the defendant’s advantage for
expert evidence not to be admitted in a child sexual assault
trial because this
allows the defence to exploit all the misconceptions associated with delay in
complaint, behavioural disturbances
and counterintuitive
As it is likely
that defence counsel will seek to have expert opinion evidence about the
behaviour of sexually abused children declared
inadmissible or excluded on the
grounds that it is prejudicial or within the common knowledge of the jury, it
may be more appropriate
for a mandatory judicial direction to be given by the
judge at the end of the
18.112 New Zealand provides an example of the type of instructions judges are
required to give when a witness is a child under the
age of 6 years under
r 49 of the
Evidence Regulations 2007
(NZ). This regulation states:
If, in a criminal proceeding tried with a jury in which a witness is a child
under the age of 6 years, the Judge is of the opinion
that the jury may be
assisted by a direction about the evidence of very young children and how the
jury should assess that evidence,
the Judge may give the jury a direction to the
following effect:
(a) even very young children can accurately remember and
report things that have happened to them in the past, but because of
developmental
differences, children may not report their memories in the same
manner or to the same extent as an adult would:
(b) this does not mean that a
child witness is any more or less reliable than an adult witness:
difference is that very young children typically say very little without some
(d) another difference is that,
depending on how they are questioned, very young children can be more open to
suggestion than other
children or adults:
(e) the reliability of the evidence
of very young children depends on the way they are questioned, and it is
important, when deciding
how much weight to give to their evidence, to
distinguish between open questions aimed at obtaining answers from children in
own words from leading questions that may put words into their
18.113 The National Child Sexual Assault Reform Committee has recommended
three draft directions that summarise the findings in the
psychological
literature about children’s memory, their reliability as witnesses, their
resistance to suggestions of abuse
and the importance of examining the way a
child is questioned when deciding how much weight to give their
18.114 The first two of these directions are similar to the NZ direction, and
relate to children’s abilities as witnesses and
apply to the evidence of
children under the age of 16 years and under the age of 5 years respectively.
The third concerns children’s
response to sexual abuse and states:
Directions Concerning Children’s Responses to Sexual Abuse
(1) This section applies to proceedings in respect of a prescribed sexual
(2) In a proceeding in which there is a jury and the complainant is
under the age of 16 years, the judge must give the jury the following
directions:
(a) there is no one set of symptoms or behaviours that all
sexually abused children display. Depending upon the individual child
circumstances, some children may exhibit a number of symptoms whereas some
children may exhibit none at all;
(b) only rarely does sexual abuse result in
physical symptoms and physical evidence that can be detected by a medical
examination;
(c) very often victims of sexual abuse do not cry out for help,
resist or escape from the offender;
(d) they often delay their complaint of
abuse for months or years and there may be a number of reasons why a child will
delay their
complaint, such as threats to themselves or their loved ones, or
fear they will not be believed or they will be blamed. They may
feel ashamed,
embarrassed or responsible for the abuse. They might want to protect the abuser
if it is someone they love or trust
and they may not know that the abuse is
wrong. They may not have the language to describe what has happened to them,
particularly
if they are very young;
(e) some children may exhibit particular
behaviours as a result of being sexually abused that are counterintuitive and
may not appear
to make sense to the adult layperson;
(f) the behaviours that
have been reported in the scientific literature include: delay in complaint for
months or years; disturbed
sleep patterns and/or nightmares; bedwetting;
disturbed behavioural patterns; learning difficulties, fearfulness and general
upset; retraction of the complaint; sexualized behaviour; and ongoing
(g) it is important to
remember that, on their own, none of these behaviours are diagnostic of sexual
abuse having
Commissions’ views
18.115 There is recognition that, in at least some cases, expert evidence on
the development and behaviour of children generally (and
those who have been
victims of sexual offences in particular) and the implications for the
credibility of children as witnesses may
be desirable.
18.116 On this basis,
whatever the problems in practice, the approach to the admissibility of such
evidence taken under the uniform
Evidence Acts is clearly an improvement on the
position in jurisdictions that have not joined the scheme. For this reason, the
Commissions
propose below that state and territory evidence legislation should
provide that (a) the opinion rule does not apply to evidence of
an opinion of a
person based on that person’s specialised knowledge of child development
and child behaviour; and (b) the credibility
rule does not apply to such
evidence given concerning the credibility of children.
18.117 The intention of this proposal is that all states and territories that
have not already done so should adopt provisions consistent
with ss 79 and
108C of the uniform Evidence Acts. As discussed earlier, the Commissions
consider it is preferable that all Australian
Evidence Acts scheme. Alternatively, reforms in the area of expert opinion
evidence could be enacted
in evidentiary provisions outside the uniform Evidence
Acts—as, for example, in the
Evidence Act 1906
(WA), which already
contains modification of common law rules of evidence specific to
18.118 There are concerns about how adducing expert opinion evidence in child
sexual assault cases works in practice. The Commissions
note that problems with
costs or delay attributable to adducing expert opinion evidence and undue
partisanship or bias on the part
of expert witnesses are not limited to those
arising in sexual offence proceedings. These problems have been widely discussed
law reform reports.
18.119 The Commissions are also interested in hearing views on the
desirability or otherwise of mandatory jury directions concerning
children’s abilities as witnesses and children’s responses to sexual
Proposal 18–9
State and territory evidence legislation should
provide that
(a) the opinion rule does not apply to evidence of an opinion of a person
based on that person’s specialised knowledge of child
development and
child behaviour; and
(b) the credibility rule does not apply to such evidence given concerning
the credibility of children.
Should Commonwealth, state and territory legislation provide for
mandatory jury directions, containing prescribed information about
children’s abilities as witnesses or children’s responses to sexual
[back to top]
Tendency and
coincidence evidence
18.120 The following section discusses aspects of the law of evidence
concerning the admissibility of ‘tendency’ and
‘coincidence’
evidence, as defined under the uniform Evidence Acts,
and ‘propensity’ or ‘similar fact’ evidence at common
law. These forms of evidence may include, for example, evidence of prior
convictions for sexual offences or prior illegal sexual
conduct—often
referred to as ‘uncharged acts’.
Current law
18.121 Under the uniform Evidence Acts (applicable in NSW, Victoria, Tasmania
and the ACT criminal proceedings) evidence about a defendant’s
illegal sexual conduct may be characterised as ‘tendency’ or
‘coincidence’
18.122 Tendency evidence is evidence ‘of the character, reputation or
conduct of a person, or a tendency that a person has or
had’ adduced to
prove that the person ‘has or had a tendency (whether because of the
person’s character or otherwise)
to act in a particular way, or to have a
particular state of
18.123 Coincidence evidence is evidence that ‘2 or more events
occurred’ adduced to prove that ‘a person did a particular
had a particular state of mind on the basis that, having regard to any
similarities in the events … it is improbable
that the events occurred
coincidentally’.
18.124 The test for admissibility under the uniform Evidence Acts is whether
the tendency or coincidence evidence has significant
probative value and its
probative value substantially outweighs any prejudicial effect it may have on
the defendant.
18.125 At common law, evidence of these kinds is referred to as either
‘propensity’ or ‘similar fact’ evidence,
depending on
the purpose for which it is admitted. In jurisdictions that do not apply the
uniform Evidence Acts, the admissibility
of these forms of evidence is governed
by the common law, as modified by statute in some jurisdictions.
18.126 At common law, as a matter of general principle, evidence of past
criminal conduct, including convictions (for sexual offences
or otherwise) is
not admissible unless there is a ‘striking similarity’ or
‘underlying unity’ between the
Admissibility is
governed by the test in
Pfennig v The Queen
—that is, propensity
evidence is admissible if its probative value is such that there is no rational
view of the evidence that
is consistent with the innocence of the
18.127 In Queensland, similar fact evidence must not be ruled inadmissible on
the ground ‘that it may be the result of collusion
or suggestion, and the
weight of that evidence is a question for the
18.128 In Western Australia, the
Evidence Act 1906
(WA) governs the
admissibility of propensity and relationship evidence by incorporating a
‘significant probative value’
test and a public interest
18.129 In South Australia, propensity evidence relating to a count of sexual
assault is only admissible in a joint trial if it has
relevance beyond mere
propensity. However, in deciding admissibility, the judge is not to have regard
to ‘whether or not there
is a reasonable explanation in relation to the
evidence consistent with the innocence of the accused or whether or not the
may be the result of collusion or
concoction’.
Impact in sexual
assault trials
18.130 The impact of these rules of evidence depends on the type of trial and
the type of evidence the prosecution seeks to adduce.
If there are two or more
complainants who have allegedly been sexually assaulted by the same defendant,
the prosecution is likely
to make a pre-trial application to have the counts
against the defendant heard in a joint trial, rather than separate trials. As
discussed in Chapter 17, the threshold question for holding a joint trial is
whether or not each complainant’s evidence will
be cross-admissible in
respect of the charges involving the other complainant or complainants.
18.131 If there is only one complainant, the prosecution may have evidence
from other witnesses about the defendant’s criminal
sexual behaviour with
them, or it may wish to adduce relationship evidence to explain the nature of
the relationship between the
complainant and the defendant, as well as the
context in which the sexual assault
18.132 Three aspects of the law of evidence concerning the admissibility of
tendency and coincidence evidence are problematic in sexual
assault cases. These
the ‘striking similarities’ test;
the ‘no rational view of the evidence’ test; and
excluding ‘a reasonable possibility of concoction’.
The ‘striking
similarities’ test
18.133 At common law, the cross-admissibility of the evidence of two or more
complainants is, at the outset, dependent on the evidence
similarities’.
cross-admissibility of evidence frequently arises in the child sexual assault
context where it has been argued that the ‘striking
similarities’
test ‘has been used to create artificial distinctions in relation to sex
offender behaviour’.
18.134 This artificiality is said to arise because ‘when it comes to
assessing the probative value of the evidence of child
complainants, there will
be higher or lower degrees of similarity depending on what a judge knows about
sex offending
behaviour’.
example, a trial judge who is unaware of the range of grooming and sexual
practices of child sex offenders ‘may look for
greater degrees of
similarity in the evidence compared to a judge who is aware of the variety of
ways in which … offenders
gain a child’s trust and affection and the
different sexual practices a serial offender will engage
18.135 A lower threshold for determining probative value may be
‘appropriate in child sexual assault cases where the identity
offender is not in issue, in order to capture the range of sexual and grooming
behaviours of serial
offenders’.
cases of sexual assault involve defendants known to the complainant, rather than
strangers, the identity of the accused
will not usually be a fact in issue. It
is also argued that, when applying the ‘striking similarities’ test,
have failed to recognise that any sexual practices with children
‘ought to be the sufficient similarity requirement since sex
will engage in different sexual conduct with different children depending upon
the age and sex of the child, the passivity
or resistance of the child, the
degree of grooming of, and the degree of access to, the child, the
defendant’s relationship
with the child and so
18.136 Cases such as
R v KP; Ex parte Attorney-General (Qld)
illustrate how rules on the admissibility of propensity and similar fact
evidence can frustrate legislative attempts to increase the
number of joint
This is because a
decision to hold a joint trial is dependent on the cross-admissibility of each
complainant’s evidence which,
in turn, is dependent on finding sufficient
similarities in the evidence. Recently, the culmination of the tension between
cross-admissibility
and joint or separate trials occurred in the High Court case
Phillips v The Queen
. Since this decision, the applicability of the
‘striking similarities’ test has been reinforced as the standard for
determining
the admissibility of similar fact evidence at common
18.137 Although the uniform Evidence Acts create a different regime for
admitting tendency and coincidence evidence, it can be argued
that the striking
similarities test is still used in assessing the probative value of the evidence
of two or more complainants about
a defendant’s sexual
18.138 For example, the NSW Court of Criminal Appeal has noted the similarity
between the approach under the
Evidence Act 1995
(NSW) and the common
Common law formulations,
including ‘striking similarities’ have been held to
‘guide’ the reasoning process
when determining whether tendency or
coincidence evidence has significant probative value under
the uniform Evidence
The ‘no rational view of the
evidence’ test
18.139 At common law, even if the evidence of two or more witnesses has
‘striking similarities’, it can still be excluded
because of its
prejudicial effect. In order to prevent the admission of prejudicial propensity
and similar fact evidence, the common
law developed the ‘no rational view
of the evidence test’,
adopted by a majority of the High Court in
Hoch v The Queen
to determine the admissibility of similar fact evidence, the trial judge must
apply the same test as a jury must apply in dealing
with circumstantial
evidence, and ask whether there is a rational view of the evidence that is
inconsistent with the guilt of the
18.140 The test was confirmed by a majority of the High Court in
who held that the
probative force of similar fact evidence will outweigh its prejudicial effect
only if there is no rational view
of the evidence that is consistent with the
innocence of the accused.
18.141 This test is now referred to as the
test and is the
means for determining how the probative force of the evidence and prejudicial
effect should be balanced against one
Where there is a
rational view of the evidence consistent with the accused’s innocence, the
probative force of the evidence
is automatically outweighed by its prejudicial
effect, thus removing any discretion on the part of the trial judge to admit the
18.142 Probative force and prejudicial effect must also be considered under
of the uniform Evidence Acts. In
, the NSW Court
of Criminal Appeal considered whether the
test should continue to
be applied.
The fact that
introduced a legislative formulation for balancing probative value
against prejudicial effect led Spigelman CJ to conclude that:
the continued application of a ‘no rational view’ test is not
… consistent with a statutory test which expressly
requires a balancing
process. … The reasoning in
… is, in my opinion,
inapplicable to a statutory test that probative value substantially outweighs
prejudicial effect.
A reasonable possibility of
18.143 It has been argued that, since the decision in
‘the necessity to exclude the possibility of collusion or other influence
is questionable’ when applying the balancing
uniform Evidence Acts.
case law indicates, however, that
has not removed the
issue of concoction from the admissibility equation under the uniform Evidence
18.144 Despite expectations that the courts would continue to develop the law
the need for legislative intervention, these expectations may have been
‘an overly optimistic
It has been
argued that, in sexual assault cases,
of the uniform Evidence Acts
is only likely to be satisfied ‘if a reasonable possibility of concoction
can be eliminated
if there are sufficient similarities (striking or
otherwise) between the evidence of two or more witnesses to be able to conclude
that the probative value of the evidence outweighs its prejudicial
, Spigelman CJ accepted that there ‘may well
be cases where, on the facts, it would not be open to conclude that the
value of particular evidence substantially outweighs its prejudicial
effect, unless the “no rational explanation” test
satisfied’,
these cases may include those where a trial judge considers that there is a
reasonable possibility of
concoction.
18.146 The Tasmania Law Reform Institute (TLRI) has observed that, in
practice, where a reasonable possibility of concoction is taken
into account
, this is no different from an application of the ‘no
rational view of the evidence’ test because concoction
weighs so heavily in the balance that the reality is that its existence means
that there is no balancing to be undertaken. The position
effectively remains
the same as that rejected … in
18.147 When a judge takes concoction or contamination into account, he or she
can be seen as performing the task of the jury, by assessing
the strength of the
evidence—in particular, whether or not it is
Yet ‘no other
exclusionary rule requires the court to determine the veracity of evidence as a
admission’.
18.148 The application of the ‘no rational view of the evidence’
test in sexual assault trials is seen to have ‘particular
consequences,
since where there are two or more complainants, the probative force of the
similar fact evidence is destroyed if there
is a reasonable possibility of
concoction between the
complainants’.
courts do not apply a universal standard for measuring what amounts to a
reasonable possibility of concoction.
18.149 Where two or more children give evidence about a defendant’s
sexual behaviour with them, the reliability of their evidence
is based on
whether they had the opportunity to concoct their allegations. While the
targeting and grooming strategies of serial
sex offenders are well documented in
the literature,
governing the admissibility of tendency and propensity evidence are based on the
belief that if two or more complainants
know each other then the possibility of
concoction must be ruled out for one complainant’s evidence to be
admissible in the
case of another.
18.150 This assumption is based on the common law’s traditional belief
that children are unreliable witnesses, prone to fantasy
suggestible.
This view still
prevails despite the fact that it is not supported by the psychological
literature.
Review of recent
literature shows that ‘children are highly resistant to abuse suggestions
and do not readily make up stories
of sexual abuse even when given the
opportunity to do so’.
18.151 In addition, the test for concoction does not take into account the
practical effects on complainants since in assessing the
possibility of
concoction the court will usually conduct a pre-trial hearing, at which the
complainants may be required to give
18.152 Several jurisdictions have enacted legislation to overcome problems
caused in sexual assault cases by the ‘no rational
view of the
evidence’ test and with evidence being excluded on the basis of possible
concoction.
18.153 In Queensland,
Evidence Act
governs the admissibility of similar fact evidence and leaves the question of
concoction to the jury. The provision states:
In a criminal proceeding, similar fact evidence, the probative value of which
outweighs its potentially prejudicial effect, must
not be ruled inadmissible on
the ground that it may be the result of collusion or suggestion, and the weight
of that evidence is
a question for the jury, if any.
18.154 In addition, s 597A(1AA) of the
Criminal Code
provides that, in determining whether there should be joint or separate trials
‘the court must not have regard to the
possibility that similar fact
evidence, the probative value of which outweighs its potentially prejudicial
effect, may be the result
of collusion or suggestion’.
18.155 In South Australia, reforms concerning the prosecution of sexual
assault charges were enacted in
following a review of
s 278(2a) of the
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
(SA), issues of
joinder, the ‘no rational view of the evidence’ test and concoction
are dealt with together. The provision
creates a presumption that where there
are two or more counts involving complainants, the counts are to be tried
together. A judge
may only order separate trials if the evidence of two or more
complainants is not
cross-admissible.
18.156 The ‘no rational view of the evidence’ test has been
specifically abrogated in relation to determining whether
or not evidence will
be cross-admissible. Section 278(2a)(c) states that in determining admissibility
for these purposes:
(i) evidence relating to the count may be admissible in relation to another
count concerning a different alleged victim if it has
a relevance other than
mere propensity; and
(ii) the judge is not to have regard to—
(A) whether or not there is a reasonable explanation in relation to the
evidence consistent with the innocence of the defendant;
(B) whether or not the evidence may be the result of collusion or concoction.
18.157 In Western Australia, under
Criminal Procedure
(WA), a court can only order separate trials if satisfied that
there would be a likelihood of prejudice to the accused by the joinder
more charges.
However, the
court need not automatically order separate trials of particular offences simply
because they are of a particular nature
or because evidence in relation to some
of the charges is not admissible in relation to others. Under
is open to the court
(a) to decide that any likelihood of the accused being prejudiced can be
guarded against by a direction to the jury;
(b) to so decide irrespective of the nature of the offence or offences
(c) to so decide even if—
(i) the evidence on one of the charges is inadmissible on another;
(ii) the evidence against one of the accused is not admissible against
as the case requires.
18.158 When considering the likelihood of prejudice to the accused from
joinder of charges, the court cannot take into account that
the evidence of two
or more complainants or witnesses may be the result of collusion or suggestion.
Section 133(6)
In considering, for the purposes of this section, the likelihood of an accused
being prejudiced in the trial by a jury of an indictment
that contains 2 or more
charges of a sexual nature, the court must not have regard to the possibility
that similar fact evidence,
the probative value of which outweighs its
potentially prejudicial effect, may be the result of collusion or suggestion.
18.159 This provision means that the likelihood of prejudice to which
refers cannot include prejudice associated with the possibility of
concoction by two or more complainants or witnesses. The Western
Court of Appeal has held that once the court concludes that the evidence of two
or more complainants is cross-admissible,
there is no other basis on which to
find that there would be any likelihood of prejudice and no basis for ordering
separate trials.
In other words, a finding of cross-admissibility
‘cures’ the prejudice that would otherwise result from impermissible
reasoning by the jury.
18.160 In addition, at the same time as the above reforms were enacted,
s 31A was inserted into the
Evidence Act 1906
(WA) to deal
specifically with the problems associated with admitting propensity evidence in
a joint trial.
Section 31A(2)
(2) Propensity evidence or relationship evidence is admissible in proceedings
for an offence if the court considers:
(a) that the evidence would, either by itself or having regard to other
evidence adduced or to be adduced, have significant probative
(b) that the probative value of the evidence compared to the degree of risk of
an unfair trial, is such that fair-minded people
would think that the public
interest in adducing all relevant evidence of guilt must have priority over the
risk of an unfair trial.
(3) In considering the probative value of evidence for the purposes of
subsection (2) it is not open to the court to have regard
to the possibility
that the evidence may be the result of collusion, concoction or suggestion.
18.161 Like the Queensland reforms,
removes the issue of
concoction from the admissibility equation and leaves it to the jury when
deciding the weight to be given to
The possibility of
concoction cannot be taken into account when determining whether the propensity
evidence has significant probative
This means that the
court has to take the evidence at ‘its
Nor can the
possibility of concoction be taken into account when the court is applying the
balancing test under
s 31A(2)(b)
, in particular the risk of an unfair
trial, because of the ‘quite clearly articulated legislative
purpose’ of the
Section 31A
abrogates the common law ‘no rational view of the
evidence’ test. The test introduced by
s 31A(2)(b)
is taken directly
from the balancing test suggested by McHugh J, dissenting in
Pfennig v The
This test is much
less stringent than the
In enacting
the legislature has accepted that, because of its nature, the admission of
propensity evidence will always create the risk an unfair
However, that risk
must be balanced against the competing public interests in holding a joint trial
in which all relevant evidence
18.163 The balancing test, when referring to fair-minded people, clearly
envisages the public interest in the prosecution of sexual
offences ought to be
taken into consideration when weighing up the risk of prejudice to the accused.
These considerations may be
especially important in relation to child sexual
assault since a particular complainant’s evidence will often make more
when evidence is given of the alleged serial nature of an accused’s
sexual behaviour.
18.164 None of the reforms enacted in Australia have addressed explicitly the
striking similarities test, which may still constitute
a major barrier to the
admissibility of tendency and propensity evidence and the ability to hold joint
trials. The Western Australian
reforms represent the most complete break from
the common law. By articulating a particular threshold test of
admissibility—that
the evidence must have significant probative
value—the common law striking similarities test may no longer be ‘a
criterion for
admissibility’.
Commissions’ views
18.165 In ALRC 102, the ALRC, NSWLRC and VLRC highlighted the difficult task
of formulating appropriate rules to deal with probative
but prejudicial
evidence. In relation to tendency and coincidence evidence, the Commissions
recognised ‘a stark contrast between
the policy objectives of receiving
all probative evidence, and minimising the risk of wrongful
conviction’.
18.166 In child sexual assault cases, however, it is likely to seem unfair to
victims and their families that:
in so many cases the isolation of one child pitted against an adult alleged to
be the perpetrator leads to acquittal of the adult,
when at the same time there
are other allegations of similar behaviour against the adult from other family
members not before the
Court, or when a history of such offending is known but
excluded, or when the conduct is part of an alleged wider course of conduct,
evidence of which for one reason or another is
18.167 As discussed above, a range of jurisdictions have implemented reforms
to address these concerns. The National Child Sexual
Assault Reform Committee
has reviewed the effectiveness of these reforms and concluded that the most
successful appear to be those
enacted in Western
—although in
the absence of empirical research it is not possible to determine the extent to
which, for example, the number
of joint trials has increased in Western
Australia as a result of those reforms.
18.168 The National Child Sexual Assault Reform Committee recommended a
number of reforms to deal with problems associated with holding
joint trials in
relation to child sex offences. These include a recommendation to overcome the
effect of the ‘no rational view
of the evidence’ test in
This would expressly
eliminate the issue of concoction when the court is required to decide whether
to order joint or separate trials.
18.169 The Commissions’ preliminary view is that a simpler mechanism to
achieve a similar result is to establish a presumption
of joint trial of two or
more counts joined in the same indictment (see Chapter 17).
18.170 The National Child Sexual Assault Reform Committee also made
recommendations to address the problem of admitting tendency,
coincidence
(propensity or similar fact) evidence in a trial involving only one
complainant.
Usually this
will occur when the prosecution seeks to call a witness who, while not a
complainant, can give evidence about the defendant’s
sexual behaviour with
him or her.
18.171 The Commissions agree that, because the mere possibility of concoction
can affect the admissibility of propensity and similar
fact evidence in common
law evidence jurisdictions, and because the uniform Evidence Acts do not
expressly deal with concoction and
the admissibility of tendency and coincidence
evidence, there is a need for reform in relation to this issue.
18.172 The Commissions propose that Commonwealth, state and territory
legislation should provide that, in sexual assault proceedings,
the court have
regard to the possibility that the evidence of a witness or witnesses is the
result of concoction, collusion or suggestion
when determining the admissibility
of tendency or coincidence evidence. In uniform Evidence Acts jurisdictions, the
appropriate mechanism
may be amendment of
, 98 and 101 of the
Such amendments might
provide that, in sexual assault proceedings:
for the purposes of
and 98, in considering whether the
evidence has significant probative value, the court must not have regard to the
possibility that
the evidence may be the result of collusion, concoction or
suggestion; and
for the purposes of s 101, in considering whether the probative
value of the evidence substantially outweighs its prejudicial effect,
must not have regard to the possibility that the evidence may be the result of
collusion, concoction or suggestion.
18.173 As discussed earlier,
the Commissions’ preference would be for all Australian jurisdictions to
join the uniform Evidence
Acts scheme. Failing this, however, common law
evidence jurisdictions that have not already done so should enact amendments in
procedure or evidence legislation providing that:
in a criminal proceeding, propensity evidence and similar fact
evidence must not be ruled inadmissible on the ground that it may
be the result
of concoction, collusion or suggestion; and
the weight of the propensity or similar fact evidence is a question
for the jury, if
18.174 Further
consideration may also need to be given to the continued reliance on the
striking similarities test for the admission
of tendency, coincidence,
propensity and similar fact evidence (including in uniform Evidence Acts
Sexual Assault Reform Committee considers
that without changes in the application of the test, reforms to increase the
joint trials may be
undermined.
The striking
similarities test may also impede the prosecution’s ability to adduce
evidence about the defendant’s sexual
conduct from witnesses in trials
which involve one complainant. Although there have been a number of reforms in
different jurisdictions
to increase the frequency of joint trials in relation to
sex offences, only one common law jurisdiction (Western Australia) has abandoned
striking similarities as the test for admissibility of propensity evidence.
Proposal 18–10
Commonwealth, State and territory legislation
should provide that, in sexual assault proceedings, a court should not have
the possibility that the evidence of a witness or witnesses is the
result of concoction, collusion or suggestion when determining
the admissibility
of tendency or coincidence evidence.
To what extent does the ‘striking similarities’ test
impede the ordering of joint trials in relation to sex offences?
Should the Western Australian reforms in relation to the
cross-admissibility of evidence be adopted in other
[back to top]
Relationship
18.175 If there is only one complainant, the prosecution may want to lead
evidence from other witnesses about the defendant’s
criminal sexual
behaviour with them, or it may wish to adduce relationship evidence to explain
the nature of the relationship between
the complainant and the defendant, as
well as the context in which the sexual assault occurred.
18.176 Evidence of uncharged acts of sexual misconduct is commonly referred
to as ‘relationship’, ‘context’
‘background’ evidence and is a type of circumstantial evidence.
While relationship evidence describes all conduct
‘of a sexual kind’
which is often referred to as ‘uncharged acts’, it also includes
grooming behaviours that
do not amount to an offence, such as the purchase of
gifts and non-sexual
18.177 Relationship evidence forms part of the background against which the
complainant’s and the accused’s evidence is
In a sexual assault
trial, relationship evidence may be relevant for a number of different
to provide a context or background in which to understand the
charges laid against the defendant;
because it provides a motive on the part of the defendant;
to show that the defendant had a sexual interest in the
complainant;
to explain why the complainant complied with the sexual demands of
the defendant without surprise;
to explain why the complainant failed to promptly complain; and
to explain the defendant’s confidence in committing the sexual
acts or his control over the
complainant.
18.178 Where
such evidence is admissible, it ‘cannot be used by the jury to reason
that, if the accused committed the uncharged
acts, he or she is more likely to
have committed the charged
However, the
distinction between relationship evidence and tendency evidence has been
described as ‘somewhat
artificial’
evidence which shows the ‘existence of a sexual relationship must surely
tend to show that the accused [has a tendency]
to do the sort of things the
subject of the
18.179 Nonetheless, many cases have held that evidence of uncharged sexual
behaviour between a complainant and an accused is admissible
as relationship
Relationship
evidence has a long history of being admitted in all types of criminal
18.180 In the last decade, however, the admissibility of relationship
evidence has had a conflicted history with ‘sharp divisions’
High Court about when and for what purposes such evidence should be
admissible.
This division saw
a majority attempt to restrict the admission of such evidence at common law in
Gipp v The Queen
case resulted in considerable uncertainty about the test that should be applied
to admit relationship
18.181 It is possible that this uncertainty has been resolved by the High
Court decision in
only applies to cases of child sexual assault, where lack of consent
is not one of the issues to be
and in jurisdictions
that have not overturned the ‘no rational view of the evidence’
18.182 The issues in
can broadly be summarised as follows:
(i) when and in what circumstances is evidence of uncharged acts of sexual
misconduct admissible in a child sexual assault trial;
(ii) what test applies to its admission; and
(iii) what directions or warnings should be given by a trial judge about how
the jury can use the evidence, in particular the standard
of proof to be
18.183 All seven judges accepted that there are important reasons why
evidence of uncharged acts of sexual misconduct by the defendant
ought to be
admissible in child sexual assault trials. The public policy reasons recognised
for permitting the child to give evidence
of uncharged acts
‘multiple and repeated incidents over a period of time’
are typical of the sexual abuse of children;
the impracticality or impossibility of being able to charge every
multiple incident of sexual abuse;
the importance of legal procedure to facilitate the giving of a
‘fair and coherent account’ by the complainant of what
the exclusion of evidence of uncharged acts would mean that the
complainant’s evidence of the charged acts of sexual misconduct
viewed in isolation and sometimes as if the complainant was sexually abused
‘out of the blue’;
the artificiality of attempting to ‘quarantine the charged
acts’ from other incidents;
the seriousness of child sexual assault as a crime and its
historical under-enforcement which ought not to be frustrated by
‘unjustifiably
restrictive court
procedures’;
because today’s juries are ‘better educated and more
literate’, there is less need for restrictive rules for excluding
but prejudicial evidence.
, all seven judges
agreed that uncharged acts of sexual misconduct are likely to be relevant to the
facts in issue in a child sexual
assault trial, that is, whether the defendant
committed the sexual acts that constitute the
However, the
relevance test was not considered to be a sufficient control on the
admissibility of relationship evidence by Gummow,
Kirby and Hayne JJ all of whom
agreed that, in addition to relevance, evidence of uncharged acts should not be
admissible unless
18.185 The National Child Sexual Assault Reform Committee has noted that
‘lower courts may not find it all that easy to decide
whether to apply the
approach of Gummow, Kirby and Hayne JJ, or the approach of the other four
who either did
not agree that the
test applied to relationship evidence at
or did not think the
test applied to the relationship evidence in the cases at hand
even though there may be other situations in which it would
18.186 It is questionable whether, if relationship evidence which reveals
sexual misconduct by the defendant will usually always be
admissible under the
‘no rational view of the evidence’
test, the test serves any
useful purpose.
, Kiefel J considered that only where relationship evidence is being
tendered for its tendency purpose should the
test be applied.
This is the same approach that is taken in uniform Evidence Acts jurisdictions
where the test under s 101(2) does
not apply to relationship evidence which
is tendered for a non-tendency
18.187 The National Child Sexual Assault Reform Committee proposed that,
because of the different and inconsistent approaches taken
by the judges in
to the admissibility of relationship evidence, the
test at common law should be abolished in relation to the admissibility of
relationship evidence.
would bring common law jurisdictions in line with those that do not use the test
(or the balancing test under s 101 of the uniform
Evidence Acts ) to
admit relationship evidence—that is, the uniform Evidence Acts
Commissions’ views
18.188 The Commissions are unconvinced about the need for such reforms,
especially given uncertainty over the meaning and the practical
effect of the
decision in
. Complex legislative drafting would be required to remove
doubt about the possible application of the test to relationship evidence
Queensland, South Australia and the Northern Territory. The reform would require
the development of a statutory definition of
relationship evidence and deal with
the purposes for which the evidence may be used, directions to the jury and so
18.189 In any case, the Commissions’ preference would be for all
Australian jurisdictions to join the uniform Evidence Acts
scheme, adopting the
balancing test under s 101(2) and removing the concern about the
application of a ‘no rational view of
the evidence’ test to
relationship evidence.
Should the ‘no rational view of the evidence’
) test be applied to determine the admissibility of relationship
evidence at common law?
[back to top]
Evidence of recent
and delayed complaint
18.190 Complaint evidence is a type of prior consistent statement which is
given by a witness or the complainant about when the complainant
first report of sexual assault. The common law recent complaint rule only allows
this type of evidence to be admissible
if the complaint was made at the first
reasonable opportunity after the alleged sexual assault. However, it is only
admissible for
credibility purposes, that is, to bolster the credit of the
complainant.
At common law,
evidence of recent complaint cannot be used to prove the facts in
issue—that is, whether or not the complainant
consented or the defendant
committed the alleged sexual conduct.
18.191 By the beginning of the eighteenth century, a failure to complain
immediately had evolved into a presumption of fabrication
on the part of the
rape complainant.
rule was based on ‘the belief that a rape complainant could only be
believed if she could demonstrate she had publicly
denounced the perpetrator,
rape complainants became a special category of witness whose credibility could
be boosted by evidence
complaint’.
18.192 The common law’s approach to recent complaint evidence meant
that evidence of delayed complaint was also considered to
be relevant to
credibility but for a different purpose—to undermine the
complainant’s credibility. Evidence of delayed
complaint is commonly used
by defence counsel to argue that a complainant has falsely accused the defendant
of sexual assault.
Uniform Evidence
Acts jurisdictions
Recent complaint
18.193 The recent complaint rule is no longer applicable in uniform Evidence
Acts jurisdictions. In
Papakosmas v The Queen,
the High Court held that
recent complaint evidence is relevant to the facts in issue in a sexual assault
trial, for example, whether
or not the complainant consented to have intercourse
with the appellant.
a child sexual assault trial, evidence of recent complaint is relevant to
whether or not the defendant committed the act, since
consent is not a fact in
18.194 Evidence of a complainant’s recent complaint is caught by the
exclusionary hearsay rule under
of the uniform Evidence Acts. Evidence
of the complaint may nevertheless be admissible under the first-hand hearsay
exception, where
the complainant is available to give
‘fresh in the memory’ test is satisfied.
Section 66(2)
uniform Evidence Acts states:
(2) If a person has been or is to be called to give evidence, the hearsay rule
does not apply to evidence of the representation that
is given by:
(a) that person; or
(b) a person who saw, heard or otherwise perceived the representation being
if, when the representation was made, the occurrence of the asserted fact was
fresh in the memory
of the person who made the representation (emphasis
Papakosmas v The Queen
, because evidence of recent complaint
was held to be relevant to the issue of consent and to satisfy
was admissible evidence that went before the jury. Crucially, for the
prosecution, three of the complainants’ work colleagues
were able to give
evidence not only of the complainant’s crying and distressed state after
emerging from the ladies’
toilets but also of her statements to them that
‘Papakosmas raped me’. This particular statement was held to fall
because the complainant had informed her work colleagues about
being sexually assaulted by the accused almost immediately after the
question so that the ‘fresh in the memory’ requirement was
18.196 The outcome in
Papakosmas v The Queen
was ‘a significant
development in the prosecution of sexual assault cases in uniform Evidence Acts
complaint evidence is now relevant to the issue of
that juries can use such evidence as proof of the events alleged by the
complainant. It also means that juries will not
receive a judicial direction
is likely to exist
in jurors’ minds about using recent complaint evidence
for credibility and non-credibility
Delayed complaint
Graham v The Queen
, the High Court was required to consider
the scope of the ‘fresh in the memory’ test under
of evidence of recent complaint, a witness had given evidence about the
complainant’s disclosures made six years after
the alleged sexual assault.
The High Court held that the witness’ evidence was
because the complainant had not told her friend she was sexually
abused by her father when the events were fresh in her memory. The
interpreted the word, ‘fresh’ to mean ‘recent’ or
‘immediate’ so that the lapse of
time ‘will very likely be
measured in hours or days, not, as was the case here, in
18.198 In ALRC 102, the ALRC, NSWLRC and VLRC recommended retention of the
concept of ‘fresh in the memory’ under
extension of the matters to be taken into account in determining what is
‘fresh in the memory’ to address the
restrictive interpretation in
Graham v The Queen
. The Commissions concluded that ‘understanding
of memory processes has progressed significantly’ since the uniform
Acts were first introduced and ‘the law should reflect that
knowledge’.
ALRC 102 noted research showing that
while focusing primarily on the lapse of time between an event and the making of
a representation about it might be justifiable in
relation to memory of
unremarkable events, the distinct and complex nature of memory of violent crime
indicates that the nature of
the event concerned should be considered in
deciding whether a memory is ‘fresh’ at the relevant time. The
of ‘freshness’ should not be confined to
18.199 ALRC 102 recommended that a new sub-section should be inserted
recommendation was subsequently enacted, with some re-wording, as
(2A) In determining whether the occurrence of the asserted fact was fresh in the
memory of a person, the court may take into account
all matters that it
considers are relevant to the question, including:
(a) the nature of the event concerned, and
(b) the age and health of the person, and
(c) the period of time between the occurrence of the asserted fact and the
making of the representation.
Other modifications
to the common law
18.200 Queensland, Western Australia and South Australia have enacted
provisions that address some of the problems with the recent
complaint rule at
common law.
18.201 Queensland has enacted a specific provision that applies to the
admission of out-of-court statements in sexual assault trials.
Criminal Law (Sexual Offences) Act 1978
(Qld) states:
(2) Evidence of how and when any preliminary complaint was made by the
complainant about the alleged commission of the offence by
the defendant is
admissible in evidence, regardless of when the preliminary complaint was
(3) Nothing in subsection (2) derogates from the power of the court in a
criminal proceeding to exclude evidence if the court is
satisfied it would be
unfair to the defendant to admit the evidence.
(4) If a defendant is tried by a jury, the judge must not warn or suggest in any
way to the jury that the law regards the complainant’s
evidence to be more
reliable or less reliable only because of the length of time before the
complainant made a preliminary or other
(5) Subject to subsection (4), the judge may make any comment to a jury on the
complainant’s evidence that it is appropriate
to make in the interests of
18.202 This provision does not allow evidence of the content of the statement
to be admissible, only evidence of how and when the
statement was
made—although it does allow this evidence to be admitted regardless of
when the complaint was made. Admissibility
is not dependent on the person being
available for cross-examination.
18.203 However, evidence of a preliminary complaint admitted under
is still only relevant to the complainant’s credibility so
that juries in Queensland will be instructed that they cannot use
the evidence
as proof of the facts in issue, such as lack of
This means that
Queensland has not abolished the common law recent complaint rule.
18.204 In Western Australia, a child-specific modification to the law on
hearsay evidence was enacted in
Evidence Act 1906
(WA), the admissibility of out-of-court statements
is left to the discretion of the judge, and is dependent on the child being
for cross-examination.
18.205 The aim of the provision was to allow any statement made by a child to
another person to be admissible in certain criminal
trials, including child
sexual assault trials. Arguably,
abolishes the common law recent complaint
rule because the ‘relevant statement’ is admissible if it
‘relates to
any matter in issue in the proceeding’. Evidence of a
child’s delayed complaint may be relevant to whether or not the
committed the alleged acts since it may explain why the child delayed making a
complaint and the circumstances that prompted
the disclosure.
18.206 In South Australia, a child-specific hearsay exception was enacted,
after the Chapman review of sexual assault
A substituted s 34CA of the
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
was intended ‘to facilitate the proof of sexual offences against
provision abolishes the recent complaint rule because out-of-court statements
admitted under this provision can be used to prove
the truth of the facts
18.207 Under s 34CA, to be admissible, the statement must have
sufficient probative value, the child must be called or be available
called to give evidence, and cross-examination of the child must be granted by
the court. Importantly, s 34CA does not contain
the words such as
‘regardless when the preliminary complaint was made’ (as is the case
in Queensland). This may mean
that any delay in complaint will be enough to make
the probative value of a child’s out-of-court statement less than
sufficient.
Evidence of delayed
18.208 Hearsay evidence has been considered unreliable because the maker of
the statement could not be cross-examined about its veracity.
The position at
common law is that hearsay evidence of delayed complaint will not be admissible,
unless this has been amended by
specific legislation.
18.209 The hearsay exception under
of the uniform Evidence Acts
overcomes this problem because the maker of the statement (the complainant) is
available to give evidence
and to be cross-examined about her complaint as long
as she is competent to give evidence. The relevance of evidence of delayed
‘is not to compete with the quality of the complainant’s
evidence but to illustrate the context in which she made her
disclosure and the
reasons for any
18.210 The psychological literature shows that delay is the most common
characteristic of both child and adult sexual
Since complainants
are routinely cross-examined by defence counsel about delays in complaint in
ways that suggest fabrication, ‘it
is likely that evidence about a
complainant’s first complaint would answer the type of questions that
jurors can be expected
themselves’.
18.211 In uniform Evidence Acts jurisdictions,
will, in some
cases, permit the admission of evidence of delayed complaint where the
occurrence of the events was ‘fresh in
the memory’ of the
complainant. In other cases, the ‘fresh in the memory’ requirements
will be a barrier to admissibility.
18.212 Evidence of delayed complaint may also be admissible under s 108
of the uniform Evidence Acts. The relevant part of this exception
credibility rule
(3) The credibility rule does not apply to evidence of a prior consistent
statement of a witness if:
(a) evidence of a prior inconsistent statement of
the witness has been admitted; or
(b) it is or will be suggested (either
expressly or by implication) that evidence given by the witness has been
fabricated or re-constructed
(whether deliberately or otherwise) or is the
result of a suggestion;
and the court gives leave to adduce the evidence of
the prior consistent
18.213 Where delay in complaint is used to impugn the credibility of the
complainant, s 108 can be used to admit evidence about the
including, for example, the reasons for the delay in complaint and the
surrounding circumstances.
Problems with the operation of
18.214 Some commentators have identified the operation of
uniform Evidence Acts as a problem in relation to evidence of delayed complaint.
This view has been summarised by the National
Child Sexual Assault Reform
Committee as follows:
Trial and appellate judges may consider that a complainant’s
representation is unreliable because of their young age at the
time it was made,
or because too much time has elapsed between the events in question and the
preliminary complaint. Because
does not actually change the
‘recent’ or ‘immediate’ requirement imposed by
case it is unlikely that the amendment will have the
effect of admitting evidence of delayed complaint, as a matter of
18.215 One option to avoid the ‘fresh in the memory’ requirement
would be to adopt the Queensland approach to evidence
of delayed complaint. This
would ensure that evidence of the content of, and the circumstances surrounding,
a sexual assault complaint
was admissible, regardless of the length of time
between the complaint and the alleged sexual abuse.
18.216 The Queensland approach recognises that the law has considered the
time lapse between the assault and the making of a complaint
as ‘evidence
of truthfulness and fabrication, despite the fact that delay in complaint has
been consistently found to be the
most typical feature’ of sexual
18.217 Questions have been raised about whether ‘courts and judges are
the appropriate forum and personnel to be making …
assessments’
If there are issues
of reliability, options for reform could be to ensure that a complainant is
available to be cross-examined about
their out-of-court statements and that
courts are able to give appropriate warnings to the jury.
Commissions’ views
18.218 The Commissions consider that this is an area of evidence law in which
consistency should be pursued, based on provisions that
recognise that delay in
complaint is a common characteristic of sexual assault.
18.219 Knowledge that children typically delay disclosure of sexual abuse is
one reason that evidence of a child’s delay in
complaint and its
circumstances have been held to satisfy the relevance test under the uniform
Evidence Acts.
Such evidence
rationally affects the assessment of the probability of the existence of a fact
in issue, namely whether the accused
committed the alleged sexual abuse.
18.220 The ‘fresh in the memory’ requirement under the uniform
Evidence Acts can mean that, for example, when a jury warning
is given regarding
the forensic disadvantage suffered by the defendant as a result of a delay in
complaint, evidence of when the
complaint was made, what was said and the
reasons for delay may be ‘technically inadmissible in
examination-in-chief’.
Consequently,
evidence about the delay is left to the defence to raise during
cross-examination, leaving the jury with an inaccurate impression
reasons for the complainant’s delayed disclosure and, unless addressed
during re-examination, an incomplete account
of why, when and how the
[complainant] made her or his first
18.221 One option to address these concerns would be for legislation to
provide that, where complainants in sexual assault trials
are called to give
evidence, the hearsay rule does not apply to evidence of a preliminary
complaint, regardless of when the preliminary
complaint was made. Consistently
with the Queensland provisions, a ‘preliminary complaint’ could be
defined as any complaint
(a) the complainant’s first formal witness statement to a police officer
given in, or in anticipation of, a criminal proceeding
in relation to the
alleged offence; or
(b) a complaint made after the complaint mentioned in
paragraph (a).
18.222 The mechanism for reform would be amendment of
uniform Evidence Acts in those jurisdictions. While the Commissions’
preference is for all Australian jurisdictions
to join the uniform Evidence Acts
scheme, in other jurisdictions, reforms could be enacted in criminal procedure
legislation relating
to sexual offences.
18.223 Such a reform may be
criticised, however, for attempting to amend an exception to the hearsay rule to
address concerns primarily
sexual assault cases. Evidence of a long delayed complaint is not inherently
more reliable than in-court evidence (the usual justification for exceptions to
hearsay rule). It can be seen as wrong in principle
generally, while creating a special exception for complainants in sexual assault
proceedings.
18.224 Another factor dictating against reform is that there has not been
enough time to establish whether new
of the uniform Evidence Acts
has had any impact on the admission of evidence of delayed complaint. This
amendment to the uniform
Evidence Acts was intended, in part, to address
‘special difficulties’ with the ‘fresh in the memory’
in sexual offence
Should Commonwealth, state and territory legislation provide
that, where complainants in sexual assault proceedings are called to
evidence, the hearsay rule does not apply to evidence of a preliminary
complaint, regardless of when the preliminary complaint
[back to top]
18.225 In jury trials, the judge directs the jury as to the legal rules that
it must apply to the evidence. The latter task encompasses
a responsibility to
direct the jury about any legal limits on the use it may make of the evidence
and to give an appropriate warning
or caution where there are potential
‘dangers’ involved in acting upon particular evidence. The judge may
also make comments
to what conclusions appear appropriate.
18.226 The matters about which a warning will be required are usually those
with which the court is said to have ‘special experience’
possessed by members of the jury. Warnings must therefore be given in terms
which convey that they are binding directions of
law. The duty of a trial judge
to give appropriate and adequate warnings stems from the overriding duty to
ensure a fair trial. Hence
the failure to give an appropriate jury warning may
lead to a miscarriage of
18.227 In the sexual assault context the purpose of jury warnings has changed
over time. Historically, they served to protect the
accused against an unfair
conviction. More recently, ‘legislation has been enacted to counter myths
to ensure that complainants, as well as people charged
with sexual offences, are treated
18.228 In a sexual assault trial, ‘a jury may receive a number of
different warnings and directions which focus on the unique
characteristics of
sexual assault such as delay, one witness to the offence and a lack of
corroborating evidence’.
As a result of the numerous
complex directions and warnings that may be required in sexual assault cases,
the trial judge’s
task of sufficiently directing a jury—in a manner
which is clear, intelligible, relevant, brief and insulated from
the jurors’ task of comprehending and applying each
direction are formidable.
18.229 Historically, sexual assault
complainants
were among classes
of witness considered by the common law to be inherently
unreliable.
The unreliability
of children and sexual assault complainants was considered a
matter—capable of affecting the evaluation of
the evidence—about
which judges had special knowledge or experience beyond the jury’s
appreciation.
18.230 For this reason, the common law required corroboration warnings to be
given by trial judges to juries in respect of the evidence
of both sexual
assault complainants and child witnesses. The common law corroboration warning
has two components:
the corroboration component—the caution that, as it is
dangerous to convict on a child or sexual assault complainant’s
‘uncorroborated’ evidence, it was necessary to have corroborating
evidence; and
the reliability component—the caution that, as children and
sexual assault complainants as classes of witness are unreliable,
the evidence
of a particular child or complainant had to be treated with
18.231 Corroboration
warnings about the potential unreliability of categories of witnesses are now
recognised as discriminatory and
based on prejudice rather than empirical
Statutory response to the corroboration
18.232 All Australian jurisdictions have enacted legislation abolishing the
mandatory requirement to warn the jury that it is dangerous
uncorroborated evidence. In South Australia and the Northern Territory the
provisions abolish the mandatory requirement
only with respect to the
uncorroborated evidence of child
whereas in the
other jurisdictions the provisions have general application to uncorroborated
18.233 This statutory response to the common law requirement to give a
corroboration warning recognises that the typical sexual assault
offence takes
place in private, without other
corroboration for an assault may exist by way of ‘an admission, DNA
evidence, medical evidence, recent complaint, or
tendency evidence … for
the most part, particularly in child sexual assault matters, such evidence may
18.234 These provisions do not prohibit a warning that it would be dangerous
to convict on uncorroborated evidence—only the
requirement to give such a
In addition, trial
judges retain their general powers and obligations to give appropriate warnings
‘necessary to avoid the
perceptible risk of miscarriage of justice arising
from the circumstances of the
Statutory response to the reliability
18.235 Judges in the uniform Evidence Acts jurisdictions are obliged to give
a warning in respect of evidence that may be unreliable,
including several
broadly described categories of evidence, unless there is good reason for not
As s 165 of
the uniform Evidence Acts concerns warnings in respect of
categories of
, rather than
of witnesses
, it is not of
immediate relevance to the present
discussion.
18.236 In all Australian jurisdictions, except for Queensland, a judge is
prohibited from warning or suggesting to the jury that children
as a class are
unreliable witnesses.
statutory response addresses the misconception that the evidence of children is
inherently less reliable than that of adults.
18.237 New South Wales, Victoria, the ACT and the Northern
have enacted
legislation pursuant to which a judge must not warn, or suggest in any way to,
the jury that it is unsafe to convict
on the uncorroborated evidence of a
complainant because the law regards complainants as an unreliable class of
witness. These provisions
were enacted to mirror the prohibition on the warning
that children as a class are unreliable witnesses, and prevent judges from
stating or suggesting to the jury that complainants in sexual assault
proceedings are unreliable witnesses as a
18.238 These provisions do not prevent a judge from making any comment on
evidence given in a trial that it is appropriate to make
in the interests of
justice—for example, warning that a particular child’s or
complainant’s evidence, or the particular
circumstances of the witness,
may affect the reliability of that evidence.
Murray warning
18.239 One warning that may be given by a trial judge pursuant to their
common law powers is the
warning cautions about the danger of convicting on the uncorroborated
evidence of a sexual assault complainant—including a child
complainant—and is frequently given in sexual assault trials, if requested
by the defence.
warning is generally to the effect that:
where there is only one witness asserting the commission of the crime, the
evidence of that witness must be scrutinised with great
care before a conclusion
is arrived at that a verdict of guilty should be brought
18.240 The legislation that now prohibits a judge from stating or suggesting
to a jury that complainants in sexual offence proceedings
are unreliable
witnesses as a class may have been enacted with the parliamentary intention of
relieving a trial judge from giving
However, because
those provisions are directed at warnings that refer to complainants of sexual
offences as an unreliable class of
witness and not whether the evidence of one
witness must be scrutinised with great care, it is unlikely that such provisions
the trial judge from giving the
18.241 Criticisms of the
warning include that it:
is ‘superfluous where the complainant’s unreliability
[is] obvious or useless where the complainant [is] a skilled and
is ‘patently
is supported by a rationale that is inconsistent with the
psychological literature;
potentially undermines a complainant’s evidence and
perpetuates myths about
may be interpreted by jurors as an invitation to
18.242 It is open to question whether the standard directions
regarding the burden and standard of proof adequately address the situation
where the only evidence comes from the complainant. Some commentators argue the
warning is unnecessary given the judge will direct
the jury not to convict
unless they are satisfied of the guilt of the accused beyond reasonable
Other sources suggest
warning is a useful reinforcement of the direction on the
standard of proof.
view questions what the
warning actually means and suggests that
it is likely to confuse jurors as to whether there is a difference between being
beyond reasonable doubt’ and ‘scrutinising the
evidence with great
Commissions’ view
18.243 There is general support for the legislative provisions which prohibit
a judge from warning or suggesting to the jury that
children as a class are
unreliable witnesses.
Commissions’ view is that similar prohibitions should also be extended to
complainants in sexual assault cases. As the
NSW Criminal Justice Sexual
Offences Taskforce commented:
this would prevent a general warning being given about scrutinising the evidence
of the complainant with great care, simply because
he or she is alleging sexual
assault. However, where there is specific evidence, which suggests that aspects
of a complainant’s
evidence may be unreliable, a comment may still be made
Proposal 18–11
Commonwealth, state and territory legislation
should prohibit a judge in any sexual assault proceeding from:
(a) warning a jury, or making any suggestion to a jury, that complainants as
a class are unreliable witnesses; and
(b) warning a jury of the danger of convicting on the uncorroborated
evidence of any complainant.
18.244 Common law assumptions in relation to sexual assault complainants
included that ‘sexual assault complainants are among
the classes of
witness considered by the common law to be inherently unreliable’ and that
‘a genuine sexual assault victim
would make a complaint at the first
opportunity and the failure to do so was considered relevant to the
complainant’s
credibility’.
18.245 These assumptions have since been discredited by
Delay in complaint
is now known to be a typical feature of reporting sexual assault. In response to
such research, legislative provisions
were enacted in a number of jurisdictions
to ‘remove the common law requirement that trial judges warn juries that
be unwise or dangerous to convict an accused of a sexual offence on the
basis of the uncorroborated evidence of the
complainant’.
Legislation was also enacted to ‘require the trial judge to warn the jury
that delay in complaint does not necessarily indicate
that the allegation is
false and that a person may have a good reason for delaying in making a
complaint’.
18.246 Arguably, these legislative reforms have subsequently been undermined
by the High Court in
Longman warning
warning has been described as the warning required
to be given to a jury in cases where there has been a substantial delay between
the time of the alleged offence and the complaint. In
complaint was made more than 20 years after the alleged offence. In general
requires that the jury be warned that, because of the
passage of a number of years, it would be ‘dangerous to convict’
the complainant’s evidence alone unless the jury is satisfied of its truth
and accuracy, having scrutinised the complainant’s
evidence with great
The rationale for the
warning is that a significant delay puts the accused at a forensic disadvantage
because he has lost the ‘means
of testing the complainant’s
allegations which would have been open to him had there been no
warning has attracted a great deal of comment and
including that:
the combined effect of
and subsequent High Court
has been to ‘give
rise to an irrebuttable presumption that the delay
prevented the
accused from adequately testing and meeting the complainant’s
result, trial judges are required to give the warning irrespective of whether
the accused has in fact been prejudiced or
suffered a forensic
disadvantage;
warning the jury in the terms that it would or may be
‘dangerous or unsafe’ to convict ‘risks being perceived as
not too subtle encouragement by the trial judge to
encroaching improperly on the fact-finding task of the jury;
the actual length of delay which necessitates the giving of a
a practice has developed of giving the
‘appeal-proof’ trial judges’ directions even if it is
unnecessary in the particular
the warning is given even where there is corroboration of the
complainant’s
warning also raises a range of other issues in relation to
perpetuating myths and misconceptions about sexual assault and discriminatory
attitudes to women and children. For example, at common law the
warning focuses on the evidence of the complainant, rather than the
disadvantage suffered by the
The warning
continues to link delay in complaint with the complainant’s credibility
and reflects discredited assumptions as
to the reliability of memory,
particularly that of
Uniform Evidence Acts approach
18.250 In ALRC 102, the ALRC, NSWLRC and VLRC identified two options for
reform to address the concerns raised in relation to the
to legislate to abolish the warning in its entirety; or to legislate to clarify,
modify or limit its
18.251 Ultimately the ALRC and the VLRC, but not the NSWLRC, recommended
the uniform Evidence Acts be amended to provide that where a request is made by
a party, and the court is satisfied that the party
has suffered significant
forensic disadvantage as a result of delay, an appropriate warning may be
The provision should make it clear that the mere passage of time does
not necessarily establish forensic disadvantage and that a judge
may refuse to
give a warning if there are good reasons for doing so.
No particular form of
words need to be used in giving the warning. However, in warning the jury, the
judge should not suggest that
it is ‘dangerous to convict’ because
of any demonstrated forensic
disadvantage.
18.252 The recommendation was subsequently enacted as
Evidence Act 1995
Evidence Act 1995
18.253 In its 2008 consultation paper on jury directions, the VLRC considered
of the uniform Evidence Acts provides a satisfactory
approach to warning the jury in relation to the forensic disadvantage because
delay and whether such a warning continues to be necessary, or the matter ought
to be left to counsel to
The VLRC concluded
Evidence Act 2008
(Vic) appropriately deals with
warnings because:
Section 165B
provides that the judge must be satisfied that the accused has
suffered forensic disadvantage because of the delay before giving
warning. The judge is probably better placed than the jury to make this
threshold assessment. If the judge makes this
determination he or she must
inform the jury of the nature of the disadvantage and instruct them to take it
into account when considering
their verdict.
Section 165B
Evidence Act
is activated by a request from counsel
for a warning. The trial judge has a discretionary power to refuse to give a
warning which
has been requested when satisfied that ‘there are good
reasons for not doing so’. This approach is consistent with our
recommendations concerning all directions other than those which are
18.254 Dr Anne Cossins
identified a number of weaknesses and limitations in the operation of
the uniform Evidence Acts. The limitations arise because:
‘does not affect any other power of the judge to give
any warning to, or to inform, the
means, trial judges are still able to give a
warning; and
warning is mandatory in nature whereas a
warning is dependent on an application by ‘a
‘the defendant’
in the Commonwealth, Victorian and the ACT jurisdictions.
number of issues may arise in practice as a result. For example, in NSW, a
circumstance may arise where the prosecution makes
application for a s 165B
warning to be given and the defence reminds the judge of the mandatory nature of
warning. In this instance the trial judge may give both a
warning and a s 165B warning, although it is more likely that the
judge will refuse to give the s 165B warning on the basis that
warning will instead be
Where there is a
conviction, it is unlikely that the defence would appeal against the failure by
a trial judge to give the less advantageous
s 165B warning. In the
Commonwealth and Victorian jurisdictions, where a warning under s 165B is
dependent on a request by the defendant,
it is doubtful whether the defence
would make such a request as an alternative to the more advantageous
Options for reform
18.256 The Queensland Law Reform Commission (QLRC) has proposed and the TLRI
has recommended the enactment of legislative provisions
to override the
warning in terms which are broadly consistent with the uniform
Evidence Acts approach.
TLRI recommendation has not yet been implemented.
18.257 South Australia has pursued an alternative reform option by enacting
Evidence Act 1929
Section 34CB
Evidence Act
(SA) was enacted with the clear intention of abolishing the
Arguably, however, the drafting abolishes the trial judge’s obligation to
warning, without limiting the power to give the warning
by providing:
(1) A rule of law or practice obliging a judge in a trial of a charge of an
offence to give a warning of a kind known as a Longman
18.258 As a result,
Evidence Act 1929
(SA) differs from
s 165B of the uniform Evidence Acts to the extent that it abolishes the
trial judge’s obligation to give
warning. In practice,
however, the provisions may differ little in the extent to which they regulate
the trial judge’s general
power to give a
The key distinction
which emerges between s 165B of the uniform Evidence Acts and
Evidence Act 1929
(SA) is that under the uniform Evidence Acts, a judge
may be obliged to give a
warning—irrespective of whether a
s 165B warning is requested—whereas a judge under
Evidence Act 1929
(SA) is not obliged to give a
18.259 Other points of difference between s 165B of the uniform Evidence Acts
Evidence Act 1929
(SA) include that:
a judge under the uniform Evidence Acts is not obliged to give a
s 165B direction to the jury if it is not
whereas a judge
Evidence Act 1929
(SA) must do so if the court
is of the opinion ‘that the period of time that has elapsed between the
alleged offending and
the trial has resulted in a significant forensic
disadvantage to the
defendant’;
a judge under the uniform Evidence Acts provision has a discretion
to refuse to give a warning relating to delay where the defendant
forensically disadvantaged if there are good reasons for doing
whereas no such
‘let out’ clause is available to a judge under
Evidence Act 1929
the uniform Evidence Acts do not explicitly require that the
direction given must be specific to the circumstances of the particular
whereas the South Australian provision makes explicit this
requirement.
18.260 The National Child Sexual Assault Reform Committee has
proposed an alternative provision to address the inadequacies of s 165B
uniform Evidence Acts.
Committee proposes that the defendant show—on the balance of
probabilities—that he has suffered ‘actual forensic
disadvantage’ before the court is required to give a s 165B warning
or instruction to the jury.
The Committee also proposes that s 165B should prescribe the exact wording of
the warning and prohibit any other form of words being
The Committee also
stated that s 165B should require the trial judge to give reasons for not giving
a warning and should explicitly
abrogate the court’s power to give a
Commissions’ views
18.261 The Commissions agree with the view expressed by the VLRC, that s 165B
of the uniform Evidence Acts provides a satisfactory
approach to the problems
warnings. The Commission proposes that all states and
territories that have not already done so should adopt provisions consistent
with s 165B.
18.262 The Commissions are interested, however, in further comments on the
operation in practice of s 165B of the uniform Evidence
Acts in sexual
assault proceedings—particularly those involving offences perpetrated in a
family violence context.
Proposal 18–12
Commonwealth, state and territory legislation
should provide that:
(a) if the court, on application by the defendant, is satisfied that the
defendant has suffered a significant forensic disadvantage
because of the
consequences of delay, the court must inform the jury of the nature of the
disadvantage and the need to take that
disadvantage into account when
considering the evidence;
(b) the judge need not comply with (a) if there are good reasons for not
doing so; and
(c) no particular form of words needs to be used in giving the warning
pursuant to (a), but in warning the jury, the judge should
not suggest that it
is ‘dangerous to convict’ because of any demonstrated forensic
disadvantage.
What issues arise in practice pursuant to s 165B of the uniform
Evidence Acts? Is the s 165B(5) abrogation of the trial judge’s
obligation and power to give a
warning sufficiently
Crofts warning
warning originates from a jury direction mandated by
the High Court in
Kilby v The
Kilby v The
, the High Court observed that evidence of recent complaint is not
evidence of the facts alleged, but goes to the credibility of the
complainant as
it demonstrates consistency of conduct. However, the court also held as a
corollary that where there has been a failure
to make a complaint at the
earliest available opportunity, this fact may be used to impugn the credibility
of the complainant.
v The Queen
therefore endorsed a court direction to juries that delay or
absence of complaint could be used as a factor in determining a
complainant’s
credibility—known as the
18.264 Legislation, including s 61(1)(b) of the
Crimes Act 1958
was subsequently passed in a number of Australian jurisdictions to require the
judge to warn the jury that a delay in making
a complaint of sexual assault does
not necessarily mean that the allegation is
Although such
provisions were designed to remove stereotypes as to the unreliability of
evidence given by sexual assault complainants,
their protective effects have
arguably been negated by the High Court decision in
Crofts v The
Crofts v The Queen
, the complainant reported that she had
been sexually assaulted by a family friend over a period of six years, and made
a complaint
six months after the last assault. The trial judge directed the
jury, as required by s 61(1)(b) of the
Crimes Act 1958
(Vic), that delay
in complaint did not necessarily indicate that the allegation of sexual assault
was false and that there were good
reasons why a complainant might delay making
a complaint.
18.266 The High Court held that s 61(1)(b) does not preclude the court from
direction or from commenting that delay in complaint of
sexual assault may affect the credibility of the complainant. It considered
the purpose of s 61(1) and like provisions is to ‘restore the
balance’ and rid the law of stereotypical notions
as to the unreliability
of sexual assault complainants, but not to immunise complainants from critical
comment where necessary in
order to secure a fair trial for the accused.
18.267 The Court held that a
direction must be given where the
delay is ‘substantial’. Two qualifications were placed on this
requirement: first,
the direction need not be given where the facts of the case
and the conduct of the trial do not suggest the need for a direction
the balance of fairness (for example, where there is an explanation for the
delay); and secondly, the warning must not
be expressed in terms that suggest a
stereotyped view that sexual assault complainants are
unreliable.
18.268 As a result, subject to the two qualifications, where a trial judge
gives the jury the statutory direction that delay in complaint
necessarily indicate that the allegation is false and that there may be good
reasons why a victim of sexual assault hesitates
in complaining about it,
the judge should also consider
giving the direction that ‘delay in complaint may be taken into account in
evaluating the evidence
of the complainant and in determining whether or not to
believe the
complainant’.
18.269 As with the
warning, the
warning has
attracted a great deal of comment and
Major criticisms
warning include
It has produced uncertainty about when a judge is to direct the jury
that it is entitled to take into account delay in assessing
complainant’s
credibility.
As a result, to
limit the risk of a successful appeal on the basis of a potential miscarriage of
justice, trial judges ‘as
a general rule’ direct in this way
irrespective of whether the complainant is the sole witness and even where
reasons have
been advanced for the delay in
It requires trial judges to give competing and apparently
contradictory statutory and common law warnings. That is, ‘to balance
explanation that evidence of a failure to complain of an assault, at the
earliest reasonable opportunity, does not necessarily
mean that the complaint
was untrue, (s 107
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
), with a direction that
the jury can take that delay into account as reducing the complainant’s
credibility’.
unnecessary complexity may confuse jurors and render the warnings
meaningless.
The near mandatory nature of the requirement to direct the jury that
it is entitled to take delay into account in assessing the complainant’s
credibility risks ‘undermining the purpose of the legislative provisions
which was to avoid misconceptions about the behaviour
of victims of sexual
The premise on which the
warning is given reflects
discredited assumptions as to the nature of sexual assault and the behaviour of
sexual assault complainants.
It may be misleading and unfairly disadvantageous
to a complainant to give a
warning ‘if there is no
evidentiary basis for suggesting a nexus between delay and fabrication of the
complaint’.
18.270 The VLRC’s 2004 report
recommended an
amendment to s 61 of the
Crimes Act 1958
(Vic) which was
subsequently enacted as s 61(1)(b)(ii):
[the judge] must not warn, or suggest in any way to, the jury that the
credibility of the complainant is affected by the delay unless,
application of the accused, the judge is satisfied that there is
tending to suggest that the credibility of the complainant is so
affected to justify the giving of such a
18.271 The National Child Sexual Assault Reform Committee criticised the
amendment because it did ‘not abolish the
warning, nor
specify what amounts to ‘sufficient
commentators consider that the words ‘sufficient evidence’ do
‘not make clear the standard of persuasion
or standard of proof
have also criticised the Victorian amendments on the basis that they could be
interpreted as simply enacting
they make provision for the trial judge to warn where he or she is
‘satisfied that there exists sufficient evidence in the
particular case to
justify such a warning’. The facts of
itself, as viewed by
the High Court, arguably satisfy this
18.272 Despite the shortcomings of the Victorian amendment, the NSW Criminal
Justice and Sexual Offences Taskforce recommended an
amendment in similar
That recommendation
was subsequently enacted as
s 294(2)(c)
Criminal Procedure Act
Section 294(2)
additionally requires the judge to warn the
jury that absence of complaint or delay in complaining does not necessarily
that the allegation that the offence was committed is false.
18.273 In ALRC 102, the ALRC, NSWLRC and VLRC noted that the
warning ‘is highly problematic as it reflects assumptions about sexual
assault complainants which are outdated and empirically
unsustainable’.
ALRC, NSWLRC and VLRC concluded that the problems created by the
warning should be
dealt with in offence-specific legislation and judicial and practitioner
education on the ‘nature of sexual
assault, including the context in which
sexual offences typically occur, and the emotional, psychological and social
impact of sexual
18.274 Following the Chapman inquiry into sexual assault laws in South
Evidence Act 1929
(SA) was enacted.
Section 34M(1)
abolishes the
directions.
Section 34M(2)
states that
no suggestion or statement may be made to the jury that a failure to make, or a
delay in making, a complaint of a sexual offence
is of itself of probative value
in relation to the alleged victim’s credibility or consistency of conduct.
18.275 Evidence relating to how and why the complainant made his or her
complaint, and to whom, is
inadmissible.
evidence is admitted, the judge must direct the jury that:
(a) it is admitted—
(i) to inform the jury as to how the allegation first came to light; and
(ii) as evidence of the consistency of conduct of the alleged victim; and
(b) it is not admitted as evidence of the truth of what was alleged; and
there may be varied reasons why the alleged victim of a sexual offence has made
a complaint of the offence at a particular time
or to a particular person,
but that, otherwise, it is a matter for the jury to determine the
significance (if any) of the evidence in the circumstances of the
18.276 Concerns arising in respect of
Evidence Act
(SA) include:
whether the words ‘of itself’ under
‘that a delay in complaint together with
might be used to make such a suggestion to the jury about delay in
complaint’;
that the instructions in relation to the manner in which the judge
must direct the jury are ‘much less informative compared
directions in other jurisdictions, such as
Procedure Act 1986
where the defence, during its closing address, uses any delay in
complaint as evidence of fabrication and the trial judge does not
explain the delay—that is, that there may be good reasons why a victim
delays their complaint and what the reasons
are in a particular case—it is
likely that directing the jury that it is a matter for them to determine what
significance,
if any, should be given to the evidence of the complainant’s
complaint invites the jury to engage in
18.277 The VLRC has again recently reviewed, and the NSWLRC and
QLRC are currently reviewing, their jurisdictions’ statutory
responses to
18.278 In its 2009 report on jury directions, the VLRC noted that s 61
Crimes Act 1958
(Vic) ‘acknowledges that there may be cases
where the credibility of the complainant is affected by delay in making a
complaint’.
In order to avoid that acknowledgment being used to justify a
mandatory warning ‘the legislation describes the circumstances
warning may be given and its content’:
First, the Act requires a direction that there may be good reasons why a victim
might delay or hesitate to complain. Secondly, the
Act prohibits judges from
telling the jury that the complainant’s credibility may be affected by
delay in complaint unless
first satisfied there is ‘sufficient
evidence’ to justify such a warning. The common law powers of a trial
judge to give
the jury a warning and to comment on the evidence ‘in the
interests of justice’ have not been disturbed, except that
the judge must
not comment on the reliability of a complainant’s evidence ‘if there
is no reason to do so in a particular
proceeding’.
18.279 The VLRC commented that it was questionable whether s 61 limits
the circumstances in which the judge is to direct the jury
that it is entitled
to take into account delay in assessing the complainant’s
credibility.
18.280 The main issue the VLRC identified was in relation to the
‘extent to which the judge should be involved in giving the
directions about the credibility of the
complainant’.
questioned whether a threshold assessment about ‘sufficient
evidence’ by the judge on the question of credibility
justified when it is the task of the jury to assess the credibility of witnesses
and decide whether they accept or
reject their
VLRC’s final view was that:
the trial judge should not be obliged to give the jury directions about delayed
complaint but should have a discretionary power to
give appropriate directions
to correct statements by counsel that conflict with the evidence or are based
upon stereotypical assumptions
18.281 The advantages of this approach are said to include that it: better
acknowledges the adversarial nature of the criminal trial
process and is more
consistent with the roles of judge and jury; is consistent with the
simplification of the law; and overcomes
the problem of juries having to
understand and apply directions about delay which appear contradictory and which
may suggest to the
jury that the evidence of the complainant has no probative
18.282 In its 2008 consultation paper on jury directions, the NSWLRC asked
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
sufficient to address ‘the issue of what (if any) warning judges should
give the jury on the impact of delay on the
complainant’s
credibility’.
NSWLRC considered the competing arguments in respect of
one hand, it is considered that to prevent a judge from warning a jury that
‘delay in complaining is relevant to the
victim’s credibility unless
there is sufficient evidence to justify such a
‘simply a reiteration of the High Court’s ruling in
other hand, reinforcing the ‘sufficient evidence’ requirement may
serve to prevent judges from ‘indiscriminately
direction for the main purpose of “appeal-proofing” the case,
particularly in cases where there was in fact no delay,
or where there are
indisputably good reasons for a
18.283 In Queensland,
Criminal Law (Sexual Offences) Act
(Qld) provides that the
warning cannot be
The main criticism of
this response is that ‘it does not allow the judge to make any comment
that might be warranted in the
light of comments by the parties, especially
defence counsel’.
means, for example, where defence counsel have raised the issue of delay in
relation to a complainant’s credibility in
cross-examination or during
their address to the jury, the judge may be prevented from commenting that there
may be good reasons
for delay in complaint. As such
may produce less fair
outcomes for complainants—particularly where little evidence is adduced by
the prosecution about the
reason for the complainant’s delay in
complaint—than the current s 61 of the
Crimes Act 1958
approach to jury warnings.
18.284 To address this concern, the QLRC’s discussion paper proposes an
amendment to
to give judges the power to ‘give appropriate directions
to correct statements by counsel that conflict with the evidence or
upon stereotypical assumptions about reporting of sexual
Commissions’ views
18.285 The Commissions propose two options for reform. The first option would
be for the Commonwealth, states and territories to develop
legislation modelled
on the VLRC’s recommendation.
18.286 Legislation would provide that, in any trial for a sexual offence, the
issue of the effect of any delay in complaint, or absence
of complaint, on the
credibility of the complainant should be a matter for argument by counsel and
for determination by the jury
and that ‘the trial judge must not give a
direction regarding the effect of delay in complaint, or absence of complaint,
the credibility of the complainant, unless satisfied it is necessary to do so
in order to ensure a fair trial’. If evidence
is given, or comments made,
that tend ‘to suggest that the person against whom the offence is alleged
to have been committed
either delayed making, or failed to make, a complaint in
respect of the offence, the judge must tell the jury that there may be good
reasons why a victim of a sexual offence of that kind may delay making or fail
to make a complaint in respect of the
18.287 The second option would be for legislation modelled on elements of
Criminal Law (Sexual Offences) Act 1978
(Qld), including the
amendment proposed by the QLRC, and s 61(1) of the
Crimes Act 1958
(Vic). Such legislation would provide that, in any trial for a sexual offence,
must inform the jury that there may be good reasons why a victim of
a sexual assault may delay or hesitate in complaining about
must not warn or suggest in any way to the jury that the law regards
the complainant's evidence to be more reliable or less reliable
only because of
the length of time before the complainant made a preliminary or other
maintains a discretion to give appropriate directions to correct
statements by counsel that conflict with the evidence or are based
stereotypical assumptions about reporting of sexual
maintains a discretion to comment on the reliability of the
complainant’s evidence in the particular case if they consider
appropriate to do so in the ‘interests of
warnings about the effect of delay on the credibility of complainants are still
necessary in sexual offence cases, the Commissions
consider that this second
option creates a model which overcomes the shortcomings of the provisions from
which it is derived.
18.289 Paragraph (a) of the second proposed option (set out below)—that
is, the direction in relation to ‘good reason
for delay’—has
been criticised because it may encourage the jury to speculate on the
Such directions were
originally introduced to eliminate unwarranted misconceptions about the
unreliability of the evidence of sexual
assault complainants and to assist the
jury to gain an understanding of the complainant’s
As long periods of
delay are not uncommon in cases of child sexual assault in a family context (for
a range of reasons), the retention
of the ‘good reason for delay’
direction may be particularly justified in those cases.
18.290 Paragraph (b) of the second option clearly prevents the
warning from being given. Paragraphs (c) and (d) of the second option proposal
act as ‘let out’ clauses in response to
the strict prohibition on
the giving of a
warning by paragraph (b). These provisions permit
trial judges to redress statements by defence counsel where the fact of delay is
used to undermine the credibility of the complainant’s account in
cross-examination or in addressing the jury; and preserve
the common law powers
of a trial judge to give the jury a warning and to comment on the evidence
‘in the interests of justice’.
Are warnings about the effect of delay on the credibility of
complainants necessary in sexual assault
proceedings?
Proposal 18–13
Commonwealth, state and territory legislation
should provide that, in sexual assault proceedings:
(a) (i) the issue of any delay in complaint, or absence of complaint, on
the credibility of the complainant should be a matter for
argument by counsel
and for determination by the jury;
(ii) subject to paragraph (iii), save for identifying the issue for the
jury and the competing contentions of counsel, the trial
judge must not give a
direction regarding the effect of delay in complaint, or absence of complaint,
on the credibility of the complainant,
unless satisfied it is necessary to do so
in order to ensure a fair trial; and
(iii) if evidence is given, or a question is asked, or a comment is made
that tends to suggest that the person against whom the
offence is alleged to
have been committed either delayed making or failed to make a complaint in
respect of the offence, the judge
must tell the jury that there may be good
reasons why a victim of a sexual offence may delay making or fail to make a
complaint in
respect of the offence.
(b) the judge:
(i) must inform the jury that there may be good reasons why a victim of a
sexual assault may delay or hesitate in complaining about
(ii) must not warn or suggest in any way to the jury that the law regards
the complainant’s evidence to be more reliable
or less reliable only
because of the length of time before the complainant made a preliminary or other
(iii) maintains a discretion to give appropriate directions to correct
statements by counsel that conflict with the evidence or
are based upon
stereotypical assumptions about reporting of sexual offences; and
(iv) maintains a discretion to comment on the reliability of the
complainant’s evidence in the particular case if the judge
considers it is
appropriate to do so in the interests of justice.
[back to top]
Cross-examination
18.291 Cross-examination
is a feature of the adversarial process and is designed, among other things, to
allow the defence to confront
and undermine the prosecution’s case by
exposing deficiencies in a witness’ testimony, including the
complainant’s
testimony. Under the common law, the uniform Evidence Acts
and other legislation, limitations have been placed on inappropriate and
offensive questioning under cross-examination. It has been argued, however, that
the effect of these provisions in practice has not
provided a sufficient degree
of protection for complainants in sexual assault proceedings. The following
briefly discusses the cross-examination of children and other
vulnerable witnesses in sexual assault cases; and
examines issues concerning cross-examination where the defendant is
not represented by a
Cross-examination
of children and vulnerable witnesses
Cossins has documented inquiries relating to the prosecution
of child sex offences, and children as witnesses within the criminal
system over the last 14
This found that
cross-examination is one of the most difficult parts of testifying for children;
children are subject to complex,
developmentally inappropriate and repetitive
questioning and questioning deliberately designed to confuse and create
inconsistencies;
and the powers of judicial officers to intervene to prevent
improper questioning are either ‘exercised sparingly’ or
have no effect on defence counsel
questioning.
18.293 Unless they have a cognitive impairment, adults are much less
vulnerable than children during cross-examination. Nonetheless,
they can be
subject to the same types of leading, repetitive, aggressive, intimidating and
humiliating questions as children. There
is, however, much less information
available about the impact of cross-examination on adult sexual assault
complainants, particularly
recent information. Because of the extent of juror
misconceptions about how women and children respond to sexual assault,
cross-examination
is likely to play a central role in confirming the
pre-existing attitudes and beliefs of
Current law
18.294 In NSW, reforms for controlling cross-examination were enacted in
2005, under
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
(NSW). This
reform imposed a positive duty on the court ‘to intervene in relation to a
range of improper questions, irrespective
of whether or not the other party
objection’.
18.295 Similar provisions were subsequently adopted under
uniform Evidence Acts (except in Victoria). When recommending, in ALRC 102, that
such a duty should be enacted, the ALRC,
the NSWLRC and the VLRC considered the
duty was necessary to: protect vulnerable witnesses from improper questioning,
ensure ‘the
best evidence is received by the court’, and overcome
judges’ long-standing reluctance to intervene in
cross-examination.
18.296 The provisions applying at Commonwealth level, and in NSW and the ACT,
apply to all witnesses, not just vulnerable ones. A
disallowable question is a
question that:
(a) is misleading or confusing, or
(b) is unduly annoying, harassing,
intimidating, offensive, oppressive, humiliating or repetitive, or
to the witness in a manner or tone that is belittling, insulting or otherwise
inappropriate, or
(d) has no basis other than a stereotype (for example, a
stereotype based on the witness’s sex, race, culture, ethnicity, age
mental, intellectual or physical
disability).
18.297 The VLRC did not agree that s 41 should apply to all witnesses.
Rather, it concluded that ‘a specific duty in relation
to vulnerable
witnesses offers the best prospect of changing the culture of judicial
non-intervention’.
Subsequently, the
Evidence Act 2008
(Vic) enacted provisions, in similar
terms, but specific to vulnerable witnesses, defined to include persons: under
the age of 18
years; who have a cognitive impairment or an intellectual
disability; or whom the court considers to be vulnerable, having regard
characteristics of the witness and the context in which the questions are
18.298 Apart from South
Australian jurisdiction places a positive duty on the court to disallow improper
Further reform
18.299 Perceived problems with the reluctance of judicial officers to
intervene to protect witnesses in criminal trials and to control
cross-examination have led to proposals for further reform of vulnerable witness
protections. For example, Cossins and the National
Child Sexual Assault Reform
Committee have set out a range of recommendations aimed at enabling children to
give their best evidence
in sexual assault trials. These include recommendations
prohibit suggestive questions or statements that are designed to
persuade the child to agree with the proposition or suggestion put
prohibit asking the same question or making the same statement more
prohibit questions or statements made by the defence that directly
accuse the child of lying or being a liar;
place restrictions on the use of prior inconsistent statements by
the defence; and
introduce court-appointed intermediaries (social workers,
psychologists or other relevant professionals) trained in child cognition,
language and development to assess defence questions during the
cross-examination of a child
complainant.
18.300 SCAG is developing, through the Evidence Working Group and
Parliamentary Counsels’ Committee, proposed amendments to
the uniform
Evidence Acts dealing with vulnerable witness provisions. Model provisions are
expected to be drafted later in 2010.
18.301 The Terms of Reference instruct the ALRC, in undertaking this inquiry,
to be ‘careful not to duplicate … the work
being undertaken through
SCAG on the harmonisation of uniform evidence laws, in particular the
development of model … vulnerable
witness protections’. For this
reason, the Commissions do not make any proposals for reform of vulnerable
witness provisions
at this stage.
Unrepresented
18.302 Every Australian jurisdiction, with the exception of Tasmania, has
enacted legislation to place restrictions on the cross-examination
complainants in sexual offence proceedings by unrepresented
defendants.
18.303 In some jurisdictions this protection is only afforded to child
complainants and child
broader range of legal proceedings and/or wider
Australia the court’s power to prohibit personal cross-examination by the
defendant is discretionary (albeit for
a wider class of witness across a range
of criminal proceedings).
18.304 The NSWLRC explored the issue of cross-examination by an unrepresented
accused in detail.
report outlined the key reasons why a defendant might be unrepresented: because
they are ineligible for legal aid and are unable
to afford to instruct a private
lawyer, or through choice.
canvassed the competing interests of the rights of the accused to a fair
trial—the critical consideration being the ability
to test the evidence
against them—and the rights of the complainant (that is, the need to
reduce the potential distress and
humiliation to complainants caused by personal
cross-examination).
18.305 In regard to this last area, the NSWLRC drew attention to the
particular nature of sexual offences, the nature of the evidence
that needs to
be elicited from the complainant, the length of cross-examination, and its focus
on issues of credibility and consent.
To be personally cross-examined by the
defendant was seen as having a negative impact on the complainant’s
ability to answer
questions, thus affecting the quality and nature of the
evidence received. This is likely to be amplified in those cases where the
complainant and the defendant have, or have had, an intimate or family
relationship.
18.306 The VLRC and QLRC, who dealt with this issue as part of broader
inquiries, also emphasised the negative effect of personal
cross-examination on
child complainants and child
18.307 In order to ‘strike a balance’ between the rights of the
accused to test the evidence against them, and the importance
of limiting the
traumatic experience of complainants in sexual offence proceedings, most
However, jurisdictions differ
whether this protection applies to witnesses other than sexual
assault complainants or alleged victims and whether it applies in
other legal
proceedings; and
who asks the questions on behalf of the unrepresented defendant and
whether that person has any role or responsibility in providing
advice to the
Which witnesses are
18.308 In some jurisdictions protection from cross-examination by an
unrepresented defendant is limited to the cross-examination of
a complainant in
sexual offence proceedings,
or to child complainants and child witnesses in sexual offence
proceedings,
while in others
it applies to a wider range of proceedings and witnesses:
In Victoria, the protection applies to ‘protected
witnesses’ in sexual offence proceedings and offences that would amount
family violence within the meaning of the
Family Violence Protection Act
In Queensland, the protection applies to witnesses under 16 years of
age, witnesses with an ‘impairment of the mind’
and alleged victims
in a ‘prescribed special offence’ (this covers rape and sexual
assault along with a range of other
offences) or, subject to conditions, victims
of a ‘prescribed
In the ACT, the protection applies to the complainant or a
‘similar act witness’ in a sexual offence proceeding, a serious
violent offence proceeding, and to a less serious violent offence proceeding
where the witness and the accused have been in an intimate
relationship
or the court
considers that the witness has some particular
vulnerability.
In South Australia, the protection applies to children or witnesses
who are the alleged victims of a ‘serious offence’,
or an offence of
contravening or failing to comply with a domestic violence restraining order or
a restraining order.
The provision in Western Australia is discretionary, but it is open
to the court to ‘forbid’ such personal cross-examination
witness in a criminal
proceeding.
Who asks the
18.309 In the Commonwealth, NSW and ACT jurisdictions, the defendant’s
cross-examination questions are to be asked on their
behalf by ‘a person
appointed by the court’. The role of the appointed person is simply to ask
the questions. In NSW
and the ACT it is made clear that this appointed person
‘must not independently give the accused person legal or other
18.310 In Western Australia, South Australia and the Northern Territory, the
defendant’s cross-examination questions are either
put by the court or a
person appointed by the
In Western Australia
and the Northern Territory the questions must be ‘repeated
accurately’ by the judge or other appointed
In South Australia,
however, the legislation makes it clear that only those questions
‘determined by the judge to be allowable’
will be asked of the
18.311 In Victoria
Queensland,
the person who
asks the questions must be a legal practitioner and has a more active legal role
in asking the questions. In Victoria
the court ‘must order Victoria Legal
Aid to provide legal representation’ to the accused for the purpose of
cross examining
the protected
practitioner provided by Victoria Legal Aid ‘must act in the best
interests of the accused person if the accused
person does not give any
instructions to that legal
practitioner’.
Queensland, the lawyer appointed to ask the questions on behalf of the accused
is ‘the person’s legal representative
for the purposes only of the
cross-examination’.
18.312 In all the jurisdictions where this alternative mode of
cross-examination is conducted the judge is required to explain to
the jury that
this is a ‘standard’ or ‘routine’ procedure, that they
are not to draw any adverse inferences
from this practice, nor are they to give
the witness’ evidence any greater or lesser
18.313 A key difference of approach in the jurisdictions, and in the
literature on this issue, is whether the person appointed to
cross-examination questions on behalf of the accused should be legally trained
and in a position to provide the accused with
legal advice in the context of the
cross-examination only.
18.314 The NSWLRC’s report on this issue canvassed whether it was
necessary for the person to be a legal practitioner. Reasons
for not having a
legal practitioner included the fact that the person has ‘already decided
against legal representation’
and that it is not a necessary
requirement.
Ultimately, the
NSWLRC concluded that a legal practitioner should cross-examine the complainant
as ‘this is not only in the
interests of the accused, but also of the
administration of justice, particularly since sexual offences are such serious
18.315 The approach in NSW, which involves the appointment of a person who is
not necessarily legally trained and is specifically
not to provide legal advice,
has been held to be valid.
has, however, been criticised, including by judicial
The NSWLRC and the
VLRC both recommended that the appointed representative should be legally
trained and in a position to provide
legal advice for the purposes of cross
examination. This is the approach that has been enacted in
Commissions’ views
18.316 The Commissions propose that Commonwealth, states and territories
legislate to prohibit an unrepresented defendant from personally
cross-examining
any complainant or other witness in any sexual offence proceeding.
18.317 In the Commissions’ view it is inappropriate to have the
judicial officer ask questions on behalf of the accused. Such
approaches (which
exist in the Northern Territory and Western Australia) place the judicial
officer in a difficult position in determining
the admissibility of the
questions and may raise perceptions of bias. This was also the view of the VLRC,
NSWLRC and QLRC.
18.318 The position in Victoria and Queensland, where the person who asks the
questions must be a legal practitioner, and has a more
active legal role, is
preferred. The Commissions note that the critical advantages of legal
practitioner involvement include benefits
associated with the professional duty
the lawyer owes to the court and the client; the skills that lawyers bring to
this work in
terms of understanding the rules of evidence; the public interest
in testing the evidence presented by the witness; and in addressing
imbalance between the prosecution and the unrepresented
Proposal 18–14
Commonwealth, state and territory legislation
(a) prohibit an unrepresented defendant from personally cross-examining any
complainant or other witness in sexual assault proceedings;
(b) provide that any person conducting such cross-examination is a legal
practitioner representing the interests of the defendant.
[back to top]
Other aspects of
giving evidence
18.319 Leaving aside the specific issue of cross-examination, some
arrangements for the giving of evidence by complainants or other witnesses in
sexual offence proceedings. Aspects of these arrangements
were discussed in
Chapter 17, in relation to the use of pre-recorded evidence.
18.320 These regimes provide a range of measures dealing with the giving of
contemporaneous evidence by closed circuit television
(CCTV) or video-link, the
use of screening to restrict contact between the witness and the defendant, and
the exclusion of persons
All jurisdictions also
permit a complainant in sexual offence proceedings to have a support person
present with them while they give
18.321 There are some variations among jurisdictions. In most jurisdictions,
the giving of evidence by way of alternative or special
arrangements
‘may’ be ordered by the
In other cases, the
arrangements are something to which, subject to exceptions, the complainant is
or are mandatory
(especially in the case of evidence given by
18.322 Some methods for giving evidence by complainants, such as the use of
CCTV, are broadly used. However, not all jurisdictions
expressly permit, for
example, the use of screens or planned seating
arrangements;
evidence of the complainant in sexual offence proceedings to be given in closed
Are there significant gaps or inconsistencies among Australian
arrangements for the giving of evidence by complainants or other witnesses in
sexual offence proceedings?
[back to top]
Evidence on
re-trial or appeal
18.323 Chapter 17 noted that some jurisdictions provide that pre-recorded
audio-visual evidence of complainants in sexual offence
proceedings may be
admissible in evidence in a re-trial or
18.324 Such provisions may also apply to a recording of a complainant’s
evidence at trial. For example, the
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
provides that such a recording:
is admissible in evidence as if its contents were the direct testimony of the
complainant—
(a) in the proceeding; and
(b) unless the relevant
court otherwise orders, in—
(i) any new trial of, or appeal from, the
proceeding; or
(ii) another proceeding in the same court for the charge for
a sexual offence or a charge for a related offence; or
(iii) a civil
proceeding arising from the same facts as those on which the charge for a sexual
18.325 NSW has introduced broader provisions relating to evidence in
re-trials of sexual offence
proceedings.
Procedure Act 1986
(NSW) provides that if a person is convicted of a
prescribed sexual offence and, on an appeal against the conviction, a new trial
is ordered, the prosecutor may tender as evidence in the new trial ‘a
record of the original evidence of the complainant’,
despite the rule
against hearsay evidence.
18.326 While the original evidence might include any pre-recorded evidence
used in the
it covers ‘all evidence given by the complainant in the proceedings from
which the conviction arose’, including court
transcripts of
18.327 If a record of the original evidence of the complainant is admitted in
proceedings, the complainant is not compellable to give
any further evidence in
the proceedings, including for the purpose of any examination in chief,
cross-examination or
re-examination.
18.328 The problem addressed by the provision was described as being that:
Not surprisingly, some complainants who have given evidence that resulted in a
conviction decide they simply cannot return to give
evidence again if a new
trial is ordered on appeal. Significant time will have passed and the
complainant will have tried as best
as possible to put the matter out of their
18.329 Similar, but more limited, provisions have been enacted in other
of the evidence of a vulnerable witness may be admitted as evidence in later
proceedings, at the discretion of the
court. Where such evidence is admitted it
‘may relieve the witness, wholly or in part, from an obligation to give
in the later
proceedings’.
18.330 The Commissions are interested in comment on whether the Commonwealth,
states and territories should develop legislation, modelled
on that in NSW, to
permit prosecutors to tender a record of the original evidence of the
complainant in any re-trial ordered on appeal.
Should Commonwealth, state and territory legislation permit
prosecutors to tender a record of the original evidence of the complainant
any re-trial ordered on appeal?
See Australian Law Reform Commission, New
South Wales Law Reform Commission and Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Uniform Evidence Law
, ALRC 102, NSWLRC Report 112, VLRC FR (2005),
The corresponding legislation
Evidence Act 1995
Evidence Act 1995
Evidence Act 2008
Evidence Act 2001
Evidence Act
For example, the
Tasmanian Act has a number of sections not found in the Commonwealth or NSW
legislation, such as those dealing
with procedures for proving certain matters,
certain privileges, certain matters concerning witnesses and rape shield
provisions.
Australian Law Reform
Commission, New South Wales Law Reform Commission and Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Uniform Evidence Law
, ALRC 102, NSWLRC Report 112, VLRC FR
(2005), [2.4]–[2.10].
[20.11]–[20.40].
[20.37]–[20.40].
See, eg, S Bronitt
and T Henning, ‘Rape Victims on Trial: Regulating the Use and Abuse of
Sexual History Evidence’ in
P Easteal (ed)
Balancing the Scales: Rape,
Law Reform and Australian Culture
(1998) 76, 81.
See, eg, J Bargen and E Fishwick,
Sexual Assault Law Reform: A National Perspective
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
Criminal Law (Sexual Offences) Act 1978
Evidence Act 1906
Evidence Act 1929
Evidence Act 2001
Evidence (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 1991
Sexual Offences (Evidence and Procedure)
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
Section 4(1)(b)
Sexual Offences (Evidence and Procedure) Act 1983
(NT) uses a
similar phrase: ‘the complainant’s general reputation as to
Criminal Procedure
Criminal Law (Sexual Offences) Act 1978
Evidence Act 1906
Evidence Act
s 34L(1)(a)
Evidence Act 2001
s 194M(1)(a)
Evidence (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act
Evidence Act
Evidence Act 2001
s 194M(6)(b).
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
Criminal Law (Sexual Offences) Act 1978
Evidence Act
Evidence (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1991
Sexual Offences (Evidence and Procedure) Act 1983
Criminal Procedure
Evidence Act 2001
s 194M(1)(b).
Evidence Act
Procedure Act 1986
Criminal Law (Sexual
Offences) Act 1978
Criminal Procedure
Evidence Act 1929
s 34L(1)(b)
Evidence (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1991
Sexual Offences (Evidence and Procedure) Act 1983
The leading case of
Bull v The Queen
(2000) 201 CLR 443
, [54]–[64] discusses the
distinctions between evidence relating to the ‘sexual reputation’,
‘disposition
of the complainant in sexual matters’, ‘sexual
experience’ and ‘sexual experiences’.
For example, an empirical study
undertaken in relation to sexual assault hearings in the District Court of New
South Wales over
a one year period between 1 May 1994 and 30 April 1995
concluded that sexual reputation evidence cannot be clearly distinguished
sexual experience evidence: J Bargen,
Heroines of Fortitude: The Experiences
of Women in Court as Victims of Sexual Assault, Gender Bias and the Law
(1996), 11. In the context of the Western Australian legislation,
‘a difficulty arises because evidence of a complainant's
experiences, which is made admissible by s 36BC, will often, but not
necessarily, also be evidence relating to a person's
sexual disposition’
which shall not be adduced or elicited by or on behalf of an accused:
(2000) 201 CLR
(2000) 201 CLR 443
R v McGarvey
(1987) 10 NSWLR 632
in relation to
‘reputation for
promiscuity’.
See, eg, J Bargen,
Heroines of Fortitude: The Experiences of Women in Court as Victims of Sexual
Assault, Gender Bias and the Law Project
(1996), 229. See also, R Bonney,
Crimes (Sexual Assault) Amendment Act 1981—Monitoring and Evaluation
NSW Bureau of Crime and Statistics and Research-Crime and Justice Bulletin,
Interim Report No 3—Court Procedures (1987).
Evidence Act 1906
Other jurisdictions deal with evidence that gives rise to
inferences about the complainant’s general disposition by providing
it must not be regarded as having substantial relevance to an issue only by
raising such an inference:
Crimes Act 1914
Procedure Act 2009
Criminal Law (Sexual Offences)
Evidence Act 1929
Sexual Offences (Evidence and Procedure) Act
(2000) 201 CLR 443
Most legislative schemes
regulate either evidence of ‘sexual activity’ or ‘sexual
activities’ on the one
hand, and ‘sexual experience’ or
‘sexual experiences’ on the other. However,
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth) regulates ‘experience with respect to sexual
activities’ and
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
explicitly regulates both evidence of the complainant’s ‘sexual
experience or … sexual activity’ and
the lack of either kinds of
S Chapman, ‘Section
276 of the Criminal Code and the Admissibility of “Sexual Activity”
Evidence’ (1999)
Queen’s Law Journal
Bull v The Queen
(2000) 201 CLR 443
Procedure Act 1986
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
Criminal Law (Sexual Offences) Act 1978
Evidence Act 1906
Evidence Act 1929
s 34L(1)(a)
Evidence Act 2001
s 194M(1)(a)
Evidence (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1991
Model Criminal Code
Officers Committee of the Standing Committee of Attorneys-General,
Criminal Code—Chapter 5 Sexual Offences Against the Person
Sexual Offences (Evidence and
Procedure) Act 1983
Crimes Act 1914
Criminal Procedure Act
Law Reform Commission, New South Wales Law Reform Commission and Victorian Law
Reform Commission,
Uniform Evidence Law
, ALRC 102, NSWLRC Report 112,
VLRC FR (2005), [20.12]–[20.18].
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Sexual Offences: Final Report
(2004); Model Criminal Code
Officers Committee of the Standing Committee of Attorneys-General,
Criminal Code—Chapter 5 Sexual Offences Against the Person
(1999); New
South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Review of Section 409B of the
, Report 87 (1998).
Model Criminal Code Officers Committee of the Standing Committee of
Attorneys-General,
Model Criminal Code—Chapter 5 Sexual Offences
Against the Person
(1999), 243–45; New South Wales Law Reform
Commission,
Review of Section 409B of the
Crimes Act 1900
87 (1998), [6.100]–[6.113]; Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Offences: Final Report
(2004), recs
(Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1991
Criminal Procedure
Evidence Act 1906
Evidence Act 2001
s 194M(1)(b).
Criminal Law
(Sexual Offences) Act 1978
Sexual Offences
(Evidence and Procedure) Act 1983
(acts which are
‘substantially contemporaneous’);
Evidence Act 1929
s 34L(1)(b)
(‘recent sexual activities with the accused’).
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
See also, Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Sexual Offences:
Final Report
(2004), Rec 68.
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Sexual Offences: Final Report
Evidence Act
South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Review of Section 409B of the
, Report 87 (1998),
Crimes Act 1914
s 15YC(2)(a).
Note however that
s 15YC(2)(b)
provides that the court must
not give leave if the evidence relates to the credibility of a child witness and
is to be adduced in
cross-examination of the child unless the court is satisfied
that the evidence has substantial probative value. See also
Procedure Act 2009
Criminal Law (Sexual Offences) Act
Evidence Act 1906
Evidence Act
Evidence (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1991
Sexual Offences (Evidence and Procedure) Act 1983
Criminal Procedure
Evidence Act
Evidence Act 2001
Evidence Act 1929
Criminal Law
(Sexual Offences) Act 1978
Evidence (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 1991
Crimes Act 1914
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
Law (Sexual Offences) Act 1978
Evidence Act 1929
Evidence (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1991
Sexual Offences (Evidence and Procedure) Act 1983
Criminal Law (Sexual Offences) Act
Evidence Act 1906
Evidence Act 2001
Crimes Act 1914
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
Criminal Law (Sexual Offences) Act 1978
Sexual Offences (Evidence and Procedure) Act
Evidence Act 1906
For an example of a recent case
applying this provision see
VOT v State of Western Australia
[2008] WASCA 102
Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Sexual Offences: Final Report
(2004), Recs 69–73.
New South Wales Law Reform
Commission,
Review of Section 409B of the
Crimes Act 1900
87 (1998), Rec 2
Victorian Law
Reform Commission,
Sexual Offences: Final Report
That is, under uniform
Evidence Acts
See, eg, uniform Evidence Acts
The VLRC considered that a
non-exhaustive list ‘would leave open the possibility that sexual activity
evidence could be introduced
inappropriately’: Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Sexual Offences: Interim Report
A Cossins, ‘Tipping the
Scales in Her Favour: The Need to Protect Counselling Records in Sexual Assault
Trials’ in P
Easteal (ed)
Balancing the Scales: Rape, Law Reform and
Australian Culture
(1998) 94, 106.
See, S Odgers,
Uniform Evidence Law
(8th ed, 2009),
[1.3.14540].
Criminal Procedure Act
That is, the
Procedure Act 2009
(Vic) regulates sexual history evidence
of the general reputation of the complainant with respect to chastity
and evidence as to the sexual activities of the complainant
Evidence of the general reputation of the complainant with respect to chastity
and evidence as to the sexual activities of the complainant
are conceptually
distinct. Sexual history evidence conceptually overlaps with evidence of the
general reputation of the complainant
with respect to chastity and evidence as
to the sexual activities of the
complainant.
Criminal Procedure Act
‘Section 276 of the Criminal Code and the Admissibility of “Sexual
Activity” Evidence’ (1999)
Queen’s Law Journal
Crimes Act 1914
Criminal Law (Sexual Offences) Act 1978
Evidence Act 1929
Evidence (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 1991
Sexual Offences (Evidence and
Procedure) Act 1983
Evidence Act 1906
This is implicit in
Procedure Act 1986
and explicit in
Evidence Act 2001
s 194M(6)(b).
Law (Sexual Offences) Act 1978
Evidence (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 1991
Sexual Offences (Evidence and Procedure) Act 1983
Evidence Act 1906
Evidence Act 2001
Evidence Act 1995
Evidence Act 1929
Crimes Act 1914
15YC(2)(b).
Criminal Procedure Act
Law Reform Commission,
Sexual Offences: Final Report
(2004) [4.65].
Criminal Law (Sexual Offences) Act
provides that: ‘An example of an inference
of having engaged in conduct of a sexual nature, is more likely to have
consented to the conduct involved in the
Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Sexual Offences: Final Report
(2004), [4.68]. This conclusion
is consistent with
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
Evidence Act 1906
Evidence Act 2001
Crimes Act 1914
s 15YD(1)(b)
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
Criminal Law (Sexual
Offences) Act 1978
Evidence Act 1906
Evidence Act 1929
Evidence Act 2001
s 194M(1)(b)
Evidence (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1991
Sexual Offences (Evidence and Procedure) Act 1983
Criminal Procedure Act
Criminal Law (Sexual Offences) Act 1978
Evidence (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1991
Sexual Offences (Evidence and Procedure) Act 1983
J Bargen and E Fishwick,
Sexual Assault Law Reform: A National Perspective
Crimes Act 1914
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
(Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1991
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Sexual Offences: Final Report
Replaced by
Procedure Act 2009
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Sexual Offences: Final Report
A court may be
required to record in writing the reasons for granting leave, eg:
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
(Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1991
; or give reasons only, eg:
Evidence Act 2001
; or may be free of any legislative
requirement.
For instance,
empirical research has suggested that questions which raise admissibility issues
are often asked without prior application
by the defence, objection by the
prosecution, reference to the relevant legislation or appropriate judicial
intervention: J Bargen,
Heroines of Fortitude: The Experiences of Women in
Court as Victims of Sexual Assault, Gender Bias and the Law Project
New South Wales Law Reform
Commission,
Review of Section 409B of the
Crimes Act 1900
87 (1998), [6. 138].
Ibid, [6.140].
Sexual Offences Against Adults in Australia
(2005) Australian Institute of
Family Studies, 15.
For current
provisions see:
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
Evidence (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1958
Evidence Act 1906
Evidence Act 1929
Evidence Act 2001
(Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1991
Evidence Act
Note that Queensland has not enacted specific legislation
protecting sexual assault counselling
communications.
The Terms of
Reference refer to the work being undertaken through SCAG in relation to the
‘sexual assault communications
provisions’ (emphasis
added). The ALRC considered the distinction between privileges and immunities in
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Making Inquiries: A New Statutory
, ALRC 111 (2009), [3.20]–[3.22]. See also, J Gans and A
Australian Principles of Evidence
(2nd ed, 2004),
Model Criminal Code
Officers Committee—Standing Committee of Attorneys-General,
Criminal Code—Chapter 5, Fatal Offences Against the Person: Discussion
Victorian Law
Reform Commission,
Sexual Offences: Final Report
[4.71]–[4.98].
Australian Law
Reform Commission, New South Wales Law Reform Commission and Victorian Law
Reform Commission,
Uniform Evidence Law
, ALRC 102, NSWLRC Report 112,
VLRC FR (2005),
[15.45]–[15.84].
Law Reform Commission,
Sexual Offences: Final Report
Criminal Procedure Act
Evidence Act 1939
Evidence (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 1991
Evidence (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1958
Evidence Act 1906
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Sexual Offences: Final Report
Evidence Act
Evidence Act 1929
Criminal Procedure
s 298(1)(a)
Evidence (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
Evidence (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1958
Evidence Act 1929
Evidence (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1958
Women’s Legal Services NSW,
Consultation
, Sydney, 20 January
Ibid. Women’s Legal
Services NSW coordinates the Sexual Assault Communications Pro Bono Referral
Pilot in the Downing Centre
(SCAP Pilot)—a New South Wales Local Court.
The Pilot brings together three pro bono firms, the NSW Bar Association and the
Office of Director of Public Prosecutions to provide referrals and free legal
representation to enable complainants in sexual assault
trials to claim and
uphold the right to the protection of the sexual assault communications
For example, as the
‘protected confider’ who made the ‘counselling
communication’:
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
Australian Law Reform
Commission, New South Wales Law Reform Commission and Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Uniform Evidence Law
, ALRC 102, NSWLRC Report 112, VLRC FR
(2005), [15.81].
See, eg, Criminal
Justice Sexual Offences Taskforce (NSW Attorney General’s Department),
Responding to Sexual Assault: The Way Forward
These proposed practices
reflect the views of Women’s Legal Services NSW as contained in: Women's
Legal Services NSW,
The NSW Sexual Assault Communications Privilege: Current
Procedure and Issues for Reform: Submission to the NSW Attorney-General’s
Women’s Legal Services NSW,
Counsellors and Subpoenas: A Practical
Guide for Counsellors Served with Subpoenas
An extensive summary of the
literature on jurors’ and laypersons’ misconceptions can be found in
A Cossins, ‘Children,
Sexual Abuse and Suggestibility: What Laypeople
Think They Know and What the Literature Tells Us’
Psychiatry,
Psychology and Law
A Cossins, J Goodman-Delahunty
and K O’Brien, ‘Uncertainty and Misconceptions about Child Sexual
Abuse: Implications
for the Criminal Justice System’
Psychiatry, Psychology and Law
, 445. Certain individuals (notably
male jurors) may be more prone to holding erroneous beliefs about
children’s reports of
sexual abuse and particular compositions of juries,
based on gender, age and education levels, may require educative expert opinion
evidence, a finding that has been reported in a number of different studies: See
also A Cossins, ‘Children, Sexual Abuse and
Suggestibility: What Laypeople
Think They Know and What the Literature Tells Us’
Psychiatry,
Psychology and Law
Quas, W Thompson and K Clarke-Stewart, ‘ Do Jurors “Know” What
Isn’t So About Child Witnesses?’
Law and Human
Freckelton and H Selby,
Expert Evidence: Law, Practice, Procedure and
(4th ed, 2008).
Cossins, ‘Children, Sexual Abuse and Suggestibility: What Laypeople Think
They Know and What the Literature Tells Us’
Psychiatry,
Psychology and Law
S v The Queen
[2001] QCA 501
(2001) 125 A Crim R
R v Venning
(1997) 17 SR(WA) 261
F v The Queen
(1995) 83 A
C v The Queen
[1993] SASC 4095
(1993) 70 A Crim R 378
Ingles v The Queen
(Unreported, Tasmanian Court of Criminal Appeal, 4 May
See A Cossins,
‘Children, Sexual Abuse and Suggestibility: What Laypeople Think They Know
and What the Literature Tells Us’
Psychiatry, Psychology and
New Zealand Law
Commission,
Evidence Code and Commentary
Australian Law Reform
Commission, New South Wales Law Reform Commission and Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Uniform Evidence Law
, ALRC 102, NSWLRC Report 112, VLRC FR
(2005), [9.156]; Legislative Council Standing Committee on Law and
Justice—Parliament
of New South Wales,
Report on Child Sexual Assault
Prosecutions
, Report No 22 (2002), 123; Australian Law Reform Commission and
Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission,
Seen and Heard: Priority for
Children in the Legal Process
, ALRC 84 (1997), 329; Royal Commission into
the New South Wales Police Service,
Final Report—Volume V: The
Paedophile Inquiry
(1997), 1118: See National Child Sexual Assault Reform
Alternative Models for Prosecuting Child Sex Offences in
, unpublished (2009),
Evidence Act
The Tasmanian Act does not include a provision that
permits the admissibility of such evidence as an exception to the credibility
rule, as is the case under the Commonwealth, NSW and Victorian Acts: eg,
Evidence Act 1995
Evidence Act 1995
Evidence Act 2008
Australian Law Reform
Commission, New South Wales Law Reform Commission and Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Uniform Evidence Law
, ALRC 102, NSWLRC Report 112, VLRC FR
(2005), [9.168].
Ibid, recs 9–1,
Evidence Amendment
Evidence Amendment Act
Evidence Act
(Vic). At the time of writing, Tasmania had not adopted these
amendments.
Evidence Act
Evidence Act 1995
Evidence Act
Cossins, ‘Children, Sexual Abuse and Suggestibility: What Laypeople Think
They Know and What the Literature Tells Us’
Psychiatry,
Psychology and Law
Ibid, 165–166.
S Blackwell, ‘Expert
Psychological Evidence in Child Sexual Abuse Trials in New Zealand’ (Paper
presented at The Children
and the Courts Conference, Canberra, 5 November 2005),
National Child Sexual Assault
Reform Committee,
Alternative Models for Prosecuting Child Sex Offences in
, unpublished (2009), 247.
Such as the bench
book recommended in National Council to Reduce Violence against Women and their
Time for Action: The National Council’s Plan for Australia to
Reduce Violence against Women and their Children, 2009–2021
S Blackwell, ‘Expert
Psychological Evidence in Child Sexual Abuse Trials in New Zealand’ (Paper
presented at The Children
and the Courts Conference, Canberra, 5 November
A recent mock jury study
found that both judicial directions and expert evidence were effective in
reducing misconceptions about
child sexual abuse cases: A Cossins, J
Goodman-Delahunty and K O’Brien,
Countering Misconceptions in
Child Sexual Assault Cases with Expert Evidence and Judicial Directions
October 2008.
recommendations address the typical juror misconceptions that have been
identified in the literature: see National Child
Sexual Assault Reform
Alternative Models for Prosecuting Child Sex Offences in
, unpublished (2009),
For example,
Evidence Act 1906
, modifying the hearsay rule with
respect to children’s statements.
Proposed solutions, in the context
of civil proceedings, include the wider use of agreed or court-appointed experts
and new mechanisms
for the accreditation and accountability of expert witnesses.
See, eg, Australian Law Reform Commission,
Managing Justice: A Review of the
Federal Civil Justice System
, ALRC 89 (1999), ch 6; New South Wales Law
Reform Commission,
Expert Witnesses
, Report 109
Uniform Evidence Acts,
Pfennig v The Queen
[1995] HCA 7
(1995) 182 CLR 461.
Ibid, 485; see
HML v The Queen
[2008] HCA 16
(2008) 235 CLR
Evidence Act 1977
Evidence Act
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
Relationship
evidence is discussed later in this
Phillips v The
[2006] HCA 4
(2006) 225 CLR 303.
National Child Sexual Assault Reform Committee,
Alternative Models for
Prosecuting Child Sex Offences in Australia
, unpublished (2009),
Ibid, 205. See, eg, the
AE v The Queen
[2008] NSWCCA 52
R v KP; Ex parte
Attorney-General (Qld)
[2006] QCA 301
R v Fletcher
[2005] NSWCCA 338
A Crim R 308.
R v KP; Ex parte
Attorney-General (Qld)
[2006] QCA 301.
The Queensland Court of Appeal held,
in the context of a case involving four different children, that the evidence of
the older brother
cross-admissible in relation to the counts involving the younger brother because
of lack of similarities in the defendant’s alleged sexual behaviour. The
Court held that charges relating to all complainants
should not have been
Phillips v The Queen
[2006] HCA 4
(2006) 225 CLR 303.
Striking Similarities between the Common Law and the Uniform Evidence Acts:
Protecting Serial Offenders and Putting Children at Risk
, unpublished
(2010), 14.
[2005] NSWCCA 338
(2005) 156 A Crim R 308
, [60]. See also
AE v The Queen
[2008] NSWCCA 52
[2004] NSWCCA 195
[2002] NSWCCA 125
(2002) 129 A Crim R 126
[2002] NSWCCA 210
(2002) 130 A
Sutton v The
[1984] HCA 5
(1984) 152 CLR 528
Hoch v The Queen
[1988] HCA 50
(1988) 165 CLR 292
Pfennig v The Queen
[1995] HCA 7
(1995) 182 CLR 461
McHugh J considered that the test enunciated by Mason CJ, Deane and Dawson JJ
was too stringent although His Honour recognised that
‘where the prosecution case depends entirely on propensity reasoning,
evidence will need to be so cogent that, when related to the other evidence,
there is no rational explanation of the prosecution
case that is consistent with
the innocence of the accused’: Ibid,
[2003] NSWCCA 319
HML v The Queen
[2008] HCA 16
(2008) 235 CLR
[2003] NSWCCA 319
Ibid, [89]. The High
Court granted Ellis leave to appeal but later revoked that leave, stating that
it agreed with Spigelman CJ’s
construction of the
Evidence Act 1995
Ellis v The Queen
[2004] HCA Trans
Tasmania Law Reform Institute,
Evidence Act 2001
Sections 97
and Hoch’s Case:
Admissibility of Tendency and Coincidence Evidence in Sexual Assault Cases with
Multiple Complainants
, Issues Paper 15 (2009),
As implied, eg, by Australian
Law Reform Commission, New South Wales Law Reform Commission and Victorian Law
Reform Commission,
Uniform Evidence Law
, ALRC 102, NSWLRC Report 112,
VLRC FR (2005),
[11.65]–[11.68].
Tasmania Law
Reform Institute,
Evidence Act 2001
Sections 97
Hoch’s Case: Admissibility of Tendency and Coincidence Evidence in Sexual
Assault Cases with Multiple Complainants
, Issues Paper 15 (2009),
Similarities between the Common Law and the Uniform Evidence Acts: Protecting
Serial Offenders and Putting Children at Risk
, unpublished (2010),
[2003] NSWCCA 319
(2003) 58 NSWLR 700
[2004] ACTSC 63
(2004) 146 A Crim R 503
followed Spigelman CJ’s reasoning by applying the ‘no rational view
of the evidence’ test to coincidence
been followed in
R v Ceissman
[2009] ACTSC 50
Clarkson v The
[2007] NSWCCA 70
(2007) 171 A Crim R 1
Tasmania v Y
[2007] TASSC 112
(2007) 178 A Crim R 481
[2006] ACTSC 47
L v Tasmania
[2006] TASSC 59
(2006) 15 Tas R 381
[2005] NSWCCA 23
(2005) 152 A Crim R 35
(2005) NSWCCA 413
Tasmania v S
[2004] TASSC 84
(2003) 140 A Crim R
Similarities between the Common Law and the Uniform Evidence Acts: Protecting
Serial Offenders and Putting Children at Risk
, unpublished (2010), 19. See,
Tasmania v S
[2004] TASSC 84
L v Tasmania
[2006] TASSC 59
(2006) 15 Tas
Tasmania v Y
[2007] TASSC 112
(2007) 178 A Crim R 481
Tasmania Law Reform
Evidence Act 2001
Sections 97
and Hoch’s Case:
Admissibility of Tendency and Coincidence Evidence in Sexual Assault Cases with
Multiple Complainants
, Issues Paper 15 (2009),
Ibid, 39. See also, K Arenson,
‘The Propensity Evidence Conundrum: A Search for Doctrinal
Consistency’ (2006) 8
University of Notre Dame Law Journal
Tasmania Law Reform Institute,
Evidence Act 2001
Sections 97
and Hoch’s Case:
Admissibility of Tendency and Coincidence Evidence in Sexual Assault Cases with
Multiple Complainants
, Issues Paper 15 (2009), 39: This point was noted by
McHugh J in
Pfennig v The Queen
[1995] HCA 7
(1995) 182 CLR 461
National Child Sexual Assault
Reform Committee,
Alternative Models for Prosecuting Child Sex Offences in
, unpublished (2009), 191.
Hoch v The Queen
[1988] HCA 50
(1988) 165 CLR 292
Child Sexual Assault Reform Committee,
Alternative Models for Prosecuting
Child Sex Offences in Australia
, unpublished (2009),
Australian Law
Reform Commission and Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission,
Heard: Priority for Children in the Legal Process
, ALRC 84 (1997), 304;
Hoch v The Queen
[1988] HCA 50
(1988) 165 CLR
As recognised by the ALRC and
the Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission more than 10 years ago:
Australian Law Reform Commission
and Human Rights and Equal Opportunity
Commission,
Seen and Heard: Priority for Children in the Legal Process
ALRC 84 (1997), 306–307.
National Child Sexual Assault Reform Committee,
Alternative Models for
Prosecuting Child Sex Offences in Australia
, unpublished (2009),
This is said to
conflict with ‘public policy objectives behind preventing child
complainants from giving evidence on more
than one occasion which has seen some
evidence at committal
proceedings’: Ibid, 193. Complainants are also
likely to be cross-examined ‘more aggressively’ at a pre-trial
because of the absence of a jury: Tasmania Law Reform Institute,
Evidence Act 2001
Sections 97
and Hoch’s Case:
Admissibility of Tendency and Coincidence Evidence in Sexual Assault Cases with
Multiple Complainants
, Issues Paper 15 (2009),
Criminal Law Consolidation
(Rape and Sexual Offences) Amendment Act 2008
L Chapman (for Government of
South Australia),
Review of South Australian Rape and Sexual Assault
Law—Discussion Paper
In contrast, the Victorian
provision (discussed above in relation to a presumption of joint trials)
attempts to encourage joint
trials even where evidence is not
cross-admissible:
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
Donaldson v Western
[2005] WASCA 196
(2005) 31 WAR 122
Criminal Procedure Act
is similar to
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
because it envisages that a joint trial may be held even where
the evidence of two or more complainants is not cross-admissible.
because it envisages that the risk of impermissible propensity reasoning by
juries and prejudice to the accused can be
corrected by an appropriate judicial
Donaldson v Western Australia
[2005] WASCA 196
(2005) 31 WAR 122
Donaldson v Western
[2005] WASCA 196
(2005) 31 WAR 122
The definition of propensity
evidence under s 31A is also more extensive than at common law and includes
tendency, relationship
and character
Di Lena v State of
Western Australia; Washer v Western Australia
[2006] WASCA 162
(2006) 165 A Crim R 482
Wood v State of Western Australia
[2005] WASCA 179
Donaldson v
Western Australia
[2005] WASCA 196
(2005) 31 WAR 122
Donaldson v Western
[2005] WASCA 196
(2005) 31 WAR 122
Ibid, [153] (Roberts-Smith
Ibid, [157] (Roberts-Smith
Pfennig v The Queen
[1995] HCA 7
(1995) 182 CLR 461
v State of Western Australia; Washer v Western Australia
[2006] WASCA 162
(2006) 165 A Crim R
The decision made under
s 31A is a question of law, not an exercise of a judicial discretion and,
once admitted, there is no room
to exclude the evidence under the discretion at
common law: Ibid,
[60], referring to
R v Christie
[1914] UKLawRpAC 20
For example, in
Western Australia
[2005] WASCA 233
(2005) 158 A Crim R 243
, separate allegations of sexual
assault over many years had been made by the two step-daughters of the accused,
who was indicted
on 44 counts. The Western Australian Court of Appeal considered
that this was ‘an example of the very type of case in which
legislature intended the jury to have the benefit of a full evidentiary familial
picture’: [168].
Child Sexual Assault Reform Committee,
Alternative Models for Prosecuting
Child Sex Offences in Australia
, unpublished (2009), 213. The Western
Australian Court of Appeal has accepted that, in a child sexual assault trial,
propensity evidence
need not show ‘striking similarities’ or sexual
interference by the defendant in a particular way:
Donaldson v Western
[2005] WASCA 196
(2005) 31 WAR 122
, [149]. If the evidence in question reveals an
underlying unity, system or pattern, that will be sufficient to establish that
evidence has significant probative value under s31A(2) ‘irrespective
of what physical acts [were] individually involved’.
the evidence of the four complainants showed that the defendant, a swimming
coach, had a particular pattern of conduct ‘or
a tendency … by
essentially similar means, to inveigle young girls under his charge into
situations in which he then commits
sexual offences upon them’: [149].
This was sufficient for the evidence of the four complainants to be
cross-admissible.
Australian Law
Reform Commission, New South Wales Law Reform Commission and Victorian Law
Reform Commission,
Uniform Evidence Law
, ALRC 102, NSWLRC Report 112,
VLRC FR (2005), [11.82].
Law Reform Commission,
The Receipt of Evidence by Queensland Courts: The
Evidence of Children
, Report No 55
Western Australian judge.
Child Sexual Assault Reform Committee,
Alternative Models for Prosecuting
Child Sex Offences in Australia
, unpublished (2009),
Procedure Act 2004
–(6). See National Child Sexual
Assault Reform Committee,
Alternative Models for Prosecuting Child Sex
Offences in Australia
, unpublished (2009),
The Committee
proposed amendments to
of the uniform Evidence Acts, of
general application to tendency and coincidence evidence and that other
amendments with respect to the admissibility of
propensity and similar fact evidence: National Child Sexual Assault Reform
Alternative Models for Prosecuting Child Sex Offences in
, unpublished (2009), Recs 3.8,
As recommended by the National
Child Sexual Assault Reform
As recommended by the
National Child Sexual Assault Reform Committee: National Child Sexual Assault
Reform Committee,
Alternative Models for Prosecuting Child Sex Offences in
, unpublished (2009),
HML v The Queen
[2008] HCA 16
235 CLR 334
[1992] HCA 68
(1992) 175 CLR 599
National Child Sexual Assault Reform Committee,
Alternative Models for
Prosecuting Child Sex Offences in Australia
, unpublished (2009), 252. See,
[1999] 3 VR
Queensland Law Reform
Commission,
The Receipt of Evidence by Queensland Courts: The Evidence of
, Report No 55
National Child Sexual Assault
Reform Committee,
Alternative Models for Prosecuting Child Sex Offences in
, unpublished (2009),
(Unreported,
QCA, J Lee, 23 June 1998), [22].
Cook v The Queen
[2000] WASCA 78
(2000) 22 WAR 67
R v Nieterink
[1999] 3 VR 618
R v Alexander
(Unreported, SASC, 24 April 1996);
R v Beserick
(1993) 30 NSWLR 510
v The Queen
[1992] HCA 68
(1992) 175 CLR 599
Harriman v The Queen
[1989] HCA 50
(1989) 167 CLR
The reception
of ‘this type of evidence has come to be routine and unsurprising’:
HML v The Queen
[2008] HCA 16
(2008) 235 CLR 334
[271]–[272].
Gaudron J considered that
the admissibility of propensity evidence in the form of past criminal conduct
(including relationship
evidence) was only warranted in a few specified
situations, eg, where the defence raised specific issues such as evidence of
character or lack of surprise or failure to complain on the part of the
complainant:
Gipp v The Queen
(1998) 194 CLR 106, 112. Callinan J stated
that if such evidence is to be admitted ‘it must owe its admissibility to
quite specific, other purpose, including eg, in an appropriate case, proof
of a guilty passion, intention, or propensity, or opportunity,
or motive’:
Gipp v The Queen
(1998) 194 CLR 106, [182]. See also
Tully v The
(2006) 230 CLR 234, [144]–[145]. Kirby J stated that
relationship evidence should only be ‘admissible if its probative
outweighs its prejudicial effect’:
Gipp v The Queen
(1998) 194 CLR
106, [141].
HML v The Queen
[2008] HCA 16
(2008) 235 CLR 334
, [163]. This uncertainty has been evident, eg, in the
different approaches taken by the Full Court of the Supreme Court of South
Australia in
R v Nieterink
(1999) 76 SASR 56
and the Court of Appeal of
Victoria decision in
[1999] 3 VR
Although ‘the six
different judgments in the case may continue to confound rather than enlighten
the law on relationship evidence’:
National Child Sexual Assault Reform
Alternative Models for Prosecuting Child Sex Offences in
, unpublished (2009),
HML v The Queen
[2008] HCA 16
235 CLR 334
Ibid, [54]. The
case does not apply to the admission of relationship evidence under the Uniform
Evidence Acts, nor under
Evidence Act
test still applies in South Australia, Queensland and the
Northern Territory.
National Child
Sexual Assault Reform Committee,
Alternative Models for Prosecuting Child Sex
Offences in Australia
, unpublished (2009),
HML v The Queen
[2008] HCA 16
235 CLR 334
This includes
‘the social interest in convicting those guilty of crimes against small
children which are both grave and difficult
to prove’: Ibid,
For example, Hayne J stated
that ‘[p]roving that the accused not only had that sexual interest but had
given expression to
that interest by those acts, made it more probable that he
had committed the charged acts’: Ibid, [103]. As discussed above,
evidence may also be relevant on other grounds, such as to explain the
complainant’s delay in complaint, although some
of those reasons may only
be directly relevant to the credibility of the complainant:
[2008] HCA 16
(2008) 235 CLR 334
HML v The Queen
[2008] HCA 16
(2008) 235 CLR 334
, [59] (Kirby J); [106] (Hayne J with
whom Gummow J agreed). The purpose for adopting the
place an extra control over ‘the discreditable facts’ that are
admitted against an accused. Without such a
control any relevant discreditable
facts would be able to be tendered against an accused simply because they throw
some light on
the ‘context’ of the offences:
HML v The Queen
[2008] HCA 16
(2008) 235 CLR 334
, [80]. Nonetheless, Hayne J considered that evidence of
uncharged acts would usually satisfy the
test because
‘there will usually be no reasonable view of the evidence … other
than as supporting an inference that the
accused is guilty of the offence
HML v The Queen
[2008] HCA 16
(2008) 235 CLR 334
, [107]. Although Hayne
J recognised the disadvantage to the defendant by admitting such evidence, His
Honour considered that ‘its
admission would work no prejudice to the
accused over and above what the evidence establishes’:
[2008] HCA 16
(2008) 235 CLR 334
National Child Sexual Assault Reform Committee,
Alternative Models for
Prosecuting Child Sex Offences in Australia
, unpublished (2009),
HML v The Queen
[2008] HCA 16
235 CLR 334
, [455] (Crennan); [511]–[512] (Kiefel
See Ibid, [27] (Gleeson CJ);
[264] (Heydon J).
McHugh and Hayne JJ observed that relationship evidence in a child
sexual assault case is ‘far removed from the kinds of propensity
that have attracted the stringent requirements of admissibility and direction
imposed by common law doctrine … [T]he
evidence of general behaviour in
this case hardly offends the policy reasons which courts and commentators have
relied on to exclude
propensity evidence’:
Gipp v The Queen
194 CLR 106, [81].
[2008] HCA 16
(2008) 235 CLR 334
, [503], [505]. In ALRC 102 the ALRC, NSWLRC
and VLRC considered whether the balancing test under s 101(2) of the
uniform Evidence
Acts should be extended to apply to any evidence tendered
against a defendant which discloses disreputable conduct although tendered
non-tendency or non-coincidence purpose—such as relationship evidence: see
Australian Law Reform Commission, New South
Wales Law Reform Commission and
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Uniform Evidence Law
, ALRC 102, NSWLRC
Report 112, VLRC FR (2005), [11.76]–[11.93]. The Commissions concluded
that the case had not been made out
for change, which would be unlikely to
result in different outcomes where questions arise as to the admissibility of
evidence relevant
for tendency or coincidence purposes and for other
National Child Sexual
Assault Reform Committee,
Alternative Models for Prosecuting Child Sex
Offences in Australia
, unpublished (2009),
History of the law of recent
complaint is found in D McDonald, ‘Gender Bias and the Law of Evidence:
The Link between Sexuality
and Credibility’ (1994) 24
University of Wellington Law Review
175; S Bronitt, ‘The Rules of
Recent Complaint: Rape Myths and the Legal Construction of the
“Reasonable” Rape Victim’
in P Easteal (ed)
Balancing the
Scales: Rape, Law Reform and Australian Culture
Cross on Evidence
(1970), 245.
National Child Sexual
Assault Reform Committee,
Alternative Models for Prosecuting Child Sex
Offences in Australia
, unpublished (2009),
Papakosmas v The Queen
(1999) 196 CLR 297
complainant is the person who made the previous representation and is available
to give evidence about the asserted fact, the
asserted fact being a fact that a
person (who made a previous representation) intended to assert by the
representation: s 59. In
a sexual assault trial, the complainant is the
Crown’s chief witness who, if competent, is available to give
National Child Sexual
Assault Reform Committee,
Alternative Models for Prosecuting Child Sex
Offences in Australia
, unpublished (2009),
Graham v The Queen
(1998) 195 CLR 606
Law Reform Commission, New South Wales Law Reform Commission and Victorian Law
Reform Commission,
Uniform Evidence Law
, ALRC 102, NSWLRC Report 112,
VLRC FR (2005), 253.
The amending
legislation in Tasmania (
Evidence Amendment Bill 2008
(Tas)) had not been
passed at the time of writing.
a more comprehensive review of modification to the common law relating to recent
and delayed complaint evidence, see: National
Child Sexual Assault Reform
Alternative Models for Prosecuting Child Sex Offences in
, unpublished (2009),
This provision was enacted to
implement the recommendations of the Western Australian Law Reform Commission,
Report on Evidence of Children and Other Vulnerable Witnesses
(1991). See
RPM v The Queen
[2004] WASCA 174
Review of South
Australia Rape and Sexual Assault Law: Discussion Paper
South Australia,
Parliamentary Debates
, House of Assembly, 25 October 2007, 1449 (M
Atkinson—Attorney-General, Minister for Justice, Minister for
Multicultural Affairs).
Law Consolidation Act 1935
National Child
Sexual Assault Reform Committee,
Alternative Models for Prosecuting Child Sex
Offences in Australia
, unpublished (2009),
For a review of this
literature see Ibid, 79–91; D Lievore,
Non-Reporting and Hidden
Recording of Sexual Assault: An International Review—Report prepared for
the Commonwealth Office of
the Status of Women
(2003) Australian Institute
of Criminology.
National Child
Sexual Assault Reform Committee,
Alternative Models for Prosecuting Child Sex
Offences in Australia
, unpublished (2009),
The rule that credibility
evidence about a witness is not admissible: Uniform Evidence Acts,
National Child Sexual
Assault Reform Committee,
Alternative Models for Prosecuting Child Sex
Offences in Australia
, unpublished (2009),
Review of South
Australia Rape and Sexual Assault Law: Discussion Paper
National Child Sexual Assault
Reform Committee,
Alternative Models for Prosecuting Child Sex Offences in
, unpublished (2009),
Australian Law Reform
Commission, New South Wales Law Reform Commission and Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Uniform Evidence Law
, ALRC 102, NSWLRC Report 112, VLRC FR
(2005), [8.75].
[18.1]–[18.2].
Victorian Law
Reform Commission,
Sexual Offences: Final Report
(2004), [7.7] (footnotes
omitted). For a discussion of the popular myths surrounding sexual assault, see
Non-Reporting and Hidden Recording of Sexual Assault: An
International Review—Report prepared for the Commonwealth Office of
Status of Women
(2003) Australian Institute of Criminology; D Boniface,
‘Ruining a Good Boy for the Sake of a Bad Girl: False Accusation Theory
Sexual Offences, and New South Wales Limitations Periods—Gone But Not
Current Issues in Criminal Justice
Cossins, ‘Complaints of Child Sexual Abuse: Too Easy to Make or Too
Difficult to Prove?’
Australian and New Zealand Journal of
Criminology
Child Sexual Assault Reform Committee,
Alternative Models for Prosecuting
Child Sex Offences in Australia
, unpublished (2009), 58.
For a summary of both the common
law and uniform
Evidence Act
directions which highlights the complexity of a
trial judge’s task see,
[2002] NSWCCA 60
(2002) 54 NSWLR 241
Kelleher v The Queen
[1974] HCA 48
131 CLR 534.
Hargan v The
[1919] HCA 45
example, Brennan J in
Bromley v The Queen
[1989] HCA 60
(1989) 168 CLR 79
‘The courts have had experience of the reasons why… [children and
sexual assault complainants] may give untruthful
evidence wider than the
experience of the general public, and the courts have a sharpened awareness of
the danger of acting on the
uncorroborated evidence of such witnesses’:
324. See also
JJB v The Queen
[2006] NSWCCA 126
(2006) 161 A Crim R 187
(2005) 153 A Crim R 129
Queensland Law Reform Commission,
A Review of Jury Directions
(2009), [7.80].
This analysis was
put forward in Queensland Law Reform Commission,
The Receipt of Evidence by
Queensland Courts: The Evidence of Children
, Report No 55 (Part 2) (2000),
For a review of the literature
on suggestibility studies and the reliability of children’s evidence see
National Child Sexual
Assault Reform Committee,
Alternative Models for
Prosecuting Child Sex Offences in Australia
, unpublished (2009),
111–124 and the Australasian Institute of Judicial Administration,
Bench Book for Children Giving Evidence in Australian Courts
Evidence Act
Evidence Act 1939
Evidence Act 1995
Evidence Act 1995
Evidence Act 2008
Criminal Code
(Qld) s 632(2);
Evidence Act 1906
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 136;
Evidence Act 2001
Evidence (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1991
See, eg, New South Wales,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Assembly, 18 October 2006, 2958
(G McBride—Minister for Gaming and Racing and Minister for the
Central Coast).
Criminal Justice
Sexual Offences Taskforce (NSW Attorney General’s Department),
Responding to Sexual Assault: The Way Forward
Conway v The Queen
(2002) 202 CLR 203, [53].
Longman v The Queen
[1989] HCA 60
(1989) 168 CLR 79
, 86. See also
Tully v The
(2006) 230 CLR 234;
Robinson v The Queen
[1999] HCA 42
(1999) 197 CLR 162
Bromley v The Queen
[1989] HCA 60
(1989) 168 CLR
Uniform Evidence Acts,
Uniform Evidence Acts
s 165 does not interfere with a trial judge’s general powers and
obligations under the common law to
give appropriate warnings and directions to
the jury—subject to s 165A of the uniform Evidence Acts which controls
what a judge
may say about the evidence of
Evidence Act 1995
Evidence Act 1995
Evidence Act
Evidence Act 1906
Evidence Act 2001
Evidence (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1991
Evidence Act
Criminal Code
(Qld) s 632(2) provides only that
‘a judge is not required by any rule of law or practice to warn the jury
that it is unsafe
to convict the accused on the uncorroborated testimony of 1
Procedure Act 1986
Crimes Act 1958
(Vic) s 61;
Evidence (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1991
Offences (Evidence and Procedure) Act 1983
See, eg, New South Wales,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Assembly, 18 October 2006, 2958
(G McBride—Minister for Gaming and Racing and Minister for the
Central Coast).
(1987) 11 NSWLR 12.
Victorian Law
Reform Commission,
Sexual Offences: Final Report
(2004), 373–374; J
Heroines of Fortitude: The Experiences of Women in Court as Victims
of Sexual Assault, Gender Bias and the Law Project
(1996); J Cashmore,
‘The Prosecution of Child Sexual Assault: A Survey of NSW DPP
Solicitors’
Australian and New Zealand Journal of Criminology
(1987) 11 NSWLR 12
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
; New South Wales,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Assembly, 18 October 2006, 2958 (G
McBride—Minister for Gaming and Racing and Minister for the Central
New South Wales Law Reform
Commission,
Jury Directions
, CP 4 (2008), [7.39]; Judicial Commission of
New South Wales,
Sexual Assault Handbook
<www.judcom.nsw.gov.au/publications
/benchbks/sexual_assault/index.html> at 14 April 2010 24 March 2010.
D Boniface, ‘The Common
Sense of Jurors vs The Wisdom of the Law: Judicial Directions and Warning in
Sexual Assault Trials’
(2005) 11(1)
University of New South Wales Law
National Child Sexual Assault
Reform Committee,
Alternative Models for Prosecuting Child Sex Offences in
, unpublished (2009),
NSW Adult Sexual
Assault Interagency Committee,
A Fair Chance: Proposals for Sexual Assault
Law Reform in NSW
Queensland Law Reform Commission,
A Review of Jury Directions
(2009), [7.82]
New South Wales Law
Reform Commission,
Jury Directions
, CP 4 (2008), [7.35].
Judicial Commission of New South
Sexual Assault Handbook
(2009) <www.judcom.nsw.gov.au/
publications/benchbks/sexual_assault/index.html> at 14 April 2010 24 March
J Wood, ‘Sexual Assault
and the Admission of Evidence’ (Paper presented at Practice and
Prevention: Contemporary Issues
in Adult Sexual Assault in New South Wales,
Sydney, 12 February 2003),
Criminal Justice
Sexual Offences Taskforce (NSW Attorney General’s Department),
Responding to Sexual Assault: The Way Forward
(2005), 104.
Australian Law Reform
Commission, New South Wales Law Reform Commission and Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Uniform Evidence Law
, ALRC 102, NSWLRC Report 112, VLRC FR
(2005), [18.72]
For details of this
research see, Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Sexual Offences: Interim
(2003), [2.43]. See also, Australian Law Reform Commission, New South
Wales Law Reform Commission and Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Evidence Law
, ALRC 102, NSWLRC Report 112, VLRC FR (2005),
[18.72]–[18.73]; A Cossins, ‘Time Out for Longman: Myths, Science
Common Law’ (2010, under review)
Melbourne University Law
Australian Law
Reform Commission, New South Wales Law Reform Commission and Victorian Law
Reform Commission,
Uniform Evidence Law
, ALRC 102, NSWLRC Report 112,
VLRC FR (2005), [18.73]. Note also that some jurisdictions have abolished
corroboration warning requires
in respect of all witnesses: see, eg, uniform
Evidence Acts
Ibid, [18.73].
Crimes Act 1958
s 61(1)(b).
Longman v The
[1989] HCA 60
(1989) 168 CLR 79.
Crofts v The Queen
[1996] HCA 22
(1996) 186 CLR
Longman v The Queen
[1989] HCA 60
(1989) 168 CLR 79
, 91. See also
See, eg, Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Jury Directions
, Final Report No 17 (2009); Queensland Law
Reform Commission,
A Review of Jury Directions
, WP67 (2009); New South
Wales Law Reform Commission,
Jury Directions
, CP 4 (2008); L Chapman,
Review of South Australia Rape and Sexual Assault Law: Discussion Paper
(2006); Tasmania Law Reform Institute,
Warnings in Sexual Offences Cases
Relating to Delay in Complaint
, Final Report No 8 (2006); Australian Law
Reform Commission, New South Wales Law Reform Commission and Victorian Law
Reform Commission,
Uniform Evidence Law
, ALRC 102, NSWLRC Report 112,
VLRC FR (2005); Criminal Justice Sexual Offences Taskforce (NSW Attorney
General’s Department),
Responding to Sexual Assault: The Way Forward
(2005); Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Sexual Offences: Final
(2004); Legislative Council Standing Committee on Law and
Justice—Parliament of New South Wales,
Report on Child Sexual Assault
Prosecutions
, Report No 22 (2002). See also A Cossins, ‘Time Out for
Longman: Myths, Science and the Common Law’ (2010, under review)
Melbourne University Law Review
Dyers v The Queen
[2002] HCA 45
(2002) 210 CLR 285
Doggett v The Queen
(2001) 208 CLR 343
[1999] HCA 42
(1999) 197 CLR 162
Crampton v The Queen
[2000] HCA 60
(2000) 206 CLR
[2002] NSWCCA 60
, [14]–[15].
[95]. See, eg,
R v Heuston
[2003] NSWCCA
Criminal Justice Sexual
Offences Taskforce (NSW Attorney General’s Department),
Responding to
Sexual Assault: The Way Forward
(2005), 89–90. See also, New South
Wales Law Reform Commission,
Jury Directions
, CP 4 (2008),
[7.49]–[7.54]; Tasmania Law Reform Institute,
Warnings in Sexual
Offences Cases Relating to Delay in Complaint
, Final Report No 8 (2006),
[2.1.1]–[2.2.1], [2.3.1]–[2.3.2].
A Cossins, ‘Time Out for
Longman: Myths, Science and the Common Law’ (2010, under review)
Melbourne University Law Review
See Tasmania Law Reform
Warnings in Sexual Offences Cases Relating to Delay in
, Final Report No 8 (2006),
Australian Law Reform
Commission, New South Wales Law Reform Commission and Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Uniform Evidence Law
, ALRC 102, NSWLRC Report 112, VLRC FR
(2005), [18.100]. See [18.101]–[18.102] for the principal arguments in
support of each
of these options.
Ibid, 628, Rec 18–3. See also [18.130]–[18.146] for the
NSWLRC’s views in relation to this
recommendation.
Differences between
these provisions include that in s 165B(2) of the Commonwealth and Victorian
Acts, application must be made
by ‘the defendant’, while in s
165B(2) of the NSW Act application must be made by ‘a party’. Also,
Act is alone in providing a non-exhaustive list of factors that may be
regarded as establishing a significant forensic disadvantage,
discussed in the final report: Victorian Law Reform Commission,
, Final Report No 17 (2009), 105.
Ibid. The relevant recommendation
is Rec 37 at 106: ‘The issue of delay in complaint in criminal trials
should be governed
by a provision in the legislation, substantially adopting
Evidence Act 2008
, in lieu of s 61 of the
‘Time Out for Longman: Myths, Science and the Common Law’ (2010,
under review)
Melbourne University Law Review
Uniform Evidence Acts, s
Evidence Act 1995
Evidence Act
Evidence Act 2008
Pursuant to
Evidence Act
Queensland Law Reform Commission,
A Review of Jury Directions
(2009), Rec 7-1; Tasmania Law Reform Institute,
Warnings in Sexual Offences
Cases Relating to Delay in Complaint
, Final Report No 8 (2006), Rec 2.
South Australia,
Parliamentary
, House of Assembly, 25 October 2007, 1449 (M
Atkinson—Attorney-General, Minister for Justice, Minister for
Multicultural Affairs).
‘Time Out for Longman: Myths, Science and the Common Law’ (2010,
under review)
Melbourne University Law Review
Cf Uniform Evidence Acts,
Evidence Act
Evidence Acts, s 165B(3).
Evidence Act 1929
s 34CB(3)(a).
National Child
Sexual Assault Reform Committee,
Alternative Models for Prosecuting Child Sex
Offences in Australia
, unpublished (2009), 71–75.
The proposed wording
would require the judge to inform the jury that they ‘may’ take the
forensic disadvantage into
account in determining whether the prosecution has
proved its case beyond reasonable doubt. Uniform Evidence Acts 165B(2) provides
the court must
‘inform the jury of the nature of that disadvantage
to take the disadvantage into account when considering the
evidence’ (emphasis added).
Kilby v The Queen
[1973] HCA 30
(1973) 129 CLR
Procedure Act 1986
Criminal Law (Sexual Offences) Act
Evidence Act 1906
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 371A;
Evidence (Miscellaneous Provisions)
v The Queen
[1996] HCA 22
(1996) 186 CLR 427.
This history is taken from Australian Law Reform Commission, New South Wales
Law Reform Commission and Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Uniform Evidence
, ALRC 102, NSWLRC Report 112, VLRC FR (2005),
[18.147]–[18.151].
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
Evidence Act 1906
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 371A;
Evidence (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 1991
Sexual Offences (Evidence and Procedure)
(NT). Note that the judge is not required to warn the jury that
delay in complaint does not necessarily indicate that the allegation
pursuant to s 61(1)(b) of the
Crimes Act 1958
(Vic). Note that
Criminal Law (Sexual Offences) Act 1978
(Qld) differs from all other
provisions.
New South Wales Law
Reform Commission,
Jury Directions
, CP 4 (2008),
See, the list of reports
cited in relation to
See also, Victorian Law
Reform Commission,
Jury Directions
, Final Report No 17 (2009), [3.123];
Australian Law Reform Commission, New South Wales Law Reform Commission and
Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Uniform Evidence Law
, ALRC 102, NSWLRC
Report 112, VLRC FR (2005),
[18.152]–[28.258].
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Jury Directions
, Final Report No 17
(2009), [3.122]; Tasmania Law Reform Institute,
Warnings in Sexual Offences
Cases Relating to Delay in Complaint
, Final Report No 8 (2006), [2.1.6];
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Sexual Offences: Final Report
(2001) 52 NSWLR 82, [175],
Report of the
Special Commission of Inquiry into Child Protection Services in NSW
Criminal Justice Sexual
Offences Taskforce (NSW Attorney General’s Department),
Responding to
Sexual Assault: The Way Forward
(2005), 97.
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Jury Directions
, Final Report No 17 (2009),
Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Sexual Offences: Final Report
Crimes Act 1958
61(1)(b)(ii) (emphasis added) .
National Child Sexual Assault Reform Committee,
Alternative Models for
Prosecuting Child Sex Offences in Australia
, unpublished (2009), 97. See
Crimes Act 1958
(Vic) s 61(2) ‘nothing in subsection (1)
prevents a judge from making any comment on evidence given in the proceeding
it is appropriate to make in the interests of
H Donnelly,
‘Delay and the Credibility of Complainants in Sexual Assault
Proceedings’ (2007) 19(3)
Judicial Officers’ Bulletin
Tasmania Law Reform Institute,
Warnings in Sexual Offences Cases Relating to Delay in Complaint
Report No 8 (2006), 24. See also, New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
, CP 4 (2008), 151.
Criminal Justice Sexual Offences Taskforce (NSW),
Responding to Sexual
Assault: The Way Forward
(2005), Rec 37.
Australian Law Reform Commission,
New South Wales Law Reform Commission and Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Uniform Evidence Law
, ALRC 102, NSWLRC Report 112, VLRC FR (2005),
[18.169]. See also
[18.170]–[18.171].
[18.172]–[18.173].
(for Government of South Australia),
Review of South Australian Rape and
Sexual Assault Law—Discussion Paper
Evidence Act 1929
‘It is not necessary that a particular from of words be used in
giving the direction under subsection (4).’
National Child Sexual Assault
Reform Committee,
Alternative Models for Prosecuting Child Sex Offences in
, unpublished (2009), 100–101.
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Jury Directions
, Final Report No 17 (2009), 54–57, 102–105;
Queensland Law Reform Commission,
A Review of Jury Directions
(2009), 238–249; New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
, CP 4 (2008).
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Jury Directions
, Final Report No 17
(2009), [3.125]–[3.126].
Ibid, [3.127].
New South Wales Law Reform
Commission,
Jury Directions
, CP 4 (2008), Issue 7.8.
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
New South Wales
Law Reform Commission,
Jury Directions
, CP 4 (2008), [7.75].
‘The judge must not
warn or suggest in any way to the jury that the law regards the
complainant’s evidence to be more
reliable or less reliable only because
of the length of time before the complainant made a preliminary or other
complaint’:
Criminal Law (Sexual Offences) Act 1978
Queensland Law Reform
Commission,
A Review of Jury Directions
, WP67 (2009), [7.45]; Tasmania
Law Reform Institute,
Warnings in Sexual Offences Cases Relating to Delay in
, Final Report No 8 (2006),
(Vic) s 61(1)(b)(i) provides that the judge ‘must inform the jury
that there may be good reasons why a victim of sexual assault
may delay or
hesitate in complaining about it’. See also National Child Sexual Assault
Reform Committee,
Alternative Models for Prosecuting Child Sex Offences in
, unpublished (2009), 98; L Chapman,
Review of South Australia
Rape and Sexual Assault Law: Discussion Paper
Queensland Law Reform
Commission,
A Review of Jury Directions
, WP67 (2009), Proposal
See Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Sexual Offences: Final Report
(2004), Rec
Crimes Act 1958
(Vic) s 61(1)(b)(i).
Criminal Law (Sexual Offences) Act 1978
See, amendment to
proposed by the QLRC: Queensland Law Reform Commission,
A Review of
Jury Directions
, WP67 (2009), Proposal
Crimes Act 1958
(Vic) s 61(2);
Criminal Law (Sexual Offences) Act 1978
Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Sexual Offences: Final Report
(2004), [5.83]. Associate
Professor John Willis considered the direction risked distracting the
jury—who will want to know
why there is a delay in complaint—and
doubted whether many people would still hold stereotypical views that delay in
is relevant to the complainant’s credibility: Victorian Law
Reform Commission,
Jury Directions
, Final Report No 17 (2009), [5.83].
Other commentators suggest that preventing such a direction from being given may
produce less
fair outcomes for complainants: National Child Sexual Assault
Reform Committee,
Alternative Models for Prosecuting Child Sex Offences in
, unpublished (2009),
See, eg, Law Reform Commission
of Victoria,
Rape and Allied Offences: Procedure and Evidence
, Discussion
Paper 5 (1987), 46–48; Law Reform Commission of Tasmania,
Recommendations on Rape and Sexual Offences
, Report 31 (1982),
‘Cross-Examination in Child Sexual Assault Trials: Evidentiary Safeguard
or an Opportunity to Confuse?’
[2009] MelbULawRw 3
Melbourne University Law
73–74; quoting Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Sexual Offences: Final
(2004), 314. See also C Eastwood and W Patton,
The Experiences of
Child Complainants of Sexual Abuse in the Criminal Justice System
Heroines of
report highlighted the experience of Indigenous women under
cross-examination in sexual offence proceedings: J Bargen,
Heroines of
Fortitude: The Experiences of Women in Court as Victims of Sexual Assault,
Gender Bias and the Law Project
‘Cross-Examination in Child Sexual Assault Trials: Evidentiary Safeguard
or an Opportunity to Confuse?’
[2009] MelbULawRw 3
Melbourne University Law
Australian Law
Reform Commission, New South Wales Law Reform Commission and Victorian Law
Reform Commission,
Uniform Evidence Law
, ALRC 102, NSWLRC Report 112,
VLRC FR (2005), 153.
Evidence Act 1995
Australian Law Reform
Commission, New South Wales Law Reform Commission and Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Uniform Evidence Law
, ALRC 102, NSWLRC Report 112, VLRC FR
(2005), [5.123].
Evidence Act
Evidence Act 1929
Evidence Act
Evidence Act 1906
Evidence Act 2001
Evidence Act 1939
‘Cross-Examination in Child Sexual Assault Trials: Evidentiary Safeguard
or an Opportunity to Confuse?’
[2009] MelbULawRw 3
Melbourne University Law
Crimes Act 1914
Criminal Procedure Act
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
Evidence Act 1977
Evidence Act 1906
Evidence Act 1929
Evidence (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 1991
(ACT) s 38D;
Sexual Offences (Evidence and
Procedure) Act 1983
Crimes Act 1914
discussed below.
Evidence Act
South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Questioning of Complainants by
Unrepresented Accused in Sexual Offence Trials
, Report No 101
[1.13]–[1.17].
submissions to Ibid, [2.11].
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Sexual Offences: Final Report
[4.122]. See also Queensland Law Reform Commission,
The Receipt of Evidence
by Queensland Courts: The Evidence of Children
, Report No 55 (Part 2)
(2000), 272–273.
Procedure Act 1986
prohibits personal cross-examination by an
unrepresented accused in ‘prescribed sexual offence proceedings’
Sexual Offences (Evidence and Procedure) Act
prohibits the cross-examination of a child complainant
(that is the child who is alleged to be the victim of the offence) and
prohibits the cross-examination of a child witness (other than the child
complainant) unless the court grants leave to do so. Both
of these sections
apply to sexual offence proceedings as specified in
It is made clear that
these protections apply to committal proceedings and other proceedings related
to the prosecution of the prescribed
Procedure Act 2009
‘Protected witness’ is defined
broadly and includes the complainant, a family member of the complainant, a
family member
of the accused person, and any other witness that the court
declares protected.
‘Prescribed special offence’ and ‘prescribed offence’
are defined in
Evidence Act 1977
relationship’ is defined in
Evidence (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act
(ACT) s 38B(2)–(4).
Ibid s 38D(1). The protection also applies to a child or person with a
disability who is giving evidence in a sexual or violent
offence proceeding (ie,
where they are not the complainant who is already protected):
(Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1991
Evidence Act 1929
Procedure Act 1986
Evidence (Miscellaneous Provisions)
(ACT) s 38D(5). The NSW legislation does not accord with the
conclusion of the NSWLRC which had recommended that the person appointed
conduct the cross-examination should be the legal representative for the accused
for the purposes of that cross-examination: see
New South Wales Law Reform
Commission,
Questioning of Complainants by Unrepresented Accused in Sexual
Offence Trials
, Report No 101 (2003), [5.38],
Evidence Act
s 25A(1)(c)
Evidence Act 1929
s 13B(2)(b)
Offences (Evidence and Procedure) Act 1983
Evidence Act 1906
s 25A(1)(c)
Sexual Offences (Evidence and Procedure) Act 1983
Evidence Act
s 13B(2)(b).
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
Evidence Act 1977
s 21O(2)(b).
Criminal Procedure
Where an accused refuses this representation, the court must
warn them that they will not be allowed to adduce evidence from another
that contradicts the evidence of the protected witness where the protected
witness has not been given the opportunity to
respond to that contradictory
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
The ACT also makes
this explicit in its legislation:
Evidence (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act
(ACT) s 38D(4)(b). This is known as the rule in
Browne v Dunn
Browne v Dunn
(1893) 6 R 67.
Evidence Act 1977
Criminal Procedure Act
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
Evidence Act 1977
Evidence Act 1929
Evidence (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1991
(ACT) s 38D(7);
South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Questioning of Complainants by
Unrepresented Accused in Sexual Offence Trials
, Report No 101 (2003),
[5.19]–[5.20].
[2008] NSWCCA 122
(2008) 185 A Crim R 1
R v MSK and MAK
[2004] NSWCCA 308
(2004) 61 NSWLR 204.
For example, by the trial judge
(Sully J) in
R v MSK and MAK
[2004] NSWCCA 308
(2004) 61 NSWLR
Criminal Procedure Act
Victorian Law
Reform Commission,
Sexual Offences: Final Report
(2004), [4.141]; New
South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Questioning of Complainants by
Unrepresented Accused in Sexual Offence Trials
, Report No 101 (2003),
[5.11]–[5.12], [5.21]; Queensland Law Reform Commission,
The Receipt of
Evidence by Queensland Courts: The Evidence of Children
, Report No 55
South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Questioning of Complainants by
Unrepresented Accused in Sexual Offence Trials
, Report No 101 (2003),
[5.7]–[5.10].
For example,
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
Criminal Procedure Act
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
Procedure Act 2009
For example,
Evidence Act 1906
Evidence (Children and Special
Witnesses) Act 2001
For example,
Procedure Act 1986
Evidence Act 1929
For example,
example, Tasmania.
For example,
while a court in Victoria may direct that only persons specified by the court be
permitted to be present while the
witness is giving evidence, in NSW,
proceedings must be held in closed court when the complainant gives evidence:
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
Criminal Procedure Act
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
Criminal Procedure
div 3 inserted by the
Criminal Procedure
Amendment (Evidence) Act 2005
Criminal Procedure Act
a recording of a police interview: Ibid
New South Wales,
Parliamentary Debates
, L Assembly, 3 March 2005, 14649 (B
Debus—Attorney General and Minister for the
Environment).
Evidence Act
ALRC CP1 Family Violence � Improving Legal Frameworks
19. Integrated Responses and Best
Introduction
Integrated responses
Terminology
Integrated responses in Australia
Australian Capital Territory
New South Wales
Northern Territory
South Australia
Western Australia
Commissions’ views
Maintaining momentum
Common policies and objectives
Inter-agency collaboration
Need and value of collaboration
Challenges of collaboration
Methods of collaboration
Victim support
Commissions’ views
Legal advice and representation
Victims’ compensation
Training and education
Existing proposals and recommendations
Audiences for training
Good practice and existing resources
Data collection and evaluation
19. Integrated Responses and Best
Introduction
19.1 This Part examines ways of improving interaction between legal
frameworks in the context of family violence, and improving consistency
interpretation and application of laws governing sexual assault in the family
violence context. Consistent with the Terms of Reference
of this Inquiry, the
focus is upon the practical impact of legal frameworks and improving the safety
of women and children. The interaction
in practice of legal frameworks requires
consideration not only of the legal frameworks, but also of institutional
frameworks, practice
and culture.
19.2 This chapter looks at integrated responses and their elements, including
governing policies; victim support; inter-agency collaboration;
information
sharing; education and training; and data collection. The next chapter addresses
specialisation, with a particular focus
on specialised courts. Specialisation,
of course, may be a feature of integrated responses in the same way as the other
discussed in this chapter, but is dealt with in a separate chapter for
the sake of convenience.
19.3 This chapter first discusses ‘integrated responses’ (also
known as ‘community coordinated responses’
or ‘multi-agency
responses’) generally, followed by an overview of integrated responses in
relation to family violence
in Australia and the corresponding issues that arise
in this Inquiry. While child protection is discussed incidentally in this
strategies of integration particular to child protection are discussed
mainly in Chapters 13 and 14. Following this discussion, elements
integrated responses—such as governing policies and victim
support—are considered in detail.
[back to top]
19.4 ‘Integrated responses’ to family violence have flourished
since a pioneering model, the Domestic Abuse Intervention
Project, was
established in Duluth, Minnesota in 1981 (the Duluth Model). This model is based
on four key principles: the need for
coordination and co-operation between
agencies; the need for collaboration between partners; a focus on victim safety;
and the need
for offenders to be held accountable for their
The Duluth model features
offender programs, community awareness-raising and training, and case
management. It works in tandem with,
and monitors, criminal justice services. A
similar model was adopted in Hamilton, New Zealand in
Terminology
Integration
19.5 ‘Integration’ is sometimes considered synonymous with the
terms ‘coordination’, ‘cooperation’
‘collaboration’. These latter terms tend to indicate degrees of
integration. Agencies that coordinate service delivery
‘might share
information and dovetail their processes but they do so essentially in order to
each pursue their own goals more
efficiently’.
Integration, on
the other hand, requires:
agencies to decide on and articulate common goals and agree on ways to pursue
those goals. Integration of services is more than coordinated
delivery—it is a whole new service. Co-location of agencies, agreed
protocols and codes of practice, joint service
agencies reconstituting or realigning their core business to confront
the challenges posed by a broadened conception of
the problem: these
are the key indicators of an
integrated response.
19.6 Cooperation, coordination and integration may be conceptualised as part
of a scale of integration, as set out below:
Cooperative links
Coordination
Integration
Parties/agencies act without reference to each other, although the actions
of one may affect the other(s).
Parties establish ongoing ties, but formal surrender of independence not
required. A willingness to work together for some common
goals. Communication
emphasised. Requires good will and some mutual understanding.
Planned harmonisation of activities between the separate parties.
Duplication of activities and resources is minimised. Requires agreed
protocols or appointment of an external coordinator or (case) manager.
Links between the separate parties draw them into a single system.
Boundaries between parties begin to dissolve as they become effectively
units of sub groups within a single larger organisation.
M Fine, P Kuru and C Thomson,
Coordinated and Integrated
Human Service Delivery Models: Final Report
(2005) Social Policy Research
Centre, University of NSW, 4.
19.7 According to this scale, most of the ‘integrated’ responses
described in this chapter are described more accurately
as forming cooperative
links or coordination, rather than integration.
19.8 Integration may occur at different levels, such as at the level of the
national or state government, at the local level, and
between individual
consumers and staff. The degree of integration may be loose—where there
are independent decentralised organisations
‘interacting as the occasion
arises’—or tight—where there are centralised independent
organisational units
acting in a coordinated or collaborative
19.9 There are also different models of integration. A report produced for
the NSW Cabinet Office and Premier’s Department in
2005 identified 10
different models of service delivery including, ‘one stop shops’
(involving co-location of services),
‘case management’ (integrated
delivery of services focusing on client outcomes) and ‘inter-agency
collaboration’
(which corresponds loosely to integrated responses as used
The report noted that most
projects tend to combine elements of these different conceptual models.
Integrated responses
19.10 The term ‘integrated responses’ is typically used in the
literature to refer specifically to inter-agency models
of collaboration, often
based on the Duluth model. They may be distinguished from ‘whole of
government’ responses to
family violence, which are government policy
frameworks that span a range of departments and agencies. Whole of government
may form an element of an integrated response (as discussed below),
but they do not necessarily exhibit other features of an integrated
such as mechanisms for inter-agency collaboration and (ideally) seamless service
19.11 Other mechanisms of integration—such as information sharing,
combined jurisdictions, and cooperative responses in relation
protection—are considered elsewhere in this Consultation
These mechanisms may form
part of an integrated response, but are not typically considered an
‘integrated response’ in
the sense described below.
19.12 An integrated response typically will have a common set of
aims—the key ones being victim safety and offender
accountability—and
guiding principles that embed a shared understanding of
family violence. Features of an integrated response may include:
common policies and objectives, including possibly pro-arrest and
prosecution policies;
inter-agency collaboration and information sharing, including
possibly: coordinated leadership across services and resources; sharing
resources and protocols; and inter-agency tracking and management of family
violence incidents;
involvement of, and recognition of the need for, victim support;
commitment to ongoing training and education;
ongoing data collection and evaluation, with a view to system review
and process improvements; and
specialised family violence courts, lists and case management
(discussed in Chapter 20), and offender programs for those who engage
violence (discussed in Chapters 6 and
19.13 While a
comprehensive integrated response has all of these features, not all features
are required for a project to be considered
an integrated response. Both
comprehensive, and more limited, integrated responses in the family violence
context in Australia are
discussed below.
19.14 In less comprehensive models, mechanisms of integration differ widely.
In some cases, integration occurs at the level of policy,
usually in the form of
steering or coordinating committees. In other cases, integration may focus on
the delivery of services by
a number of agencies. A number of projects focus on
improving liaison between police and family violence services, particularly
police refer victims to victim support services, with the victim’s
consent. These are often known as ‘fax-back protocols’,
typically fax the details of the victim to the service.
19.15 In some jurisdictions, such as the ACT and Tasmania, the
‘integrated response’ covers the entire jurisdiction at
policy and operational level, while in other jurisdictions, such as New South
Wales, the projects are more localised.
19.16 Integrated responses offer a number of potential advantages. Ideally,
agencies involved in service delivery for family violence
victims should share
similar understandings of the phenomenon of family violence and have similar
goals; share information and good
practice; connect services seamlessly for
victims; improve service delivery for victims; and reflect critically on ways of
the safety of victims and the accountability of those who engage in
family violence.
[back to top]
Integrated responses
in Australia
19.17 Integrated responses to family violence in Australia have flourished in
the past decade and are generally fostered in relatively
small-scale
communities. The most comprehensive responses are in the small jurisdictions of
the ACT and Tasmania, combining both
policy and operational levels within a
broad strategic vision. In Victoria, a broader policy response has been
initiated, with funding
for smaller-scale local partnerships as part of an
Integrated Family Violence Service program. In other Australian jurisdictions,
the focus so far has been on small-scale projects. The following is a brief
overview of the large-scale projects, and notable smaller-scale
projects, in
each Australian jurisdiction (discussed in alphabetical
Australian Capital
19.18 The Family Violence Intervention Program (FVIP) is a coordinated
criminal justice response established in 1998, following the
recommendation of
the ACT Community Law Reform Committee in
It includes most of the
key elements of the Duluth model. Its focus is the criminal justice system in
the context of family violence.
The FVIP operates within the context of an
overarching ACT Government policy framework oriented towards the safety of women
19.19 The FVIP has no legislative basis and operates under protocols
established in 1998 and under a 2006 Memorandum of Agreement.
The key agencies
involved are the Australian Federal Police (ACT Policing); Office of the
Director of Public Prosecutions (ODPP);
ACT Magistrates’ Court; ACT
Corrective Services; Domestic Violence Crisis Service (DVCS); Office for
Children, Youth and Family
Support; Policy and Regulatory Division, Department
of Justice and Community Safety; and the Office of the Victims of Crime
Coordinator.
19.20 At the policy level, the FVIP is steered by a coordinating committee
chaired by the Victims of Crime Coordinator (acting as
the Domestic Violence
Project Coordinator).
of the committee is to act as the forum for discussion about strategic planning
and coordination, as well as policy and
procedural frameworks.
19.21 The core components of the FVIP are:
pro-charge, pro-arrest policies with a presumption against
early provision of victim support (by DVCS);
pro-prosecution policies;
coordination and case management; and
an offender program as a sentencing
19.22 Under
the FVIP, police are encouraged to lay charges and arrest offenders when they
are called to an incident. They are trained
in evidence collection methods
particular to family violence and equipped with Family Violence Investigation
Kits. DVCS workers are
and offer victim support services at the time of the incident, as well
ongoing victim support. The police identify all family violence incidents and
these are transferred to a specialist list for family
violence matters in the
Magistrates’ Court. The ODPP is responsible for prosecuting and their
policy is to continue prosecutions
even where victims are reluctant or give
unfavourable evidence. Evidence is disclosed earlier, in line with a practice
and all pre-trial matters are managed by a single magistrate,
although trials are heard by other magistrates in the court. If a person
found guilty, the usual result is the imposition of a good behaviour bond with a
number of conditions, and may include a mandated
referral to a behaviour change
program for offenders run by ACT Corrective Services.
19.23 The FVIP has been implemented in phases, and a key feature of the FVIP
is the periodic evaluation of the
The evaluations
indicate that the FVIP has helped to establish better relations between
agencies; has contributed to victim safety
and protection; has contributed to
offender accountability by ensuring incidents are charged and processed in
court; and has implemented
practices to improve and develop the
19.24 In New South Wales, integrated responses to family violence have tended
to be localised, smaller-scale and focused on service
delivery. These projects
include (but are not limited to):
Mt Druitt Family Violence Response and Support Strategy;
Canterbury Bankstown Inter-agency Domestic Violence Response
Green Valley Domestic Violence Service;
Domestic Assault Response Team (Tuggerah Lakes);
Domestic Violence Intervention Response Team (Brisbane Water);
Staying Home Leaving Violence (Bega and East Sydney);
Operation Choice (Shoalhaven and Lake Illawarra);
Manning/Great Lakes Police and Women’s Refuge Partnership
Against Domestic Violence Project; and
Domestic Violence Intervention Court Model (Wagga Wagga and
Campbelltown) (discussed in Chapter
19.25 Some of
these, such as the Domestic Violence Intervention Response Team, involve police
referring victims to victim support
workers. The Green Valley project refers
victims of family violence to a specialist team of family violence, drug and
alcohol and
child protection workers located within NSW Health, and also
facilitates applications for housing.
19.26 The Wyong and Tuggerah Lakes Domestic Assault Response Team (DART)
combines police and Department of Community Services (DoCS)
caseworkers. When
police apply for a protection order in relation to family violence, the DART is
alerted and performs an extensive
background check on the parties, including any
child protection interventions and outcomes and current or pending Family Court
The police conduct home visits or contact victims and, if children are
involved, a DART caseworker also comes to explain child protection
make appropriate referrals. In joint meetings between DoCS and police, high-risk
families are identified for support through
‘intensive case
management’.
In 2007, an
independent review emphasised the need for coordination in the delivery of
services in relation to family violence in
This has led to the
establishment of both a centralised Violence Prevention Coordination Unit (VPCU)
within the NSW Department of
Premier and Cabinet, and an expert advisory
committee, the Premier’s Council on Preventing Violence against Women. The
and the Premier’s Council are currently developing a Strategic
Framework for addressing family violence in NSW, which is likely
to strengthen
inter-agency responses.
19.27 In the Northern Territory, the Ngaanyatjarra Pitjantjatjara
Yankunytjatjara Women’s Council have established the Cross
Domestic Violence Service, which covers a remote area crossing the borders of
the Northern Territory, South Australia and
Western Australia. It provides
access to medical and legal services, and also focuses on the development of
inter-agency protocols.
service does not appear to have been evaluated.
19.28 In 2009, Queensland released a whole of government strategy for
addressing family violence.
focused on five areas of reform: prevention; early identification and
intervention; connected victim support services; perpetrator
accountability; and
system planning and
coordination.
It also includes a
focus on improving integrated
As part of its
2009–10 program of action, one key measure is to test an enhanced
integrated response in Rockhampton, comprising:
case management services for
those with multiple support needs; a specialised court program; enhanced legal
services; offender programs;
community awareness raising and capacity building
of the service sector.
19.29 A long-running integrated response in Queensland is the
Coast Domestic Violence Integrated Response (GCDVIR), a community-based response
which has been operating since 1996. It has
a coordinating committee with
representatives from family violence centres and shelters; police; the Gold
Coast Hospital; the Southport
Magistrates Court; Legal Aid; the offenders’
program service provider; and government departments for corrective services,
justice, child safety, community services, and housing.
19.30 The GCDVIR has developed a number of programs, including:
the Police Fax Back Project (a fax-back protocol);
Domestic Violence Court Assistance Program: a secure and specially
designed family violence office at the Southport Magistrates Court,
the Domestic Violence Prevention Centre Gold Coast Inc (DVPC), which provides
victim support, information and advocacy;
Mandated Men’s Program: a 24-week court-ordered family
violence program for offenders, run collaboratively by Community Correction
Southport and DVPC;
the Safety First Project: a service where basic information and a
comprehensive risk assessment about women leaving refuges is faxed
to the DVPC
for quicker access to its services;
inter-agency protocols on communication and inter-agency training;
development of family violence
19.31 Townsville and Thuringowa in northern Queensland have
developed an integrated response to family violence, known as Dovetail.
Government partners include Centrelink, Corrective Services, Department of Child
Safety, Department of Communities and Department
of Housing. Dovetail partners
also include the legal sector—Family Court, Legal Aid, Legal Services,
Townsville Magistrates
Court—as well as the police; city councils; and
non-government services, including the North Queensland Domestic Violence
Service, Salvation Army, and women’s
19.32 These agencies commit to key principles and goals, including the
development of protocols for all services, and monitoring of
the legislation and
family violence systems. Agencies meet regularly and monitor relevant programs,
which include fax-back protocols
with the police; court support; and offender
19.33 The Logan River Valley Integrated Community Response to Domestic
Violence Group Fax-Back Project also provides a fax-back process
19.34 The South Australian Government, as part of its Women’s Safety
Strategy and Keeping them Safe—Child Protection Agenda,
piloted the Family
Safety Framework (FSF) in Holden Hill, the South Coast Local Service area and
the Far North Local Service Area
between late 2007 and 2008.
19.35 The FSF involves an inter-agency agreement on key principles and is
focused on targeting high risk families for risk assessment
by a local Family
Safety Meeting, attended by a range of agencies. The sharing of information in
that meeting is governed by a specially
developed Information Protocol, and an
Action Plan is prepared for each referral. The agencies involved in the Protocol
include the
police, a range of government departments, and non-government family
violence services. No additional funding was allocated to agencies.
19.36 The FSF was evaluated in November 2008 and was found to have achieved
improved responses to victims and their children and enhanced
victim safety and
reduced re-victimisation.
October 2009, the FSF was expanded to three other
19.37 Tasmania has implemented ‘Safe at Home’, an integrated
whole of government criminal justice response to family violence.
Safe at Home
comprises 16 funded initiatives across the Departments of Justice; Police and
Public Safety; Health and Human Services;
and Premier and Cabinet. Part of the
response included the reforms that led to the
Family Violence Act 2004
(Tas). The Department of Justice is responsible for its implementation; a
Statewide Steering Committee chaired by the Department of
Premier and Cabinet is
responsible for high level issues including resource distribution; and an
Inter-Departmental Committee chaired
by the Department of Justice is responsible
for operational planning and development, supported by Regional Coordinating
Committees.
19.38 In respect of police,
initiatives include a Family Violence Response and Referral Line, which operates
24 hours a day, seven
days a week and refers callers either to police,
counselling or support services; specialist Victim Safety Response Teams (VSRT)
in each policing district; and specialist police prosecutors. Police attending
family violence incidents play a key role in identifying
the presence of family
violence; administering risk assessment tools; and entering a Family Violence
Management System report which
is quality assured by a VSRT or supervising
Sergeant. Operational police also issue police-initiated Family Violence Orders,
for Family Violence
determine bail, and
prepare oppositions to bail. Police are also responsible for notifying Children
and Family Services if a child
is affected by family
19.39 There are weekly Integrated Case Coordination (ICC) meetings attended
by relevant agencies to consider all new and ‘active’
violence cases in each policing district, supported by an ICC database linking
police and Department of Justice
19.40 Victim support is provided by a Court Support and Liaison Service, a
Child Witness Service and a Special Needs Liaison Service,
which provide support
to victims, children and people with special needs such as drug and alcohol
problems (respectively). In addition,
there is a specialist Children and Young
Person’s Program counselling service. For offenders, there is a Family
Violence Offender
Intervention Program.
19.41 Specific additional funding has been provided for legal aid, the
Tasmanian Magistrates’ Court and the Department responsible
protection. There has also been specific funding for alternative accommodation
for offenders removed from their
and for the Ya Pulingina
Kani Aboriginal Advisory Group, to advise on the most culturally appropriate
ways to manage Aboriginal offenders
and provide support to Aboriginal adult and
child victims.
19.42 The Safe at Home initiative was independently reviewed in June
The review found evidence
that the objectives were being achieved, but made 37 recommendations for
improvement, including: the adoption
of family safety as a unifying paradigm; a
strengthened risk assessment
a Victim Rights
Charter; case management for high-risk offenders; establishment of a specialist
family violence court and use of
specialist prosecutors; and improved support
for child witnesses.
19.43 In 2002, the Victorian Government established a Statewide Steering
Committee to Reduce Family Violence, including representatives
from police,
government departments, family violence services, the courts, peak bodies for
family violence, support organisations
for sexual assault victims, the No to
Violence Male Family Violence Prevention Association, legal services and the
Victorian Health
Foundation.
This Committee
advised on the need for, and developed a model for, an integrated response in
Victoria. The Government also established
an Indigenous Family Violence Task
Force in 2002, which reported in
19.44 Since 2005, the Victorian Government has invested $140 million in whole
of government policies to address violence against
These initiatives
reforms to family violence and sexual offences legislation, based on
the recommendations in two reports of the Victorian Law Reform
Commission;
a new Code of Practice and five-year strategy plan for the Victorian
police in respect of family
the establishment of specialist family violence courts, as well as
sexual assault lists and prosecution teams and multi-disciplinary
sexual assault
the provision of counselling and offender treatment programs in the
context of family violence and sexual assault;
the establishment and funding of a child witness service;
funding for the Department of Human Services for partnerships with
community and local organisations to provide integrated services
housing, counselling and treatment programs (known as the Integrated Family
Violence Service program);
the development of a comprehensive risk assessment framework and
ten-year plans to: address Indigenous family
prevent violence
against women;
forthcoming
Strategic Framework for Family Violence Reform 2010–20
to build on existing reforms for the handling of family violence.
19.45 The Integrated Family Violence Service program includes
common risk assessment tools, protocols, and accreditation and funding
specialist family violence services according to a Code of
19.46 One notable multi-agency local project in Victoria is the Violence
Against Women Integrated Services Partnership project in
Warrnambool. The key
focus of this partnership has been the establishment of protocols responding to
family violence with the police,
the Magistrates Court, Accident and Emergency
Department at South West Healthcare, Emma House Domestic Violence Services and
Salvation Army. These partners refer victims, with their consent, to Emma
House, through a fax-back service. Services such as counselling,
referrals to
mental health and sexual assault services, and a children’s worker are
provided. The Salvation Army provides emergency
accommodation for offenders; the
Warrnambool Magistrates’ Court operates a special family violence list to
enable victim support
on-site; the RSPCA provides emergency accommodation for
pets; and the partnership meets monthly to discuss broader strategic
19.47 In Western Australia, an integrated response is developing through
whole of government strategic plans to address family violence,
developed and
implemented by a Senior Officers’ Group, consisting of senior state and
Australian Government departmental representatives
as well as the community
sector. As part of the 2004–08 plan, the Western Australian Government
developed specialist Family
Violence Courts (discussed in Chapter 20) and
protocols between the police and child protection
authorities.
19.48 The 2009–13 plan commits to a range of initiatives, including a
focus on prevention and early intervention strategies;
and a ‘statewide
integrated response’ for victims of family violence, including an
accessible, integrated 24-hour response
throughout the
19.49 There are two notable local multi-agency projects in Western Australia.
The first inter-agency model adopted in Western Australia
was the Armadale
Domestic Violence Intervention Project (ADVIP), established in 1993. It includes
representatives from the police,
women’s refuges, community corrections,
the hospital and Curtin University. Fortnightly Core Group meetings are held to
problems in specific cases and to coordinate interventions in particular
cases, while monthly meetings of the Inter-agency Safety
Committee focus on
broader systemic issues.
accountability audit has been conducted of the
19.50 Domestic Violence Advocacy Support Central in Perth provides a
‘one stop shop’ for family violence services, through
co-location of refuge, legal, family support, police and counselling services.
The agencies involved include Orana Women’s
Refuge, Legal Aid, Police and
Department for Community Development, with visiting sessions from Centrecare and
the Domestic Violence
Children’s Counselling
Commissions’
19.51 Integrated responses seem to offer clear benefits for service delivery
to victims, including—importantly for this Inquiry—benefits
improving experiences for victims involved in multiple proceedings across
different legal frameworks. For example, fax-back protocols
between police and
victim support services, and co-location of services, facilitate victims’
access to a range of legal options
and referrals. Another benefit is that such
responses enable networks to be formed across services and government
departments at
a local level, fostering collaboration and communication between
key players in different legal frameworks, and providing ongoing
improvements to
practice and understanding. The precise costs and benefits depend, of course,
upon the models adopted.
19.52 As discussed above, a number of Australian jurisdictions have either
implemented or are in the process of implementing integrated
responses. In other
Australian jurisdictions, however, the ‘integrated responses’ that
exist are mostly small-scale operations,
focused on liaison between police and
victim support services. It is clearly desirable for integrated responses to be
developed in
close consultation with local networks and leaders, in order to
reflect the diversity of needs and strengths in different geographical
The Commissions consider, however, that Australian states and territory
governments should have, or continue to have, responsibility
for fostering such
integrated responses.
19.53 The Commissions note that there are many ways in which governments may
foster the development of integrated responses. These
developing strategic plans;
creating statewide steering committees;
creating model information sharing protocols and/or amending
information sharing legislation;
providing training and education; and
funding locally developed initiatives.
19.54 At this
stage, the Commissions also consider that there is strong evidence that
integrated responses should, at a minimum, have
a number of key features. These
are: common policies and objectives; mechanisms for inter-agency collaboration,
including those to
ensure information sharing; provision for victim support, and
a key role for victim support organisations; training and education
and provision for data collection and evaluation. These features are discussed
in more detail in the rest of this chapter.
Specialised courts and offender
programs, which may also be features of integrated responses, are discussed in
the next chapter.
Risk assessment frameworks are discussed in Chapter 11.
19.55 There is also a role for the Australian government in promoting
integrated responses, as part of a national agenda for action
violence. The Commissions note that this may take a number of forms. For
example, much could be learnt from other Australian
development of integrated responses, and the Australian Government could
facilitate the transfer of this knowledge
between Australian jurisdictions. This
could be done through existing mechanisms such as the Standing Committee of
Attorneys-General
and the Ministerial Council for Police and Emergency
Management, or through more informal mechanisms. For example, the United Kingdom
has developed a resource manual for the development of specialist family
violence courts.
national resource manual for integrated responses could be one way of promoting
integrated responses.
19.56 The Commissions note that the Australian Domestic and Family Violence
Clearinghouse has a very useful Good Practice Database
(and Coordinator) that
provides helpful information about such
This may be a logical
starting point for training and the transfer of knowledge between jurisdictions.
Alternatively, this may be
a function for the National Centre of Excellence
recommended in the
Time for Action
report or the expert panel and
reference group recommended by the Family Law Council.
19.57 Another mechanism might be the use of federal funding to promote
initiatives. The FVIP in the ACT, for example, was established
using federal
funding for family violence.
Proposal 19–1
State and territory governments should establish
and further develop integrated responses to family violence in their respective
building on best practice. The Australian Government should also
foster the development of integrated responses at a national level.
integrated responses should include the following elements:
(a) common policies and objectives;
(b) mechanisms for inter-agency collaboration, including those to ensure
information sharing;
(c) provision for legal and non-legal victim support, and a key role for
victim support organisations;
(d) training and education programs; and
(e) provision for data collection and evaluation.
Maintaining momentum
19.58 One lesson that can be
learnt from the ACT experience with integrated responses is that it can be a
challenge to sustain the
momentum and resourcing of these integrated responses.
Integrated responses often depend on the energy, enthusiasm and expertise
people originally involved, and sustaining integrated responses when those
people move on is a key challenge.
19.59 One key aspect for retaining momentum is leadership. The Commissions
have heard from stakeholders that committed leadership
is necessary to drive
integrated (and other) responses forward. One model, used in the ACT, provides
for a statutory position of
coordinator. The ACT Victims of Crime Coordinator
chairs the FVIP in the role of Domestic Violence Project Coordinator under the
Domestic Violence Agencies Act 1986
This model has the
benefit of ensuring that one person has a statutory responsibility and resources
for driving the integrated response
forward, and ensuring a degree of continuity
and victim-focused leadership.
19.60 A separate issue is whether integrated responses themselves should have
a legislative basis. The FVIP itself, like other integrated
responses in
Australia, does not have a legislative basis. On the one hand, a legislative
basis may provide greater security, especially
in terms of funding, and may help
sustain commitment to the response as key players enter and exit. A legislative
basis could also
have the benefit of setting out statutory positions for
steering committees, special provisions on information sharing, and underlining
the importance of the integrated response as part of the core responsibilities
of key players.
19.61 On the other hand, legislation may restrict the flexibility of
integrated responses, and increase costs. Integrated responses
sensitive to the needs, strengths and existing institutions and frameworks in a
particular area, and these contextual
factors may change over time. Legislation
may also restrict the capacity of integrated responses to evolve as part of an
process of feedback.
19.62 The Commissions are interested in hearing from stakeholders whether
legislative support for integrated responses is desirable
and, if so, what such
legislation should address.
Should state and territory legislation support integrated
responses to family violence within their jurisdictions and, if so, what
this legislation address? For example, should responsibility for coordinating
integrated responses within a jurisdiction be
placed on a statutory
office-holder or agency?
19.63 As noted above, another key mechanism for ensuring critical reflection
and improvement of integrated responses is the need for
ongoing data collection
and periodic independent evaluations of integrated responses. This is discussed
further below.
19.64 While the precise model of integrated responses is clearly a matter for
relevant governments in consultation with relevant stakeholders,
common features of an integrated response which should be considered in the
development of these models. These are considered
in the rest of this chapter.
19.65 To some extent, however, these features also represent best practice,
whether inside or outside of an integrated response. The
following discussion,
therefore, is not confined to integrated responses but also considers how these
features may play a role in
improving practices generally.
[back to top]
Common policies and
19.66 One of the first steps in developing any integrated response is for key
players to agree upon shared principles and objectives.
Two common objectives in
most integrated responses are victim safety and defendant accountability.
Similar objectives are sometimes
legislation.
19.67 For example, both the integrated responses in the ACT and in Tasmania
are founded on common principles and objectives. The Safe
at Home response in
Tasmania is based on the following principles:
family violence is a crime and where evidence exists that it has
been committed arrest and prosecution will occur;
the safety of victims is paramount;
police are responsible for providing immediate intervention to
secure victim safety and manage the risk that the offender might repeat
escalate the violence;
the victim does not determine the response of the justice system;
wherever possible, victims should be able to choose to remain in or
return (as soon as possible) to their own homes; and
the criminal justice response to family violence should be seamless
and the roles and responsibilities of each participating agency
and service
should be clear.
19.68 Its objectives are to:
achieve a reduction in the level of family violence in the medium to
improve safety for adult and child victims of family violence;
change the offending behaviour of those responsible for the
19.69 These principles and objectives may also be stated as part of
a statewide plan or response. For example, similar principles
and objectives
have been stated as part of the
NSW Strategy to Reduce Violence against
; Queensland’s whole of government response to family violence,
released in July 2009;
Australia’s statement on the Women’s Safety
and Western
Australia’s strategic plan for family
At the time of
writing, both Victoria and the Northern Territory were preparing similar
strategic plans. It is likely that these
will also include shared principles and
objectives, as in other state and territory plans or strategies.
19.70 Ensuring a shared understanding of the nature of family violence and
the overall objectives of government in this field is a
foundational step in
ensuring integration.
step is to ensure that agencies commit to common policies and objectives as part
of furthering that shared understanding.
The Commissions therefore support the
development of common objectives and principles in state and territory strategic
in other inter-agency programs. However, as this first step has been,
or is being, taken in most Australian jurisdictions, the Commissions
that no proposals are required in this area.
is common, although not universal, for these principles and objectives to
include within them reference to two types of policies,
commonly known as
‘pro-arrest’ and ‘pro-prosecution’ (or
‘no-drop’) policies. Pro-arrest policies
are policies which
encourage police to arrest those committing family violence, in certain
circumstances, while pro-prosecution policies
encourage prosecution in a family
violence context. In both cases, the victim’s wishes do not determine
whether a person is
arrested or
prosecuted.
19.72 The primary objectives of such policies include: removing
responsibility (and blame) for the decision to arrest or prosecute
victim; increasing the number of arrests and prosecutions made in relation to
family violence; increasing the reporting
of incidents of family violence;
promoting more rigorous prosecution of cases; reducing the number of withdrawals
or stays of proceedings;
promoting victim cooperation in prosecutions; and
reducing re-offending.
evidence that these policies have improved the response of the criminal justice
system to family violence in Australia and
[back to top]
Inter-agency
collaboration
19.73 While inter-agency collaboration is a feature of integrated responses,
the issue of inter-agency collaboration extends well
beyond such responses. The
need for collaboration between agencies (and courts) is one of the most
important issues raised in this
Inquiry, and has been a common and strongly
emphasised theme in consultations and research to date.
19.74 Specific forms of inter-agency collaboration are discussed elsewhere in
this Consultation Paper, including in relation to cooperation
between police and
family law courts in Chapter 8, in relation to information sharing in Chapter
10, and cooperative responses in
child protection in Chapters 13 and 14.
19.75 It is convenient, however, to draw together here some of the common
issues that arise in relation to inter-agency collaboration,
building upon the
lessons learned from integrated responses. These include: the need and value of
collaboration; the challenges of
collaboration; forms and levels of
collaboration; issues relating to information sharing; and collaboration between
the federal and
state levels of government. These issues form the more general
backdrop of the proposals and suggestions for reform in relation to
inter-agency
collaboration elsewhere in this Consultation Paper.
Need and value of
collaboration
19.76 The way government services are delivered tends to follow the structure
of government. For example, services for child protection
typically are
delivered by a different department from that responsible for crime and justice.
Similarly, the delivery of legal services
reflects both jurisdictional divisions
and different governing legal frameworks.
19.77 These divisions are convenient for those administering the services,
but are less convenient for those receiving services. For
these reasons, there
has been an increasing trend towards coordination and integration of services,
by either co-locating services
or by integrating services delivered to a
particular category of
advantages of integration have been described as follows:
In essence there are three main sets of arguments for improved integration:
improved access for consumers; increased efficiency,
achieving more from the use
of limited resources; and enhanced effectiveness, resulting in enhanced outcomes
for consumers and funders.
19.78 More specifically in the context of this Inquiry, the advantages of
inter-agency collaboration include:
ensuring that victims of family violence are referred to appropriate
government services wherever and whenever they are brought into
government agencies or services;
minimising elements of duplication or inefficiencies arising from
the delivery of multiple services by multiple agencies, such as
through the
sharing of information;
increasing the capacity of services and legal systems to manage
complex cases through networks of information and services, and improving
decisions made by agencies and courts as a result;
ensuring that victims of family violence do not fall ‘through
the cracks’ of agencies and legal systems working in isolation
avoiding or reducing the prospect of conflict between measures or
policies adopted by different
of collaboration
19.79 Despite these advantages, caution needs to be exercised in the
promotion of inter-agency collaboration for its own sake. While
inter-agency
collaboration has a number of advantages:
[w]hat is required … is not the promotion of the goal of service
integration as an end in itself, but a more differential approach.
evidence of the nature and extent of problems in particular spheres of service
provision together with evidence of the value
of specific initiatives to address
these difficulties is necessary before an ongoing commitment is made to new
initiatives.
19.80 Not all services need to be integrated for all people, and services may
have such different approaches or philosophies that
they ought not be
integrated. For this reason, proposals and suggestions for inter-agency
collaboration are discussed in the specific
contexts in which they arise in this
Consultation Paper, rather than in the abstract.
19.81 It is also important to recognise a number of challenges of
inter-agency collaboration. Some of these, such as the need for
leadership and
continued commitment by key players, have been discussed earlier in this chapter
in the context of maintaining momentum
for integrated responses.
19.82 Another important challenge is the need for adequate resourcing,
training and support. Inter-agency collaboration ‘costs
pays’: it requires resourcing for staff and support systems, services, and
start up costs.
Further, staff
will experience greater pressure and will undertake ‘tasks of greater
complexity requiring more training and
expertise, time and effort, if their
resources do not
19.83 Finally, another key challenge is ensuring that the mechanisms of
collaboration are flexible enough to meet the respective needs
of the different
partners, and yet stable enough to endure.
collaboration
19.84 As discussed above, there are different mechanisms of collaboration. At
the level of policy, agencies may collaborate in agreeing
upon common principles
and objectives, as noted above, and in formulating strategy plans. Agencies may
also collaborate through overarching
policy and operational bodies such as
statewide steering committees.
19.85 At an operational level, key ways in which agencies may collaborate
sharing information obtained by agencies;
sharing knowledge by agencies (such as joint training);
facilitating or making referrals for victims between agencies
(referred to in this chapter as victim liaison);
developing protocols for communication and working together;
collaborative decision making by agencies (such as joint case
management conferences); and
developing inter-agency networks, including mechanisms for feedback
on system improvements.
19.86 Collaboration between agencies and
other actors is discussed at various points in this Consultation Paper. For
example, cooperation
between federal family courts and state and territory
courts is discussed in Chapter 8. Collaboration between family dispute
practitioners and family lawyers and courts is discussed in
Chapter 11. Cooperation in the context of child protection and the criminal
law is discussed in Chapter 13, while cooperation in the context of child
protection and family law is discussed in Chapter 14.
19.87 In particular, information sharing is a key issue for this Inquiry
which has been addressed in other parts in this Consultation
Paper. Information
sharing in the context of family violence and family law is discussed in
Chapter 10. This discussion canvasses
issues including access to court
records; offences prohibiting the publication of information about specific
court proceeding; the
sharing of agency information, information sharing
protocols, and the development of a national protection order database.
Information
sharing in the context of child protection is discussed in
Chapter 14.
[back to top]
Victim support
19.88 Victim support is a critical element of integrated responses, and
beyond. Victim support workers play a pivotal role generally
‘integrating’ the legal frameworks for victims, helping victims to
navigate between the different legal frameworks.
Victims who are supported make
better decisions and are more likely to use both the legal system and available
government services.
In consultations, stakeholders repeatedly emphasised the
importance of family violence support services as the key mechanism of
integration
from the point of view of victims. As noted in the next Chapter,
this view is also borne out by evaluations of specialised courts
which employ
victim support workers.
19.89 Victim support organisations may provide a range of services. These
include: information and referral to services; counselling;
safety planning;
accommodation; and practical services such as child care. Most relevantly, these
services may include crisis support;
legal advice; advocacy services; court
support (where a worker provides general information about court processes and
supports the
person in court) or advocacy at court (where the worker advocates
for the client in court).
19.90 Victim support may be provided at different points of entry into the
legal system. It may be provided at, or soon after, an
incident to which the
police were called; they may be provided as telephone support or as a centre at
which victims may attend for
advice and information; and it may be provided on
the day a person attends court.
19.91 One of the most
significant ways of improving the ability of victims to navigate through the
system is to enable timely and
effective access to victim support organisations.
The ACT’s model of victim support delivery was widely recognised among
stakeholders
as a leading model, although not necessarily a feasible model in
larger jurisdictions. In the ACT, the DVCS has a memorandum of understanding
with the Australian Federal Police (AFP). This provides that police should offer
the services of DVCS at the time of a family violence
incident to all parties
present at the incident (except those taken into custody). Approximately 85% of
people accept this suggestion.
DVCS crisis workers are informed by the police if the parties wish to use their
services, and typically arrive at the scene where
police brief the workers. The
memorandum of understanding is implemented and administered by a management
committee constituted jointly
by the AFP and DVCS. As noted above,
‘fax-back protocols’ also operate in other areas and enable close
collaboration
between police and victim support services, and early delivery of
victim support, at a critical stage.
19.92 The DVCS is also an approved crisis support organisation under the
Domestic Violence Agencies Act 1986
As an approved
organisation, it benefits from
of that Act, which enables a police
officer or staff member of the
on suspicion of the past or
future commission of a ‘domestic violence offence’, to disclose to
the organisation ‘any
information that is likely to aid the organisation
in rendering assistance to the person or to any children of the person’.
This Act is discussed in the context of information sharing in Chapter 10.
19.93 The DVCS also offers 24-hour telephone support and court support
(although not court advocacy) services. It also acts as an
advocate with
government agencies including child protection agencies.
19.94 Another aspect of victim support is court assistance schemes. In NSW,
for example, the Legal Aid Commission operates 33 Women’s
Violence Court Assistance Schemes. Support workers can provide information about
protection orders, act as a support person
in court, explain the court process,
and refer victims to other services. While court support workers cannot
themselves provide legal
advice, they may be able to organise lawyers to provide
legal advice on a particular
The Women’s Family
Law Support Service also provides court support and information at the Sydney
and Melbourne registry of
the Family Law
and a similar service is
provided in South Australia (known as the Women’s Information Service
Family Court Support).
19.95 Victim support is a key aspect of the Victorian specialised family
violence courts, discussed in Chapter 20. An on-site victim
support worker is
available during the court days allocated to family violence hearings. A duty
lawyer from Legal Aid is available
19.96 Victim support workers are also provided as part of the Domestic
Violence Intervention Court Model (DVICM) in NSW. Notably,
an independent
evaluation indicated that victim support was by far the most successful element
of the DVICM.
19.97 The importance of victim support has been recognised in the United
Kingdom’s national strategy for reducing family violence,
which includes
as a core element the funding of Independent Domestic Violence Advisors and
Independent Sexual Violence Advisors.
The role of these advisors is to
‘help victims navigate their way through various systems; for example, the
criminal justice
system …, the civil court system, and other systems such
as housing, health, and
education’.
especially associated with the specialised family violence courts in the United
Kingdom and Multi-Agency Risk Assessment
Conferences (MARACs), which provide
multi-agency responses to very high-risk victims.
19.98 In 2009, an independent evaluation of Independent Domestic Violence
Advisors (IDVAs) in the United Kingdom was published. It
The IDVA role offers a unique opportunity to provide independent, objective
advice to victims about their options, and one that is
not duplicated by any
other worker. IDVAs navigate multiple systems and are crucial contributors to
multiagency initiatives, especially
MARACs. Their specialist skills and ability
to provide both individual and institutional advocacy are very highly
19.99 The evaluation found strong support for the work of the advisors in
court support, citing one victim as follows:
To have that support, it just gives you the strength to go and give evidence. I
could have backed out many times because I was afraid
to stand up and go against
my ex-husband but having [the Advisor] there, she gave me the strength to go on
with it. It is a hard
thing to do, but having someone there to talk to you and
listen to you, to reassure you everything will be ok, it did really
19.100 It also noted that partner agencies
were quick to comment on the importance of providing support to victims, as they
were sympathetic to the stress involved in a court
case. In fact, IDVA support
was viewed as a necessary precursor to having successful court outcomes; for
example, reducing retraction,
giving better evidence, and obtaining
convictions.
Commissions’ views
19.101 There is strong evidence that victim support provided at the time of
an incident to which the police are called, at court,
and at other key times
during the legal process is an important measure that can improve the ability of
victims to navigate between
legal frameworks. Victim support workers can, and
do, routinely navigate through the legal, social and health systems on behalf of
19.102 In the Commissions’ view, one of the most practical methods of
improving the interaction in practice of legal frameworks
strengthening and supporting existing victim support services. This would be
immediately beneficial and is proven to have
significant impact on
victims’ experiences in navigating systems. Although extra resourcing
would be required, it is likely
that this would ultimately be one of the most
cost-effective measures for improving victim satisfaction and safety.
19.103 There is much to be said for the delivery of victim support at the
time the police are called out to an incident. It is notable
that a number of
‘fax-back protocols’ have been initiated in some areas. This may be
a practice that should be encouraged
by Australian state and territory
governments.
19.104 Victim support is also particularly crucial at court. The Commissions
note that, while victim support workers are a feature
of specialised courts,
they need not be tied to such courts. Indeed, this is one element which the
Commissions believe can be productively
mainstreamed across courts. The NSW
Domestic Violence Court Assistance Schemes are useful precedents, and the Family
Law court support
schemes in NSW, Victoria and South Australia should be
extended nationally across the family court system.
Proposal 19–2
State and territory governments should, to the
extent feasible, make victim support workers and lawyers available at family
violence-related
court proceedings, and ensure access to victim support workers
at the time the police are called out to family violence incidents.
Proposal 19–3
The Australian Government should ensure that court
support services for victims of family violence are available nationally in
family courts.
Legal advice and
representation
19.105 One important, practical, aspect of victim support is access to legal
advice. The role of legal representation, and in particular
the role of legal
aid, in ensuring this access was discussed in detail in Richard Chisholm’s
Family Courts Violence Review
Chisholm recommended that careful consideration should be given in the
funding and administration of legal aid to the serious implication
of parties,
especially children, being legally
unrepresented.
19.106 The National Council to Reduce Violence against Women and their
Children (National Council) also included in its report,
Time for Action
(2009), the following strategy:
Ensure adequate funding for legal aid and advocacy services is provided by the
Australian Government, over and above State/Territory
funding, to recognise the
significant focus given to domestic and family violence in the 2006 amendments
Family Law Act
19.107 The Commissions have heard that the limited availability of legal aid
and scope of practitioner expertise often result in victims
needing to obtain
separate representation for family law as compared with protection order
proceedings. The problem of fragmented
legal representation is exacerbated by
the fact that victims may also need to be separately represented in property and
proceedings in federal family
Commissions’ view is that access to legal advice and representation is a
crucial element of integrated responses.
The Commissions support the
recommendations of both the National Council and Chisholm in this regard. In
particular, they consider
that the adequate resourcing and further development
of women’s legal services is critically important, because of the need
specialised, timely and free legal advice and representation.
compensation
19.109 Another, often overlooked, aspect of support for victims is access to
financial assistance. Family violence, among other harms,
often has a
significant impact on the financial security of
Victims of family
violence may incur medical, counselling, legal and housing expenses, as well as
education and child care expenses,
and may have been subject to economic abuse
as an element of family
19.110 In practice, these costs may constitute a significant barrier for
victims in accessing the legal system. Improving access to
compensation may be an important way of improving the way victims navigate the
legal system as well as the social
and health systems, by providing (for
example) access to counselling and funds to change
The purposes of
victims’ compensation are discussed in Chapter 3.
19.111 There are three legal avenues for obtaining compensation. First, it is
possible for some victims to sue in tort, usually for
assault and
While this has the
advantage that much higher damages are generally
it is not a route
that is used frequently in the context of family violence. This is largely
because of the limited financial resources
of defendants; the expense, delay,
and trauma involved in civil litigation, including the fear of facing the
offender; and victims’
tendency to delay disclosing or reporting family
Further, there are
legal barriers, including limitation
the limitations of the
tort of assault;
difficulty of providing evidence of claims. Victims may also be reluctant to
begin proceedings in multiple
19.112 Secondly, in all jurisdictions except Western Australia, one available
sentencing option is to order an offender to pay compensation
for loss, injury
or damage as a consequence of an
Although this power is
exercised in the criminal context of sentencing, the compensation awarded is
civil in nature and assessed
in the same way as claims in
19.113 This power has been exercised very infrequently in the context of
family violence,
both because of
the fact that family violence is typically under-enforced in the criminal
system, and because offenders rarely have
the resources to pay the
In some jurisdictions,
the financial capacity of the defendant to pay is a relevant factor in deciding
to award compensation.
the usual policy is that the power is only exercised in clear and simple
Other barriers may
apply in certain
Finally, this
option requires the victim to take the matter to
19.114 For most victims, therefore, the only practical method of financial
redress is through statutory victims’ compensation
schemes, funded by
state and territory governments. All Australian state and territory governments
currently provide such schemes.
Although these are available to victims of
family violence, there are problems with the ways such schemes operate in this
limiting the capacity of the schemes to provide effective support to
such victims. Although this discussion is not confined to issues
of integration,
it is convenient to deal with these issues here.
19.115 The difficulties of using statutory victims’ compensation
schemes in the context of family violence have been comprehensively
reviewed by
Isobelle Barrett Meyering in a paper produced for the Australian Domestic and
Family Violence Clearinghouse in
The key problem is that
the schemes,
like the criminal law, are premised on a ‘stranger violence model’.
The schemes assume that the victim does not know
the assailant, that the
violence is a random act and that the victim is not dependent on the assailant.
… As such, many schemes
have historically included—and in some cases
continue to include—specific requirements that discriminate against women
who experience domestic violence
19.116 Six types of provisions in victims’ compensation legislation
have been identified in the literature as problematic for
victims. There are,
however, examples of Australian legislation that have addressed—at least
in part—these concerns.
Criminal acts and injuries
19.117 Legislation usually links victims’ compensation to the
commission of specific criminal acts of violence and the suffering
of criminal
injuries. This typically has the effect of under-compensating victims of family
violence, for several reasons. First,
acts of family violence may not be
recognised as criminal,
in some jurisdictions only specified offences can trigger
compensation.
Secondly, there
is a need to prove each discrete ‘incident’ and
‘injury’, which poses problems in the context
of the pattern of
abuse that, typically, constitutes family
19.118 For example, the Chief Compensation Assessor in Western Australia
concluded in one case:
In considering the application, it was necessary for me to distinguish the
impact of the years of domestic violence asserted by the
applicant, some
occurring outside WA and most not reported to the police and including events
after the date of the incident the
subject of the present application, together
with the impact on her of psychiatric illness, unstable accommodation and
in managing her own children. I accepted that it was likely that the
incident in June 2001 for which I am able to compensate the
applicant would
have contributed to her condition, however in light of the review of the
applicant’s background referred to
herein, the contribution of this
particular incident can only be said to have been relatively
19.119 Another issue is that the definition of ‘injury’
emphasises physical injury and does not include all the psychological
typical of family violence. For example, suicide attempts, drug addictions,
eating disorders, guilt, self-mutilation, nightmares,
low self-esteem, a lack of
trust, vocational setbacks, and educational deprivation are typical forms of
harm that are not necessarily
recognised as ‘mental injuries’ for
the purposes of compensation legislation in all
Neither does
this restrictive definition necessarily recognise the ‘differing impact of
violence and sexual abuse on the variety
of cultures and communities that make
up Australian
19.120 These limitations have been addressed in NSW by providing in the
legislation that an act of violence extends to domestic violence
assault, and listing both ‘domestic violence’ and ‘sexual
assault’ as specific compensable
(As discussed in
Chapter 15, sexual assault often forms part of a pattern of family violence.)
Legislation in the Northern Territory
also defines ‘domestic violence
injuries’ as a specific
In NSW, victims of
family violence can elect to claim a specific (listed) physical, psychiatric or
psychological injury, or claim
for ‘domestic violence injuries’ or
an injury of ‘sexual assault’. The injury of ‘domestic
has a standard compensation amount of $7,500–$10,000.
There are three categories of sexual assault including, as the most serious,
category that includes cases where there is a ‘pattern of
19.121 The principal benefit of these provisions is that the standard of
evidence is lower than for other applications, but the standard
amount awarded
for these injuries is considerably less than for other
These special
provisions are used by the overwhelming majority of victims of family violence
in NSW, with 85% of awards to family
violence victims made as a consequence of
an injury of ‘domestic
19.122 In other jurisdictions, compensation claims must still be founded on
specific criminal acts. However, in some jurisdictions
there may be higher
awards available in the context of family violence. In the ACT, Victoria and
Queensland, ‘special financial
assistance’ (in addition to
compensation for actual loss) may be available to certain family violence
victims. In the ACT,
an amount of $50,000 (rather than the standard $30,000) is
available to sexual assault
while in Victoria
and Queensland specified acts of violence, including sexual assaults, are
eligible for special financial assistance
in amounts up to
Higher amounts are
available in Victoria for repeated sexual assaults or acts of
Further, these
awards may be granted not only in respect of ‘injuries’ but also in
respect of ‘significant adverse
In Victoria,
this includes in addition ‘grief, distress, [or]
Queensland the definition of adverse impacts in relation to sexual offences is
more specific and
Related acts or injuries
19.123 All Australian jurisdictions also have provisions deeming that related
acts of violence or related injuries should be treated
as one claim, or reducing
the amount available for related acts or
These provisions
were enacted in response to increasing claims by victims of family violence for
separate compensable events in the
Christine Forster has
criticised these provisions as follows:
The ‘related acts’ provisions manipulate the legal concept of harm
to act as a gatekeeper by fictionalising continuous
and multiple criminal events
into a single compensable event, specifically reducing the amount that can be
claimed by any individual
claimant. Apart from the financial repercussions for
victims of intra-familial harm, other broader systemic inequalities are also
entrenched. The harm is presented as isolated, random and impersonal, mystifying
the reality that intra-familial harm most often
forms part of a continuing and
repetitive pattern.
19.124 The scope of these provisions varies between the jurisdictions. In
Queensland, South Australia and the Northern Territory,
the definition of
related acts encompasses acts committed by the same person or group of persons,
so all incidents within a pattern
of family violence are likely to be deemed a
single act.
As well, the
interpretation by courts of whether an act is ‘related’ varies both
within, and between, the
In 2009, for
example, the Supreme Court of New South Wales ruled that over 500 sexual
assaults committed over 11 years by a member
of a foster family were not
‘related’ acts for the purpose of compensation
legislation.
In Victoria and
Queensland, there are provisions requiring that the applicant be given an
opportunity to object to the treatment
of claims as
19.125 In some jurisdictions, other provisions reduce the amount available
for multiple claims. In Western Australia and Tasmania,
a (higher) maximum limit
applies to acts committed by the same
As already noted,
higher maximum limits also apply for repeated sexual assaults in NSW, Victoria
and the Northern Territory. In NSW
and the Northern Territory, claims for
multiple injuries may be subject to substantial
reductions.
Reporting and conviction
requirements
19.126 In the ACT, a person who does not report a crime to the police is
disqualified from
compensation,
Western Australia and Tasmania, reasonable cooperation with law enforcement is a
necessary condition for a compensation
In other states and
territories, failure to report and cooperate with law enforcement can be
considered as a discretionary factor
in deciding whether to grant a
Since family violence
is typically under-reported,
these requirements can have the effect of precluding or restricting access for
victims of family violence.
19.127 In NSW, Queensland and Victoria, this effect has been addressed to
some degree by requiring assessors to consider, when deciding
whether it was
reasonable not to report the crime, particular factors such as the nature of the
injury, the nature of the relationship
between the victim and the offender,
reports to a health professional or practitioner, and fear or
19.128 While all jurisdictions no longer require a conviction before
compensation can be granted,
two jurisdictions retain restrictive provisions that link compensation to court
proceedings. These provisions preclude many claims
from victims of family
violence because such violence is typically under-reported and rarely leads to
prosecutions and any
convictions.
19.129 In South Australia, a compensation order may only be made if an
offence has been admitted or proved beyond reasonable doubt
in a court, or
admitted in related statutory proceedings or can be reasonably inferred from
admissions in such
proceedings.
Attorney-General has a discretionary power to make an ex gratia payment in
specified circumstances.
Western Australia, the legislation allows compensation only in respect of
‘proved’ offences with the following important
exceptions: if the
person alleges another person committed the offence; the person was acquitted on
the ground of unsoundness of
mind or found mentally unfit to stand trial; or for
specified reasons the charge is not determined; or if no person is
Contributory conduct
19.130 A common consideration in awarding victims’ compensation is that
the victim did not contribute to the
Claims may also be
reduced in some jurisdictions on the basis that a victim engaged in criminal
conduct, which may be relevant where
victims may also be engaging in assault as
part of the dynamic of family
In the ACT, a
deduction is required if the victim was intoxicated at the time of the offence
(although victims of sexual assault
19.131 These provisions have been criticised for blaming the victim and
failing to recognise the behaviour of victims in the context
For example, in
Western Australia, compensation claims have been reduced because a victim picked
up a knife to defend herself; and
because a victim pushed the offender toward
the door telling him to
19.132 In NSW, these issues have been partly addressed by requiring the
assessor to consider the relationship between the victim and
the offender in
assessing whether the victim failed to take reasonable steps to mitigate the
Advantage or benefit to offender
19.133 In Victoria, Western Australia and the Northern Territory,
victims’ compensation schemes may exclude claims on the basis
offender might benefit from the
This had the obvious
effect of excluding most victims of family violence, especially where the victim
continued to reside with the
offender, and fails to take into account the fact
the compensation award may be used to leave the
19.134 However, in jurisdictions such as Victoria and Queensland, where
compensation is mostly paid on the basis of expenses incurred,
the potential for
awards to benefit the offender is limited. Another option may be to restrict
offenders’ access to
For example, in
Queensland prior to the replacement of its legislation in 2009, the
administrative unit referred cases to the Public
Trustee where victims might be
at risk of psychological or emotional abuse by an offender who stood to benefit
from an award.
Time limitations
19.135 In all jurisdictions, victim compensation claims are also subject to
time limitations, ranging from one to three years after
the offence took place
(or, in the case of child victims, usually after they turn
In the context of family
violence, this time limit may be too short, because ‘the cycles of
violence in which women find themselves
[are] not about reason’, and a
period of time is needed to allow a woman to segregate a single assault from the
continuum of
violence and to take steps to secure her own and her family’s
well-being.
This may be
particularly problematic in the cases of child sexual assault or children
witnessing family violence, where effects may
not show up until significantly
19.136 However, in all jurisdictions there is discretion to extend these time
periods. In some jurisdictions, the legislation provides
greater guidance on
extension in the case of family violence. In the Northern Territory, the
legislation requires decision makers
to consider the fact that the application
involves sexual assault, family violence or child abuse in deciding to extend
while in NSW there is a
presumption that leave to extend time should be given in such
In Victoria and
Queensland, assessors must consider whether the offender was a in position of
power, influence or trust in deciding
whether to extend
However, the
Victims’ Compensation Tribunal in NSW has called for a time limit for
cases of sexual assault.
Offender involvement
19.137 Australian jurisdictions differ in how decisions are made. While in
some jurisdictions—such as NSW, Queensland and Western
Australia—assessment is on the papers, in other jurisdictions there is a
hearing by a tribunal (in Victoria) or a court (in
South Australia and the ACT).
Hearing-based models may require victims to ‘endure the difficult and
time-consuming process
of re-living the details and effects of the crime’,
leading to the risk of re-victimisation by the
In Victoria,
however, there are provisions that require hearings to be closed to the public
and enable alternative arrangements for
19.138 Re-victimisation by the process is even more likely where offenders
are invited or entitled to attend hearings on the compensation
claim. In South
Australia, the model is unusual in that mediation by the Crown Solicitor is
required before an application can be
made to the District Court, and the
offender must be joined in an application to the court unless the victim is a
child or not of
19.139 In Victoria, the Victims of Crime Assistance Tribunal may give notice
to any other person whom the Tribunal considers to have
a legitimate interest in
the matter, and any person whom the Tribunal thinks has a substantial interest
in the matter is entitled
However, the Tribunal cannot give
notice to an alleged offender without first giving an opportunity for the
applicant to object at
a directions
19.140 Concerns have been expressed over an increasing tendency in Victoria
of informing offenders of the claim. Although the alleged
offender only appears
in a relatively small number of cases, ‘for many [victims] the clear
message they receive when told of
the Tribunal’s decision to notify is
that once again they are not being
Access to victims’
compensation
19.141 Other practical barriers may also impede victims’ access to
compensation. One important issue is whether victims can
access compensation
quickly. For example, as noted above, quick access to compensation may enable a
person to secure their safety
(such as by changing the locks).
19.142 All jurisdictions allow for the making of interim awards, although the
conditions for these vary. Typically, the legislation
provides that such
payments can only be made if it is likely that an award will be
In some jurisdictions,
other circumstances are also required to justify an interim
19.143 In Queensland and Victoria, however, the power to award interim
assistance is broader. In Queensland, the only condition is
that the assessor
must be reasonably satisfied it is necessary to incur the expenses before the
application is decided.
Victoria, the Tribunal can make interim awards ‘in any circumstances it
appropriate’.
19.144 The Commissions understand that the power to make interim payments has
proven to be very useful in the Specialist Family Violence
courts in Victoria
(discussed in Chapter 20). The Commissions are unaware, however, of whether
there are problems with the current
law and practice concerning the availability
of interim payments.
19.145 It is unclear whether there are also other practical barriers, such as
lack of knowledge, which limit access to victims’
compensation for victims
of family violence. This is partly because, apart from NSW (which has the
advantage of a specific ‘domestic
violence injury’), data collected
on victims’ compensation do not identify separately victims of family
In NSW, the
2007–08 report of the Victims Compensation Tribunal stated that domestic
violence (28%) and sexual assault (27%)
were the second and third highest
category of offences for which compensation were claimed. The report also stated
that, of claims
made by Indigenous peoples, 41% (310) claims were for domestic
violence and 30% (227) for sexual
19.146 It is notable, however, that in the financial year following the
establishment of the specialist Victorian Family Violence
Courts in Heidelberg
and Ballarat, 31% of all applications for financial assistance lodged with the
Victims of Crime Assistance Tribunal
came within the jurisdiction of those
This increase in
applications ‘highlights the capacity of specialist courts to provide
holistic support to domestic violence
19.147 One way of improving access to victims’ compensation is through
the provision of information about this option to victims.
For example, Victoria
Legal Aid’s publication for victims of sexual assault includes a section
on victims’
compensation.
Commissions’ views
19.148 Although victims’ compensation schemes are not a method of
integration, they provide an important support mechanism for
victims which
facilitates, and possibly enables, a victim to navigate the legal system. The
Commissions heard, in consultations in
the specialist courts in Victoria, that
this jurisdiction is a practically important one, enabling (for example) safety
such as the changing of locks, where a victim remains in the same home,
or emergency accommodation, where the victim leaves.
19.149 While the issue of compensation for victims is often overlooked in the
context of family violence, it has been dealt with in
some detail here because
in practice this legal framework has the potential to improve victims’
abilities to navigate through
different legal systems. If a key purpose of many
of the legal frameworks governing family violence is to ensure the safety of the
victim—and this is the central focus of the Terms of Reference of this
Inquiry—this is one practical measure that can
For example, victims’ compensation can assist victims in securing their
and accessing health services.
19.150 This potential, however, does not appear to be achieved in a number of
provisions. The
Commissions’ preliminary view is that Australian state and territory
governments should amend their victims’
compensation legislation to ensure
the legislative provisions do not unfairly discriminate against victims of
family violence. In
particular, the Commissions make a number of specific
proposals towards these ends.
19.151 First, the Commissions consider that the definition of the act and
injuries that trigger compensation needs to be revisited
to ensure that the
pattern of violence that is characteristic of family violence can be considered
in assessing victims’ compensation
claims, rather than focusing
exclusively on specific incidents. This objective may be achieved in a number of
ways, and different
methods may be more appropriate to different legislative
schemes. One approach would be to specify that evidence of a pattern of
violence can be considered when assessing the probability that an act of
violence or injury has occurred. Another method is
to adopt the approach of NSW,
and deem ‘domestic violence’ to be an act of violence and a specific
form of injury, which
would be defined as involving a pattern of violence.
Another approach is to extend the definition of injury to enable consideration
of adverse impacts, as is done with sexual offences in Victoria and Queensland.
19.152 Secondly, state and
territory legislation should be amended so that the mere fact that the same
offender committed the crime
does not mean the crimes are ‘related’.
This does not mean that states or territories cannot reduce the amounts payable
for multiple claims, as is already done in some jurisdictions. This may be
necessary because of the resource implications of such
claims. In the
Commissions’ view, however, to treat all criminal incidents of family
violence as if they constituted a ‘single’
incident discriminates
unfairly against victims of family violence. Further, the state and territory
legislation should allow a victim
to object if claims are to be treated as
19.153 Thirdly, victims’ compensation legislation should be amended so
that a failure to report the criminal incident to the
police, or to provide
reasonable cooperation with law enforcement, does not automatically disqualify a
victim of family violence
from claiming compensation. A pre-requisite that a
victim report to the police or cooperate with law enforcement impacts
particularly
upon victims of family violence (including victims of sexual abuse)
who choose not to report or cooperate for fear of the offender.
This proposal
affects the Western Australian, Tasmanian and ACT legislation. This should be a
discretionary factor, as it is in other
19.154 In all jurisdictions, the legislation should provide that decision
makers consider the nature of the relationship between the
offender and the
victim when assessing these discretionary factors (as is done in NSW, Victoria,
and Queensland), in light of the
nature and dynamics of family violence.
Similarly, the legislation should be amended to provide that the nature of the
relationship,
in light of the nature and dynamics of family violence, should
also be considered when assessing whether a victim contributed to
the injury and
(where the legislation so provides) whether a victim failed to take reasonable
steps to mitigate the injury. As well,
decision-makers should be required to
consider, when deciding whether to extend the time for making an application,
the fact that
a claim is made on the basis of family violence, sexual assault,
or child abuse (as is done in NSW and the Northern Territory), or
the fact that
the offender was in a position of power, influence, or trust (as in Victoria and
Queensland).
19.155 In the view of the Commissions, the legislation in Victoria, South
Australia and the ACT should also be amended to ensure that
victims of family
violence are not required to attend hearings in the presence of offenders.
Clearly, there is the potential for
the victim to suffer trauma as a result, and
the risk that victims will be unfairly deterred from claiming compensation.
the legislation should require that alternative arrangements, such as
remote witness facilities, should be employed in cases of family
19.156 The Commissions also propose the repeal of provisions in the
Victorian, Western Australian, and Northern Territory legislation
compensation on the basis that it would advantage or benefit the offender, as
has been done in other jurisdictions. These
provisions discriminate against
victims of family violence who remain in relationships with the offender. The
Commissions are interested,
however, in hearing from stakeholders whether any
mechanisms can and should be adopted to ensure that offenders cannot access
compensation awards, and whether there are any issues as to the
availability of interim compensation awards.
19.157 The Commissions consider that there is a clear need for better data
collection in relation to claims and awards of victims’
compensation. The
reports of the Compensation Tribunal of NSW provide a useful model, as they
identify victims of family violence,
including those who claim for other types
of injuries. These reports also usefully separately identify claims made by
victims from
Indigenous communities. The
Time for Action
highlighted the disproportionate representation of Indigenous women and child
victims of family violence.
19.158 Finally, the Commissions consider that Commonwealth, state and
territory governments should ensure that information about victims’
compensation is readily available in all courts dealing with family violence
Proposal 19–4
State and territory victims’ compensation
legislation should:
(a) provide that evidence of a pattern of family violence may be considered
in assessing whether an act of violence or injury occurred;
(b) define family violence as a specific act of violence or injury, as in
s 5 and the Dictionary in the
Victims Support and Rehabilitation Act
(NSW) and cl 5 of the
Victims of Crime Assistance Regulation
(c) extend the definition of injury to include other significant adverse
impacts, as is done in respect of some offences in
Victims of Crime Assistance Act 1996
Victims of Crime Assistance Act 2009
Proposal 19–5
State and territory victims’ compensation
legislation should provide that:
(a) acts are not ‘related’ merely because they are committed by
the same offender; and
(b) applicants should be given the opportunity to object if multiple claims
are treated as ‘related’, as in
Crime Assistance Act 1996
Victims of Crime
Assistance Act 2009
Proposal 19–6
State and territory victims’ compensation
legislation should not require that a victim report a crime to the police, or
reasonable cooperation with law enforcement authorities, as a condition
of such compensation for family violence-related claims.
Proposal 19–7
State and territory legislation should provide
that, when deciding whether it was reasonable for the victim not to report a
or cooperate with law enforcement authorities, decision makers must
consider factors such as the nature of the relationship between
the victim and
the offender in light of the nature and dynamics of family violence.
Proposal 19–8
State and territory victims’ compensation
legislation should require decision makers, when considering whether victims
contributed
to their injuries, to consider the relationship between the victim
and the offender in light of the nature and dynamics of family
violence. This
requirement should also apply to assessments of the reasonableness of
victims’ failures to take steps to mitigate
their injuries, where the
legislation includes that as a factor to be considered. Section 30(2A) of the
Victim Support and Rehabilitation Act 1996
(NSW), which makes such
provision in relation to a failure to mitigate injury, should be referred to as
Proposal 19–9
State and territory victims’ compensation
legislation should not enable claims to be excluded on the basis that the
might benefit from the claim.
Proposal 19–10
State and territory victims’ compensation
legislation should ensure that time limitation clauses do not apply unfairly to
of family violence. These provisions may take the form of providing
(a) decision makers must consider the fact that the application involves
family violence, sexual assault, or child abuse in deciding
to extend time, as
Victims of Crime Assistance Act 2006
(b) decision makers must consider whether the offender was in a position of
power, influence or trust in deciding to extend time,
as set out in
Victims of Crime Assistance Act 1996
Victims of Crime Assistance Act 2009
Proposal 19–11
State and territory victims’ compensation
legislation should ensure that victims of family violence are not required to be
at a hearing with an offender in victims’ compensation
Proposal 19–12
State and territory governments should ensure
that data is collected concerning the claims and awards of compensation made to
of family violence under statutory victims’ compensation schemes.
The practice of the Victims’ Compensation Tribunal
in NSW provides an
instructive model.
Proposal 19–13
State and territory governments should provide
information about victims’ compensation in all courts dealing with family
matters. The Australian Government should ensure that similar
information is available in federal family courts.
In practice, are the current provisions for making interim
compensation awards working effectively for victims of family
Question 19–3
Should measures be adopted to ensure that
offenders do not have access to victims’ compensation awards in cases of
family violence?
If so, what measures should be
introduced?
[back to top]
and education
19.159 The importance of training and education is both a common feature of
integrated responses, and a common theme in this Consultation
Paper. A proper
appreciation of the nature and dynamics of family violence (discussed in Chapter
4) including sexual assault (discussed
in Chapter 15) is fundamental to its
proper handling by the legal system.
19.160 This section addresses briefly different issues relating to education
and training in the context of family violence. Specific
training needs are
discussed elsewhere in the Consultation Paper. While quality training and
education are critical, it must be recognised
that training and education are
subject to limitations—including the receptiveness of its audience and the
persistence of social
and cultural norms. Training cannot and will not fix
systemic problems.
Existing proposals
and recommendations
19.161 In this Consultation Paper, the need for effective training and
education is discussed in the context of definitions of family
violence in
Chapter 4 and in relation to federal offences relevant to family violence in
Chapter 5. The training of police and prosecutors
is discussed in Chapters 5, 6
and 7; proposals for judicial training are made in the context of family law and
family violence in
Chapter 7 and 8; and training in the context of family
dispute resolution is discussed in Chapter 11.
19.162 Training is discussed in the context of sexual offences in Chapter 15;
in relation to specialist police and prosecutors, inter-sectoral
training, and
training in interviewing in the context of sexual offences in Chapter 17; and in
relation to judicial training on issues
relating to sexual offences in Chapter
19.163 Training and education have also been addressed in the reports
commissioned by the Australian Government by the National Council,
Institute of Family Studies, Richard Chisholm, and the Family Law
19.164 A key theme of the National Council’s 2009 report,
, was the need for ‘attitudinal change at all levels of
government and society’, which involves ‘adequate funding
professional training of the
workforce’.
included a number of strategies relating to training and education in different
19.165 The National Council advocated for the establishment of a National
Centre of Excellence for the Prevention of Violence against
This would, among
other things, provide a national resource for the development of policy and
benchmarks, and develop and promote
‘gold-standard’ practice to
reduce violence against women and their children across
Further, there
should be a specific funding stream to address prevention education policy,
including training and accreditation of
19.166 In particular, the National Council recommended that, in achieving the
outcome of ensuring just responses, a key strategy was
to ‘ensure judicial
officers, law enforcement personnel and other professionals within the legal
system have appropriate knowledge
expertise’.
particular, it recommended that a national education and professional
development framework be developed that recognised the specific
roles of those
involved in the legal system. This framework should
be designed with these specific audiences in mind; be informed by research on
the social context within which violence against women
and children takes place;
emphasise the diversity of experiences and needs of victim/survivors of violence
in the community; and
enhance understanding of the intent and operation of
relevant legislation.
19.167 In addition, the National Council recommended that a model Bench Book
be produced, in consultation with jurisdictions and as
part of a national
professional development program for judicial officers, which would include a
social context analysis and case
This recommendation is
endorsed in this Consultation
19.168 The Australian Institute of Family Studies report, while not making
any explicit recommendations, noted that there continued
‘difficulties arising from a lack of understanding among professionals,
including lawyers and decision-makers, about
family violence and the way in
which it affects children and
19.169 Chisholm recommended that: there should be consideration of ways in
which those working in the family law system ‘might
be better educated in
relation to issues of family violence’; lawyers’ organisations and
legal education bodies ‘give
due weight to the importance of including
programs about issues relating to family violence, including its effects on
and family law courts review the use of existing best practice
principles in relation to family
and consider
measures to make those principles more
influential.
19.170 A key recommendation by the Family Law Council concerned the
development of a ‘common knowledge base’ by an expert
reference group for those working in the family law
The reference group
would include representatives of a diverse range of organisations and be
involved in reviewing Australian and
international research findings to ensure
that the common knowledge base is evidence based and current, and advising the
on its research agenda in the area of family
It recommended that
professional and peak bodies should use the common knowledge base to guide good
practice and underpin training
programs and professional
development,
and that family
pathways networks are aware of and disseminate information from the family
violence common knowledge
19.171 The Family Law Council also recommended that the expert panel and
reference group ‘endorse the content of education and
training on family
violence for those involved in the system’, including family dispute
resolution practitioners, lawyers,
independent children’s lawyers, family
consultants, and experts who provide evidence to courts and judicial
It recommended that
all key players should undertake relevant ongoing training at least
The training and
education would be conducted by, or performed under the auspices of, bodies
including the Family Law Section of
the Law Council, state law societies and
foundations, the Australian Institute of Judicial Administration, National Legal
the federal family
The Family Law
Council also recommended the revision and periodic updating of the
Practice Guidelines for Lawyers Doing Family Law
19.172 Judicial training and education were also identified as key issues by
the Victorian Law Reform Commission in its reports on
family violence and sexual
assault laws
and as key areas
in strategic frameworks for addressing family violence, including the
Australasian Policing Strategy for the Prevention and Reduction of Family
19.173 The Commissions endorse the recommendations of the National Council,
Chisholm and the Family Law Council that there be further
training of those in
the family law system in relation to family violence, including judicial
officers, lawyers and family dispute
resolution practitioners. The Commissions
make further proposals in this Consultation Paper, building upon these
recommendations.
19.174 One of the main needs for education and training is in relation to the
context of family violence—matters such as its
nature, its prevalence, its
dynamics, its effects, and the barriers faced by victims. Understanding family
violence better helps
those working with victims—including judicial
officers—to make better decisions.
19.175 This type of training should include the following material:
the primacy of the safety of the victim;
the key principles and theories of family violence;
the role of gender in family violence;
the different needs and contexts of particular marginalised victims,
such as Indigenous victims, victims from culturally and linguistically
backgrounds, victims with disabilities, victims in same-sex relationships, and
victims of parental abuse; and
how to protect children from family
19.176 Another
need is for training on the law itself. Family violence may engage a range of
overlapping legal frameworks, and familiarity
and competence in these frameworks
by legal professionals and judicial officers is vital to improving the
interaction of those legal
frameworks from the perspective of victims.
19.177 Further, there is a need for education about the roles of different
players within the system itself. For example, government
staff and community
workers benefit from understanding the legislation and how the court system
works, just as the court system benefits
from understanding the social and
financial consequences of their
As discussed in
Chapter 4, there are a range of legislative definitions of family violence,
which do not always sit well with non-legislative
definitions.
19.178 Finally, training in communication skills, including cross-cultural
communication, may be needed particularly to address the
different needs and
contexts of family violence in the case of marginalised groups.
Audiences for
19.179 This Consultation Paper addresses the need for training of different
categories of people. First, Chapters 8 and 15 address
the need for training of
judicial officers. In particular, there appears to be limited training of
judicial officers—even those
in some specialised courts—about the
context of family violence. This has been identified as a key concern of those
in the family law
This is in contrast
to specialised family violence courts in the US, where training of all staff is
a prominent feature.
19.180 Secondly, another key target for training is that of lawyers. Lawyers
engaging with issues of family violence need to be trained
to be more aware of
family violence issues, and lawyers need to be equipped to navigate through the
different legal frameworks that
apply. Family violence should be addressed in
university law courses and in continuing professional development requirements.
19.181 An issue that has been raised with the Commissions is the need for
better training of lawyers at both an undergraduate level
and in continuing
professional development training. In the Commissions’ view, the
curriculum of degree courses in law and
continuing professional development
frameworks need to be reviewed in order to ensure that issues of family violence
are being addressed
appropriately.
Proposal 19–14
Australian universities offering law degrees
should review their curriculums to ensure that legal issues concerning family
are appropriately addressed.
Proposal 19–15
Australian law societies and institutes should
review continuing professional development requirements to ensure that legal
concerning family violence are appropriately addressed.
19.182 Thirdly, as addressed in the next chapter, training for specialised
police units, specialised prosecutors, and those involved
in specialised courts
needs to be a priority.
19.183 More generally, other targets of education include: operational
police; court staff, especially in specialised courts; government
workers; and victim support workers, in the sense of understanding how the court
system works. It is important, in addressing
these more general training needs,
that managers and policy workers be trained, in addition to frontline
Good practice and
existing resources
19.184 Education and training may take many forms, including: formal training
programs, training conducted face to face; seminars;
online programs; and
educational resources such as bench books or DVDs.
19.185 There is already a wealth of information, training programs and
educational resources in the field of family violence, and
many committed and
highly skilled professionals throughout the family violence sector. Further,
there are a number of existing bodies
who are responsible for training judicial
officers and legal professionals. The Commissions’ proposals for further
are directed towards building upon these existing resources and bodies,
and existing good practice. For example, in Chapter 8, the
Commissions propose
that judicial training be provided in conjunction with the National Judicial
College of Australia, the Judicial
Commission of NSW and the Judicial College of
19.186 For example, as already noted, the Family Court of Australia has
published best practice principles in relation to parenting
disputes where
allegations of family violence are
The Australian
Institute of Judicial Administration has published useful bench books and other
resources including, relevantly, the
Solution-Focused Judging Bench Book
(including an excellent chapter on the nature of family violence), and the
Bench Book for Children Giving Evidence in Australian
The Judicial
Commission of NSW and the Judicial College of Victoria have published other
bench books on sexual assault and sentencing
issues (including family
The Australasian
Institute of Judicial Administration has made family violence the subject of a
conference, and the National Judicial
College of Australia has conducted a
gender audit of its programs.
19.187 As noted above, the
Time for Action
report recommended the
development of a model bench book on family violence and sexual assault issues
and the Commissions endorse
this recommendation. An excellent comparative
example of a bench book dealing with family violence issues has been published
by the National Judicial Institute. This covers, among other things,
the use and misuse of social context information; understanding
and assessing
family violence; and interpreting victim and offender
This is a very
useful precedent for a similar bench book in Australia. Legal Aid Queensland
have also produced best practice guidelines
for working with clients affected by
family violence and sexual
which could be
adopted more widely in Australia.
19.188 A number of organisations also already conduct specific training on
family violence. For example, the Education Centre Against
Violence (ECAV), a
part of NSW Health, provides specialised training and resources for NSW Health
and inter-agency workers in the
field of sexual assault and domestic and family
The Queensland
Centre for Domestic and Family Violence Research and the Domestic Violence
Resource Centre in Victoria also provide
training and resources for the
community and professionals.
19.189 In 2009, ECAV conducted an audit of domestic and family violence
training conducted by government and non-governmental organisations
part of the Intersectoral Domestic & Family Violence Education and Training
project, established under the NSW government’s
new whole of government
approach to domestic and family violence in NSW. This audit involved a survey of
key agencies of training
conducted in those agencies in 2008. The survey was
followed by a number of regional cross-sector focus groups on training needs.
This audit has not yet been
19.190 The Commissions are not aware of any similar audits being conducted in
other states or territories. The Commissions consider
that it is desirable,
before implementing any recommendations regarding training, that a national
audit of existing family violence
training should be conducted, in order to
ensure that existing resources are best used, to evaluate whether existing
training meets
best practice principles, and to promote the development of best
practice in training.
Proposal 19–16
The Australian Government and state and territory
governments should collaborate in conducting a national audit of family violence
training conducted by government and non-governmental agencies, in order to:
(a) ensure that existing resources are best used;
(b) evaluate whether such training meets best practice principles; and
(c) promote the development of best practice in training.
Ensuring quality
19.191 Ensuring that training is effective, and measuring the effectiveness
of training, is a challenge. It is essential to ensure
that training and
education is sensitive, specific, and relevant to the needs of particular
stakeholders and that training programs
are designed with the ultimate aim of
improving service responses to victims of domestic and family violence. In
particular, it must
recognise the time constraints of those being trained and
the aversion to training that can result if training is not appropriately
designed. It needs to be ongoing and substantive, rather than superficial. It
also needs to be based on solid evidence, and open
to diverse viewpoints. The
Commissions recognise that calls for further education and training are easy to
make, but that ensuring
that training is relevant, useful, and has a meaningful
impact on behaviour is much more difficult.
19.192 ECAV has identified a number of challenges in ensuring the quality of
family violence training. These include the adequacy
of the content of training
(discussed above); the adequacy of the length of training, with most training
programs reported on in
the audit averaging less than four
and the number and
qualifications of trainers.
Most training is not subject to accreditation and not otherwise assessed for
quality or longer term impacts on
19.193 One key challenge is ensuring that training is delivered in an
appropriate way. Research has long proven that adults learn
best by applying
skills in practice and engaging in critical reflection on their own practice.
However, it appears that less appropriate
classroom-based learning continues to
be prevalent in family violence training. It is also not generally appropriate
to conduct such
training through e-learning packages.
19.194 Another significant challenge is that of cost. Training needs to be
resourced adequately and less visible costs of training
need to be considered in
funding training.
19.195 Adequate access to training is also important. All staff should be
trained when they start the job, and workers in remote or
regional areas need
better access to training. Another issue is the impact of organisational
cultures and practices in training,
such as attitudes to releasing staff for
19.196 The quality and effectiveness of training also needs to be regularly
monitored and evaluated. In order to do this effectively,
minimum standards for
assessing the quality of training in family violence have to be developed.
Further, the development of training
should be based on evidence of the needs of
those being trained.
19.197 The Commissions’ preliminary view is that it is important to
propose ways to ensure the quality of training and education.
A number of
strategies appear necessary to achieve this aim. First, there need to be minimum
standards for assessing the quality
of family violence training, and training
needs to be evaluated according to those standards. In addition, best practice
for quality family violence training—including key issues such
as the content, length, and format of such training—should
19.198 Secondly, agencies should conduct an assessment of the training needs
of staff, to ensure that training is sensitive and specific
to the needs of
those being trained. Agencies should also foster training in conjunction with
other agencies, to improve the cooperation
and collaboration between key players
in the legal system.
19.199 Thirdly, the Commissions support the strategy of developing a
comprehensive professional development framework for professionals
family violence, as recommended in the
Time for Action
report. It also
supports proposals for a coordinating body to have a primary role in training
and education, either in the form of
a National Centre of Excellence (as
proposed in the
Time for Action
report) or an expert panel and reference
group (as recommended by the Family Law Council).
Proposal 19–17
The Australian Government and state and territory
governments should ensure the quality of family violence training by:
(a) developing minimum standards for assessing the quality of family
violence training, and regularly evaluating the quality of
such training in
relevant government agencies using those standards;
(b) developing best practice guidelines in relation to family violence
training, including the content, length, and format of such
(c) developing training based on evidence of the needs of those being
trained, with the ultimate aim of improving outcomes for victims;
(d) fostering cross-agency and collaborative training, including
cross-agency placements.
[back to top]
Data collection and
19.200 Finally, an important part of integrated responses is the need for
ongoing data collection and evaluation. Throughout this
Consultation Paper, the
need for a solid evidence base has been repeatedly noted to underpin
recommendations for change. The Commissions
have noted repeatedly the inadequacy
of current data, including: data on federal prosecutions relevant to family
court statistics in
relation to family violence-related criminal
data on the extent
of sexual violence against children, women from culturally and linguistically
diverse backgrounds, Indigenous
data on the
reporting and prosecution of sexual
and data on
victims’ compensation claims in the context of family violence. The
Commissions have also noted the effect of different
definitions of family
violence on the comparability of
statistics.
19.201 Other gaps in the system include the absence of a national protection
order database,
absence of evaluations of restorative justice and family violence offender
The Commissions
have also noted the need for (and made some proposals in relation to)
evaluations of: a Tasmanian protocol between
police, the Magistrates Court and
Family Court;
screening and
risk assessment tools for family dispute resolution
practitioners;
and specialist
19.202 Proposals for data collection and evaluation include proposals for: a
central statistical database of federal prosecutions
relevant to family
state and territory
courts to ensure that their statistical data capture separately criminal matters
in a family-violence related
the establishment of a national protection order
and prioritising
the collection of comprehensive data on attrition rates and outcomes in sexual
assault cases.
19.203 The need to build the evidence base was identified as an important
theme in the
Time for Action
It envisaged that
its proposed National Centre of Excellence, discussed above, would have a
‘primary role … in data collection
and analysis as well as policy
and program advice’.
Similarly, the Family Law Council’s proposal for an expert panel and
reference group, discussed above, would also provide coordinating
improving data collection and analysis.
19.204 There are many existing examples of good practice in relation to data
collection and analysis, however. As noted above, a number
of integrated
responses have been evaluated, including the ACT’s FVIP program; the
Tasmanian Safe at Home program; the DVICM
model in NSW; the Joondalup
specialised court in Western Australia; and the offender program in NSW. There
are, however, operational
challenges in ensuring the quality of evaluations. The
Victorian government has also published since 1999 detailed statistical
information
in its Victorian Family Violence Database, the most comprehensive
such database in Australia. The Australian Government has published
analysis of the costs of family
19.205 As with training, the quality of data collection and evaluation is
critical. Long-term programs of data collection and evaluation
are necessary to
ensure that systems continually improve and reflect upon their practice. The
methodology of such evaluations needs
to withstand scrutiny, and should enable
comparisons across time and across different variables. A commitment to quality
data collection
and evaluation is crucial to ensure systemic change and
improvement.
Domestic Abuse Intervention Programs,
Duluth Model on Public Intervention
<www.theduluthmodel.org/duluthmodelonpublic.php> at 11 January
J Mulroney,
Interagency Work
(2003) Australian Domestic and Family Violence
Clearinghouse, 3.
Domestic Violence
Incest Resource Centre,
Developing an Integrated Response to Family Violence
in Victoria—Issues and Directions
See Chs 8, 10, 12–14.
Pro-arrest and pro-prosecution policies
are discussed further below.
Steering Committee to Reduce Family Violence,
Reforming the Family Violence
System in Victoria
(2007), 19.
Descriptions of these projects are usefully compiled by the Australian Domestic
Violence Clearinghouse in its Good Practice Database:
see Australian Domestic
and Family Violence Clearinghouse,
Good Practice Database
<www.austdvclearinghouse.unsw.edu.au/good_practice.html> at 11 January
ACT Community Law Reform
Domestic Violence
, Report No 9
ACT Government,
Options and Prevention—Working to Make the Lives of ACT Women Safe
The Domestic Violence Project
Coordinator is a statutory appointment under the
Domestic Violence Agencies
(ACT), and the Victims of Crime Coordinator is a statutory
appointment under the
Victims of Crime Act 1994
See Australian Domestic and Family
Violence Clearinghouse,
Good Practice Database
<www.austdvclearinghouse.unsw.edu.au/good_practice.html> at 11 January
2010, ‘Family Violence Intervention Program’,
An evaluation was prepared in
2009 and is being prepared for
publication.
See Urbis Keys Young,
Evaluation of the ACT Family Violence Intervention Program Phase II
These are listed in NSW
Domestic Violence: Improving Police Practice
(2006), 47. The
Commissions are aware that other arrangements may apply informally, such as a
protocol for expediting information
exchange in family violence matters on the
Katoomba and Lithgow circuit of the Local Court, which developed from a court
50–51. Child protection is discussed in Chs
ARTD Consultants,
Report on Coordinating NSW Government Action Against Domestic and Family
(2007) NSW Department of Premier and
Office for Women’s
Policy (NSW),
Discussion Paper on NSW Domestic and Family Violence Strategic
Ngaanyatjarra
Pitjantjatjara Yankunytjatjara Women’s Council,
NPYWC Domestic Violence
(2010) <www.waru.org/organisations/npywc/npy_domestic.php> at
30 January 2010.
Government,
For Our Sons and Daughters: A Queensland Government Strategy to
Reduce Domestic and Family Violence 2009–2014
Queensland Government,
Sons and Daughters: A Queensland Government Strategy to Reduce Domestic and
Family Violence Program of Action 2009–2010
(2009), 5. The specialised
court in Rockhampton is described in Ch
Domestic Violence Prevention
Centre Gold Coast,
Domestic Violence Prevention Centre Gold Coast
<www.domesticviolence.com.au/GoldCoastPartnerships.htm#overview> at 2
February 2010.
Northern Queensland
Domestic Violence Resource Service,
<www.nqdvrs.org.au/
Dovetail.htm> at 11 January 2010.
Australian Domestic and Family Violence Clearinghouse,
Good Practice
<www.austdvclearinghouse.unsw.edu.au/good_practice.html> at
11 January 2010, ‘Logan River Valley Integrated Community
Response to
Domestic Violence Group Fax-Back Project Record’.
J Marshall, E Ziersch and N Hudson,
Family Safety Framework—Final Evaluation Report
(2008) Office of
Crime Statistics and Research (SA).
Office for Women (SA),
Women’s Safety Strategy
<www.officeforwomen.sa.gov.au/index.
php?section=970> at 2 February 2010.
Successworks,
Review of the Integrated Response to Family Violence: Final
(2009), 19–20.
are discussed in Ch 5.
Successworks,
Review of the Integrated Response to Family Violence: Final Report
(2009), 12.
Funding has been
provided for an Integrated Case Coordination Management System as the next
stage: Ibid, 13.
Ibid, 15 reports,
however, that this funding was returned from the contracted non-government
service provider as the service was
unsuccessful.
Risk assessment is discussed in
the context of family dispute resolution in Ch 11.
Department of Human Services (Vic),
Changing Lives—A New Approach to Family Violence in Victoria
Victorian Indigenous
Family Taskforce,
Final Report
Office of Women’s
Policy (Vic),
Right to Respect: Victoria’s Plan to Prevent Violence
Against Women 2010 –20
(2009), 4. These strategies involve the
Minister for Housing and Minister for Local Government; the Minister for
Women’s Affairs;
the Attorney-General; the Minister for Police and
Emergency Services; and the Minister for Community Services and
Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of Family Violence Laws: Report
(2006); Victorian Law
Reform Commission,
Sexual Offences: Final Report
Victoria Police,
Free from Violence—Upholding the Right: the Victoria Police Strategy to
Reduce Violence Against Women and Children 2009–2014
(2009); Victoria
Code of Practice for the Investigation of Family Violence
The specialist family violence and
sexual assault courts are discussed in Ch 20. Sexual assault centres are
discussed in Ch 20 in
the context of specialist sexual assault
Government of Victoria,
Family Violence Risk Assessment and Risk Management: Supporting an Integrated
Family Violence Service System
Aboriginal Affairs
Strong Culture, Strong Peoples, Strong Families-Towards a Safer
Future for Indigenous Families and Communities
Office of Women’s Policy (Vic),
Right to Respect: Victoria’s Plan to Prevent Violence Against Women
Youth and Families (Vic),
Integrated Family Violence
Australian Domestic and Family
Violence Clearinghouse,
Good Practice Database
<www.austdvclearinghouse.unsw.edu.au/good_practice.html> at 11 January
2010, Record 126.
Department for Child
Protection (WA),
WA Strategic Plan for Family and Domestic Violence
E Pence, S Mitchell and A
Western Australian Safety and Accountability Audit of the Armadale
Domestic Violence Intervention Project
(2007) Department for Communities
Government of Western Australia.
Legal Aid Western Australia,
Domestic Violence Advocacy Support Central
<www.legalaid.wa.
gov.au/annualreport/section1/7dvasc.html> at 2 February
Crime Reduction Centre
Information Services Team,
Specialist Domestic Violence Court Programme
Resource Manual
(Revised ed, 2008).
Australian Domestic and Family Violence Clearinghouse,
Good Practice
austdvclearinghouse.unsw.edu.au/good_practice.html> at 11 January
Domestic Violence Agencies
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
These purposes are
discussed in Ch 3.
Successworks,
Review of the Integrated Response to Family Violence: Final Report
(2009), 10.
Queensland Government,
Sons and Daughters: A Queensland Government Strategy to Reduce Domestic and
Family Violence 2009–2014
South Australian Government,
Commitment to Women’s Safety in South Australia
Department for Child Protection (WA),
WA Strategic Plan for Family and Domestic Violence 2009–2013
This is discussed in
See also the discussion in
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Review of Family Violence Laws: Report
(2006), Ch 5.
Federal-Provincial-Territorial Working Group Reviewing Spousal Abuse Policies
and Legislation,
Spousal Abuse Policies and Legislation
See, in Canada, Ibid; in the US, A
Practical Implications of Current Domestic Violence Research: For Law
Enforcement, Prosecutors and Judges
(2009) National Institute of Justice,
[2–10], [6–12]. In Australia, see R Holder and N Mayo, ‘What
Do Women Want
- Prosecuting Family Violence in the ACT’
Current Issues in Criminal Justice
M Fine, P Kuru and C Thomson,
Coordinated and Integrated Human Service Delivery Models: Final Report
(2005) Social Policy Research Centre, University of NSW,
Domestic Violence Crisis
Service (ACT),
Domestic Violence Crisis Service (ACT)
<www.dvcs.org.au/
domesticviolencb.html#CrisisIntervention> at 14 April 2010at 15 January
See Domestic Violence (Crisis
Support Organisation) Approval 1992, 8 July 1992, authorised under
Domestic Violence Agencies Act 1986
A branch of the AFP, ACT Policing, is
responsible for policing in the ACT.
Legal Aid NSW,
Women’s Domestic Violence Court Assistance Schemes
<www.legalaid.nsw.
gov.au/asp/index.asp?pgid=728> at 2 February
Richard Chisholm noted in his
2009 report that this service had proved particularly invaluable to victims of
family violence: R
Family Courts Violence Review
(2009), 151,
L Rodwell and N Smith,
Evaluation of the NSW Domestic Violence Intervention Court Model
Bureau of Crime Statistics and
A Robinson,
Evaluation of
Independent Sexual Violence Advisors (ISVAs) and Independent Domestic Violence
Advisors (IDVAs)
(2009) Home Office (UK),
R Chisholm,
Family Courts
Violence Review
(2009), 168–172.
National Council to Reduce
Violence against Women and their Children,
Time for Action: The National
Council’s Plan for Australia to Reduce Violence against Women and their
Children, 2009–2021
Comment on ALRC Family
Violence Online Forum: Women’s Legal Service
The Australian Domestic
and Family Violence Clearinghouse are presently conducting a study on
women’s financial security both
before and after abusive relationships.
See R Braaf and I Barrett Meyering,
When Does It End? The Continuation of
Family Violence Through the Court Process, Financial Outcomes for Women and Good
, Australian Institute of Judicial Administration, 1–3 October
See Access Economics,
Cost of Domestic Violence to the Australian Economy, Part I
(2004), esp
National Council to Reduce
Violence against Women and their Children,
Time for Action: The National
Council’s Plan for Australia to Reduce Violence against Women and their
Children, 2009–2021
(2009), 98.
Other actions, such as breach of
fiduciary duty or negligence, may also be available, although these have not
tended to be successful.
Only a few tort claims in the context of family
violence have been made: see, eg,
Varmedja v Varmedja
[2008] NSWCA 177
Giller v Procopets
[2004] VSC 113
Ainsworth v Ainsworth
Jackson v Jackson
[1999] NSWSC 229.
For claims of breach of
fiduciary duty, see:
Paramasivam v Flynn
[1998] FCA 1711
(1998) 90 FCR 489
[2004] VSC 514
; and for claims of negligence, see:
Batchelor v State
of Tasmania
[2005] TASSC 11
[2004] VSC 514.
For example, in
[2008] NSWCA 177
, damages of $232,791.55 were awarded in respect of
a number of physical and sexual assaults; in
Ainsworth v Ainsworth
, $572,815 was awarded in respect of four separate assaults; and in
[1995] FLC 92–565, $100,000 was awarded in respect of a sexual
These were commonly cited in
one empirical study of women’s motivations: B Feldthusen, O Hankivsky and
L Greaves, ‘Therapeutic
Consequences of Civil Actions for Damages and
Compensation Claims by Victims of Sexual Abuse’ (2000) 12
Journal of Women and the Law
77. One Canadian study uncovered only 25 tort
actions for family violence cases between 1989–2007: L Buckingham,
Back: The Tort Action for Spousal Violence’
Canadian Journal of Family Law
For example, in
[2004] VSC 113
, three of the eight claims of assault were barred
by the limitation period, and an extension of time was granted only in respect
of one of them.
This issue was noted
in respect of the criminal offence of assault in Ch
In the 1990s, it was possible for
victims to claim in the Family Court under legislation vesting state
This led to a rise in such claims: see, eg,
the Marriage of CK and IW Kennon
[1997] FamCA 27
(1997) 22 Fam LR 1
In the Marriage of
(Unreported, Family Court of Australia, Chisholm J, 14 February
Marsh v Marsh
[1993] FamCA 57
(1993) 17 Fam LR 289.
Re Wakim; Ex
parte McNally
(1999) 198 CLR 511, however, this jurisdiction is no longer
available: see Ch 2.
Support and Rehabilitation Act 1996
Sentencing Act 1991
Penalties and Sentences Act 1992
Criminal Law (Sentencing) Act 1988
Sentencing Act
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
Sentencing Act 1995
The Western Australian
legislation only permits restitution orders in respect of property damage:
Sentencing Act 1995
R Fox and A Freiberg,
Sentencing: State and Federal Law in Victoria
(2nd ed, 1999), 5.
No statistics appear to be available.
Research has revealed only two uses of this power in the context of family
Mordaunt v Assessor, Victim Services
[1997] NSWSC 1131
Stevens v Baxter
[2009] VSC 257.
Some evidence for the inability of
offenders to pay is recorded in the Victims Compensation Tribunal (NSW),
Chairperson’s Report 2007–2008
, 23. The Tribunal notes the
difficulty of recovering debts from offenders, and records that it recovered
$3.3 million from offenders
against payments of $61 million to victims that
year. In Tasmania, compensation orders are mandatory in respect of property
However, in the first year of this coming into operation, only 4% of
orders relating to burglary and/or stealing were fully paid,
and 20% of orders
relating to injury to property; in the second year, the percentages were 8% and
12%: K Warner and J Gawlik, ‘Mandatory
Compensation Orders for Crime
Victims and the Rhetoric of Restorative Justice’
and New Zealand Journal of Criminology
The relevance of this factor is
discussed in
This is also discussed
critically in Ibid. This is because the procedure is summary and not well-suited
to lengthy and complex investigations.
For example, in the ACT and the
Northern Territory, only the Director of Public Prosecution can apply for such
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
Sentencing Act
; and in NSW, there is a statutory maximum of $50,000 in
relation to compensation for injury, and the court must consider any
contributory
conduct, as to which see the discussion below:
Victims Support
and Rehabilitation Act 1996
In most jurisdictions, the
order is enforceable as a civil debt: see, eg,
Sentencing Act 1991
Sentencing Act 1997
I Barrett Meyering,
Victim Compensation and Domestic Violence: A National Overview
Australian Domestic and Family Violence
Clearinghouse.
C Forster, ‘Good Law or
Bad Lore? The Efficacy of Criminal Injuries Compensation Schemes for Victims of
Sexual Abuse: A New
Model of Sexual Assault Provisions’
University of Western Australia Law Review
Breaches of protection orders
are not included in some jurisdictions, such as Victoria, Queensland and the
Victims of Crime Assistance Act 1996
Crime Assistance Act 2009
Victims of Crime (Financial
Assistance) Act 1983
(ACT) s 3. The Queensland and ACT Acts allow for
criminal acts to be prescribed in regulations, but none are presently
prescribed.
The nature and
dynamics of family violence are discussed in
[2009] WACIC
C Forster, ‘The Failure
of Criminal Injuries Compensation Schemes for Victims of Intra-Familial Abuse:
The Example of Queensland’
Torts Law Journal
162–164. See also L Finestone, ‘Crimes Compensation: A National
Perspective’ in M Heenan (ed)
Legalising Justice for All Women:
National Conference on Sexual Assault and the Law
(1996) 198,
C Forster, ‘The Failure
of Criminal Injuries Compensation Schemes for Victims of Intra-Familial Abuse:
The Example of Queensland’
Torts Law Journal
Victims Support and
Rehabilitation Act 1996
, Dictionary, sch 1 cls 6, 7A.
Victims of Crime Assistance
Regulations
(NT) regs 5, 22. Regulation 4 defines sexual offences as violent
acts for the purposes of the governing
Victims Support and
Rehabilitation Act 1996
(NSW) sch 1 cls 6, 7A, Table. The most serious
category also includes cases of unlawful sexual intercourse in which: serious
injury is inflicted; two or more offenders are involved; or in which the
offender uses an offensive weapon. The standard amount for
the most serious
category of sexual assault is
$25,000–$50,000.
Victim Compensation and Domestic Violence: A National Overview
(2010) Australian Domestic and Family Violence Clearinghouse,
Victims Compensation Tribunal
Chairperson’s Report 2007–2008
Victims of Crime
(ACT) s 10(1)(f).
Victims of Crime Assistance Act 1996
Crime Assistance Act 2009
, sch 2. See I Barrett
Victim Compensation and Domestic Violence: A National Overview
(2010) Australian Domestic and Family Violence Clearinghouse,
Victims of Crime Assistance
(Special Financial Assistance) Regulations 2000
(Vic), regs 6, 7. In
contrast, the Queensland legislation restricts the amount of special financial
assistance to that payable for
a crime in the highest category:
Crime Assistance Act 2009
(Qld) sch 2, cl
These provisions were
inserted by the
Victims of Crime Assistance (Amendment) Act 2000
which commenced on 1 January 2001.
Victims of Crime Assistance Act 1996
Victims of Crime Assistance Act
These include a sense of violation; reduced self worth
or perception; lost or reduced physical immunity; lost or reduced physical
capacity, including the ability to have children; increased fear or increased
feelings of insecurity; adverse effects of others reacting
adversely to the
person; adverse impact on lawful sexual relations; and adverse impact on
feelings. This provision was introduced
Criminal Offence Victims
Regulation 1995
(Qld) regs 1A(1),
Victims Support and
Rehabilitation Act 1996
Victims of Crime
Assistance Act 1996
Victims of Crime Assistance Act
Victims of Crime Act 2001
Criminal Injuries Compensation Act 1985
Crime Assistance Act 2006
Victims of Crime (Financial
Assistance) Act 1983
C Forster, ‘The
Failure of Criminal Injuries Compensation Schemes for Victims of Intra-Familial
Abuse: The Example of Queensland’
Torts Law Journal
Victims of Crime Assistance
Victims of Crime Act 2001
Victims of Crime Assistance Regulations
This is reviewed in C
Forster, ‘The Failure of Criminal Injuries Compensation Schemes for
Victims of Intra-Familial Abuse:
The Example of Queensland’
Torts Law Journal
Moore v Victims Compensation Fund Corporation
[2009] NSWSC
Victims of Crime
Assistance Act 1996
Victims of Crime Assistance Act
In Victoria, this applies unless the Tribunal
considers that they should not be treated as
Criminal Injuries
Compensation Act 1985
Victims of Crime Assistance Act
Since 2003, the Western Australian provisions apply
whether or not the acts were related. Judges in Western Australia have not
to interpret acts of family violence as related if they do not occur at a
similar time: C Forster, ‘The Failure of Criminal
Injuries Compensation
Schemes for Victims of Intra-Familial Abuse: The Example of Queensland’
Torts Law Journal
, 155. The maximum limit is twice the
maximum limit applicable to the last offence committed. The Tasmanian provision
allows a different
maximum limit to be prescribed in relation to a series of
In NSW, if a person
receives two or more compensable injuries, the victim may receive only 10% and
5% of the standard amount in
respect of the second and third most serious
injuries, and no further amount:
Victims Support and Rehabilitation Act
(NSW) sch 1 cl 3. In the Northern Territory, the reductions are 30% and
15% respectively, but this reduction does not apply to the
specific injury of
‘domestic violence’:
Victims of Crime Assistance Regulations
(NT) reg 18.
Crime (Financial Assistance) Act 1983
Criminal Injuries
Compensation Act 1985
Victims of Crime Assistance Act
Victims of Crime Act 2001
Victims of Crime
Assistance Act 2006
Under-reporting is
discussed specifically in the context of sexual assault in
‘Between a Rock and a Hard Place: Women Victims of Domestic Violence and
the Western Australian
Criminal Injuries Compensation Act
’ (1996) 3(2)
Murdoch University Electronic Journal of Law
http://www.murdoch.edu.au/elaw/issues/v3n2/jurevic.html
[54]–[73]. This is even more true in the case of Indigenous victims: see C
Forster, ‘Good Law or Bad Lore? The
Efficacy of Criminal Injuries
Compensation Schemes for Victims of Sexual Abuse: A New Model of Sexual Assault
Provisions’
University of Western Australia Law Review
Victims Support
and Rehabilitation Act 1996
Victims of Crime
Assistance Act 1996
Victims of Crime Assistance Act
Queensland was the last jurisdiction to retain this requirement, but it was
removed in 2009.
Further, it has
been suggested that in practice there is an unofficial requirement that a
conviction must be obtained: C Forster,
‘Good Law or Bad Lore? The
Efficacy of Criminal Injuries Compensation Schemes for Victims of Sexual Abuse:
A New Model of Sexual
Assault Provisions’
University of
Western Australia Law Review
, 277. Forster’s analysis of 114
judgments showed that, of those, only five proceeded without a
conviction.
Victims of Crime Act
Further, if no person is charged for the offence,
the evidence of the victim alone is sufficient without corroboration:
s 27(4)(b).
This discretion is not subject to review:
Criminal Injuries
Compensation Act 1985
Victims Support and
Rehabilitation Act 1996
Victims of Crime Assistance Act
Victims of Crime Assistance Act 2009
Victims of Crime Act 2001
Injuries Compensation Act 1985
Victims of Crime
Assistance Act 1976
Victims of Crime (Financial
Assistance) Act 1983
(ACT) s 31;
Victims of Crime Assistance Act
Victims Support and Rehabilitation Act 1996
Victims of Crime Assistance Act 2009
Injuries Compensation Act 1985
Victims of Crime
(Financial Assistance) Act 1983
(ACT) s 38;
Victims of Crime
Assistance Act 2006
In Queensland, however, criminal conduct
on the part of the victim must be the ‘primary or only reason for the
acting being
committed’:
Victims of Crime Assistance Act 2009
. In South Australia, it is restricted to consideration of
indictable offences which materially contributed to the risk of injury,
the court was satisfied it was otherwise unjust:
Victims of Crime Act
Victims Support and Rehabilitation Act 1996
of Crime Act 2001
Victims of Crime Assistance Act
of Crime (Financial Assistance) Act 1983
‘Between a Rock and a Hard Place: Women Victims of Domestic Violence and
the Western Australian
Criminal Injuries Compensation Act
’ (1996) 3(2)
Murdoch University Electronic Journal of Law
http://www.murdoch.edu.au/elaw/issues/v3n2/jurevic.html
[24]–[53]; R Langer, ‘Battered Women and the Criminal Injuries
Compensation Board: Re AL’ (1991) 55
Saskatchewan Law Review
K Whitney, ‘The Criminal
Injuries Compensation Acts: Do They Discriminate Against Female Victims of
[1997] SCULawRw 5
Southern Cross University Law Review
See also L Finestone, ‘Crimes Compensation: A National Perspective’
in M Heenan (ed)
Legalising Justice for All Women: National Conference on
Sexual Assault and the Law
(1996) 198,
Victims Support and
Rehabilitation Act 1996
Victims of Crime
Assistance Act 1996
Criminal Injuries Compensation
Victims of Crime Assistance Act 2006
‘Between a Rock and a Hard Place: Women Victims of Domestic Violence and
the Western Australian
Criminal Injuries Compensation Act
’ (1996) 3(2)
Murdoch University Electronic Journal of Law
http://www.murdoch.edu.au/elaw/issues/v3n2/jurevic.html
‘The Criminal Injuries Compensation Acts: Do They Discriminate Against
Female Victims of Violence?’
[1997] SCULawRw 5
Southern Cross University Law
Government,
Victims of Crime Review Report
It is one year in the ACT and
also, for secondary victims, one year after the death of the primary victim in
South Australia:
Victims of Crime (Financial Assistance) Act 1983
Victims of Crime Act 2001
; two years in NSW,
Victoria, and the Northern Territory:
Victims Support and Rehabilitation Act
Victims of Crime Assistance Act 1996
Victims of Crime Assistance Act 2006
; and three
years elsewhere:
Victims of Crime Assistance Act 2009
Victims of Crime Act 2001
(with a further six months to
apply to the court after negotiations for settlement have ended);
Injuries Compensation Act 1985
Victims of Crime Assistance
Langer, ‘Battered Women and the Criminal Injuries Compensation Board: Re
AL’ (1991) 55
Saskatchewan Law Review
C Forster and P Parkinson,
‘Compensating Child Sexual Assault Victims Within Statutory Schemes:
Imagining a More Effective
Compensatory Framework’
[2000] UNSWLawJl 30
of New South Wales Law Journal
Child protection is dealt with in
and sexual assault in
of this Consultation
Victims of Crime
Assistance Act 2006
s 31(3)(a).
Victims Support and
Rehabilitation Act 1996
Victims of Crime
Assistance Act 1996
Victims of Crime Assistance Act
The Queensland provision gives as an example a
person in the position of spouse, parent or
Victims Compensation
Tribunal (NSW),
Chairperson’s Report 2007–2008
Queensland Government,
Victims of Crime Review Report
Victims of Crime
Assistance Act 1996
Victims of Crime Act 2001
Crime Assistance Act 1996
L Finestone,
‘Crimes Compensation: A National Perspective’ in M Heenan (ed)
Legalising Justice for All Women: National Conference on Sexual Assault and
(1996) 198,
In Tasmania and the
ACT, the decision-maker must be satisfied that financial assistance should be
awarded and there is insufficient
information to decide the amount of the award:
Victims of Crime Assistance Act 1976
Victims of Crime
(Financial Assistance) Act 1983
(ACT) s 43.
In NSW, the assessor must also be
satisfied that the person is either in financial hardship, funeral expenses are
due, or there
are other circumstances where the assessor considers it
appropriate:
Victims Support and Rehabilitation Act 1996
In South Australia, the Attorney-General has absolute discretion to make an
interim award to a person who is ‘in necessitous
circumstances’ and
is likely to be awarded statutory compensation:
Victims of Crime Act 2001
In the Northern Territory, the Director must also be
satisfied that the financial loss has been or will be suffered or incurred,
the financial loss results from the violent act:
Victims of Crime Assistance
There is a cap of $5,000 on this immediate payment,
which is payable within 28 days of the decision:
Victims of Crime Assistance
. In Western Australia, the interim payment also
must be warranted:
Criminal Injuries Compensation Act 1985
Victims of Crime Assistance
of Crime Assistance Act 1996
The legislation in the ACT
requires a brief description of each claim, from which cases of family violence
can be identified to
some degree:
Victims of Crime (Financial Assistance) Act
(ACT) s 71.
Victims Compensation Tribunal (NSW),
Chairperson’s Report
Victim Compensation and Domestic Violence: A National Overview
(2010) Australian Domestic and Family Violence Clearinghouse,
Victoria Legal Aid,
Sexual Assault: The Law, Your Rights as a Victim
(5th ed, 2009),
The Terms of Reference
for this Inquiry instruct the ALRC not to duplicate the work of the Australian
Institute of Family Studies
in particular: see Ch
National Council to Reduce
Violence against Women and their Children,
Time for Action: The National
Council’s Plan for Australia to Reduce Violence against Women and their
Children, 2009–2021
Ibid, Recs 1.3.2, 3.1.1, 3.1.4,
3.1.5, 3.3.8.
Ibid, Rec 4.4.2. This is
also discussed in Ch 15.
Australian Institute of
Family Studies,
Evaluation of the 2006 Family Law Reforms
Family Court of Australia,
Best Practice Principles for Use in Parenting Disputes When Family Violence
or Abuse is Alleged
Family Courts Violence Review
(2009), Recs 4.3, 4.6,
Family Law Council,
Improving Responses to Family Violence in the Family Law System: An Advice on
the Intersection of Family Violence and Family Law Issues
(2009), Recs
6.1–6.7. This is also noted in
Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of Family Violence Laws: Report
(2006), chs 5, 6, 12;
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Sexual Offences: Final Report
Australasian Policing
Strategy on the Prevention and Reduction of Family Violence
S Stewart (Education Centre
Against Violence),
Consultation
, By telephone, 18 February
The legislative framework
appears to be commonly used as a basis for training, at least in NSW:
This was identified by the
Education Centre Against Violence as a key issue for agency workers:
Family Court of
Best Practice Principles for Use in Parenting Disputes When Family
Violence or Abuse is Alleged
Solution-Focused Judging Bench Book
(2009); Australasian Institute of
Judicial Administration,
Bench Book for Children Giving Evidence in
Australian Courts
Judicial Commission of New South Wales,
Sexual Assault Handbook
<www.judcom.nsw.gov.au/publications/benchbks/sexual_assault/index.html> at
14 April 2010; Judicial Commission of New
South Wales,
Sentencing Bench
(2009) <www.judcom.nsw.gov.
au/publications/benchbks/sentencing/index.html> at 21 February 2010; Judicial
College of Victoria,
Victorian Sentencing Manual
(2009), Judicial College
of Victoria,
Sexual Assault Manual
<www.judicialcollege.vic.edu.au/publications/sexual-assault-manual> at 21
February 2010.
National Council to
Reduce Violence against Women and their Children,
Time for Action: The
National Council’s Plan for Australia to Reduce Violence against Women and
their Children, 2009–2021
Violence and Family Law in Canada: A Handbook for Judges
Legal Aid Queensland,
Working with Clients Who Have Experienced Domestic or Family Violence
(2008); Legal Aid Queensland,
Best Practice Guidelines for Lawyers Working
with Clients Who Have Experienced Sexual Violence
NSW Health,
Centre Against Violence
<www.ecav.health.nsw.gov.au> at 14 April
Queensland Centre for
Domestic and Family Violence Research,
Queensland Centre for Domestic and
Family Violence Research
<www.noviolence.com.au/purpose.html> at 14
April 2010; Domestic Violence Resource Centre Victoria,
The Domestic Violence
Resource Centre (Vic)
<www.dvirc.org.au/> at 21 February
S Stewart (Education Centre
Against Violence),
Consultation
, By telephone, 18 February
Ibid. Training can vary from
competency-based courses delivered over a number of months. Clearly, the
adequacy of the length of
training depends greatly on the position of those
being trained.
Training should
preferably be conducted by at least two trainers, with specific qualifications
or experience in family violence
as well as workplace training: Ibid.
See Chs 8 and 10. As
discussed there, the Australian Government has committed to working with the
states and territories to establish
a national scheme for the registration of
protection orders. Details have not yet been released about how such a national
would operate.
Proposal 8–11.
Ch 11, Proposal 11–2.
National Council to
Reduce Violence against Women and their Children,
Time for Action: The
National Council’s Plan for Australia to Reduce Violence against Women and
their Children, 2009–2021
(2009), 47–48, 52, 68, 89, 122, 143,
Access Economics,
of Domestic Violence to the Australian Economy, Part I
(2004); Access
The Cost of Domestic Violence to the Australian Economy, Part
ALRC CP1 Family Violence � Improving Legal Frameworks
20. Specialisation
Introduction
Advantages and challenges of specialisation
Specialised police
Commissions’ views
Specialised prosecutors
Commissions’ views
Specialised courts
Defining ‘specialised courts’
Family violence courts in Australia
International comparisons
Specialised sex offences courts
Value of specialised courts
Commissions’ views
Designing specialised courts
Features of specialised family violence courts
‘Problem-solving’ courts
Therapeutic jurisprudence
Issues with problem-solving courts
Best practice in courts generally
Intake services
The role of the federal government
20. Specialisation
Introduction
20.1 A common element of integrated responses, discussed in Chapter 19, is
the specialisation of key personnel such as the police,
prosecutors and courts.
Specialisation is also a strategy that can be used outside of specific
integrated response programs. The
importance of specialisation warrants separate
discussion in this chapter, although elements of integration and specialisation
to co-exist and reinforce each other in best practice.
20.2 Specialisation is discussed in this chapter as a method of improving the
interaction in practice of the legal frameworks governing
family violence, and
improving the consistency of the interpretation and application of laws for
victims of sexual assault in the
context of family violence, with an overall
objective of improving the safety of women and children. This chapter addresses
of specialisation generally, and in the specific contexts of
specialised police, prosecutors, and courts, as a method of improving
interactions and consistency. It focuses in particular on specialised courts and
describes specialised family violence and sexual
assault courts in Australia and
overseas. Key issues for this Inquiry are examined, including the jurisdiction
and features of such
courts; the potential of ‘problem-solving’
courts; ways of ‘mainstreaming’ benefits of specialised courts;
the role of the federal government in supporting specialised courts.
Advantages and
challenges of specialisation
20.3 Specialised approaches have been promoted as a strategy for achieving
best practice in dealing with family violence. There are
a number of advantages
of specialisation. One advantage of specialisation is that the majority of
victims of family violence will
be dealt with by those with an understanding of
the nature and dynamics of family violence, and who know how to deal best with
violence. Specialists can also develop and foster a shared understanding
of family violence that benefits victims of family violence.
Specialists also
assist victims in navigating the legal, social and health systems by connecting
together legal frameworks and social
20.4 Specialisation can also improve consistency and efficiency in the
interpretation and application of laws, as a result of shared
understandings and
the awareness and experience of a smaller number of decision makers. Specialists
can identify and solve problems
more quickly. Specialists can also develop best
practice, drive change in the system, and provide support for generalists. As a
of these advantages, specialists are likely to be more effective in
addressing family violence, including sexual assault in the context
20.5 One concern commonly expressed about specialisation is that, at least
initially, specialised units, because of the resources
they require, may only
reach a certain segment of the population, meaning other victims of family
violence are no better off. This
can lead to a degree of arbitrariness in which
some victims receive better treatment than others.
20.6 There are also challenges associated with the operation of specialised
units and courts. These include: the appropriate selection
of specialists; the
risk specialists will suffer burnout due to the difficult nature of their work;
and the ongoing need to ensure,
and maintain, adequate resourcing and support.
Specialisation v mainstreaming
20.7 There is a real debate about whether resources—such as funding,
staffing and administrative support—are better concentrated
in specialised
units and courts, or dispersed more generally throughout the system. A number of
points, however, may be made about
this genuine concern.
20.8 The first point to make is that specialisation has the advantage of
being a feasible and practical measure to improve the system.
Stakeholders have
commented on the impossibility of ensuring that all judicial officers and
police, for example, understand and engage
with the nature of family violence,
and act consistently with each other. Specialisation does not require systemic,
wholesale, changes
in attitudes, behaviours and practices, which are by their
nature very difficult to achieve—although, of course, highly desirable.
20.9 Secondly, the resources required by specialisation can benefit the
general system as well. Professionals can be rotated in and
out of specialist
positions, enabling them to bring specialist knowledge into the general system.
Specialists can also drive change
in the generalist system, by developing and
mainstreaming best practice. Improvements in efficiency through specialisation
will offset
some of the increases required in resources. Dedicated lists enable
resources and training to be targeted more effectively. Further,
specialised
courts may result in better outcomes that may result in substantial savings
elsewhere in government—for example,
earlier and more effective legal
intervention may result in fewer cases requiring child protection, and fewer
demands on medical
and psychological services.
20.10 Thirdly, the particular model of specialisation adopted is crucial in
determining the resources required, and the coverage of
specialised units. Not
all elements of specialisation are resource-intensive and (as discussed later)
some of those elements could
be readily ‘mainstreamed’ into
generalist courts. The model may also specify criteria that enable
specialisation to be
directed towards those in greatest need (as discussed
20.11 Perhaps most importantly, the model of specialisation need not be
confined to a few geographical sites. For example, Western
Australia has
committed itself to expanding its network of specialised family violence courts
to all metropolitan areas; Victoria
has extended specialist family violence
services to other courts; and the United Kingdom has committed itself to an
ambitious program
of 128 Specialist Domestic Violence Courts (SDVCs) by 2011.
Operational challenges
20.12 A number of issues have been identified in relation to specialised
units and courts. One issue is how specialists are selected.
Clearly, the
attitudes and aptitudes of specialists are key to ensuring quality outcomes.
Many models of specialisation, however,
lack clarity about the selection
criteria for specialised roles.
Most specialised courts in Australia, for example, do not require specialised
judicial officers to receive particular
A related issue is the
need to ensure that there are incentives to take up such specialised positions.
For example, in 2006, the
New South Wales (NSW) Ombudsman commented in relation
to specialised police known as Domestic Violence Liaison Officers (DVLOs):
Unfortunately, there are still few, if any, incentives for police officers to
act in the role, apart from the availability of regular
daytime shifts.
Conversely, the inability of DVLOs to work 12-hour shifts and have up to six
consecutive rest days is one of the
less appealing aspects of the role for many
officers. There is no special allowance payable to DVLOs, and no recognised
career path
associated with the position. Partly for these reasons, there is
little status attached to being a
20.13 Stakeholders have also commented on the difficult and traumatising
nature of the work specialists undertake, particularly in
the area of family
violence and sexual offences. Specialists in this field of work may suffer
‘burnout’ as a result,
unless care is taken. This may be a factor to
consider in developing models of specialisation. For example, it may be
to consider a rotation model of specialisation. As well, judicial
officers and other staff could be provided with counselling including,
example, debriefing sessions to deal with the traumatic nature of their job.
20.14 Another issue is the need to ensure that adequate resources are
available for specialists, and that there is a commitment to
resourcing. For example, the NSW Ombudsman noted that the effectiveness of DVLOs
was being hampered by inadequate access
to vehicles, computers and mobile
[back to top]
Specialised
20.15 In a number of jurisdictions, police officers specialise in family
violence and sexual assault. The role of specialised police
in the context of
sexual assault is discussed in Chapter 17. In that Chapter, the Commissions
ask questions about the effectiveness,
and the need for training and
This section briefly
describes the role of specialised police in the context of family violence
outside of the context of sexual
20.16 As discussed in Chapters 5 and 6, police have a major role both in the
criminal legal system and in applying for protection
orders in the civil system.
Most Australian jurisdictions have established specialised police roles in
relation to family violence.
Most commonly, the functions of such specialised
positions include:
development of police strategies and policies concerning family
development and representation of inter-agency networks, and
coordination and liaison with relevant government and non-government
conducting training, education and research on family violence
providing advice and guidance to other police officers on family
violence issues;
supervising, monitoring or providing quality assurance in relation
to police responses to family violence incidents;
liaising with courts and prosecutors; and
providing information and support to
Tasmanian specialised units have other responsibilities, including providing
case coordination; attending integrated case
coordination meetings, assessing
applications to vary police family violence orders, and conducting safety audits
and preparing safety
responsibilities arise under the ‘Safe at Home’ integrated response
in place in that jurisdiction.
20.18 NSW and Queensland also have specialised police prosecutors who apply
for protection orders on behalf of victims. In both jurisdictions,
reports have
noted that the heavy workloads involved and limited time for preparation reduce
the quality of the
representation.
20.19 Another factor to bear in mind is the release of the
Australasian
Strategy on the Prevention and Reduction of Family Violence
in November
2008. This strategy includes principles and objectives, as well as a program for
action. Relevantly, measures in this
program include an audit of training and a
review of workforce development; audits of research and the development of an
Australasian
knowledge base of best practice across jurisdictions; and audits of
current legal and policy responses, including confirming the
role of specialised
20.20 There are wide variations in the structure of specialised police. For
example, Victoria and Western Australia employ more comprehensive
models that
provide for specialisation in policy and strategy, inter-agency and community
engagement, and training and advice. In
other jurisdictions, such as South
Australia and the Northern Territory, the role of DVLOs appears primarily to be
as a contact point
for victims.
20.21 There is little information or research, on the role and value of
specialised police in Australia. However, the value of the
DVLO in NSW has been
recorded by the NSW Ombudsman:
The overall message communicated was that an effective DVLO is indispensable.
Services were forthcoming with acknowledgement of and
praise for such DVLOs.
They commonly expressed to us the view that DVLOs should have more seniority as
well as support at the corporate
and local operational level. The following
comments, by a women’s refuge manager and a Regional Violence Prevention
respectively, sum up the feelings of many people with whom we
DVLOs almost always try to help. Some go far beyond what is required of
DVLOs often provide a positive face of police to the community. They are
… in the main excellent facilitators of action around
the policing of
domestic violence.
20.22 In the US, 11% of police departments have specialised family violence
units. Research there indicates that specialised units
which emphasise repeated
victim contact and evidence gathering
have been shown to significantly increase the likelihood of prosecution,
conviction and sentencing. Specialized domestic violence
units are generally
associated with more extensive inquiries by police department call takers
… Domestic violence units are
also more likely to amass evidence to turn
over to prosecutors.
20.23 Further, there was evidence that specialised responses were associated
with victims leaving their relationships earlier; reporting
repeated incidents
more frequently; and being more likely to secure protection
There is some evidence
that they also reduce violence.
20.24 Specialisation of police typically occurs in three key areas: as a
point of contact and support for victims; in promoting best
practice through
training, advice, and monitoring; and in developing and shaping policy and
strategy, and liaising with other agencies.
20.25 As a primary contact for victims, specialised police would have the
following key advantages. They would have greater understanding
of the nature
and dynamics of family violence; be able to assist victims in navigating the
system at an early point in the process,
especially between the civil and
criminal legal frameworks; and could promote and drive best practice in police
responses. In providing
training, advice, and monitoring, specialisation would
promote consistency in the application of laws, and develop and promote best
practice. The development and shaping of policy and strategy by specialists
would also promote consistency, efficiency, best practice,
and effectiveness of
strategies. Finally, a specialised role would facilitate ongoing inter-agency
collaboration (discussed in Chapter
Commissions’
20.26 There is substantial merit in the use of specialised police units.
Liaison officers provide an important early point of contact,
and continuity in
police at all levels provide contact
points for inter-agency collaboration, and
may form a key element of integrated responses. Further, monitoring and
supervision by
specialised police is likely to improve consistency in the
application of laws in the context of family violence. In particular,
comprehensive models in Victoria and Western Australia, which designate
specialised units at different levels of command and
across a wide range of
functions, appear most promising. The use of specialised police, however, is a
complement to, rather than
a substitute for, important general measures such as
a Code of Practice and training of operational police.
20.27 The Commissions consider that each state and territory police force
should ensure that:
victims have access to a primary police contact person, who
specialises in, and is trained in, family violence issues;
a police officer is designated as a primary point of contact for
government and non-government agencies involved in the family violence
specially trained police have responsibility for supervising,
monitoring or assuring the quality of police responses to family violence
incidents, and providing advice and guidance to operational police and police
prosecutors (who may apply for protection orders on
behalf of victims) in this
regard; and
there is a central forum or unit responsible for policy and strategy
concerning family violence within the police.
20.28 In expressing
these views, the Commissions are aware that there is relatively little
information on the roles of specialised
police, and relatively little empirical
evidence of their value. Further, the Commissions recognise that police services
have different
needs, strengths, policy frameworks and organisational
structures, and operate in different policy and operational contexts.
20.29 In light of this, the Commissions invite stakeholders to provide
further information about the operation of specialised police
units, and any
other issues that arise in relation to them.
Proposal 20–1
Each state and territory police force should
ensure that:
(a) victims have access to a primary contact person within the police, who
specialises and is trained in family violence issues;
(b) a police officer is designated as a primary point of contact for
government and non-government agencies involved in responding
(c) specially trained police have responsibility for supervising,
monitoring or assuring the quality of police responses to family
incidents, and providing advice and guidance to operational police and police
prosecutors in this regard; and
(d) there is a central forum or unit responsible for policy and strategy
concerning family violence within the police.
What issues arise in practice concerning the role and operations
of police who specialise in family violence
[back to top]
Specialised
prosecutors
20.30 This section deals with prosecutors responsible for criminal
prosecutions in the context of family violence. The term
‘prosecutors’
is sometimes also used to describe police officers who
represent police applying for protection orders—which are civil in
behalf of victims of family
Prosecution of sexual
assault, in the context of family violence, is also discussed in
Chapter 17.
20.31 In some jurisdictions, there are prosecutors who specialise in dealing
with family violence or sexual assault. The ACT Office
of the Director of Public
Prosecutions (ODPP), for example, has for several years had specialised family
violence prosecutors as
part of the Family Violence Intervention Program
They are assisted by
three witness assistants. The ODPP states that:
Having specialist prosecutors allows for a consistency of approach and for
continuity for victims. Specialisation also enhances the
relationships with
other essential agencies—the police, the Office of Children and Youth and
Family Support, the Domestic Violence
Crisis Service and Victims Support
20.32 The Tasmanian Safe at Home project included funding for six specialised
family violence prosecutors. However, the review of
the Safe at Home project in
2009 reported:
This aspect of Safe At Home has not been implemented as intended. Police report
that difficulties have arisen with the allocation
of family violence clients to
specialist prosecutors because of the limited capacity of the Courts to cluster
family violence matters
into specialist family violence
20.33 This experience may be a result of a smaller jurisdiction, where
specialised approaches are less likely to achieve efficiencies
because of the
smaller number of cases.
20.34 As discussed below, specialised prosecutors are a feature of some
specialised courts in Australian jurisdictions. For example,
the Victorian
family violence courts included funding for specialist police prosecutors. There
has been variation in implementing
this aspect of the courts, with a reluctance
to allocate and maintain the specialist role in all specialised courts. However,
is reported that, in practice, many police prosecutors undertake this role
with great enthusiasm.
20.35 Specialised prosecutors are also used in related fields. For example,
Victoria has established a Specialist Sexual Offence Unit,
including a regional
office in Geelong. The Office of Public Prosecutions (OPP) in that state
The work of the OPP’s Specialist Sexual Offences Unit … has proven
that the co-location of specialist prosecutors and
solicitors under the
leadership of an experienced Crown Prosecutor can produce significant
improvements in the handling of such sensitive
and traumatic
prosecutions.
20.36 In the US, specialised family violence prosecutors are more common. The
National Institute of Justice has helpfully summarised
the research available in
the US on the effectiveness of specialised prosecutors. It notes that the
research is limited and, because
of the variation of programs and their
co-existence with specialised courts in many cases, it is ‘difficult to
pinpoint what
works and what does
However, ‘in
general, the research suggests that these programs work well on a number of
There is evidence
of increased victim satisfaction; significant increases in prosecution and
conviction rates; and more robust outcomes
that are better monitored and
Commissions’
20.37 There may be significant value in specialised prosecutors dealing with
family violence issues, including cases of sexual assault.
This appears to have
been of significant benefit in the ACT, and the weight of evidence in the US
suggests that, provided such units
are adequately funded, they are effective.
There are also potential benefits when specialised prosecutors work in
conjunction with
specialised courts, as noted below, as their greater
understanding of the nature and dynamics of family violence and sexual assault
improves outcomes and levels of victim satisfaction.
20.38 The Commissions consider, however, that further exploration of this
issue is required to justify making a proposal. It may be
that other options,
such as specialised training for all prosecutors or prosecution guidelines
specific to family violence (as, for
example, already exist in some Australian
approaches. The Commissions invite stakeholders to provide further information
on whether there is value in creating positions
for specialised prosecutors for
family violence matters.
What are the benefits of specialised family violence prosecutors,
and the disadvantages or challenges associated with them, if any?
benefits of specialised prosecutors be achieved in other ways, such as by
training or guidelines on family violence?
[back to top]
Specialised
20.39 The use of specialised courts dealing with family violence are of
particular interest to this Inquiry. Since the 1990s, specialised
courts have
flourished in Australia and overseas, in the form of drug courts, mental health
courts, community courts and—most
importantly, for the purposes of this
Inquiry—family violence courts. In Australia, family violence courts now
operate in the
NSW, Victoria, Queensland, Western Australia (WA) and the
Such a court has also been
recommended recently for
In the US, where they
originated, over 200 family violence courts now
and since 1999 the UK has
rolled out over 120 SDVCs in an ambitious
Canada has several
well-established specialised family violence
Some have also been
established in New Zealand.
20.40 Specialised courts for sexual assault have also been established in
some countries, most notably in South Africa. Specialised
sexual assault courts
are much less common than family violence courts. A specialised child sexual
assault jurisdiction has been
piloted in NSW, and Victoria operates special
sexual offences lists.
Specialised sexual assault courts are considered in this section.
‘specialised courts’
20.41 This section uses the term ‘specialised courts’ to refer to
specialised courts designed to improve experiences and
outcomes for victims and
the community at large through a range of features including specialist
personnel within the courts; the
provision of victim and defendant support
services; and collaboration with other agencies and non-governmental
organisations. However,
as discussed further below, the model of specialisation
and the features of such courts differ markedly. The term ‘family violence
courts’ is used to refer to specialised courts dealing with family
20.42 It is important to define here the term ‘specialised
courts’, because this term can be used to refer to a number
of different
things. For example, courts that deal with a particular
subject-matter—such as the Family Court—‘specialise’
that subject-matter. This section does not deal with such
20.43 The term can also be confusing in that, generally speaking, specialised
courts are not usually separately constituted courts,
but rather operate as
divisions or special programs within existing courts, usually in a local or
magistrates Courts.
20.44 Specialised courts, as the term is used in this section, should also be
distinguished from specialist
adopted by courts, such as
judicially managed lists and case management. However, a specialised court will
often also adopt specialist
approaches. A common approach adopted in many
(largely metropolitan) courts in Australia is to operate a dedicated or
list, in which certain categories of cases are heard on
certain days of the week. It is common, for example, for Australian metropolitan
courts to have days of the week reserved for hearing applications for protection
orders. In some, but not in all cases, these may
be heard by a specially
assigned judicial officer. This section does not discuss courts that simply
adopt such a dedicated list,
although all specialised courts also use dedicated
20.45 It is also important to note that some family violence courts are
located within a broader strategy, often known as an ‘integrated
response’ or ‘coordinated community response’ to family
violence. Integrated responses are considered in detail
in Chapter 19. In
Australia, the family violence court in the ACT is located within such an
integrated response, the FVIP.
Robyn Holder, the Victim of Crimes Coordinator in the ACT and chair of the
steering committee of the FVIP, has noted that it may
be more appropriate to
refer to the ACT as a ‘specialist jurisdiction’ rather than focus on
the element of the specialised
Family violence
courts in Australia
20.46 As noted above, family violence courts have been established in NSW,
Victoria, Queensland, WA and the ACT. All these are part
of the local or
magistrates court in that jurisdiction. In most of these jurisdictions, there is
either one or only a few such courts,
with the exception of WA. The models of
specialisation, and the elements of these courts, differ quite significantly.
20.47 One particularly important way in which these courts differ is in their
or magistrates courts have
broad jurisdiction over a range of matters—including criminal matters,
protection orders, and family
law (to the extent that this is
conferred)—the full extent of this jurisdiction is not necessarily
exercised in family violence
courts. A commentator in the US has identified
three different models of family violence court, depending on the jurisdiction
is covered:
Dedicated Civil Protection Order Docket: the operation of a
specialised ‘list’ or docket dealing with protection orders;
Criminal Model: the separation of criminal cases dealing with
offences relating to family violence for specialised handling by a
judicial officer or judicial officers; and
Domestic Violence Courts with Related Caseload: this model merges
the civil proceedings related to family law and protection orders
with related
proceedings.
noted above, many local and magistrates courts in Australia operate a
specialised list for protection
Family violence courts
in NSW, WA, and the ACT—described below—follow the ‘criminal
model’, in that they
deal exclusively with criminal matters related to
family violence. This is also the model used in the SDVCs in the UK. The South
Australian specialised family violence court deals with both criminal matters
and applications for protection orders.
20.49 In Australia, only the Family Violence Court Division (FVCD) of the
Magistrates’ Court of Victoria operates a broader
model, exercising
for indictable offences; civil personal
injury claims; compensation and
restitution; and (to the extent conferred upon the Magistrates’ Court)
law and child
It can also sit as the
Victims of Crime Assistance Tribunal to hear applications for statutory
victims’ compensation in family
20.50 Family violence courts typically include some of the following
Specialised personnel
: Typically, there are specialised
judicial officers, but it may also extend to specialised prosecutors, lawyers,
victim support workers,
community corrections officers, and police. In some
cases, these personnel may be chosen because of their specialised skills, or
given specialised training in family violence.
Specialised procedures:
Commonly, these will include special
days in court dedicated to family violence matters (‘dedicated
lists’). They may
include ‘case coordination mechanisms’ to
identify, link, and track cases related to family violence, such as integrated
case information systems, or the use of ‘specialised intake
procedures’ (specialised procedures that apply when a victim
first enters
the court system).
They may also
involve other types of procedures, such as special practice directions,
fast-tracking of cases, or case management.
Emphasis on support services:
Typically, there will be a
worker—employed by the court or an independent advocate—available to
support victims in managing
the court process, and often these workers are
responsible for referring victims to other services they may need, such as
counselling.
In some courts, there may also be workers to assist defendants or
children. There may also be legal advice or representation available.
Special arrangements for victim safety:
Some courts will also
include specially designed rooms to ensure the safety of victims, and may offer
facilities which enable vulnerable
witnesses to give evidence remotely.
Offender programs:
Some courts have the capacity to order or
refer an offender to a program which aims to educate the offender and address
issues to prevent re-offending, usually through counselling. This is
discussed further below.
Problem-solving or therapeutic approaches:
Some courts adopt
broader approaches aiming to ‘solve problems’ and achieve
therapeutic outcomes. This is discussed further
following table sets out the elements of each family violence court in
A brief description
of the courts in each jurisdiction follows.
Table: Family Violence Courts in Australia
Campbelltown; Wagga Wagga
Rockhampton
Criminal matters pre-trial
Criminal matters pre-trial
Criminal matters
Specialised personnel
Judicial officers, prosecutors, police
Prosecutors
Specialised training
Prosecutors and police
Special procedures
Dedicated list; case tracking; practice direction
Case tracking; practice direction
Dedicated list
Victim support services
Witness assistant; Domestic Violence Crisis Service
Victim advocate; referrals to services
Victim support workers; referrals to services
Victim safety arrangements
‘Safe’ waiting rooms
Remodelling of facilities
Inter-agency collaboration
Part of coordinated community response; coordinating
committee; protocols; memorandums of understanding; case tracking
Management plan; memorandum of understanding; strategic and
operational committees at senior and regional level; case tracking
Stakeholder meetings; improved communication and
Offender programs
Elizabeth; Port Adelaide; Adelaide
Joondalup; Fremantle; Rockingham; Midland; Armadale;
Criminal matters; protection orders
Criminal matters; protection orders; civil and statutory
compensation;
Criminal matters (with some trials) and protection
Specialised personnel
Judicial officers
Judicial officers, prosecutors, registrars, legal aid
lawyers for victims and defendants
Judicial officers, police prosecutors, defence
Specialised training
Special procedures
Dedicated list
Dedicated list
Dedicated list; case management
Victim support services
Support workers for victim, defendant and children;
counselling for children and
Victim and offender support workers; family violence
outreach workers; referrals to services
Victim support worker; referrals services
Victim safety arrangements
Extra security officers; remote witness rooms
Inter-agency collaboration
Court users group
Steering committee for policy; case management
Offender programs
Table continued: Family Violence Courts in Australia
Australian Capital Territory
20.52 As noted above, one of the components of the ACT’s integrated
response, the FVIP, is a specialised family violence list
in the ACT Magistrates
This deals with criminal
charges related to family violence, which are managed pre-trial by a
coordinating magistrate. The Family
Violence list does not deal with protection
Matters tagged as family
violence-related are heard weekly. A practice direction imposes tighter time
limits and earlier disclosure
of evidence. The court has the benefit of
specialised police officers and (as discussed earlier) specialised family
violence prosecutors.
Victim support services include Police Victim Liaison
Officers, a Witness Assistant, and the Domestic Violence Crisis Service, a
victim support organisation.
20.53 Independent evaluations of the program indicate that the specialised
court has led to earlier finalisation of cases through
guilty pleas, with the
majority of cases being finalised within 13
Earlier evaluations also
recorded positive responses by the majority of victims to the court
New South Wales
20.54 In 2005, two family violence courts, known as the Domestic Violence
Intervention Court Model (DVICM), were piloted in Wagga
Wagga and Campbelltown.
These courts focused on inter-agency collaboration through a Memorandum of
Understanding between the NSW
Attorney-General’s Department, the police,
the Department of Community
the Department of
Corrective Services, the Legal Aid Commission of NSW and the NSW Department of
20.55 The DVICM program focused on improved evidence collection by police;
automated referrals of victim services; and increased information-sharing
co-ordination from key agencies through Regional Reference Groups and Senior
Officers Groups. The Local Court implemented a Practice
Note requiring earlier
disclosure of evidence,
stakeholder agencies meet weekly to update matters before court.
20.56 An independent evaluation in 2008 indicated that the pilots did not
have any significant impact on the finalisation of cases
by early pleas, the
withdrawal of prosecutions, the time for finalisation, or
The most successful
aspect of the pilot was increased access to victim
While the DVICM has
been made permanent in those locations, there are no plans to roll it out
elsewhere in NSW. However, practice
directions mandating stricter time limits
have been issued in other local
20.57 A pilot was developed after 2006 in Rockhampton Magistrates Court,
under the leadership of the Chief Magistrate. The pilot included
a specialised
police prosecutions team; a dedicated list; domestic violence support officers
in court; improved information and referrals
to service providers; changes to
police procedure; greater communication and liaison through regular stakeholder
meetings and co-ordination;
and offender programs. While the pilot began without
the 2009–10
Queensland family violence strategy indicates that the specialised court program
will form part of an integrated
response being tested in
Rockhampton.
South Australia
20.58 South Australia has three Family Violence Courts. Unlike the model used
in NSW, Queensland and the ACT, these hear both criminal
matters and protection
order matters. Where both criminal and civil matters arise in a case, these are
heard together. While the
courts have specially assigned magistrates, there is
no specialised training for judicial
20.59 The South Australian model also provides support workers for victims,
offenders and children; and can refer offenders to offender
programs (known as
Violence Intervention Programs), with access to counselling for children and
women victims.
20.60 The FVCD of the Magistrates’ Court of Victoria, established in
2005, has both the broadest jurisdiction and the most features
of a family
violence court. In addition, a Specialist Family Violence Service (described
below) operates in courts in Frankston,
Melbourne, Sunshine and Werribee.
20.61 The Victorian Government committed $5.2 million over four years to the
resourcing of the FVCD, with a separate allocation for
the offender programs
associated with the FVCD.
Funding has been continued for those two sites. The FVCD was evaluated in 2009,
but the evaluation has not yet been made public.
20.62 The FVCD differs from
other Australian family violence courts in a number of ways. It is the only such
court that has a legislative
As noted above, it is also
the only such court that exercises jurisdiction over civil compensation claims,
statutory compensation
claims, and family law and child support matters as well
as criminal matters and protection
The same judicial
officer hears related cases, but each case is heard using the applicable
standard of proof and procedure. Judicial
officers report satisfaction with
managing these processes.
20.63 At its inception, all judicial officers and staff received specialised
training, with some training continuing afterward. In
addition to specialised
magistrates and police prosecutors, it also has support workers for victims and
offenders, family violence
outreach support workers, legal aid and community
lawyers for victims and defendant, and a specialised registrar. The FVCD is
the closest example of a ‘one stop shop’ model for victims
of family violence in Australia. As it is a pilot, however,
it is available only
where victims or offenders are residing in, or the family violence was committed
in, postcodes specified by
20.64 The Specialist Family Violence Service courts have similar features,
with three key exceptions: they do not formally have the
same combined
co-located with the family violence
registry in
Melbourne);
they do not have
power to order counselling; and they do not have a support worker for the
20.65 Victoria has also established a Neighbourhood Justice Centre in 2007 as
a pilot program. This is a multi-jurisdictional court
focused on the
neighbourhood of the City of Yarra, which sits as a Magistrates’ Court and
Children’s Court, Victorian
Civil and Administrative Tribunal (VCAT) and
Victims of Crime Assistance Tribunal (VOCAT). Its jurisdiction in relation to
violence is the same as those in the
In addition, it has
(sitting as VCAT) and victims’
compensation claims (sitting as VOCAT). It
is a ‘one stop shop’ for a range of services including counselling,
advice and representation, mediation, housing support, personal and
material aid, and employment and training support. It also includes
restorative
justice processes.
20.66 The Neighbourhood Justice Centre has an on-site officer from the family
law courts on some mornings. The officer can provide
forms, contact details for
referral agencies, advice on Family Court and Federal Magistrates Court
processes, advice on what clients
can expect in a court room, and confirm
listing dates for matters already before the family
Western Australia
20.67 Western Australia has developed the most geographically extensive
program of family violence courts in Australia, with courts
in Joondalup,
Fremantle, Rockingham, Midland, Armadale, and Perth. The plan is to roll out
such courts in all metropolitan areas
20.68 After Victoria, the Western Australian model has the most features of a
family violence court in Australia. While there are
variations between the
individual courts, in general the courts can deal with criminal matters
pre-trial, and have some capacity
to deal with trials as well as protection
orders. There are specialised magistrates and police prosecutors, support
workers, a coordinating
committee for strategy and policy, and inter-agency case
management for operational
Offender programs are
available and there is some monitoring of progress by judicial officers halfway
through the program. It also
provides customised programs for Indigenous and
other cultural groups.
20.69 The Joondalup court was evaluated in 2000–01. The evaluation
found that far more charges were laid as a result of a specialised
police family
violence investigation unit.
Only slightly more offenders were referred to offender programs in the pilot
court. More breaches of the requirements of the program
were detected and
recorded in the pilot court, which may have been the result of case management.
Case management was seen to be
beneficial, and overall the court was described
as a ‘qualified
International
comparisons
20.70 This section discusses some overseas models of specialised family
violence courts that may be instructive. As noted above, there
are over 200
courts in the US operating specialised family violence courts. More than half of
the courts have been established in
New York, Washington, Florida, California,
and Alabama.
Many of these,
however, simply operate dedicated lists for matters relating to protection
orders. Many others adopt the ‘criminal
model’ of streaming all
criminal matters related to family
20.71 Perhaps the most notable example is the New York model, which includes
both Domestic Violence Courts and Integrated Domestic
Violence Courts (IDVCs).
There are now 44 IDVCs in operation, servicing approximately 90% of the
population of New York.
the Domestic Violence Courts deal with criminal matters relating to intimate
partners, cases are transferred to the IDVCs where
there are overlapping civil,
criminal, or family law claims arising out of a family violence incident between
intimate partners.
In IDVCs, a
single judge conducts all related criminal, civil and family law matters from
beginning to end.
As in other
specialised courts, the cases are not consolidated, but rather remain separate
civil, criminal, and family law matters.
As a result, each case has its own
burden of proof and is conducted as any other like case would be. A resource
coordinator keeps
judges informed of offender compliance and refers the
defendant to appropriate services.
20.72 Another notable model is the Domestic Violence Unit in the District of
Columbia, which includes a fully integrated court that
handles civil, criminal,
and family law matters in relation to disputes ‘where the parties are
related by blood, legal custody,
marriage, cohabitation, a child in common, or a
romantic relationship’.
The court hears protection order hearings and all misdemeanour criminal charges
and, once a case has been brought to it, any family
law matters involving the
same parties. These are consolidated and heard in the Domestic Violence
The court is serviced by
two intake centres that serve as a ‘one stop shop’ for victim
support (discussed further below),
and a Domestic Violence Coordination Unit, a
specialised section of the court registry. Meetings are also held with a range
of interested
representatives every two weeks.
20.73 This court operates under federal legislation which requires related
cases to be assigned for the duration of those proceedings
to the same judge or
magistrate judge, ‘[t]o the greatest extent practicable, feasible, and
The legislation
also requires an ongoing program in multi-disciplinary training, the provision
of accessible materials, and an integrated
computerised case management
20.74 A notable feature of many of the American models, in comparison with
the Australian models, is a commitment to extensive judicial
monitoring of
compliance. The Commissions understand that, in Victoria, some judicial officers
take an oversight role to ensure attendance
at offender programs, but this is
not a formal part of the judicial role. In contrast, the Dorchester Domestic
Violence Court in
Boston, Massachusetts has a mandatory review process in which
a minimum of three ‘judicial review hearings’ are held
typically 30,
60, and 120 days after sentencing. These review hearings are
‘automatically scheduled and [are] not dependent
on lack of compliance to
trigger the hearing’.
New York, in the Domestic Violence courts and IDVCs, offenders are automatically
required to return regularly to court to report
on their compliance with court
orders. Many New York courts also employ a resource coordinator who, among other
things, monitors
defendants’ compliance with court orders, such as whether
they are attending court-mandated rehabilitation
20.75 In Canada, over 50 family violence courts are in
The first, and most
studied, court was established in 1990 in Manitoba. The Manitoba court has
specialised staff, special rooms and
victim support services dealing with
spousal abuse, child abuse and elder
An evaluation of that
court found a significant reduction in domestic homicide and recidivism, and
earlier and more frequent reporting
The broadest program
operates in Ontario, where there is a specialised family violence court in every
In Calgary, the
specialised team includes probation officers, police, and court caseworkers.
Caseworkers contact the victims shortly
after the police lay charges and review
each case, checking whether the victims’ wishes have changed, ensuring
that victims
are aware of the status of the case, as well as conducting risk
assessments.
As in the US, the
exact models vary greatly between
20.76 The UK has probably the most ambitious program, with 141 family
violence courts already in
These deal only with
criminal matters. While models vary, the UK has a National Resource Manual that
lists 12 key components for
successful IDVCs, including a steering group;
multi-agency risk assessment conferences; trained and specialised staff;
identification
of family violence and data collection; victim and children
support services; and a focus on equality and
20.77 The first 25 SDVCs were evaluated in
The performance
of individual SDVCs varied significantly, which obscured the success of some
individual SDVCs.
successful SDVCs, there was evidence of higher arrests and more successful
prosecutions; higher rates of victim support in
court; and improve confidence in
the criminal justice system by both victims and the community. The review
concluded that
omission of any of the core components led to less successful outcomes in one or
more of the measures. The combination of the overall
components was pivotal in
delivering success.
20.78 In New Zealand, two specialised family violence courts have been
established in Waitakere and Manukau. The features of these
courts include
stakeholder meetings, dedicated lists, specialised staff, duty solicitors,
victim advisors, and linkages with community
services. While these courts deal
primarily with criminal matters related to family violence, applications for
protection orders
(which, in the New Zealand legal system, are dealt with by the
Family Court of New Zealand) can be made before the specialised criminal
If those orders are consented to, the family violence court arranges for the
application to be processed in the Family Court
of New Zealand. If the order is
not consented to, the application is referred to the Family Court. The process
is facilitated by
a ‘Family Court Coordinator’, who is jointly
responsible with Victim Advisors for information sharing between the Family
Court and the Family Violence
A recent evaluation
indicates that the courts have had some success ‘in spite of considerable
difficulties’, including
lack of resources and
Specialised sex
offences courts
20.79 As noted above, in a few locations specialised sex offences courts have
also been established. As with family violence courts,
these may be created
either with a legislative basis or within an already existing court structure.
20.80 Like specialised family violence courts, specialist sex offences courts
are designed to improve experiences and outcomes for
victims and the community
at large, using measures similar to those used in specialised family violence
courts. As with specialised
family violence courts, specialised sex offences
courts may be distinguished from specialised approaches to sex offences.
20.81 There are, however, factors that complicate the prosecution of sex
offences. These include: the unique needs of victims; misconceptions
prejudices held by jurors;
lack of corroborating evidence; particular evidentiary and procedural
as well as few guilty
pleas by defendants and low conviction
Other factors include
the relatively short sentences for sex offenders, and recidivism rates.
20.82 In addition, there are particular characteristics of child sexual
assault that require a more specific criminal justice response,
the relatively high incidence of child sexual abuse in the
Australian community;
the much higher incidence of child sexual abuse in Indigenous
communities compared to the non-Indigenous population;
the fact that a majority of offenders are either related or known to
their victims and the reality of continued access to those children;
that offender behaviour is usually responsible for delays in making
complaints and the lack of corroborating evidence;
the difficulties associated with detection and the high rate of
under-reporting; and
the high attrition rate of reported
Specialisation
in Australia
20.83 There are no specialist courts in Australia for prosecuting sex
offences. However, the Magistrates’ Court of Victoria
and the County Court
of Victoria established Sexual Offences Lists (SOLs) as a result of
recommendations made by the Victorian Law
Commission.
specialist sex offences unit was established within the Victorian OPP.
20.84 A SOL operates in the Melbourne Magistrates’ Court as well as in
six regional Magistrates’
A SOL now also
operates in the Children’s Court. The SOL deals with sexual offences being
tried summarily and committal proceedings
for sexual offences. The SOL is
designed to track all cases relating to a charge for a sex offence in order to
reduce delay,
to enable the
use of special facilities for vulnerable
‘provide a greater level of consistency in the handling of these
supported by remote witness facilities and a child witness
20.85 The SOL operating in the County Court of Victoria covers all cases
involving sex offences against
and all directions
hearings and pre-trial issues are heard by a specialised judge. A practice note
applies, which is designed to
expedite the hearing of cases through pre-trial
management and directions hearings, with the aim of ensuring early
identification
of, and rulings on, procedural and evidential
20.86 In NSW, a specialised child sexual assault jurisdiction was piloted in
2003 in Parramatta following the recommendation of the
NSW Legislative Council
Standing Committee on Law and
The objectives were
to: reduce delay; improve the physical environment of the court and assist child
witnesses; and increase the
skills of the legal professionals in the court
20.87 The features of the NSW pilot included specialised training for
judicial officers and prosecutors; child-friendly facilities
and schedules;
remote witness facilities; pre-trial hearings between judicial officers and
counsel; and evidentiary presumptions
to reduce secondary victimisation of child
witnesses. These were implemented to varying degrees, with a subsequent
evaluation noting
technological difficulties and a lack of training and practice
directions.
20.88 The evaluation of this pilot, which was limited by its small size and
variations in practice between the specialised courts,
did not find any
significant benefits beyond the use of the remote witness
facilities.
It had no impact
on reducing delays,
little or no impact on courtroom culture and the conduct of the
20.89 In 2005, the Criminal Justice and Sexual Offences Taskforce established
by the NSW Government reported on the feasibility of
a specialised sex offences
court. After the Taskforce recommended the use of specialised case management
hearings, supported by a
number of measures such as appropriately equipped
courtrooms, specially trained prosecutors and judicial officers, and the
of a cross-agency monitoring
This recommendation has
not been implemented.
20.90 The National Child Sexual Assault Reform
has recommended the
establishment of a child sexual offences court in each Australian jurisdiction,
with features including specialist
judicial officers and prosecutors; training
programs; specialist listing arrangements; case management; special facilities
evidence and evidentiary measures; offender programs; and ongoing
monitoring.
Sexual offences courts overseas
20.91 South Africa is the primary jurisdiction in which specialised sexual
assault courts have been established. The first was established
Wynberg, as part of the Magistrates’
It hears cases of
sexual assault against women and children, and its features include: specialised
police units; specialised prosecutors;
specialised case managers;
multidisciplinary training; special facilities to ensure the safety of
witnesses; and a victim support
worker. Magistrates rotate through the system
once every six weeks, and prosecutors are assigned to a case until it is
In addition, since 2000 South Africa has established several
Thuthuzela Centres, which are ‘one stop shops’ for sexual
victims, comprising investigative, prosecutorial, and hospital medical and
psychological services. The procedure and rules
of evidence are the same as in
all South African courts, with special provision also for children to give
evidence by closed circuit
television.
20.92 Since 1999, over 50 similar Sexual Offences Courts (SOCs) have been
established in South Africa, and the policy is to establish
such a court in
every regional court.
policy has been driven by the Sexual Offences and Community Affairs Unit, which
developed in 2002 a national blueprint identifying
essential requirements for
20.93 Several evaluations of these courts have been conducted, and have found
increases in convictions and reductions in
There continue,
however, to be issues concerning victims feeling re-traumatised by the
experience. Problems include under-funding
and related high caseloads and high
staff turnover.
20.94 The specialised family violence court in Manitoba, Canada, also has
children, and adult
survivors of child sexual assault. The court has the following features relevant
to child abuse: a specialised
police unit; specialised prosecutors; victim
support programs; specially designated courtrooms; and a child friendly
This court is one
of the most extensively evaluated, and the evidence is that it has improved
conviction rates.
20.95 New York also piloted a specialised sexual offences court in 2005, in
Oswego County, New York State. This was the first such
court in the US. By
January 2009, six similar courts had been established in other counties in New
The court has
under New York’s
Sex Offender Registration
The court is also
responsible for monitoring and imposing special conditions for sexual offence
cases involving pleas and for sex
offenders who move into the
However, any
sexual assaults that occur in a domestic violence context remain under the
20.96 The sex offence courts in New York feature specialised, trained
judicial officers; trained court personnel; extensive and regular
compliance by defendants; and coordination and collaboration with criminal
justice agencies, probation departments and
community service providers,
including through inter-agency planning
[back to top]
Value of specialised
20.97 The first issue that arises for this Inquiry is whether specialised
courts should be established more widely in Australia. The
general advantages of
specialisation have been discussed above. These apply to specialised courts in
the following ways:
greater sensitivity to the special context of family violence, and
the needs of victims, through mechanisms such as victim support,
gathering and
treatment of evidence, greater emphasis on speed, specialised training and
skills of staff;
greater integration and coordination of the management of cases,
through mechanisms such as case tracking, inter-agency collaboration,
of victims to services, and the capacity to deal with related legal matters;
greater consistency in the handling of family violence cases both
within and across legal jurisdictions;
greater efficiency in court processes, through mechanisms such as
case management;
development of best practice, through the improvement of procedural
measures in response to regular feedback from court users and
other agencies;
better outcomes in terms of victim satisfaction, improvements in the
response of the legal system (for example, better rates of reporting,
prosecution, convictions and sentencing in the criminal context),
and—potentially—changes in offender
the purposes of this Inquiry, one key benefit in terms of improving the
interaction between legal frameworks is the greater
integration and coordination
of the management of cases. Key methods of integration may include:
identification and clustering of family violence cases into a
dedicated list for handling by specialised staff;
the integrated provision of information and services to victims and
management of individual cases by a single judicial officer (at
least pre-trial);
collaboration with government agencies and non-governmental
organisations at a policy level, through committees, protocols and memoranda
understanding;
collaboration with government agencies and non-governmental
organisations at an operational level, through the exchange of information
individual cases; and
a single judicial officer or court handling related cases across
different legal frameworks.
20.99 The evaluations of specialised
family violence courts in Australia (discussed above) provide some evidence of
the benefits of
such courts. Variations in models, methodologies of evaluation,
and the challenges of implementation, need to be taken into account
in assessing
those evaluations.
20.100 In the US, considerable research into the effectiveness of specialised
family violence courts has been done. The implications
to be drawn from this
research have been stated as follows. Some, but not all, family violence courts
are associated with reduced
levels of reoffending. Family violence courts are
associated with increased rates of conviction and decreased dismissal rates.
of family violence rate their satisfaction in specialised courts more
highly. Victims of family violence who were aware that there
was a family
violence court reported greater willingness to report repeat offending. Family
violence courts are associated with more
efficient case processing. Finally,
family violence courts report higher levels of offender
compliance.
Commissions’
20.101 The Commissions have visited the ACT specialised court, and two of the
Specialist Family Violence Service courts in Victoria,
and consulted with the
magistrates there, as well as with magistrates in the South Australia family
violence court.
observations conducted, and the discussions with magistrates and other
stakeholders in those jurisdictions, suggest that victims
of family violence are
treated with sensitivity and consistency. As well, the observations in the
Specialist Family Violence Service
courts indicated that those magistrates, the
registrars and—in particular—legal and non-legal victim support
were of great assistance to victims in helping them to navigate through
different legal frameworks, and ensuring they are referred
appropriately to
social services.
20.102 The Commissions consider that family violence courts offer many
potential benefits, and this is supported by evaluations. Family
violence courts
should be established more widely in Australia, as the Western Australian
government has begun to do.
20.103 In the Commissions’ preliminary view, state and territory
governments should establish and foster specialised family
violence courts in
their jurisdictions. This view is reflected in Proposal 20–4, set out
after consideration of the features
such courts should have.
20.104 As noted elsewhere in this Consultation Paper, the Commissions are
concerned to ensure that sexual assault is recognised as
a form of family
It is therefore
critical that personnel in specialised family violence courts receive training
on the nature and dynamics of sexual
assault. This Inquiry, however, considers
sexual assault only in the context of family violence, and therefore does not
comment upon
the desirability of establishing specialised courts dealing with
sexual assault generally. If such courts were to be established,
however, the
Commissions endorse the approach in New York, where sexual assault cases in the
context of family violence are dealt
with by the specialised family violence
court, as sexual assault should not be isolated from a surrounding context of
family violence.
[back to top]
specialised courts
20.105 Jurisdictions vary in their needs, strengths and approaches to family
violence, and legal frameworks. Specialised courts need
to be developed in close
consultation with local community organisations, service providers, and court
staff, including judicial
officers, drawing on leadership and best practice.
Further, specialised courts need the ability to evolve and learn lessons, and
adapt to changing circumstances and needs. The establishment and further
development of specialised courts, however, need to be guided
and facilitated by
state and territory governments. For example, governments need to provide
funding, programs of action, and policy
and operational support, including
support across affected government departments.
20.106 The Commissions recognise the need for a degree of flexibility in
designing specialised courts, and the many operational matters
which should be
decided at a local level. These aspects of the design of specialised courts not
discussed here. The following features
of specialised courts are discussed in
this section: the jurisdiction that should be conferred on such courts; the
features that
should be included, with a particular focus on offender programs,
problem-solving or therapeutic approaches, and judicial supervision
offenders; and ways of adopting features of specialist courts as best practice
in generalist courts.
20.107 The Commissions express preliminary views about core, or minimum,
features of such courts in this section and encourage the
adoption of features
that represent best practice, to the extent that this is feasible.
20.108 Most specialised courts in Australia focus on criminal cases only; in
South Australia, protection orders are dealt with alongside
criminal cases. Only
Victoria employs a ‘one stop shop’ model, which deals with all
related matters within the jurisdiction
of the Magistrates’ Court. This
more expansive model is also rare overseas, although there are notable
exceptions such as New
York and Washington DC. There are options short of a
‘one stop shop’ that may have similar effects of improving
information
sharing and minimising the burden on the victim—for example,
co-locating courts, integrated case management systems, and centralised
‘intake’ procedures.
20.109 The ‘one stop shop’ approach has obvious appeal as a way
of ensuring integration and consistency across multiple
related legal
proceedings, and minimising the burden on the victim. One judicial officer in
the US has described the combination
of civil and criminal jurisdictions as the
‘single best thing’ about the creation of his
A recent study has
concluded that the benefits of a combined model outweigh the
detriments.
Consultations
with one of the magistrates at the Ballarat FVCD in Victoria also indicated that
the ‘one stop shop’ model
was beneficial for victims, who had the
advantage of familiarity with the court throughout related
proceedings.
20.110 One key concern with a ‘one stop shop’ is the need to
respect the underlying policy rationales of different legal
frameworks, and
ensure that different legal proceedings did not prejudice a fair trial or
pressure victims to testify in order to
receive civil remedies. This concern has
been expressed in relation to the ‘one stop shop’ models in the
20.111 This concern may be capable of being addressed appropriately at a
procedural level. The FVCD and South Australian courts do
not appear to find
this difficult, as magistrates are used to dealing with different legal
frameworks.
As noted above,
the IDVCs in New York also handle this issue at a procedural level.
20.112 There may also be a range of pragmatic difficulties with
multi-jurisdictional courts, including: the need for judicial officers
familiar with different legal frameworks; the greater organisational and
cultural shift required to implement such an approach;
and the greater resources
required for such an undertaking.
20.113 In Australia, another difficulty is that the federal legal system is
primarily responsible for family law, while the states
and territories have
responsibility for most other legal frameworks relevant to family
Constitution
, federal jurisdiction can be conferred on state
or territory courts, but state or territory jurisdiction cannot be conferred on
20.114 Another jurisdictional issue concerns how victims access specialised
courts. In all Australian courts, including (at this stage)
the FVCD in
determined by geography. In contrast, the jurisdiction of the IDVCs in New York
is triggered by a computer system
which identifies overlaps between cases in the
criminal and civil jurisdictions. The IDVC judges may also transfer cases from
20.115 One possible model is to establish a mechanism by which judicial
officers from general courts could make referrals to specialised
courts. This
could be designed either so that referrals would automatically result in the
case being transferred, or so that the
specialised court would decide whether
the case should be accepted upon referral. A mechanism of referral would have
the advantage
of prioritising cases which would benefit more from treatment by
specialised courts, and widening access to specialist courts.
20.116 Criteria would need to be specified for when such referrals could be
made, such as:
where there are concurrent claims or actions in relation to the same
where there have been multiple legal actions in relation to the same
family in the past;
where, for exceptional reasons, a judicial officer considers that
the nature of the case warrants specialised treatment.
course, courts would also need to consider the practicality of any referral,
such as whether a victim would be able to travel
to the specialised court, and
the cost of such travel.
Commissions’ views
20.118 There appear to be considerable benefits, from the perspectives of
victims and families, in enabling specialised courts to
address issues across
different legal frameworks. Most judicial officers dealing regularly with family
violence issues already have
experience both in criminal proceedings and in
protection order proceedings. As discussed in Chapter 6, many courts have the
or are required to, make protection orders following criminal proceedings
related to family violence. The multi-jurisdictional nature
of the South
Australian and Victorian family violence courts does not appear to have caused
difficulties in practice. The Commissions
consider that, when establishing
family violence courts, state and territory governments should establish courts
which deal with
both criminal proceedings and protection orders in relation to
family violence.
This can be
achieved relatively rapidly in many existing courts.
20.119 The Commissions’ preliminary view is that there is much
advantage in the multi-jurisdictional model used in the FVCD
in Victoria, which
includes civil and statutory claims for compensation, as well as child support
and family law matters (to the
extent to which such jurisdiction is conferred on
the state or territory).
20.120 The Commissions note that most existing family violence courts are not
multi-jurisdictional courts. As discussed above, the
different needs, strengths
and operational contexts of jurisdictions need to be borne in mind, and the
decision not to adopt a multi-jurisdictional
model in specialised courts may
have been influenced by these factors. While the Commissions consider that, at a
minimum, courts
should deal with criminal proceedings and protection orders,
they are interested in hearing from stakeholders on the feasibility
multi-jurisdictional courts. The Commissions propose, at this stage, that state
and territory governments should review whether
specialised family violence
courts should exercise other jurisdiction relevant to family violence.
20.121 The Commissions also consider that, in order to maximise the potential
of specialised family violence courts and improve access
to such courts, a
mechanism for referral from general to specialised family violence courts should
be established. Referral should
be based on principled criteria, such as
concurrent or multiple claims or actions in relation to the same family. A more
discretion could be conferred, such as where a judicial officer
considers it necessary for exceptional reasons. There may be other
demonstrating a particular need for the use of specialised family violence
courts. The Commissions are interested in hearing
stakeholder views on this
Proposal 20–2
State and territory governments should ensure that
specialised family violence courts determine matters relating to protection
and criminal proceedings related to family violence. State and territory
governments should review whether specialised family violence
courts should also
be responsible for handling related claims:
(a) for civil and statutory compensation; and
(b) in child support and family law matters, to the extent such jurisdiction
is conferred in the state or territory.
Proposal 20–3
State and territory governments should establish
mechanisms for referral of cases involving family violence to specialised family
violence courts. There should be principled criteria for determining which cases
could be referred to such courts. For example, these
criteria could include:
(a) where there are concurrent family-related claims or actions in relation
to the same family issues;
(b) where there have been multiple family-related legal actions in relation
to the same family in the past;
(c) where, for exceptional reasons, a judicial officer considers it
Features of
specialised family violence courts
20.122 As discussed above, the features of specialised family violence courts
vary markedly from jurisdiction to jurisdiction. While
state and territory
governments, in close consultation with stakeholders, should ultimately be
responsible for selecting particular
elements, there is strong evidence that
some features are either essential, or represent best practice.
20.123 A key concern expressed by many stakeholders is the need to ensure
that judicial officers understand the nature and dynamics
of family violence.
The literature emphasises that the selection of the right judicial officers,
with the right attitude and the
capacity to deal sensitively with family
violence victims, is critical to the success of specialised
The Commissions note
that there is presently a lack of transparency about the criteria for the
selection of judicial officers for
specialised courts. The Victorian model, in
which the Chief Magistrate may only assign magistrates to the FVCD after having
to ‘the magistrate’s relevant knowledge and experience in
dealing with matters relating to family violence’, appears
constructive one.
assignment was to be supported by ongoing comprehensive judicial training, which
has been maintained in part.
However, the Commissions have heard that the specialisation has been diluted in
practice by the assignment of many magistrates to
the court for operational
20.124 A national survey conducted in the US also indicates that specialised
judges offer significant benefits. In that survey, a
particular advantage of
specialised judges was reported to be
consistency.
prosecutor responded to that survey:
The experience and knowledge of the [specialised] judge regarding domestic
violence cases and dynamics are the most critical pieces
20.125 Another issue is that in Australia there is no specialised training in
family violence in a number of specialised
In contrast, the vast
majority of specialised family violence courts in the US include specialised
training for judicial
Research in the US
found that training needs to be ongoing and remains a significant challenge in
implementation.
Inquiry, stakeholders emphasised that such training is highly desirable.
20.126 An important feature of all family violence courts in Australia is the
use of legal and non-legal victim support workers. As
discussed in Chapter 19,
victim support workers perform a crucial role in navigating victims through
legal and social support systems.
While such workers are not necessarily
confined to specialised courts, they are an integral part of them.
20.127 Another feature of some family violence courts is adaptation of court
facilities and practices to ensure victim safety. Victim
safety in court should
be a paramount consideration.
The use of separate waiting rooms, separate exits and entrances, and remote
witness facilities are all strategies for ensuring that
victims feel secure in
courtrooms, and should be encouraged.
20.128 Finally, specialised courts should have mechanisms for collaborating
and coordinating with other agencies, courts, and non-government
organisations.
This may take many forms. For example, it may take the form of court
users’ forums; steering committees; or
case management procedures. As a
prosecutor in a specialised family violence court in the US stated:
Coordination, cooperation, and communication among all agencies
involved—police, corrections officers, prosecutors, government
advocates, nongovernmental victim advocates, judges, and probation
officers—is essential to most effectively holding
accountable.
Offender programs
20.129 A common feature of family violence courts in Australia is the
capacity of the court to mandate or refer a person to an offender
program (also
known as perpetrator
While these
offender programs are characteristic of specialised courts, they are not
necessarily linked to a family violence court
and may be available to generalist
courts as well.
programs may relate to issues such as drug and alcohol counselling, or be
specific to family violence. Offenders may voluntarily
use these programs, be
referred to such programs by others (including by judicial officers), or be
required to undertake such programs
by judicial officers.
20.130 Offender programs aim
to educate the offender and address personal issues to prevent re-offending,
usually through counselling.
Family violence offender programs in Australia
differ in terms of content, duration, eligibility criteria, and monitoring of
For example, in the ACT, all family violence offenders are referred
for assessment as to their suitability to participate in the
Family Violence
Self Change Program (FVSC), and in some cases such assessment is ordered by the
court. The FVSC is available to men
who have offended against an intimate
partner or other family member, and involves a weekly two-hour group session
over a nine to
12-month period, centred on changing the attitude and behaviour
of the offender. Case tracking meetings are held weekly and partners
partners are contacted throughout the program to raise awareness of risk levels
and to address any safety concerns they
20.131 Such programs offer the potential to address and modify the underlying
behaviour of offenders. Nevertheless, there are questions
effectiveness of such programs, particularly in light of the resources required
to sustain them. While a few evaluations
of their effectiveness have been
conducted, it is difficult to draw robust conclusions for several reasons,
including the differences
in the programs and in evaluation methodology, as well
as the limitations of the data.
20.132 The most extensive evaluation in Australia has been of a year-long
pilot program run in Penrith, NSW in
This evaluation found a
relatively high rate of completion of the program (75%); a strongly positive
response by the offenders; and
a positive response by the majority of victims;
and found that 63% of these men did not come to the attention of police in the
years of the evaluation, although the incidence of family violence increased
after 12 months. However, women’s feelings of
safety while the men were
attending the program were very
20.133 In the US, where there have been more than 35 evaluations of such
programs, those evaluations ‘have yielded inconsistent
study claimed that the ‘vast majority of men’ stop their violent
others have come
to widely differing conclusions. One study which analysed a range of individual
program evaluations concluded that
there was only a 5% reduction in re-offending
A few studies have
found that such programs can even make offenders more likely to re-offend, or
have found no reduction in re-offending
at all, and another study of four
offender programs concluded that approximately a quarter of offenders
‘appear unresponsive
and resistant’ to
intervention.
concluded from this research that:
[offender] programs, in and of themselves, are not likely to protect most
victims or new intimate partners of referred abusers from
further harm from
higher risk abusers. Consequently, if mandated or utilized, [offender] programs
should be supplemented by other
measures to assure victim safety from these
Commissions’ views
20.134 The Commissions’ preliminary view is that, at a minimum,
specialised family violence courts should have a number of features.
strong evidence that some features are necessary to maximise the potential
benefits of such courts.
20.135 First, all judicial officers in a family violence court should be
especially selected for their roles. The attitude, knowledge
and skills of a
judicial officer are critical to the success of such a court and it is important
that selection be based on these
criteria. The mechanisms for selection,
however, should be determined by those establishing the court, in close
consultation with
stakeholders.
20.136 Secondly, specialised and ongoing training on family violence issues
is key to ensuring a shared understanding of family violence
within the court.
Ideally, this training should be provided to all staff, as was done with the
Victorian FVCD. At a minimum, training
should be provided to the following key
participants: judicial officers, prosecutors, registrars, and the police who
appear in those
courts. If there are specialised lawyers in the court, they
should also participate in this training.
20.137 Thirdly, as stakeholders have emphasised, victim support workers play
a key role in ensuring the success of such courts. Such
workers may be employed
directly by the court or a community organisation may be funded to provide such
workers. The Commissions
are also of the view that there would be significant
benefit in providing support for defendants but, given the impact on resources,
they do not propose that this be required for all specialised family violence
20.138 Family violence courts should also have special arrangements for
victim safety at court, such as a separate waiting room for
victims, separate
entrances and exits, remote witness facilities, and appropriately trained
security staff. Finally, the Commissions
propose that family violence courts
should have mechanisms for collaboration with other agencies and non-government
organisations.
Those establishing such courts should determine precisely what
kinds of mechanisms are desirable for each court, in close consultation
stakeholders.
20.139 The Commissions’ preliminary view, however, is that offender
programs should not be required as part of this minimum
set of features.
Offender programs are resource-intensive and, so far, the evidence of their
effectiveness is equivocal.
Proposal 20–4
State and territory governments should establish
or further develop specialised family violence courts in their jurisdictions, in
close consultation with relevant stakeholders. These courts should have, as a
(a) especially selected judicial officers;
(b) specialised and ongoing training on family violence issues for judicial
officers, prosecutors, registrars, and police;
(c) victim support workers;
(d) arrangements for victim safety; and
(e) mechanisms for collaboration with other courts, agencies and
non-government organisations.
[back to top]
‘Problem-solving’
20.140 Some specialised family violence courts are ‘problem-solving
courts’ (also known as problem-oriented, solution-focused
or collaborative
justice courts).
specialised family violence courts in Australia, only the Victorian FVCD and
Specialised Family Violence Service courts expressly
embrace a problem-solving
There are different
views about the value of ‘problem-solving’ courts, and in particular
the appropriateness of those
approaches in the context of family violence, which
require some consideration.
20.141 While problem-solving courts come in many shapes and sizes, they have
been defined as courts which seek ‘to use the authority
of the courts to
address the underlying problems of individual litigants, the structural problems
of the justice system, and the
social problems of
communities’.
courts have their origins in experiments in the US with drug courts, and have
since extended to mental health courts, community
courts, and family violence
courts. Problem-solving family violence courts typically include offender
programs, including judicial
monitoring of progress made in such programs; a
shift away from an adversarial formal court process; and a focus on broader
changes and concrete outcomes in the health and well-being of victim
and offender.
20.142 The rapid introduction of problem-solving courts over the last two
decades ‘reflects a realisation that social problems
require social
solutions’.
reflects a reaction against ‘assembly line justice’, in which people
are processed quickly by the legal system
without any appreciable effect on the
underlying behaviour of the
Problem-solving
courts are also part of a wider movement focused on broadening dispute
resolution beyond the legal system, including
concepts of restorative justice
(discussed in Chapter 11) and therapeutic jurisprudence, which are discussed
20.143 The Center for Court Innovation based in New York, which has been a
driving force for problem-solving courts in the US, has
distilled the principles
of such courts in the following way:
Enhanced information
: Better staff training and information
can improve decision-making.
Community engagement
: Active engagement of local and
community groups fosters trust in, and cooperation with, the legal system.
Collaboration
: Engagement of those working within the justice
system and those working outside of it can improve communication, trust and
strategies.
Individualised justice
: Evidence-based referrals to
community-based services can improve community safety and aid victims.
Accountability
: The justice system can send messages about
the impact and consequences of all criminal behaviour, and can insist on regular
and reporting by service providers.
: The regular collection and evaluation of data are
important in continually improving processes and as a form of
accountability.
20.144 Professor
Arie Freiberg has summarised the differences between traditional and
problem-solving courts in the following
Traditional process
Transformed process
Dispute resolution
Problem-solving dispute avoidance
Legal outcome
Therapeutic outcome
Adversarial process
Collaborative process
Claim or case oriented
People oriented
Rights based
Interest or needs based
Emphasis based on adjudication
Emphasis placed on non-adjudication and alternative dispute
Judge as arbiter
Judge as coach
Backward looking
Forward looking
Precedent based
Planning based
Few participants and stakeholders
Wide range of participants and stakeholders
Individualistic
Interdependent
Common-sensical
20.145 As with specialised courts generally, problem-solving courts can be
distinguished from problem-solving
that take on some of these
features, such as focusing on the needs of people in a collaborative, informal,
commonsensical process.
Such approaches may be adopted informally by judicial
officers outside of problem-solving courts.
20.146 A key distinction between problem-solving courts and traditional
courts is the role of the judicial officer. In traditional
courts, the role of a
judicial officer is to adjudicate innocence and guilt; in problem-solving
courts, the focus of the judicial
officer is on ‘broader issues of
improvements in the health and wellbeing of the offender, of public safety and
amenity more
broadly, and of the social and communal problems which may be
conducive to criminal
behaviour’.
addition, judicial officers are typically required to monitor the progress of
the offender by requiring the offender to report
officers directly engage with offenders as part of the process of making the
court ‘more meaningful’
participants.
illustrated particularly in drug courts.
20.147 In the US, as noted above, an important aspect of problem-solving
courts is the use of judicial monitoring to ensure compliance
with sentence
conditions. According to a 2009 report, 56% of family violence courts surveyed
in the US held regular compliance reviews
‘often or always’, and an
additional 15% reported doing so
‘sometimes’.
However, different courts used these ‘compliance hearings’
differently, leading the authors of the report to conclude
that ‘there are
not currently any strategies that have been universally adopted as part of a
best or “recommended practice”
model for such
20.148 It was also reported that those working in these family violence
courts were ‘enthusiastic about monitoring and enforcement
of court orders
as a mechanism of accountability and
deterrence’.
evidence into the effectiveness of judicial monitoring, however, is
‘mixed, … which probably should not be
surprising because the
quality of judicial monitoring is undoubtedly mixed as
Therapeutic
jurisprudence
20.149 Therapeutic jurisprudence is an interdisciplinary perspective on law
that focuses on its ‘impact on emotional life and
psychological
well-being’.
premised on the idea that ‘the law is a social force that can produce
therapeutic or antitherapeutic
consequences’.
a mechanism for promoting law reform using wellbeing as the lens through which
the law is studied and the behavioural sciences as
the source of possible
remedies that could be adapted for use within the legal system. It sees a
commonality between the law and
the behavioural sciences in their interest in
the functioning of the human psyche and how healthy behaviour may be
20.150 Therapeutic jurisprudence does not, however, suggest that therapeutic
goals must trump all other goals in law. Rather, it provides
a ‘framework
for asking questions and for raising certain questions that might otherwise go
unaddressed’.
20.151 Therapeutic jurisprudence developed out of mental health law. Its
application, however, is far broader and it has been applied
to other kinds of
law including workers’ compensation, family law and international
Most relevantly, it has
been applied to family
therapeutic jurisprudence in judging has been endorsed in Australia and
20.152 Therapeutic jurisprudence has been claimed as a ‘theoretical
foundation for problem-solving courts and
approaches’,
its scope is far wider.
Principles of therapeutic jurisprudence ‘shed light on how court
structures and the conduct of individual judges can help people
solve crucial
life problems’, and equip judicial officers with techniques to enable
offenders to confront and solve their
The Victorian
family violence Courts employ a therapeutic
20.153 Therapeutic jurisprudence suggests that there are ‘basic
principles associated with motivation and positive behavioural
change that are
based on empirical research that should inform all judging and advocacy
practices in problem-solving
These include
principles of self-determination or autonomy, and the promotion of procedural
justice values.
20.154 Giving participants the opportunity to enter offender programs or
restorative justice practices may be one way of promoting
participant
self-determination. In contrast, paternalistic and coercive approaches are
avoided because they ‘promote resistance’
counter-productive.
20.155 Another insight of therapeutic jurisprudence, associated with
procedural justice research, is the importance of aspects of
procedural justice
in recognising people as competent human beings. Key aspects include the
neutrality of the judicial officer, the
respect accorded to individuals in the
process, allowing individuals to explain their situation before the judicial
officer, and
the ‘trustworthiness’ of the judicial officer, in the
sense of whether the judicial officer ‘truly cares’
20.156 The practical implications of therapeutic principles and
problem-solving approaches in judging are spelled out in the
Solution-Focused
Judging Bench Book
produced by Michael
This Bench Book sets
out the findings of behavioural science research on matters such as substance
abuse, mental health and family
violence. It also includes chapters on judicial
communication skills; judicial listening skills; and processes and strategies to
encourage behavioural change.
Issues with
problem-solving courts
20.157 A range of views have been expressed as to whether, and to what
extent, courts should be problem-solving or ‘therapeutic’.
concerns that such courts, by moving away from the traditional paradigm of the
courts, may threaten core judicial values,
undermine procedural justice, and
fail to recognise sufficiently the function of the criminal law in condemning
behaviour. Others
have suggested that such courts appeal to those who want
‘simple solutions to complex social
that such solutions falsely assume that there is an underlying
‘problem’ and that there is consensus on how
that can be
conceptualised and
20.158 The role of problem-solving courts in the context of family violence
is especially controversial. One important concern is
that family violence is
‘not a health problem or disease—rather, it is the
major public health problem’ and is ‘based in conscious choice for
which the offender must take
responsibility’.
therefore inappropriate to consider family violence as a ‘problem’
capable of being ‘solved’. Further,
in family violence courts the
principal objectives are usually the safety of victims (including children) and
defendant accountability,
while in other problem-solving courts the focus is on
offender treatment.
causes and complexity of family violence are less amenable to treatment than
drug addiction—the domain of drug courts.
Further, it has been noted that
while drug courts arose as a way of attempting to divert offenders from the
legal system, family
violence courts arose in the context of under-enforcement
of the law.
20.159 There are a range of practical matters that need to be addressed in
designing problem-solving courts. First, there is a need
to fund such courts
adequately—particularly in relation to maintaining offender programs and
enabling continuous judicial supervision.
To a lesser extent, of course, this
point is applicable to specialised courts generally, and there are also
arguments that such courts
generate efficiencies.
20.160 Secondly, there are a number of specific issues in terms of the
operational elements of problem-solving courts. For example,
the Law Reform
Commission of Western Australia has examined issues such as when a person should
be eligible for such processes; the
interaction between offender programs and
the criminal law; the input accorded to the victim; and the role of
monitoring.
Commissions’ views
20.161 The Commissions consider that much can be learnt from problem-solving
courts. Many of the principles of such courts—including
better training
and information; community engagement; collaboration; and evidence-based
referrals to community services—have
been proposed above as minimum
elements of family violence courts. In particular, many of the insights of
therapeutic jurisprudence
could be constructively applied generally in courts
dealing with family violence issues.
20.162 However, a number of philosophical and practical concerns have been
raised with the adoption of problem-solving approaches
in the context of family
violence. There are a range of views as to the appropriateness of
problem-solving approaches in the context
of family violence; the
appropriateness of the changed role of the judicial officer; and the claims,
implicit in such approaches,
for the potential of the legal system to address
deep-seated social problems. Further, offender programs and judicial supervision
of the progress of offenders are resource-intensive and the empirical evidence
of their effectiveness is mixed. Perhaps the greatest
practical issue, however,
is the willingness of the judicial officers to embrace a problem-solving
20.163 For these reasons, the Commissions consider at this stage that the
question of whether a problem-solving or therapeutic approach
is adopted is
properly a question for those establishing specialised courts. Ultimately, the
efficacy of a problem-solving approach
depends on the attitude, aptitude and
desire of judicial officers to use such an approach. The evaluation of the
Victorian FVCD may
also shed further light on the desirability of such an
[back to top]
Best practice in
courts generally
20.164 Another issue for this Inquiry is whether elements of family violence
courts can be adopted by non-specialised courts dealing
with family violence. As
the Victorian dual model shows, not all courts need be specialised to the same
degree. Further, not all
elements of specialised courts are necessarily
resource-intensive.
20.165 Several elements of specialised family violence courts appear capable
of being adopted in other courts as ‘best practice’.
First, it would
appear efficient for proceedings relating to protection orders and, potentially,
criminal proceedings related to
family violence to be listed on the same day,
where the caseload permits . The Commissions understand that this is already the
in many courts. It may also be worth reviewing whether related claims
(in, for example, child support and family law) can also be
listed at the same
time. As part of this review, it is also desirable for courts to review their
capacity to identify and deal with
family violence-related matters in their
general lists, such as in bail applications.
20.166 If such listing practices are adopted, it would also be possible for
the courts to facilitate the presence of victim support
workers on those days,
including legal aid lawyers. In addition, defendant support workers could also
be employed. In Chapter 19,
the Commissions propose that state and
territory governments should, to the extent feasible, make victim support
workers available
at court proceedings related to family violence, and at the
time the police are called out to family violence incidents. Of course,
requires additional funding. However, where there are victim support
organisations in the region which already offer court support
services, general
courts could immediately facilitate the provision of court support by providing,
for example, an office and other
institutional support.
20.167 Assigning selected judicial officers to work on cases related to
family violence may also be cost-effective, depending on the
caseload of the
court. This would likely provide an immediate benefit in terms of improving
consistency and, provided the selection
was done carefully, is likely also to
improve the treatment of victims. If the caseload justifies it, specialised
police and prosecutors
could also be assigned. This would potentially result in
long-term efficiencies. For example, it would be efficient to target training
towards those dedicated to this work, rather than training all judicial
20.168 Another practice that may be worth adopting is the use of practice
directions for family violence cases. The ACT Magistrates
Court uses a Practice
Direction that sets out timelines for stages in the process and, in particular,
specifies the information that
is required at particular stages in the
The Local Court in
NSW has also adopted a shorter practice direction, which also sets out a
timeframe for certain stages in the
Similarly, a
practice note in the New Zealand family violence courts sets a timetable for
family violence prosecutions to minimise
The adoption of
similar practice directions elsewhere may be one way of ensuring more timely
dispositions of family violence
Such practice
directions should enable courts to provide victims with some guidance as to the
usual duration of court proceedings
related to family violence.
20.169 Courts generally could also review existing court facilities and
practices with a view to improving victim safety at court.
For example, the use
of separate exits and entrances, the use of a separate waiting room for victims,
and the use of escorts to and
from the courtroom may be ways of increasing
victim safety.
20.170 Finally, another practice used in specialised courts that could be
developed in courts generally is the establishment of a
forum for feedback from,
and discussion with, other agencies and non-government organisations. Many
courts already have court users
groups for this purpose.
20.171 In the view of the Commissions, there is likely to be considerable
benefit in state and territory governments reviewing whether,
and to what
extent, these features have been adopted in the courts in their jurisdiction
dealing with family violence, with a view
to adopting them.
Proposal 20–5
State and territory governments should review
whether, and to what extent, the following features have been adopted in the
in their jurisdiction dealing with family violence, with a view to
adopting them:
(a) identifying, and listing on the same day, protection order matters and
criminal proceedings related to family violence, as well
as related family law
act and child protection matters;
(b) providing victim and defendant support, including legal advice, on
family violence list days;
(c) assigning selected and trained judicial officers to work on cases
related to family violence;
(d) adopting practice directions for family violence cases;
(e) ensuring that facilities and practices secure victim safety at court;
(f) establishing a forum for feedback from, and discussion with, other
agencies and non-government organisations.
20.172 As discussed above, the Superior Court of the District of Columbia has
established an integrated Domestic Violence Unit, which
includes within it a
Domestic Violence Court, a Domestic Violence Coordination Unit, and a Domestic
Violence Intake Center.
20.173 There are two Intake Centers within the District of Columbia, which
serve as a ‘one stop shop’ for victims of family
violence. The
Intake Centers are staffed by government employees, as well as employees of
non-governmental support
Victims are
referred to the intake centres by police, shelters, and other support agencies.
At the intake centre, an intake counsellor
interviews the victim, explains the
legal process in general terms, and helps the victim to fill out any forms.
Intake counsellors
also refer victims to non-governmental agencies and support
services. A victim advocate from the US Attorney-General’s Office
involved if an arrest has been made and there is potential for criminal charges.
Advocates from the Victim Advocacy Project
answer questions, offer court
support, and provide referrals for services and safety planning. Advocates also
to hearings for final protection orders to remind them of
the hearing and answer any
As noted above,
the Domestic Violence Court deals with a broad range of legal matters including
protection orders, criminal charges,
paternity and child support issues.
20.174 There are some similarities between the Intake Centers and the
Domestic Violence Advocacy Support Central in Perth. As discussed
in Chapter 19,
this also provides a ‘one stop shop’ of family violence services,
through the co-location of refuge, legal,
family support, police and counselling
A key point of
difference, however, is that the Intake Center acts as a service centre for the
Domestic Violence Court itself.
20.175 Providing a ‘one stop shop’ centre for a range of related
services is one method of delivering the benefits of
victim support, and would
complement the existence of victim support workers at court or at the time the
police were called.
centre would minimise the burden on victims, and facilitate access to the full
range of government and victim services.
20.176 The exact form in which such intake services should be delivered may
differ depending on resources and needs in different jurisdictions.
is to establish an intake unit to service courts in a region generally. For
example, an intake unit could be established
in a capital city, but service all
courts within the metropolitan area. An intake unit that services several courts
would improve
the efficiency of those courts and provide many of the benefits of
specialised family violence courts in the general system. If designed
several courts, an intake unit could be open for extended hours, facilitating
access to the courts beyond that available
in family violence courts, which have
dedicated family violence days. While victims may have to travel further to
reach an intake
unit than to reach a local court, this may be preferable to
visiting several locations to perform the same functions. The centre
established within a court, or within a victim support organisation. Another
option would be to provide such services through
telephone support, such as a
24-hour emergency hotline.
20.177 The intake services so provided could perform a range of functions. If
staff are appropriately trained, they could assist in
(for example) recording
victim statements and complaints, and filing claims across a range of
law jurisdiction. An intake centre could
act as a central point of contact for victims for basic information about
pending court
proceedings. For example, an intake centre could inform victims
when court proceedings have been listed. It could also facilitate
legal advice and other victim services. As in the Neighbourhood Justice Centre
in Victoria, a family law courts officer
could be available at certain times to
provide information on family law courts. The Commissions consider that intake
units could
be a practical and affordable measure to ensure access to the
benefits of specialised family violence courts across the court system
generally. In its preliminary view, state and territory governments should
establish such units, where feasible.
Proposal 20–6
State and territory governments should establish
centres providing a range of family violence services for victims, which would
the following functions:
(a) recording victim statements and complaints;
(b) facilitating access to victim support workers for referrals to other
(c) filing all claims relating to family violence from victims on behalf of
the victim in relevant courts; and
(d) acting as a central point of contact for victims for basic information
[back to top]
The role of the
federal government
20.178 A particular issue for this Inquiry is the role of the federal
government in supporting family violence courts. As family violence
governed by state or territory law, these courts would need to be established or
maintained by state or territory governments.
Clearly, the feasibility of
establishing such courts will vary between and within state and territories, and
there needs to be a
‘bottom up’ approach in developing such courts
with the support of the leadership of the court and the partnership of
community organisations and service providers.
20.179 However, there are several ways for the federal government to support
specialised family violence courts. One important national
mechanism could be
the use of funding. The Australian government has already provided federal
funding for family violence programs,
including the ACT’s FVIP, under the
Partnerships against Domestic Violence initiative (1997–2003), and
currently under
the Women’s Safety Agenda
initiative.
the federal government provides considerable funding under the STOP Violence
against Women Formula Grant Program, which
was first authorised as part of the
Violence Against Women Act
The funding has
been used, among other things, for specialised family violence and sexual
assault units and family violence
20.180 The Australian Government could also assist by facilitating the
transfer of knowledge and expertise across state and territory
For example, training could be provided by existing specialised courts or
judicial officers; and research and evaluations
of existing specialised courts
could be funded for the benefit of other jurisdictions. The Center for Court
Innovation in New York
is an example of an organisation funded to provide
research and expertise in the field of problem-solving courts. Similarly,
appropriate
funding could be provided to the National Judicial College of
Australia for the purpose of providing ongoing judicial education in
relation to
family violence, including in relation to family violence courts. Other
proposals relating to training and education
are discussed in Chapter 19, which
will have an impact on the education and training of those involved with
specialised courts.
20.181 The Australian Government could also coordinate state and territory
government action in relation to specialised courts. For
example, a working
party could be set up by the Standing Committee of Attorneys-General which could
exchange information and collaborate
on projects for such courts. Another way of
fostering national cooperation and collaboration is by establishing a network of
specialised family violence courts and judicial officers specialising
in family violence or family law.
20.182 There is also a key
role for the Australian Government in ensuring coordination between federal and
state/territory courts.
In New Zealand, as noted above, there is a position of
Family Law Coordinator.
coordinators liaise with people external to the court, including specialist
report writers and counsellors. Importantly, for
the purposes of this Inquiry,
the coordinator also liaises with child protection services, as well as family
violence courts.
20.183 A similar liaison position could be created within the Family Court
and Federal Magistrates Court to facilitate communication
between federal courts
and state and territory courts. This liaison officer could act as a central
point of contact for state and
territory courts where there are concurrent
family law proceedings, and thus facilitate information exchange between federal
law courts and state and territory courts. Further, a liaison officer
could act also to develop and promote best practice in relation
coordination and integration between the federal, state and territory courts.
For example, a liaison officer could be
responsible for the negotiation of
protocols between courts, and for addressing problems with interaction raised by
the judicial
officers and staff of the courts. The liaison officer could also
represent the federal family law courts in relevant forums for collaboration
with agencies, courts and non-government organisations.
Proposal 20–7
The Australian Government should assist state and
territory governments in the establishment, development and maintenance of
family violence courts by, for example, facilitating the transfer of
specialised knowledge and expertise in dealing with family violence
assault across federal and state and territory jurisdictions; and establishing
and maintaining national networks of judicial
officers and staff specialising in
family violence or family law.
Proposal 20–8
The Australian Government should create positions
for Family Law Courts liaison officers. These officers should have the following
(a) facilitating information sharing between federal family law courts and
state and territory courts;
(b) developing and promoting best practice in relation to information
sharing between the federal family law courts and state and
territory courts;
(c) representing the federal family law courts in relevant forums for
collaboration with agencies, courts and non-government organisations.
For example, magistrates in the
specialised family violence courts in Victoria, discussed below, routinely ask
questions in applications
for protection orders about pending prosecutions or
past convictions, pending or past family law proceedings, the use of counselling
and drug programs, and applications for victims’ compensation:
Observation: Sunshine Magistrates’ Court of Victoria: Family Violence
, 25 January 2010.
See, eg, NSW
Policing Domestic Violence in NSW
(1999), 47–48. This
issue was not addressed in the report of the NSW Ombudsman,
Violence: Improving Police Practice
Under s 4H of the
Magistrates’ Court Act 1989
(Vic), the Family Violence Court
Division is constituted only by magistrates gazetted by the Chief Magistrate.
The Chief Magistrate
is required to ‘have regard to the magistrate’s
relevant knowledge and experience in dealing with matters relating to
NSW Ombudsman,
Domestic Violence: Improving Police Practice
Questions 17–1,
Victim support is discussed
Successworks,
the Integrated Response to Family Violence: Final Report
The Safe at Home project is
discussed in Ch 19.
Crime and Misconduct Commission,
Policing Domestic Violence in Queensland
64–65; New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Apprehended Violence
, Report No 103 (2003), [3.21]; NSW Ombudsman,
Domestic Violence:
Improving Police Practice
Australasian Policing Strategy
on the Prevention and Reduction of Family Violence
NSW Ombudsman,
Domestic Violence:
Improving Police Practice
Practical Implications
of Current Domestic Violence Research: For Law Enforcement, Prosecutors and
(2009) National Institute of Justice, ch 5,
Ibid, ch 5,
Ibid, ch 5,
The Family Violence
Intervention Program is discussed in Ch 19. In 2009–2010, the ODPP
intend to establish a specialist unit
for sexual offences as well: Office of the
Director of Public Prosecutions (ACT),
Annual Report 2008–2009
(2009), 16.
Successworks,
Review of the
Integrated Response to Family Violence: Final Report
Magistrate Noreen Toohey,
Consultation
, Melbourne, 25 January
Office of Public Prosecutions
and Director of Public Prosecutions (Vic),
Annual Report
7. The Victorian OPP also has legal prosecution
specialists in other areas, such as organised crime:
Practical Implications
of Current Domestic Violence Research: For Law Enforcement, Prosecutors and
(2009) National Institute of Justice,
See Office of the Director of
Public Prosecutions (NSW),
Prosecution Guidelines
, Appendix E; Office of
the Director of Public Prosecutions (NT),
, ch 21. There
is also (limited) specific reference to family violence in Office of the
Director of Public Prosecutions (WA),
Statement of Prosecution Policy and
(2005), [41]–[44].
An overview of these courts is set
Successworks,
the Integrated Response to Family Violence: Final Report
A national project on
such courts in the US identified 208 courts with specialised dockets or
dedicated judges at the end of 2009,
although this was restricted to courts
dealing with criminal cases: M Labriola and others,
A National Portrait of
Domestic Violence Courts
(2009) Center for Court Innovation, ix. See DE
Shelton and E Donald,
The Current State of Domestic Violence Courts in the
United States, 2007
(2007); S Kelitz, R Guerrero, AM Jones and DM Rubio,
Specialization of Domestic Violence Case Management in the Courts: A National
(2001) National Center for State Courts; JA Helling,
Specialized
Criminal Domestic Violence Courts
See Crime Reduction Centre
Information Team,
Safety and Justice: The Government’s Proposals on
Domestic Violence
(2003) Home
See L Tutty, J Ursel and F
Douglas, ‘Specialized Domestic Violence Courts: A Comparison of
What’s Law Got to Do With It? The Law, Specialized Courts
and Domestic Violence in Canada
See New Zealand Family Violence
Clearinghouse,
Evaluating the Waitakere Family Violence Court
This was based on the
recommendation of the Victorian Law Reform Commission that a special list be
piloted for child sexual assault
and sexual assault for those with cognitive
impairments: Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Sexual Offences: Final
(2004), Rec 50.
Court of Australia and the Family Court of Western Australia is dealt with in
detail in Chs 2, 8, 9, and 14. The Magellan
and Columbus programs in the Family
Court are considered in Ch 14.
The 2009–2010 Queensland family violence program of action also indicates
that the Rockhampton court will form part of an
integrated response in that
community: Queensland Government,
For Our Sons and Daughters: A Queensland
Government Strategy to Reduce Domestic and Family Violence Program of Action
Holder, ‘The Emperor’s New Clothes: Court and Justice Initiatives to
Address Family Violence’
Journal of Judicial Administration
Domestic Violence Court: Guidelines and Best Practices
(2002) Family
Violence Prevention Fund. Sack further identifies three sub-categories within
the Domestic Violence Courts with Related
Caseload, depending upon which (if
any) related cases are assigned to a single judge.
The Family Court of Western
Australia, which exercises federal family law jurisdiction as well as
non-federal jurisdiction in relation
to adoption and surrogacy and child
protection, is also not considered here, although it might be conceived of as a
‘specialised
court’ in some ways. This court is discussed in
Magistrates’ Court
(Vic) s 4I.
Department of Justice—Victoria,
Family Violence Court
Division—Overview
<www.justice.vic.gov.au> at 10 December
S Kelitz, R Guerrero, AM Jones
and DM Rubio,
Specialization of Domestic Violence Case Management in the
Courts: A National Survey
(2001) National Center for State Courts,
5–6, describes case management in the US
This is based on published
information about the courts available as at January 2010, and in some cases
there is insufficient information
to establish whether the court includes a
particular element.
This column refers to the Family
Violence Division of the Magistrates’ Court of Victoria. There are also
courts which have
a Specialist Family Violence Service, which is discussed
further below.
The Division sits as the Victims of
Crime Assistance Tribunal to hear claims of statutory victims’
compensation.
To the extent that
Only in Joondalup is there a
dedicated defence lawyer.
Counselling may be available to
children and victims where the offender is in an offender
The FVIP is discussed in
Protection orders are
dealt with by the Protection Unit of the Magistrates Court.
The Domestic Violence Crisis Service
offers court support, but it notes that it has been forced to reduce the
availability of this
service significantly, because of inadequate resources:
Domestic Violence Crisis Service (ACT),
Annual Report 2008
(2008), 45.
Urbis Keys Young,
Evaluation of
the ACT Family Violence Intervention Program Phase II
(2001); Urbis Keys
Evaluation of the ACT Family Violence Intervention Program Phase
(2001). Another evaluation was conducted in 2009 but has not yet been
Urbis Keys Young,
Evaluation of the ACT Family Violence Intervention Program Phase II
Now known as Community
Local Court,
Local Court
Practice Note No. 1 of 2006
Rodwell and N Smith,
An Evaluation of the NSW Domestic Violence Intervention
Court Model
(2008) NSW Bureau of Crime Statistics and
NSW Government Department of
Premier and Cabinet (Office For Women’s Policy),
Discussion Paper on
NSW Domestic and Family Violence Strategic Framework
A Hennessy,
Domestic and Family Violence Courts: The Rockhampton Experiment
<www.archive.sclqld.org.au/judgepub/2008/Hennessy160608.pdf> at 2 October
Queensland Government,
Our Sons and Daughters: A Queensland Government Strategy to Reduce Domestic and
Family Violence Program of Action 2009–2010
Deputy Chief Magistrate Andrew
Cannon and R McInnes,
Consultation
, By telephone, 25 September
Courts Administration Authority
South Australia,
Magistrates Court Violence Intervention Program
<www.courts.sa.gov.au/courts/magistrates/index.html> at 16 February
Department of Justice (Vic),
Family Violence Court Division—Overview
<www.justice.vic.gov.au/> at 16 February
It is established by
Magistrates’ Court Act 1989
Magistrate Noreen Toohey,
Consultation
, Melbourne, 25 January 2010.
Magistrates’ Court Act
(Vic) s 4I(4).
noted above, all magistrates courts have the same jurisdiction as the FVCD.
While there is no legislative support for co-listing
of cases in the Specialist
Family Violence Service courts, this does occur in practice at the direction of
some specialist judicial
Department of Justice (Vic),
Neighbourhood Justice Centre
<www.neighbourhoodjustice.
vic.gov.au/site/page.cfm> at 16 February 2010.
Restorative justice processes are
discussed in Ch 11.
Department of
Justice (Vic),
Neighbourhood Justice Centre
<www.neighbourhoodjustice.vic.
gov.au/site/page.cfm> at 16 February
Law Reform Commission of Western
Court Intervention Programs
, Consultation Paper (2008),
As noted in the table,
above, there is a dedicated defence lawyer at
In 39% of cases as compared
to 7.1% in non-specialised districts: Law Reform Commission of Western
Court Intervention Programs
, Consultation Paper (2008),
Two Decades of
Specialized Domestic Violence Courts: A Review of the Literature
Center for Court Innovation, 2.
Shelton and E Donald,
The Current State of Domestic Violence Courts in the
United States, 2007
(2007); see also M Labriola and others,
Portrait of Domestic Violence Courts
(2009) Center for Court Innovation.
New York State Unified Court System,
Integrated Domestic Violence Courts
<www.nycourts.gov/
courts/problem_solving/idv/home.shtml> at 16 February 2010.
IDVCs have authority to hear a whole
range of matters, including criminal domestic violence cases, protection order
hearings, and
all related family issues, including custody, visitation, and
divorce: New York State Division of Criminal Justice Services,
New York State
Domestic Violence Courts Program Fact
The Center for Court
Innovation,
Integrated Domestic Violence Courts
<www.courtinnovation.org/> at 16 February
D Epstein, ‘Effective
Intervention in Domestic Violence Cases: Rethinking the Roles of Prosecutors,
Judges, and the Court
Yale Journal of Law and
Superior Court of
District of Columbia,
Domestic Violence Unit Rules
<www.dccourts.gov/
dccourts/docs/Rules-DV.pdf> at 16 February 2010.
District Court of Columbia
11 DC CODE ANN §11–1104
A Harrell, L Newmark and C
Final Report on the Evaluation of the Judicial Oversight
Demonstration
(2007) Urban Institute, Justice Policy Centre,
The Center for Court Innovation,
Integrated Domestic Violence Courts
<www.courtinnovation.org/> at
16 February 2010.
Decades of Specialized Domestic Violence Courts: A Review of the Literature
(2009) Center for Court Innovation.
See J Ursel and C Hagyard, ‘The Winnipeg Family Violence Court’
What’s Law Got to Do With It? The Law, Specialized Courts and Domestic
Violence in Canada
Specialist Domestic and Family Violence Courts: The Rockhampton
<www.archive.sclqld.org.au/judgepub/2008/Hennessy160608.pdf> at 2 October
Ministry of the Attorney
General (Ontario),
Programs and Services for Victims of Crime
<www.attorneygeneral.jus.gov.on.ca/english/ovss/programs.asp#domestic> at
16 February 2010. See M Dawson and R Dinovitzer,
‘Specialized
Justice: From Prosecution to Sentencing in a Toronto Domestic Violence
What’s Law Got to Do With It? The Law, Specialized Courts
and Domestic Violence in Canada
See L Tutty, K McNichol and J
Christensen, ‘Calgary’s HomeFront Specialized Domestic Violence
What’s Law Got to Do With It? The Law, Specialized Courts
and Domestic Violence in Canada
See L Tutty, J Ursel and F
Douglas, ‘Specialized Domestic Violence Courts: A Comparison of
What’s Law Got to Do With It? The Law, Specialized Courts
and Domestic Violence in Canada
See Department of Justice (UK),
‘More Specialist Domestic Violence Courts Offer Tailored Support to
Victims’ (Press
Release), 19 March 2010). This exceeds the 128 planned to
roll out by 2011: Her Majesty’s Government (UK),
National Domestic
Violence Delivery Plan—Annual Progress Report
Crime Reduction
Centre Information Services Team,
Specialist Domestic Violence Court
Programme Resource Manual
(Revised ed,
Her Majesty’s Courts
Services (UK), Home Office (UK) and Crown Prosecution Service (UK),
with Safety: Specialist Domestic Violence Courts Review 2007–08
Ministry of Justice (NZ),
Violence Courts National Operating Guidelines
The Waitakere and
Manukau Family Violence Courts: An Evaluation Summary
(2008) Ministry of
Justice—New Zealand.
These include: separate
versus joint trials; difficulties with the admissibility of types of evidence;
and issues with cross-examination,
discussed in
National Child Sexual
Assault Reform Committee,
Alternative Models for Prosecuting Child Sex
Offences in Australia
, unpublished (2009),
Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Sexual Offences: Final Report
Magistrates’ Court Act 1989
The pilot SOL
commenced in Melbourne on 7 April 2006, and on 1 July 2007 in Ballarat, Bendigo,
Geelong, La Trobe Valley, Mildura
Shepparton.
Under Schedule 5 of the
Magistrates Court Act
(Vic), sexual offences in the committal stream
are to be determined within 60 days of the first or final committal mention
Facilities for vulnerable
witnesses are discussed in Chs
Magistrates’
Court of Victoria,
Sexual Offences List
<www.magistratescourt.vic.gov.au/> at 16 February 2010.
This SOL was introduced as a
pilot on 1 October 2005.
Court of Victoria,
Sex Offences List—Practice Note
The recommendation of the
Committee, however, was not fully implemented by this pilot, as it did not
employ specialist judicial
officers or prosecutors.
J Cashmore and L Trimboli,
Evaluation of the NSW Child Sexual Assault Specialist Jurisdiction Pilot
(2005) NSW Bureau of Crime Statistics and Research,
Criminal Justice Sexual
Offences Taskforce (NSW Attorney General’s Department),
Responding to
Sexual Assault: The Way Forward
The National Child
Sexual Assault Reform Committee was formed in 2000 and comprises Directors of
Public Prosecutions, judges, Children’s
Commissioners, academics, Legal
Aid representatives, senior police officers, Crime Commissioners and others. The
Terms of Reference
of the Committee direct it, in summary, to (i) to document
the best practice (or minimum) standards in each Australian jurisdiction
conduct of the child sexual assault trial; (ii) to document the outcomes of
prosecuting child sex offences in each Australian
reporting, attrition and conviction rates; and (iii) to research and consider
alternative models for prosecuting
child sex offences: National Child Sexual
Assault Reform Committee,
Alternative Models for Prosecuting Child Sex
Offences in Australia
, unpublished (2009),
Although called Regional
Magistrates Courts, the sexual offences courts are analogous to District Courts
in Australia.
See Criminal
Justice Sexual Offences Taskforce (NSW Attorney General’s Department),
Responding to Sexual Assault: The Way Forward
(2005), 149–154; A
Cossins, ‘Prosecuting Child Sexual Assault Cases: To Specialise or Not,
That is the Question’
Current Issues in Criminal Justice
‘Prosecuting Child Sexual Assault Cases: To Specialise or Not, That is the
Current Issues in Criminal Justice
The development of SOCs is
detailed in J Reyneke and H Kruger, ‘Sexual Offences Courts in South
Africa: Quo Vadis?’
Journal for Juridical Science
The conviction rate is more than
15% higher in SOCs, and the overall conviction rate is even higher where the
court is linked to
a Thuthuzela Centre: Ibid, 54,
A Cossins, ‘Prosecuting
Child Sexual Assault Cases: To Specialise or Not, That is the Question’
Current Issues in Criminal Justice
The overall conviction rate
was 54% compared with 46% nationally: J Ursel and K Gorkoff ‘Court
Processing of Child Sexual
Abuse Cases: The Winnipeg Family Violence Court
Experience’, in
D Hiebert-Murphy and L Burnside (eds),
Pieces of a Puzzle: Perspectives on
Child Sexual Abuse
New York State Unified Court System,
Problem Solving Courts—Sex
Offense Courts
<www.courts.state.ny.us/courts/problem_solving/so/courts.shtml> at 16
February 2010.
New York State
Unified Court System,
Sex Offense Courts—Mission Statement and Key
<www.courts.state.ny.us/courts/problem_solving/so/mission_goals.shtml> at
16 February 2010.
Establishing a Model Court: A Case Study of the Oswego Sex Offense Court
(undated) Center for Court Innovation <www.courtinnovation.org> at 16
February 2010.
New York State
Unified Court System,
Sex Offense Courts—Mission Statement and Key
<www.courts.state.ny.us/courts/problem_solving/so/mission_goals.shtml> at
16 February 2010.
LW Sherman and H
Restorative Justice: The Evidence
(2007) Smith
National Council to
Reduce Violence against Women and their Children,
Time for Action: The
National Council’s Plan for Australia to Reduce Violence against Women and
their Children, 2009–2021
(2009); Law Reform Commission of Western
Court Intervention Programs: Final Report
Project No 96
(2009), 92; S Eley, ‘Changing Practices: The Specialised Domestic Violence
Court Process’
The Howard Journal of Criminal Justice
, 114–115; S Kelitz, R Guerrero, AM Jones and DM Rubio,
Specialization of Domestic Violence Case Management in the Courts: A National
(2001) National Center for State Courts,
Implications of Current Domestic Violence Research: For Law Enforcement,
Prosecutors and Judges
(2009) National Institute of Justice. See also M
Labriola and others,
A National Portrait of Domestic Violence Courts
(2009) Center for Court Innovation,
Deputy Chief Magistrate Andrew
Cannon and R McInnes,
Consultation
, By telephone, 25 September 2009,
Magistrate Noreen Toohey,
Consultation
, Melbourne, 25 January 2010,
Court Observation: Melbourne Magistrates’ Court of Victoria: Family
Violence List
, 24 November 2009;
Court Observation: Sunshine
Magistrates’ Court of Victoria: Family Violence List
, 25 January
See Chs 3, 4,
As cited in J Plotnikoff and R
Review of the Effectiveness of Specialist Courts in Other
, DCA Research Series 3/05 (2005),
Magistrate Noreen Toohey,
Consultation
, Melbourne, 25 January
J Moye, ‘Don’t
Tread on Me to Help Me: Does the District of Columbia
Family Court Act
Violate Due Process by Extolling the One Family, One Judge Theory’ (2004)
Southern Methodist University Law Review
This view was expressed
in consultations: see Magistrate Noreen Toohey,
Consultation
, Melbourne,
25 January 2010.
The position
of the Family Court in Western Australia is an exception. See the discussion in
Re Wakim; Ex parte
(1999) 198 CLR 511. The constitutional framework is discussed in
The FVCD is a pilot
which may be rolled out to other courts at a later stage, which will reduce the
impact of the geographical
restrictions.
Local courts and
magistrates courts already have such jurisdiction under their enabling
The jurisdiction of state
and territory courts in relation to family law is discussed in
See, eg, M Labriola and
A National Portrait of Domestic Violence Courts
(2009) Center for
Court Innovation, 71–72.
Magistrates’ Court Act 1989
(Vic) s 4H.
As noted above, the evaluation of
the FVCD is due shortly.
Noreen Toohey,
Consultation
, Melbourne, 25 January
M Labriola and others,
National Portrait of Domestic Violence Courts
(2009) Center for Court
Innovation, 72–73.
Training is discussed
generally in Ch 19. See Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Family Violence Laws: Report
(2006), Ch 6
M Labriola and others,
National Portrait of Domestic Violence Courts
(2009) Center for Court
Innovation, 38–39, reports that 86% of judicial officers in that study
reported receiving such training,
and 91% of dedicated judges received such
Ibid, 71. This was the
second most common theme in open-ended surveys used in that
Ibid, vi, reports that
this is a significant concern among stakeholders in the US. See also
this Consultation Paper.
These powers are
discussed in Ch 6, in relation to the conditions of protection orders.
See especially the discussion of
‘court intervention programs’ as opposed to ‘specialised
courts’ in Law
Reform Commission of Western Australia,
Intervention Programs: Final Report
Project No 96 (2009), 1; Law Reform
Commission of Western Australia,
Court Intervention Programs
Consultation Paper (2008),
Information obtained from the
Acting Victim of Crimes Coordinator (ACT), John Hinchey.
There has also been a much more
limited evaluation of the perpetrator program in the ACT in 2009, which is not
yet published, and
in Western Australia: Court Services
Division—Department of Justice and Crime Prevention and Community Support
Division—West
Australian Police Service,
Joondalup Family Violence
Court: Final Report
Urbis Keys Young,
Evaluation of the NSW Pilot Program for Perpetrators of
Domestic Violence: Final Report
Implications of Current Domestic Violence Research: For Law Enforcement,
Prosecutors and Judges
(2009) National Institute of Justice, Ch 8,
‘Evaluating Batterer Counseling Programs: A Difficult Task Showing Some
Effects and Implications’ (2004)
Aggression and Violent Behavior
J Babcock, C
Green and C Robie, ‘Does Batterers’ Treatment Work? a Meta-Analytic
Review of Domestic Violence Treatment’
Clinical Psychology
1023, 1032.
research is discussed A Klein,
Practical Implications of Current Domestic
Violence Research: For Law Enforcement, Prosecutors and Judges
National Institute of Justice, ch 8, section
Ibid, ch 8, section
For a discussion of the
terminology, see A Freiberg, ‘Problem-Oriented Courts: Innovative
Solutions to Intractable Problems?’
Journal of Judicial
Administration
Department of
Justice (Vic),
Justice Statement 2
A Freiberg,
‘Problem-Oriented Courts: Innovative Solutions to Intractable
Journal of Judicial Administration
A Freiberg,
‘Problem-Oriented Courts: An Update’
Judicial Administration
, 197–198; Law Reform Commission of Western
Court Intervention Programs
, Consultation Paper (2008),
A Freiberg,
‘Problem-Oriented Courts: Innovative Solutions to Intractable
Journal of Judicial Administration
This is true of the protection
order context, in which proceedings typically take three minutes:
J Wangmann, ‘“She Said
…” “He said
…” : Cross Applications in NSW Apprehended Domestic Violence Order
Proceedings’,
, University of Sydney, 2009,
The relationship between
restorative justice and therapeutic jurisprudence is discussed in
of Problem-Solving Justice
(2007) Center for Court Innovation. See also
Judicial Council of California,
Programs: Collaborative Justice
<www.courtinfo.ca.gov/programs/collab/> at 16 February
A Freiberg,
‘Problem-Oriented Courts: Innovative Solutions to Intractable
Journal of Judicial Administration
A Freiberg,
‘Problem-Oriented Courts: An Update’
Judicial Administration
M Labriola and others,
National Portrait of Domestic Violence Courts
(2009) Center for Court
Innovation, 62.
Implications of Current Domestic Violence Research: For Law Enforcement,
Prosecutors and Judges
(2009) National Institute of Justice, Ch 7,
Section 16.
B Winick and D Wexler,
‘Introduction’ in B Winick and D Wexler (eds),
Judging in a
Therapeutic Key: Therapeutic Jurisprudence and the Courts
Solution-Focused
Judging Bench Book
(2009), 24.
Therapeutic Jurisprudence: An Overview
<www.law.arizona.edu/depts/upr-intj/> at 16 February
Solution-Focused
Judging Bench Book
(2009), 24.
See B Winick, ‘Applying the Law Therapeutically in Domestic Violence
Cases’ (2000) 69
University of Missouri-Kansas City Law Review
MS King, ‘Restorative Justice, Therapeutic Jurisprudence and the Rise of
Emotionally Intelligent Justice’ (2008) 32
Melbourne University Law
In 2004, the
Western Australian country magistrates resolved to apply it in their work, and
it is included in the national curriculum
for Australian judicial officers. It
was also endorsed by the Conference of Chief Justices and the Conference of
State Court Administrators
in the US in 2000: M King,
Solution-Focused
Judging Bench Book
(2009), 25.
B Winick and D Wexler, ‘Introduction’ in B Winick and D Wexler
Judging in a Therapeutic Key: Therapeutic Jurisprudence and the
(2003) 3, 7.
Solution-Focused Judging Bench Book
B Winick and D Wexler,
‘Introduction’ in B Winick and D Wexler (eds),
Judging in a
Therapeutic Key: Therapeutic Jurisprudence and the Courts
Department of Justice (Vic),
Justice Statement 2
Solution-Focused
Judging Bench Book
(2009), 26.
R Holder, ‘The
Emperor’s New Clothes: Court and Justice Initiatives to Address Family
Journal of Judicial Administration
A Freiberg,
‘Problem-Oriented Courts: Innovative Solutions to Intractable
Journal of Judicial Administration
Specialist Domestic/Family Violence Courts Within the Australian Context
Australian Domestic & Family Violence Clearinghouse, Issues Paper 10 (2005),
17. See also Ch 1.
Plotnikoff and R Woolfson,
Review of the Effectiveness of Specialist Courts
in Other Jurisdictions
, DCA Research Series 3/05 (2005),
R Holder and J Caruana,
Criminal Justice Intervention in Family Violence in the ACT
Law Reform Commission of
Western Australia,
Court Intervention Programs: Final Report
‘Family Violence
List’, Practice Direction No 2 of 2009, Magistrates Court of the
Australian Capital Territory.
‘Procedures to be Adopted in Domestic Violence Matters’, Practice
Direction No 3 of 2008 (as amended), Local Court of
New South Wales.
‘Domestic Violence
Prosecutions’, Practice Note, Appendix to
Family Violence Courts
National Operating Guidelines
The Magistrates Court
in Queensland has a practice direction relating to family violence, but it only
relates to the recording of
such applications: ‘Domestic Violence (Family
Protection) Act 1989 Recording of Applications for Domestic Violence
Practice Direction No 5 of 2001, Magistrates Court of
Queensland.
The Domestic Violence
Intake Centers have representatives from the Court as well as the following
organisations: Office of the Attorney
General for the District of Columbia
(including a child support enforcement officer), DC Metropolitan Police
Department, Women Empowered
Against Violence (WEAVE), DC Coalition Against
Domestic Violence, and the US Attorney’s Office: Superior Court of
of Columbia,
Domestic Violence Unit— Intake Centers
<www.dccourts.gov/dccourts
/superior/dv/intake.jsp> at 16 February
See generally D Epstein,
‘Effective Intervention in Domestic Violence Cases: Rethinking the Roles
of Prosecutors, Judges,
and the Court System’
Yale Journal of
Law and Feminism
, 29–31; M Steketee, L Levey and S Keilitz,
Implementing an Integrated Domestic Violence Court: Systemic Change in the
District of Columbia
(2000) State Justice Institute, 33–34; B Tsai,
‘The Trend toward Specialized Domestic Violence Courts: Improvements on
Effective Innovation’
Fordham Law Review
Legal Aid Western
Domestic Violence Advocacy Support Central
<www.legalaid.
wa.gov.au/annualreport/section1/7dvasc.html> at 2 February
This is discussed in
Australian Government
Department of Families, Housing Community Services and Indigenous Affairs,
Women’s Safety Agenda
(2009) <www.fahcsia.gov.au/> at 16
February 2010. The Partnerships Against Domestic Violence initiative, launched
provided federal funding for national, state and territory
Violence Against Women
42 USC §14043 (US). Each state receives a minimum of
US$600,000 each year, and since its inception in 1995, agencies have received
over US$750 million under this program: Office on Violence Against Women (US),
STOP Violence Against Women Formula Grant Program
<www.ovw.usdoj.gov/stop_grant_desc.htm> at 16 February
O Trujillo and G Test,
Funding the Work: Community Efforts to End Domestic Violence and Child
Zealand is not a federal state, there is a need for coordination between family
law courts and other courts.
ALRC CP1 Family Violence � Improving Legal Frameworks
Appendix 1. List of
Submissions
Appendix 1. List of Submissions
Appendix 1. List of
Submissions
Submission Number
Association for Better Care of Children
3 August 2009
9 February 2010
Confidential
31 August 2009
Confidential
23 October 2009
Confidential
5 November 2009
Confidential
11 November 2009
Confidential
27 January 2010
26 February 2010
14 October 2009
27 July 2009
13 October 2009
14 September 2009
C Humphreys
23 August 2009
Inner City Legal Centre—Safe Relationships Project
13 January 2010
National Peak Body for Safety and Protection of Parents and Children
13 January 2010
29 January 2010
17 February 2010
31 July 2009
29 March 2010
Non-Custodial Parents Party (Equal Parenting)
21 October 2009
B Smyth and R Kaspiew
13 October 2009
Victims of Crime Assistance League Inc NSW
23 February 2010
23 February 2010
18 September 2009
13 October 2009
9 November 2009
13 March 2010
ALRC CP1 Family Violence � Improving Legal Frameworks
Appendix 2. List of Agencies,
Organisations and Individuals Consulted
Appendix 2. List of Agencies, Organisations and Individuals Consulted
Appendix 2. List of Agencies,
Organisations and Individuals Consulted
ACT Policing
Professor H Astor
Australian Centre for the Study of Sexual Assault
Australian Domestic and Family Violence Clearinghouse
Australian Institute of Criminology
Professor T Brown
Children’s Court, New South Wales
Professor R Chisholm
Dr A Cossins
Dr K Cripps and M Davis
Justice L Dessau, Family Court of Australia
Education Centre against Violence (ECAV)
Judge R Ellis, District Court, New South Wales
Family Law Council
Family Law Council, sub-committee
Family Violence Magistrates, South Australia
Federal Magistrates
Magistrate A Goldsbrough
Professor A Hayes, Australian Institute of Family Studies
Dr M Heenan
R Holder, Victims of Crime Coordinator (ACT)
Judge P Fulton Hora and S King
Professor C Humphreys
Legal Aid Roundtable
Legal and Support Services Roundtable
Magistrates, New South Wales
Magistrates, Victoria
Dr E McInnes
Assistant Commissioner M Murdoch, NSW Police
NSW Police (JIRT)
NSW Rape Crisis Centre
S Odgers SC
Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions (ACT)
Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions (NSW)
Office of the Director of Public
Prosecutions
Office of Public Prosecutions (Vic)
Professor P Parkinson
Restorative Justice Unit (ACT)
Professor J Stubbs
C Thompson, NSW Attorney-General’s Department and
M Paramaguru, NSWLRC
Magistrate N Toohey, Victoria
Victorian Law Reform Commission
Violence Against Women Advisory Group
J Wells, Senior Prosecutor
Women’s Legal Services NSW
ALRC CP1 Family Violence � Improving Legal Frameworks
Appendix 3. List of
Abbreviations
Appendix 3. List of Abbreviations
Appendix 3. List of
Abbreviations
2004 Family Law Council advice
Family Law Council,
Review of Division 11—Family Violence
2009 Family Law Council advice
Family Law Council,
Improving Responses to Family Violence in the Family
Law System: An Advice on the Intersection of Family Violence and Family Law
Abduction Convention
Convention on Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction
Australian Bureau of Statistics
Australian Centre for the Study of Sexual Assault
Alternative dispute resolution
Armadale Domestic Violence Intervention Project (WA)
Apprehended Domestic Violence Orders (NSW)
Australian Federal Police
Attorney-General’s Department
Australian Government Solicitor
Australian Institute of Criminology
Australian Institute of Family Studies
Australian Institute of Health and Welfare
Australian Law Reform Commission
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Domestic Violence
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Equality Before the Law: Justice for
Australian Law Reform Commission and Human Rights and Equal Opportunity
Commission,
Seen and Heard: Priority for Children in the Legal Process
Australian Law Reform Commission, New South Wales Law Reform Commission and
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Uniform Evidence Law
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Same Crime, Same Time: Sentencing of
Federal Offenders
Australian Law Reform Commission,
For Your Information: Australian
Apprehended Personal Violence Orders (NSW)
Best Practice Principles
Family Court of Australia,
Best Practice Principles for use in Parenting
Disputes when Family Violence or Abuse is Alleged
ChildFirst Assessment and Interview Team (WA)
Culturally and linguistically diverse
Child Abuse Taskforce (NT)
Closed circuit television
Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against
Child FIRST
Child and Family Information Referral Support Teams (Vic)
Chisholm Review
R Chisholm,
Family Courts Violence Review
Commissions
ALRC and NSWLRC
Client Relationship Information System (Vic)
Convention on the Rights of the Child
Child Wellbeing Unit (NSW)
Domestic Assault Response Team (NSW)
Department of Community Services
Director of Public Prosecutions
Duluth Model
Domestic Abuse Intervention Programs,
Duluth Model on Public
Intervention
Domestic Violence Crisis Service (ACT)
Domestic Violence Intervention Court Model (NSW)
Domestic Violence Liaison Officer
Domestic Violence Prevention Centre Gold Coast (Qld)
Education Centre Against Violence (NSW)
Department of Families, Housing, Community Services and Indigenous
Family Court
Family Court of Australia
Family dispute resolution
FDR Regulations
Family Law (Family Dispute Resolution Practitioners) Regulations
Federal Magistrates Court
Family Court of Australia, Form 4—Notice of Child Abuse or Family
Family Relationship Centres (Cth)
Family Safety Framework (SA)
Family Violence Court Division (Vic)
Family Violence Intervention Program (ACT)
Family Violence Self Change Program (ACT)
Gold Coast Domestic Violence Integrated Response (Qld)
Hague Convention
Convention on the Civil Aspects of International Child
Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission
Integrated Case Coordination (Tas)
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
Independent Domestic Violence Advisors (UK)
Integrated Domestic Violence Courts (New York, USA)
Information Privacy Principles
International Violence Against Women Survey
Joint Investigative Response Team, NSW Police
Kearney McKenzie Report
Kearney McKenzie & Associates,
Review of Division 11
Magistrates Court of Western Australia
Magistrates Court of Western Australia constituted by a Family Law
Magistrate of Western Australia
Multi-Agency Risk Assessment Conferences (UK)
Model Criminal Code Officers Committee
Multidisciplinary Centres (Vic)
Moloney study
L Moloney and others,
Allegations of Family Violence and Child Abuse in
Family Law Children’s Proceedings: A Pre-reform Exploratory Study,
(2007) Australian Institute of Family Studies.
Memorandums of understanding
Mandatory Reporters Guidance
National Council
National Council to Reduce Violence against Women and their Children
National Privacy Principles
New South Wales
New South Wales Law Reform Commission
New Zealand Law Commission
Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions (ACT)
Office of Public Prosecutions (Vic)
Pyke Review
South Australian Domestic Violence Laws: Discussion and Options
Queensland Law Reform Commission
Rape Law Reform Evaluation Project
Sexual Assault and Child Abuse Team (ACT)
Standing Committee of Attorneys-General
Suspected Child Abuse and Neglect (Qld)
Screening and Assessment Framework
Australian Catholic University and Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
Framework for Screening, Assessment and
Referrals in Family Relationship Centres and the Family Relationship Advice
Specialist Domestic Violence Courts (UK)
Sexual Offences and Child Abuse units (Vic)
Sexual Offences Courts (South Africa)
Sexual Offences and Child Abuse Investigation Team (Vic)
Sexual Offence List (Vic)
Time for Action
National Council to Reduce Violence against Women and their Children,
Time for Action: The National Council’s Plan for Australia to Reduce
Violence against Women and their Children, 2009–2021
Tasmania Law Reform Institute
Universal Declaration of Human Rights
video or audio taping of evidence
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal
Victorian Law Reform Commission
Victims of Crime Assistance Tribunal (Vic)
Violence Prevention Coordination Unit (NSW)
Victim Safety Response Team (Tas)
Western Australia
Wood Inquiry
Report of the Special Commission of Inquiry into Child
Protection Services in NSW
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
PDF format (9.81 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter