URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/lawreform/NSWLRCDP/1998/40.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:36:10
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Set-off - Discussion Paper [1998] NSWLRCDP 40
Discussion Paper 40 (1998) : Set-Off
Table of Contents
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
1. INTRODUCTION
THE REFERENCE
DEFINITION OF SET-OFF
Comparison with counterclaim
Contractual set-off
Set-off provided for by statute
Set-off under insolvency legislation
Set-off under the Statutes of Set-off
Set-off under the
Supreme Court Act
Equitable set-off
Rights analogous to set-off
Liability arising from a running account
The rule in Cherry v Boultbee
2. SET-OFF UNDER THE STATUTES OF SET-OFF
THE STATUTES OF SET-OFF
Reasons for their introduction
Injustice to defendants
Elimination of unnecessary law suits
INTERPRETATION OF THE STATUTES OF SET-OFF
NATURE OF THE RIGHT ESTABLISHED BY THE STATUTES OF SET-OFF
ISSUES ARISING UNDER THE STATUTES OF SET-OFF
Actions by and against the Crown
Narrow coverage
Requirement that both claims be due and payable
Requirement that claims be liquidated
3. THE REPEAL OF THE STATUTES OF SET-OFF
APPLICATION AND REPEAL IN NEW SOUTH WALES
STATUTES OF SET-OFF IN OTHER JURISDICTIONS
Australian Capital Territory
New Zealand
Saskatchewan
DIFFICULTIES ARISING FROM THE REPEAL OF THE STATUTES OF SET-OFF
Matters involving original parties to a transaction
Procedural practicality
Matters involving third parties to an original transaction
Joinder of principal debtors by guarantors
Limitation of actions
Set-off against an assignee
4. PROPOSALS FOR REFORM
OPTIONS FOR REFORM
Insert a savings provision in the
Imperial Acts Application Act 1969
Revive the Statutes of Set-off by proclamation
Re-insert a provision in the rules of court
New limited statutory form of set-off
CONCLUSIONS OF OTHER LAW REFORM AGENCIES
Law Reform Committee of South Australia
Law Reform Commission of Western Australia
Law Reform Commission of British Columbia
Australian Law Reform Commission
THE COMMISSION’S CONCLUSION
TABLE OF LEGISLATION
TABLE OF CASES
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY
Discussion Paper 40 (1998) : Set-Off
Terms of Reference, Participants and Submissions
History of this Reference (Digest)
Terms of reference
Pursuant to
Law Reform Commission Act 1967
(NSW), the Attorney General, the Hon Jeff Shaw QC, referred the following to the Law Reform Commission by letter on 26 September
1. To review the current law relating to set-off with a view to determining whether any change is needed.
2. In undertaking the review the Commission should have regard to the law relating to set-off that existed prior to the
Imperial Acts Application Act 1969
and to judicial comment on the operation of the provisions in this Act relating to set-off.
Participants
The Law Reform Commission is constituted by the
Law Reform Commission Act 1967
(NSW). For the purpose of this reference, the Chairman, in accordance with the Act, created a Division comprising the following members
of the Commission:
Mr Michael Adams QC
The Hon Justice David Hodgson*
Mr Craig Kelly
Professor Michael Tilbury
(* denotes Commissioner-in-Charge)
Officers of the Commission
Executive Director
Mr Peter Hennessy
Research and Writing
Mr Joseph Waugh
Ms Beverley Caska
Ms Aferdita Kryeziu
Administrative Assistance
Mrs Wendy King
Ms Kathryn Sharpe
Ms Shannon Field
Desktop Publishing
Mrs Leanne Nowakowski
Butterfield's Communication Concepts
Submissions
The Commission invites submissions on the issues raised in this Discussion Paper. Submissions and comments must reach the Commission
30 June 1998
. Suggestions for further issues which should be considered are welcome.
All submissions and enquiries should be directed to:
Mr Peter Hennessy
Executive Director
NSW Law Reform Commission
GPO Box 5199
SYDNEY NSW 2001
[DX 1227 Sydney]
Phone: (02) 9228 8230
Fax: (02) 9228 8225
Current contact details for the Law Reform Commission
There is no special form required for submissions. If it is inconvenient or impractical to make a written submission you may telephone
the Commission and either direct your comments to a Legal Officer over the telephone, or else arrange to make your submission in
Closing date for submissions
The closing date for submissions is
30 June 1998
. No final decisions will be made by the Commission until after the deadline for submissions has passed.
Use of submissions and confidentiality
If you would like your submission to be treated as confidential, please indicate this in your submission. Submissions made to the
Commission may be used in two ways:
Since the Commission’s process of law reform is essentially public, copies of submissions made to the Commission will normally
be made available on request to other persons or organisations. However, if you would like all or part of your submission to be treated
as confidential, please indicate this in your submission. Any request for a copy of a submission marked “confidential”
will be determined in accordance with the
Freedom of Information Act 1989
In preparing the Report on this reference, the Commission will refer to submissions made in response to this
Discussion Paper
. However, requests for confidentiality will be respected by the Commission in relation to the publication of submissions.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Select bibliography
Table of contents
Discussion Paper 40 (1998) : Set-Off
1. Introduction
History of this Reference (Digest)
THE REFERENCE
1.1 On 26 September 1997 the New South Wales Law Reform Commission received a reference from the Attorney General, the Honourable
J W Shaw, QC, MLC, as follows:
1. To review the current law relating to set-off with a view to determining whether any change is needed.
2. In undertaking the review the Commission should have regard to the law relating to set-off that existed prior to the
Imperial Acts Application Act 1969
and to judicial comment on the operation of the provisions in this Act relating to set-off.
1.2 This reference was made following a request from Justice K R Handley that consideration be given to rectifying the situation caused
by the repeal of the Statutes of Set-off
Imperial Acts Application Act 1969
(NSW). Justice Handley’s view was that the repeal had been a mistake.
DEFINITION OF SET-OFF
1.3 Set-off, at its most basic, is a mechanism whereby one party can apply a debt owed to him or her by another party to discharge
all or part of a debt that he or she owes to that other party.
The result is either that the debt is completely discharged, or a sum remains which represents the balance of the debt owed by one
of the parties to the other.
Although sometimes invoked as a self help remedy, it is usually applied as a countervailing claim in answer to a plaintiff’s
claim in proceedings before a court. In the context of such proceedings set-off is quite different from counterclaim.
Comparison with counterclaim
1.4 While set-off as a plea in bar is a defence in whole or in part to a claim, counterclaim is merely a procedural device (involving
cross-claim) whereby actions by one party against the another and vice versa are heard as part of the one proceeding. Such actions
are treated essentially as distinct actions, including for the purposes of striking out, summary judgment
and costs in the proceeding.
Although the economic result of counterclaim will often be the same as the one which would be achieved by set-off, the result of
a hearing involving claim and counterclaim is separate judgments for each party against the other,
whereas a single judgment only is issued when set-off is pleaded.
1.5 Traditionally there have been three basic types of set-off:
contractual set-off;
set-off provided for by statute; and
equitable set-off.
There are also some related remedies and procedures which cannot necessarily be said to be a type of set-off, but are analogous in
certain respects.
Contractual set-off
1.6 Contractual set-off, or set-off by agreement, arises in the same manner as any other contractual term would, for example, expressly,
by implications, from course of conduct, or by custom. The availability of this form of set-off is useful in circumstances where
other forms of set-off are not available. Set-off by agreement has been recognised in New South Wales as not depending on any statutory
foundation, but as being “in law equivalent to actual payment on each side”.
1.7 A related issue is that of netting in financial market transactions, which has been the subject of a report of the Netting Sub-Committee
of the Companies and Securities Advisory Committee.
The report deals with two specific types of netting, namely bilateral close-out netting and market netting. Bilateral close-out netting,
which is used in financial markets transactions, is described as:
a process which permits a party to a financial contract to terminate the contract if the counterparty becomes insolvent, to calculate
the termination values of the obligations of the parties, and to set off the termination values so calculated to arrive at a net
amount payable by one party to the other.
1.8 Market netting, which typically arises under the rules of a stock exchange, futures exchange or clearing house, commonly involves:
the novation to a clearing entity of contracts entered into by exchange members and the setting off of obligations under those contracts
in the event of default by the member and for the purposes of settlement.
1.9 Notwithstanding the advice of some experienced lawyers that there was no basis for doubting the effectiveness of such netting
arrangements, the prime concern of the report was to ensure their effectiveness in the event of the insolvency of one of the parties.
Draft legislation has been framed to achieve this so that the operation of close-out and market netting provisions would be confirmed
notwithstanding the insolvency of one of the parties “on the basis that recovery of the net sum calculated under the netting
provisions would be subject to the normal insolvency rules”.
1.10 The operation of the proposed financial markets legislation is clearly within the Commonwealth’s field of legislative competence
and is principally concerned with ensuring that other Commonwealth Acts do not hinder the operation of netting agreements. It will
not apply to areas in which New South Wales is competent to legislate, such as non-bank financial institutions and non-corporate
Set-off provided for by statute
Set-off under insolvency legislation
1.11 Set-off provided for under insolvency legislation is the oldest form of statutory set-off.
It dates from 1705 when 4 & 5 Anne c 17 (1705)
was enacted:
And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That where there shall appear to the commissioners, or the major part of them,
that there hath been mutual credit given between such person or persons, against whom such commission shall issue forth, and any
person or persons who shall be debtor or debtors to such person or persons, and due proof thereof made, and that the accounts are
open and unballanced, That then it shall be lawful for the commissioners in the said commission named, or the major part of them,
or the assignee or assignees of such commission, to adjust the said account, and to take the ballance due in full discharge thereof,
and the person debtor to such bankrupt, shall not be compelled or obliged to pay more than shall appear to be due on such balance.
1.12 In Australia the modern statement of this provision is
Bankruptcy Act 1966
(1) Subject to this section, where there have been mutual credits, mutual debts or other mutual dealings between a person who has
become a bankrupt and a person claiming to prove a debt in the bankruptcy:
(a) an account shall be taken of what is due from the one party to the other in respect of those mutual dealings;
(b) the sum due from the one party shall be set off against any sum due from the other party; and
(c) only the balance of the account may be claimed in the bankruptcy, or is payable to the trustee in the bankruptcy, as the case
(2) A person is not entitled under this section to claim the benefit of a set-off if, at the time of giving credit to the person who
has become a bankrupt or at the time of receiving credit from that person, he had notice of an available act of bankruptcy committed
by that person.
1.13 The phrase “mutual credits, mutual debts or other mutual dealings” has been described as more comprehensive than
the provisions in the Statutes of Set-off.
Indeed, given its broad coverage,
Bankruptcy Act 1966
(Cth) has been held to be a code
so that, in circumstances involving the insolvency of one of the parties, the set-off provided for by insolvency legislation is exclusive
of all other forms of set-off, including in equity or under the Statutes of Set-off.
Set-off under the Statutes of Set-off
1.14 Set-off was provided for more generally in England by s 13 of 2 Geo II c 22 (1729) and
of 8 Geo II c 24 (1735).
This kind of set-off is limited to mutual claims that are liquidated or ascertainable with certainty and which are due and payable
at the time the plaintiff commenced his or her action at law. As a result of the
Imperial Acts Application Act 1969
(NSW) it is no longer applicable in New South Wales. Set-off under the Statutes of Set-off is discussed more fully in Chapter 2.
Set-off under the
Supreme Court Act
1.15 Set-off was also found to have been available in New South Wales under s 78 of the
Supreme Court Act 1970
(NSW) and the now omitted
r 25 of the
Supreme Court Rules 1970
(NSW) which provided:
Where a claim by a defendant to a sum of money (whether of an ascertained amount or not) is relied on as a defence to the whole or
part of a claim made by a plaintiff, it may be included in the defence and set off against the plaintiff’s claim, whether or
not the defendant also cross-claims for that sum of money.
Supreme Court Rules
reproduce, virtually verbatim, the text of Order 18 r 17 of the
Rules of the Supreme Court 1965
The English
Supreme Court Practice
makes it clear that the provision merely states that set-off may be pleaded as a defence and does not in any way define the term,
citing Lord Justice Morris in
Hanak v Green
The question as to what is a set-off is to be determined as a matter of law and is not in any way governed by the language used by
the parties in their pleadings.
1.17 The New South Wales Court of Appeal had given a different interpretation to that provided in the English case of
Hanak v Green
Stehar Knitting Mills Pty Ltd v Southern Textile Converters Pty Ltd
the Court of Appeal overturned the conclusion of Justice Sheppard at first instance
that, because the Statutes of Set-off had been repealed, legal set-off was no longer available in New South Wales. Justice Hutley
held that set-off established by the Statutes of Set-off operated procedurally for the most part, notwithstanding the fact that a
plea of set-off can amount to a plea in bar. Since this type of set-off was mostly procedural in operation, Justice Hutley saw no
reason why its existence could not be covered by
r 25 of the
Supreme Court Rules
which he saw as a partial restoration of set-off at law, though purely procedural in form.
Justice Glass also agreed that the contention that set-off under the Statutes of Set-off was substantive in nature was unsound and
concluded that
r 25 allowed a defendant to raise set-off at law.
Derham noted that the effect of this judgment would have been that:
monetary cross-demand which was due and payable, whether it was liquidated or unliquidated and whether or not it was connected with
the plaintiff’s claim, could be the subject of a set-off in an action at law. It was not necessary to show mutual debts, or,
if one of the demands was unliquidated, that the cross-demands were sufficiently closely connected so as to give rise to an equitable
r 25 was omitted from the
Supreme Court Rules 1970
(NSW) in 1984.
Some commentators have suggested that this omission from the
was made, in light of the finding that the Statutes of Set-off had been repealed in New South Wales, “in order to avoid outmoded
habits of thought”, the effect being “completely [to] eliminate the term ‘set-off’ from procedural law in
the Supreme Court”.
The consequence of this omission is that in New South Wales there is now no statutory set-off available except that provided for
Bankruptcy Act 1966
Equitable set-off
1.19 Meagher, Gummow and Lehane have identified four distinct kinds of equitable set-off:
Where equity recognises a right of set-off which exists at law
. This type of equitable set-off is part of the general principle that all legal rights, titles and interests are recognised in equity.
Equity in such instances will work in close analogy to the equivalent common law action,
and cannot operate when an action ceases to exist at law. A right to set-off which exists at law is not recognised in such cases
only where reliance on it would be inequitable.
Where an equitable set-off exists by analogy with a legal set-off
This type of equitable set-off arises from a situation where “equity follows the law by imitating a legal statute”. This
allowed equity to extend its previously restricted doctrine of set-off following the enactment of the Statutes of Set-off,
so that, for example, equity could find set-off where one of two mutual liquidated cross-demands is itself “a matter of equitable
the requirement of mutuality is satisfied only by reference to the equitable titles.”
Where an equitable set-off exists by agreement
In equity very slight evidence of an agreement to set off will be invoked in order to establish a right to set off between the parties
to an action.
Where true equitable set-off can be said to exist
This is where “the party seeking the benefit of [set-off] can shew some equitable ground for being protected against his adversary’s
1.20 The early cases on “true” equitable set-off have been interpreted as requiring:
(i) clear cross-claims for debts or damages, which
(ii) were so closely related as to subject-matter that the claim sought to be set-off impeached the other in the sense that it made
it positively unjust that there should be recovery without deduction.
1.21 There has been some movement in New South Wales from the traditional formulation of equitable set-off. Justice Giles, in
AWA Ltd v Exicom Australia Pty Ltd,
concluded that the “ultimate question” was, remembering that the existence of the defendant’s cross-claim was not
enough, whether it would be “unjust or inequitable” that the plaintiff be allowed to proceed with its claim.
A more traditional approach has, however, been reasserted by the Court of Appeal which has held that the equity required to establish
equitable set-off must be such as to impeach the plaintiff’s title to demand payment.
1.22 Another aspect of the “equitable jurisdiction” of the court is that it can order that the costs of the parties to
a proceeding be set off. This right was once supposed to originate under the Statutes of Set-off, but since 1791 it has been recognised
as part of the equitable jurisdiction of the court.
Justice Young in a recent case quoted
Montagu on Set-off
as stating:
Opposite demands arising upon judgments may upon motion be set-off against each other, whenever such set-off is equitable though the
judgments are in different courts, and though the parties to the different records are not the same. Costs may be set-off against
costs only, or against debt and costs.
Justice Young has noted that this basis for the setting off of costs is important in light of the repeal of the Statutes of Set-off
in New South Wales.
Rights analogous to set-off
1.23 There are several rights which, while they cannot strictly be classified as forms of set-off, are closely analogous and have
even, on occasions, been taken to be forms of set-off. They may be of particular interest to jurisdictions, such as New South Wales,
where set-off is no longer generally available by statute, for example, in situations where the assignee of a debt takes subject
only to any equitable set-off or such analogous rights as may be available.
Liability arising from a running account
1.24 Liability arising from a running account, despite some similarities to set-off, is often treated as quite distinct from set-off
and counterclaim in that a running account simply does not involve a question of competing claims. The sum owed by either party is
only determined once a balance has been struck between the parties’ transactions,
that is usually when a bank exercises it as a self-help remedy. Wood, however, has identified it as a form of set-off called “current
account set-off”.
1.25 The common law right of abatement is a defence which is generally limited to contracts for sale of goods or for work or labour
and can be invoked by a defendant to reduce the value of goods and services supplied by the plaintiff where, for some reason, the
goods and services in fact supplied did not justify the payment of the full agreed price by the defendant.
Abatement with respect to contracts for sale of goods is now provided for by
Sale of Goods Act 1923
1.26 More recently abatement has been identified by some as a form of set-off.
Wood has suggested that it is similar, in most essential respects, to a form of equitable set-off, noting in particular that it arises
from the same transaction, or a closely connected series of transactions and can be seen as an attempt on the part of the common
law to avoid the rigours of the Statutes of Set-off.
The rule in Cherry v Boultbee
1.27 Application of the rule in
Cherry v Boultbee
arises where there is a person who is liable to contribute to a fund such as a deceased estate, trust fund, or insolvent estate
and that person seeks to take a part of the net assets of that fund without first contributing to it. The rule prevents the person
from receiving anything from the fund without first making the required contribution.
It is applied in situations where set-off is not available.
1.28 While classing it as one of seven different types of set-off, Justice Young has noted that strictly speaking the application
of the rule in
Cherry v Boultbee
is not a set-off, although it is “closely analogous to it”.
Wood, in his work on set-off, has identified the rule in
Cherry v Boultbee
as “retainer” or “fund set-off”.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Select bibliography
Table of contents
. 2 Geo II c 22 (1729)
Geo II c 24 (1735)
. K R Handley,
Letter to the Chairman of the NSW Law Reform Commission
(28 February 1994). Justice Handley’s views of the deficiencies arising from the repeal of the Statutes of Set-off are set out
in Chapter 3. See especially paras 3.14 and 3.19.
. Where a joint debt is owed to a creditor, however, one of the joint debtors cannot set off a debt owed separately to him or her
by the creditor:
Vale of Clwydd Coal Co v Garsed
(1885) 2 WN 14.
. See M B Hapgood, “Rights of Set-off as Security” in F W Neate (ed),
Using Set-off as Security
(Graham & Trotman, London, 1990) at 22.
. See P R Wood,
English and International Set-off
(Sweet & Maxwell, London, 1989) at para 6-46.
. See P R Wood,
English and International Set-off
(Sweet & Maxwell, London, 1989) at para 6-42.
. See R P Meagher, W M C Gummow and J R F Lehane,
Equity: Doctrines and Remedies
(3rd edition, Butterworths, Sydney, 1992) at para 3701.
. See S McCracken,
The Banker’s Remedy of Set-Off
(Butterworths, London, 1993) at 47.
Re application of Keith Bray Pty Ltd
(1991) 23 NSWLR 430 at 431 per McLelland J. See also
Pro-image Studios v Commonwealth Bank of Australia
(1991) 4 ACSR 586
at 589-590 (Vic SC). This may be an aspect of the “common law” set-off referred to by Young J who noted that the line
of authorities relied on may have depended upon there being an “express or implied agreement that there would only be an account
for the balance due”:
P Rowe Graphics Pty Ltd v Scanagraphix Pty Ltd
(New South Wales, Supreme Court, ED 1429/1988, Young J, 6 September 1988, unreported) at 9.
. Australia, Netting Sub-Committee of the Companies and Securities Advisory Committee,
Netting in Financial Markets Transactions
(Final Report, June 1997). The recommendations of the Netting Sub-Committee are also the subject of proposals put by the Corporate
Law Economic Reform Program: Australia, Corporate Law Economic Reform Program,
Electronic Commerce: Cutting Cybertape - Building Business
(Proposals for Reform: Paper No 5, 1997) at 37-43.
. Australia, Netting Sub-Committee of the Companies and Securities Advisory Committee,
Netting in Financial Markets Transactions
(Final Report, June 1997) at para 1.1.
. Australia, Netting Sub-Committee of the Companies and Securities Advisory Committee,
Netting in Financial Markets Transactions
(Final Report, June 1997) at para 1.2.
. See the legal concerns outlined in Australia, Netting Sub-committee of the Companies and Securities Advisory Committee,
Netting in Financial Markets Transactions
(Background Paper, December 1996) at 15-17. See also S R Derham,
(2nd edition, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1996) at 543-551.
. Australia, Netting Sub-Committee of the Companies and Securities Advisory Committee,
Netting in Financial Markets Transactions
(Final Report, June 1997) at para 6.1.
. Although there is a possibility that there may have been recognition of set-off in bankruptcy at common law:
(1676) 1 Mod 215;
Chapman v Derby
[1689] EngR 37
; (1689) 2 Vern 117;
Green v Farmer
(1768) 4 Burr 2214 at 2221;
[1768] EngR 49
at 158. See also the discussion on the origins of set-off in bankruptcy in
Gye v Davies
(1995) 37 NSWLR 421
at 424-425 per Powell JA; and W H Loyd, “The development of set-off” (1916) 64
University of Pennsylvania Law Review
541 at 547.
. Often referred to mistakenly as 4 & 5 Anne c 4 which is, in fact, “An Act for the Naturalization of the most Excellent
Princess Sophia, Electress and Duchess Dowager of Hanover, and the Issue of her Body”.
. See also s 553C of the
Corporations Law
(Cth) which reproduces the substance of s 86 for the purposes of the winding up of companies. Set-off is not available if a company
enters voluntary administration under Part 5.3A of the
Corporations Law
Gye v McIntyre
[1991] HCA 60
(1991) 171 CLR 609.
Day & Dent Constructions Pty Ltd v North Australian Properties Pty Ltd
[1981] FCA 12
(1981) 34 ALR 595
McIntyre v Perkes
[1990] FCA 100
(1990) 22 FCR 260
at 271-272 per Gummow and Von Doussa JJ.
. Statutes dealing with set-off can be traced in the American colonies to the enactment of a statute in Virginia in 1645: W H Loyd,
“The development of set-off” (1916) 64
University of Pennsylvania Law Review
541 at 553-562.
Rules of the Supreme Court 1965
(Eng) O 18 r 17. This ties in with
Supreme Court Act 1970
(NSW) which provides:
“Where there is a claim by a plaintiff and a claim under section 78 by a defendant, the Court may:
(a) give judgment for the balance only of the sums of money awarded on the respective claims; or
(b) give judgment in respect of each claim
and the Court may give judgment similarly where several claims arise between plaintiffs, defendants and any other parties.”
. Derived originally from O 18 r 17 of the
Rules of the Supreme Court 1962
(Eng) and O 19 r 3 of the
Rules of the Supreme Court 1883
The Supreme Court Practice 1967
(Sweet & Maxwell et al, London, 1966) Vol 1 at 268.
. [1958] 2 QB 9 at 26. See also
West Street Properties Pty Ltd v Jamison
[1974] 2 NSWLR 435
[1980] 2 NSWLR 514.
Southern Textile Converters Pty Ltd v Stehar Knitting Mills Pty Ltd
[1979] 1 NSWLR 692.
Stehar Knitting Mills Pty Ltd v Southern Textile Converters Pty Ltd
[1980] 2 NSWLR 514
at 519-520.
Stehar Knitting Mills Pty Ltd v Southern Textile Converters Pty Ltd
[1980] 2 NSWLR 514
at 523-524.
. S R Derham,
(2nd edition, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1996) at 133.
Supreme Court Rules
(Amendment No 154) 1984
. P W Young, K F O’Leary and A E Hogan,
Supreme Court Civil Procedures: New South Wales
(2nd edition, Butterworths, Sydney, 1987) at para 14.104.
. R P Meagher, W M C Gummow and J R F Lehane,
Equity: Doctrines and Remedies
(3rd edition, Butterworths, Sydney, 1992) at para 3707.
. R P Meagher, W M C Gummow and J R F Lehane,
Equity: Doctrines and Remedies
(3rd edition, Butterworths, Sydney, 1992) at para 308.
Southern Textile Converters Pty Ltd v Stehar Knitting Mills Pty Ltd
[1979] 1 NSWLR 692
at 698-699.
. S R Derham,
(2nd edition, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1996) at 38-39.
. Cf contractual set-off at paras 1.6-1.10. See also P R Wood,
English and International Set-off
(Sweet & Maxwell, London, 1989) at para 5-12.
Rawson v Samuel
(1841) Cr & Ph 161 at 178;
at 458. The best modern statement is that of Woodward J in
D Galambos & Son Pty Ltd v McIntyre
(1974) 5 ACTR 10.
D Galambos & Son Pty Ltd v McIntyre
(1974) 5 ACTR 10
(1990) 19 NSWLR 705.
AWA Ltd v Exicom Australia Pty Ltd
(1990) 19 NSWLR 705
at 712. See also S McCracken,
The Banker’s Remedy of Set-off
(Butterworths, London, 1993) at 60.
Lord v Direct Acceptance Corporation Ltd
(1993) 32 NSWLR 362
at 367. See also S R Derham,
(2nd edition, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1996) at 53-56.
Mitchell v Oldfield
[1791] EngR 1260
(1791) 4 TR 123
100 ER 929.
Wentworth v Wentworth
(New South Wales, Supreme Court, ED 3748/1989, Young J, 12 December 1994, unreported) at 3-4 quoting
Montagu on Set-off
(American Ed, 1825) at 6-8.
Wentworth v Wentworth
(New South Wales, Supreme Court, ED 3748/1989, Young J, 12 December 1994, unreported) at 4.
. See S R Derham,
(2nd edition, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1996) at 573 and paras 3.20-3.21 below.
. R P Meagher, W M C Gummow and J R F Lehane,
Equity: Doctrines and Remedies
(3rd edition, Butterworths, Sydney, 1992) at para 3702.
. See P R Wood,
English and International Set-off
(Sweet & Maxwell, London, 1989) at para 3-4.
. See P R Wood,
English and International Set-off
(Sweet & Maxwell, London, 1989) at para 4-35.
Mondel v Steel
(1841) 8 M&W 858 at 871-872;
[1841] EngR 61
151 ER 1288
at 1293-1294; and
Gilbert-Ash (Northern) Ltd v Modern Engineering (Bristol) Ltd
[1974] AC 789
at 699 per Lord Morris, and at 717 per Lord Diplock. See also P R Wood,
English and International Set-off
(Sweet & Maxwell, London, 1989) at paras 4-32 - 4-37.
. Young J has identified abatement as one of seven probable types of set-off:
P Rowe Graphics Pty Ltd v Scanagraphix Pty Ltd
(New South Wales, Supreme Court, ED 1429/1988, Young J, 6 September 1988, unreported) at 6. See also P R Wood,
English and International Set-off
(Sweet & Maxwell, London, 1989) at paras 1-20 - 1-25.
. See P R Wood,
English and International Set-off
(Sweet & Maxwell, London, 1989) at paras 1-20 - 1-25.
. (1839) 4 Myl & Cr 442; 41 ER 771.
. See P R Wood,
English and International Set-off
(Sweet & Maxwell, London, 1989) at paras 8-30 - 8-78 for a full discussion of situations where the rule may be applied. See also
S R Derham,
(2nd ed, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1996) at 436-451.
. A recent application of the rule was
Saltergate Insurance Co Ltd and the Companies Act (No 2)
[1984] 3 NSWLR 389
P Rowe Graphics Pty Ltd v Scanagraphix Pty Ltd
(New South Wales, Supreme Court, ED 1429/1988, Young J, 6 September 1988, unreported) at 12. On the distinction between the right
Cherry v Boultbee
and set-off see S R Derham,
(2nd edition, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1996) at 439-442.
. P R Wood,
English and International Set-off
(Sweet & Maxwell, London, 1989) at para 8-6.
Discussion Paper 40 (1998) : Set-Off
2. Set-Off Under the Statutes of Set-Off
History of this Reference (Digest)
THE STATUTES OF SET-OFF
2.1 The provisions conventionally referred to as the Statutes of Set-off are contained in two statutes from the reign of George II.
The first is s 13 of 2 Geo II c 22 (1729) which states:
And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That where there are mutual Debts between the Plaintiff and Defendant, or if
either Party sue or be sued as Executor or Administrator, where there are mutual Debts between the Testator or Intestate and either
Party, one Debt may be set against the other, and such Matter may be given in Evidence upon the General Issue, or pleading in Bar,
as the Nature of the Case shall require, so as at the Time of his pleading the General Issue, where any such Debt of the Plaintiff,
his Testator or Intestate, is intended to be insisted on in Evidence, Notice shall be given of the particular Sum or Debt so intended
to be insisted on, and upon what Account it became due, or otherwise such Matter shall not be allowed in Evidence upon such General
2.2 This Act was, however, subject to a sunset clause contained in s 14. The section was amended and made perpetual by s 4 and 5 of
8 Geo II c 24 (1735) which state:
4. And whereas Provision for setting mutual Debts one against the other, is highly just and ‘reasonable at all Times;’
Be it therefore further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Clause in the said first recited Act, for setting mutual
Debts one against the other, shall be and remain in full Force forever.
5. And be it further enacted and declared by the Authority aforesaid, That by virtue of the said Clause in the said first recited
Act contained, and hereby made perpetual, mutual Debts may be set against each other, either by being pleaded in Bar, or given in
Evidence on the General Issue, in the Manner therein mentioned, notwithstanding that such Debts are deemed in Law to be of a different
Nature; unless in Cases where either of the said Debts shall accrue by reason of a Penalty contained in any Bond or Specialty; and
in all Cases where either the Debt for which the Action hath been or shall be brought, or the Debt intended to be set against the
same hath accrued, or shall accrue, by reason of any such Penalty, the Debt intended to be set off, shall be pleaded in Bar, in which
Plea shall be shewn how much is truly and justly due on either Side; and in case the Plaintiff shall recover in any such Action or
Suit, Judgment shall be entred for no more than shall appear to be truly and justly due to the Plaintiff, after one Debt being set
against the other as aforesaid.
Reasons for their introduction
2.3 The traditional position at common law before the passing of the Statutes of Set-off was that set-off was not possible. This was
noted by Lord Mansfield in 1759:
At common law, before these Acts, if the plaintiff was as much or even more indebted to the defendant than the defendant was indebted
to him, yet the defendant had no method to strike a balance: he could only go into a Court of Equity, for doing what is most clearly
just and right to be done.
2.4 The precise reasons for the enactment of the Statutes is somewhat obscure, owing not least to the fact that publication of the
debates of Parliament was, for most of the eighteenth century, considered to be a breach of privilege.
The many attempts at determining the reasons for the enactment of the statutes can be said essentially to have arrived at two reasons
which, stated broadly, are:
the idea that an injustice is done to the defendant in refusing the right to set-off; and
the idea that unnecessary law suits are undesirable.
Injustice to defendants
2.5 Lord Mansfield, in 1768, observed that the refusal of the common law to allow set-off of mutual debts was shocking to the “natural
sense of mankind”, and noted in particular in respect of pre-insolvency set-off:
the injustice of not setting off, (especially after the death of either party) was so glaring that Parliament interposed...
This may, however, have been no more than an assumption based on the wording of s 13 of the Act of 1729.
2.6 A subcategory of the question of injustice to defendants arises as a result of the old practice of imprisoning debtors. The Act
of 1729, which first introduced pre-insolvency set-off, was entitled:
An Act for the Relief of Debtors with respect to the Imprisonment of their Persons.
This aspect has come to be emphasised by more recent commentators.
McCracken, in her work on set-off, has also pointed to the fact that the first statute was enacted following reports to Parliament
on the conditions in various (privately-run) debtors’ prisons. Particular attention was paid to the means of preventing gaolers
from extorting their prisoners. McCracken acknowledges that none of the reports on imprisonment of debtors referred to set-off, but
considers that the practical effect of the section on set-off was to keep a debtor out of gaol when it could be shown that a substantial
amount was also owed the debtor by the creditor.
Elimination of unnecessary law suits
2.7 The undesirability of unnecessary law suits has been the reason most often favoured by the courts. The earliest pronouncement
was in 1741, just six years after the passing of the second statute, when Chief Justice Willes held:
The true reason is that this was only substituted in the room of an action, to prevent circuity or a bill in equity.
He again noted, in 1744, that the aim of the Statutes of Set-off was to prevent “multiplicity of actions”.
This reason has been taken up by the courts throughout the succeeding centuries.
INTERPRETATION OF THE STATUTES OF SET-OFF
2.8 Set-off under the Statutes of Set-off has been interpreted as:
requiring that there be mutuality between the parties, that is, that the demands must be between the same parties and that the debts
not be due to the parties in different rights;
only being available where the debts are liquidated or where money demands could be ascertained “readily and without difficulty”
at the time of pleading;
cannot operate to extinguish or reduce a claim until judgment is given;
only being available where both debts are due and payable when the plaintiff commences his or her action at law.
NATURE OF THE RIGHT ESTABLISHED BY THE STATUTES OF SET-OFF
2.9 Traditionally set-off under the Statutes of Set-off has been characterised as procedural, whereas equitable set-off has been regarded
as substantive. A classification as either substantive or procedural has, however, not been easy to make and some commentators have
tended towards the view that set-off under the Statutes of Set-off is not purely procedural.
The main reason for the characterisation as procedural has been that set-off under the Statutes of Set-off takes effect as at the
date of judgment and separate and distinct debts remain until that time.
Another reason has been seen as the early understanding of set-off as a means of avoiding circuity of court actions.
The New South Wales Court of Appeal in 1980 came down in favour of a procedural classification.
However, notwithstanding its characterisation as procedural, set-off under the Statutes of Set-off remains a defence, unlike counterclaim
which is merely a procedural mechanism allowing separate actions to be tried together.
A consequence of the characterisation as procedural is that legal proceedings are required to effect set-off under the Statutes of
2.10 Set-off under the Statutes of Set-off does, however, have some substantive effect as a defence, for example, where an assignee
of a debt takes subject to any defence available to the debtor.
Derham has, therefore, noted that “any increase in the ambit of the defence of set-off will interfere with substantive rights,
in the sense that it will have a substantive effect upon the rights of third parties such as assignees of debts, undisclosed principals
and subrogated insurers.
2.11 Another consequence of the characterisation as procedural can be felt in the area of conflict of laws. Set-off under the Statutes
of Set-off has been said to be procedural for the purposes of conflicts of laws. Its operation is therefore governed by the
that is, according to the law of the court in which the matter is tried.
Wood has, however, noted that this characterisation was arrived at in the period before the “flowering of English private international
law” and would prefer to characterise set-off under the Statutes of Set-off as substantive,
noting, amongst other things, that there is little sense in applying the
in a situation where both claims, for example, are governed by a foreign system of law.
ISSUES ARISING UNDER THE STATUTES OF SET-OFF
Actions by and against the Crown
2.12 Under the former Statutes of Set-off, the Crown could plead set-off against the claim of a subject
but a subject could not plead set-off against the Crown.
However, the
Crown Proceedings Act 1988
(NSW) now includes “set-off” in its definition of “civil proceedings” so that
of the Act extends to allow set-off to be claimed against the Crown. This followed a recommendation by the New South Wales Law Reform
Commission in 1975.
Narrow coverage
2.13 The proliferation and separate development of the many different types of set-off has not prevented situations arising where
a form of set-off is not available but where justice might expect it to be. This situation, particularly with regard to the availability
of equitable set-off and set-off under the Statutes of Set-off, has recently been considered absurd by some Judges of the English
Court of Appeal.
Lord Justice Leggatt observed:
I would add ... the comment that the state of the law is unsatisfactory that allows a set-off at law of debts which are liquidated,
even if unconnected, and in equity of debts which are connected, even if unliquidated, but not a set-off of debts which are both
unliquidated and unconnected.
This view has, however, been criticised by at least one commentator who suggests that the law is not wrong to refuse set-off where
debts are both unliquidated and unconnected because there is no merit in making such a right available and in particular such a change
in the law would:
create delay, especially with respect to summary judgments;
encourage the raising of spurious defences; and
couple together unrelated claims.
2.14 However, Lord Justice Staughton’s more limited criticism of the current arrangements concerning set-off has been better
received. In his judgment, he stated that the historical development of set-off:
has led to results which appear to lack logic and sense. Legal set-off is available if both claims are for liquidated sums. Thus if
a plaintiff has a claim for unliquidated damages, the defendant cannot at law seek to set-off a liquidated claim. I can see no sense
in that today. This rule was mitigated by the Court of Chancery through the doctrine of equitable set-off which is available in broad
terms if there is a sufficient degree of connection between the two transactions, whether or not either or both claims are unliquidated.
But, as Leggatt LJ has pointed out, it is questionable whether the remedy is wholly effective as a cure for the disease.
Requirement that both claims be due and payable
2.15 Where a debtor’s liquidated
cross-claim becomes due and payable only after the commencement of the creditor’s proceedings, the cross claim cannot be set-off
against the original claim. Wood has suggested that this situation is difficult to reconcile with current practice where, for example,
rules of court can provide that a cross claim may be pleaded in respect of a cause of action that has arisen after the commencement
of proceedings:
A party may plead any matter notwithstanding that the matter has arisen after the commencement of the proceedings.
2.16 The problem can be seen by considering a situation where there has been an assignment of a creditor’s claim and the assignee
then seeks enforcement of the claim. The debtor may have a cross claim against the original creditor, but to qualify for set-off
the debtor’s cross claim must have become due and payable before the commencement of the assignee’s action. Set-off can,
therefore, be precluded simply by the assignee taking action before the debtor’s cross claim becomes due and payable.
Requirement that claims be liquidated
2.17 Set-off under the Statutes of Set-off differs from equitable and insolvency set-off in not allowing unliquidated claims to be
pursued. It has been questioned whether this requirement that claims be liquidated or readily ascertainable is justified. The requirement
is seen as arising from an unwillingness on the part of the courts to deal with two different claims in the one action so as to avoid
delay. This is particularly so where a creditor’s claim is clear and undisputed.
2.18 One result is that, where a claim is unliquidated, the defendant will need to raise a counterclaim and, if the claim is unrelated,
he or she may be forced to institute separate proceedings. This means that a defendant may be subject to the whole of the judgment
in the first proceedings before the defendant’s own claim against the plaintiff has been adjudicated.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Select bibliography
Table of contents
Collins v Collins
[1759] EngR 90
(1759) 2 Burr 820
[1759] EngR 90
at 582-583. See also
Sir William Darcy’s Case
(1677) 2 Freeman 28;
22 ER 1037.
. M F Bond,
Guide to the Records of Parliament
(HMSO, London, 1971) at 36.
. See W H Loyd, “The Development of Set-off” (1916) 64
University of Pennsylvania Law Review
541 at 562.
Green v Farmer
(1768) 4 Burr 2214 at 2221;
[1768] EngR 49
. See S R Derham,
(2nd edition, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1996) at 9.
. S McCracken,
The Banker’s Remedy of Set-off
(Butterworths, London, 1993) at 55.
Hutchinson v Sturges
(1741) Willes 261
125 ER 1163
Pilgrim v Kinder
(1744) 7 Mod 463 at 467;
. See, for eg,
Forster v Wilson
(1843) 12 M&W 191 at 203-204;
[1843] EngR 1141
152 ER 1165
Day & Dent Constructions Pty Ltd v North Australian Properties Pty Ltd
[1981] FCA 12
(1981) 34 ALR 595
Stehar Knitting Mills Pty Ltd v Southern Textile Converters Pty Ltd
[1980] 2 NSWLR 514
at 518 per Hutley JA; and
Gye v Davies
(1995) 37 NSWLR 421
at 425-427.
. See S R Derham,
(2nd edition, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1996) at 319.
Stooke v Taylor
(1880) 5 QBD 569
at 575 per Cockburn CJ. See also
Hanak v Green
[1958] 2 QB 9 at 17 and 23; and P R Wood,
English and International Set-off
(Sweet and Maxwell, London, 1989) at paras 2.68 - 2-130.
Stehar Knitting Mills Pty Ltd v Southern Textile Converters Pty Ltd
[1980] 2 NSWLR at 518 per Hutley JA. See also
Covino v Bandag Manufacturing Pty Ltd
[1983] 1 NSWLR 237
at 238 per Hutley JA; and
Re John Dillon Ltd (In Liq); ex parte Jefferies
[1960] WAR 30.
. See P R Wood,
English and International Set-off
(Sweet & Maxwell, London, 1989) at paras 2-131 - 2-185.
. See especially S R Derham,
(2nd edition, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1996) at 136; S McCracken,
The Banker’s Remedy of Set-off
(Butterworths, London, 1993) at 133.
. S R Derham, “Recent Issues in Relation to Set-off”
Australian Law Journal
at 339; S McCracken,
The Banker’s Remedy of Set-off
(Butterworths, London, 1993) at 115.
. See para 2.7. See also S McCracken,
The Banker’s Remedy of Set-off
(Butterworths, London, 1993) at 117-121.
Stehar Knitting Mills Pty Ltd v Southern Textile Converters Pty Ltd
[1980] 2 NSWLR 514.
See above at para 1.17.
. S R Derham, “Recent Issues in Relation to Set-off”
Australian Law Journal
331 at 339.
. See para 3.20 below.
. S R Derham, “Recent Issues in Relation to Set-off”
Australian Law Journal
331 at 342.
Myer v Dresser
[1864] EngR 441
(1864) 16 CB (NS) 646
[1864] EngR 441
143 ER 1280
at 1288 per Willes J; and
[1864] EngR 441
16 CB (NS) 646
[1864] EngR 441
143 ER 1280
at 1288 per Byles J.
. P R Wood,
English and International Set-off
(Sweet & Maxwell, London, 1989) at paras 23-2 and 23-3.
. P R Wood,
English and International Set-off
(Sweet & Maxwell, London, 1989) at para 23-9.
De Lancey v R
(1871) LR 6 Ex 286.
Attorney-General v Guy Motors Ltd
[1928] 2 KB 78.
. New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Proceedings by and against the Crown
(Report 24, 1975) paras 5.2 and 5.4. See also New South Wales,
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Assembly, 18 October 1988 at 2418, second reading speech, Hon J R A Dowd, Attorney General. But see R P Meagher, W M C
Gummow and J R F Lehane,
Equity: Doctrines and Remedies
(3rd edition, Butterworths, Sydney, 1992) at para 3705 who were apparently not aware of this fact.
Axel Johnson Petroleum AB v M G Mineral Group AG
[1992] 1 WLR 270.
Axel Johnson Petroleum AB v M G Mineral Group AG
[1992] 1 WLR 270 at 274 per Leggatt LJ.
. N H Andrews, “The Proper Limits of Set-off”
Cambridge Law Journal
Axel Johnson Petroleum AB v M G Mineral Group AG
[1992] 1 WLR 270 at 275-276 per Staughton LJ.
Supreme Court Rules 1970
. P R Wood,
English and International Set-off
(Sweet & Maxwell, London, 1989) at paras 6-30 - 6-31. For the position where equitable set-off is available see
Roadshow Entertainment Pty Ltd v (CAN 053 006 269) Pty Ltd
(New South Wales, Court of Appeal, CA 40550/95, 10 October 1997, unreported) at 36-38.
Discussion Paper 40 (1998) : Set-Off
3. The Repeal of the Statutes of Set-Off
History of this Reference (Digest)
APPLICATION AND REPEAL IN NEW SOUTH WALES
3.1 The application of the Statutes of Set-off in New South Wales was confirmed by s 24 of the
Australian Courts Act 1828
In the review of the application of Imperial Acts by the New South Wales Law Reform Commission, the provisions of the Statutes of
were labelled, in a list of Imperial Acts proposed for repeal, as “now unnecessary”. No further explanation was offered
for this decision.
The recommendation for their repeal was carried into effect by
Imperial Acts Application Act 1969
(NSW). The savings clause in
Imperial Acts Application Act 1969
(NSW) does not, like other savings clauses,
operate to preserve set-off or any other principles of law established by the repealed provisions.
3.2 It has been assumed that the Statutes of Set-off were then considered unnecessary because of the availability of
r 25 of the
Supreme Court Rules 1970
r 25 was recommended by the Law Reform Commission as part of its draft Supreme Court Bill in 1969, but again, no specific mention
was made regarding this provision in the explanatory references to the Bill.
It should also be remembered that the
Supreme Court Rules 1970
(NSW) commenced on 1 July 1972, eighteen months after the repeal of the Statutes of Set-off came into effect on 1 January 1971.
r 25 has since been omitted from the
Supreme Court Rules 1970
3.3 Opinion, where the repeal of the Statutes of Set-off in New South Wales is considered at all, is divided. Some have considered
the repeal of the Statutes to be part of a natural progression of procedural reforms
and that there had been no “blunder” in recommending their repeal.
However, others have noted the repeal of the Statutes with some regret. Justice Young has considered that the repeal was “perhaps
unintended”,
while Meagher, Gummow and Lehane state that the Statutes may have been repealed “one suspects, unwittingly”.
At first instance in
Southern Textile Converters Pty Ltd v Stehar Knitting Mills Pty Ltd
counsel for the defendant had contemplated applying for a proclamation to revive the Statutes of Set-off.
STATUTES OF SET-OFF IN OTHER JURISDICTIONS
3.4 Different approaches to the Statutes of Set-off have been taken in other jurisdictions. Some have followed the New South Wales
approach, others have taken no action to repeal the Statute, while others, in terminating the application of the Statutes of Set-off,
have preserved the principles established by the Statutes of Set-off. Following are a representative sample of the various approaches
to the Statutes of Set-off in other jurisdictions.
3.5 The doctrines and principles of law established by the Statutes of Set-off were preserved in England by what is known as a “Westbury
savings” clause
contained in s 4(1)(b) of the
Civil Procedure Repeal Act 1879
(Eng) which applied to the then newly founded Supreme Court of Judicature:
The repeal effected by this Act shall not affect ... Any jurisdiction or principle or rule of law or equity established or confirmed,
or right or privilege acquired, or duty or liability imposed or incurred, or compensation secured, by or under any enactment so repealed.
3.6 The Statutes of Set-off were repealed in Victoria by s 7 of the
Imperial Acts Application Act 1922
(Vic), but the Act contained a savings clause, similar to that in England which has ensured the continued operation of set-off at
common law. Their repeal was carried out, according to the explanatory paper to the Bill, with no more consideration than that they
had been repealed in England.
3.7 It is now doubtful that a right to set off debts exists at common law in Queensland following the enactment of the
Imperial Acts Application Act 1984
(Qld) which terminated the application of the Statutes of Set-off in that State. It would seem that the Queensland Act, in not containing
a savings clause, has had a similar effect to the
Imperial Acts Application Act 1969
Australian Capital Territory
3.8 In 1986 the Australian Capital Territory enacted the
Imperial Acts Application Ordinance 1986
(ACT) whereby the Statutes of Set-off, in accordance with s 5 of the Ordinance, were deemed to be amended “to the extent necessary”
for them to be in force in the terms set out in Parts 15 and 16 of Schedule 3 to the Ordinance. The restated provisions are, in essential
respects, the same as those contained in the Statutes of Set-off except that some of the unnecessary verbiage associated with an
18th century piece of legislation has been removed.
New Zealand
Imperial Laws Application Act 1988
(NZ) recognises a number of Imperial statutes as part of the law of New Zealand, including the Statutes of Set-off. The preservation
of the Statutes of Set-off was included in legislation proposed by the New Zealand Law Commission in its 1987 report on Imperial
legislation,
but without explanation. The preservation of the Statutes of Set-off had previously been proposed in the
Imperial Laws Application Bill 1986
which was not enacted.
Saskatchewan
3.10 In Saskatchewan a defendant’s claim to set-off is governed by rule 104 of the Rules of Court, being in essence a restatement
of set-off under the Statutes of Set-off. The Law Reform Commission of Saskatchewan, in its report on the status of English law,
considered that the Statutes of Set-off could be “safely ignored in Saskatchewan”.
DIFFICULTIES ARISING FROM THE REPEAL OF THE STATUTES OF SET-OFF
Matters involving original parties to a transaction
Procedural practicality
3.11 The procedural practicality of set-off as a plea in bar being a defence in whole or in part to a claim has been lost, cross-claim
being merely an independent action by the defendant and not a defence to a plaintiff’s claim.
For example, set-off can be used, where available, by a defendant to avoid entry of a summary judgment in favour of the plaintiff,
a result which could not be achieved by the defendant raising a mere counterclaim.
3.12 The non-availability of set-off as provided for by the Statutes of Set-off has meant that in situations where defendants now
only have counterclaim available to them, each party will be liable to costs depending on the outcome of their individual claims.
So that, where a plaintiff is successful, that plaintiff is entitled to costs in his or her claim and if the defendant is successful
in his or her counterclaim, the defendant is entitled to costs in the counterclaim. That is, where the defendant is successful, in
effect, in defeating the plaintiff’s claim by counterclaim, he or she is only entitled to additional costs incurred by reason
of the cross-claim. However, when set-off is successfully pleaded as a defence, normally the defendant will be awarded costs.
Matters involving third parties to an original transaction
Joinder of principal debtors by guarantors
3.13 In situations not involving insolvency set-off,
where a creditor took action against a guarantor under a contract of guarantee and the Statutes of Set-Off allowed for set-off between
the creditor and principal debtor, it appears to have been the case that the guarantor could rely on the availability of set-off
to reduce his or her liability to the creditor without the need to join the principal debtor to the proceedings.
The availability of set-off to the guarantor extended only to instances where the debts existing between the parties were liquidated.
Set-off was, therefore, not available for a guarantor to exercise against the creditor where the debts between the creditor and principal
debtor were unliquidated.
3.14 With the repeal of the Statutes of Set-Off in New South Wales, the availability, albeit limited, of so simple a remedy to a guarantor
has been removed. Justice Handley has suggested that the need now to join the principal debtor to proceedings between a creditor
and guarantor is one of the unfortunate side effects of the repeal of the Statutes of Set-Off.
This is particularly so where the guarantor is resisting an application for summary judgment by the creditor.
3.15 Chief Justice Stawell in 1867 considered it desirable to allow a guarantor to rely on a right to set-off between a creditor and
principal debtor:
If there is a sum which may be set-off in reduction, it must be set-off; for if the setting-off were to depend on the option of either
the creditor or the principal debtor, the surety might be compelled to pay the creditor more of the original debt, than the creditor
himself could have recovered from the principal debtor.
3.16 Derham has suggested that the preferred approach is for the guarantor to be able to defend him or herself “on the basis
of any defence of set-off available to the debtor”.
Others, however, have argued that the availability of the right of a guarantor to plead a set-off existing between the creditor and
principal debtor is not desirable on a number of grounds. Some have suggested that it is unreasonable, as a matter of policy:
for the guarantor to be able to reduce her or his clear liability on the guarantee by reason of a debt owed by the creditor to the
debtor which might be quite unrelated to the principal transaction. Without an assignment of such a claim by the principal debtor
to the guarantor, it is difficult to find any justification for allowing the guarantor to invoke the claim against the creditor by
way of defence.
3.17 It has also been argued that there is some difficulty in finding the necessary mutuality, for the purposes of the Statutes of
Set-off, between the creditor and guarantor when the mutual debts are in fact between the creditor and principal debtor.
3.18 The above discussion should, however, be considered in light of the policy of the law to protect guarantors by ensuring that,
subject to the right of the creditor to be paid, the burden of relief should fall on those primarily liable, namely the principal
Limitation of actions
3.19 Originally, there was a distinction between set-off and counterclaim for the purposes of limitation of actions so that, in the
case of counterclaim, the period of limitation was calculated back from the date of the counterclaim and not from the date of the
commencement of the principal action, as would be the case with the defence of set-off.
This situation was altered by the passing of
Limitation Act 1969
(NSW) which has made it so that, for the purposes of limitation of actions, defendants claiming by way of either set-off or counterclaim,
are taken to have made the claim on the date on which they became parties to the principal action, usually at its commencement. However,
Justice Handley has suggested this has left guarantors in a worse position since the repeal of the Statutes of Set-off, because they
can no longer plead a set-off which is available to the principal debtor as a set-off.
Set-off against an assignee
3.20 It is a general rule that an assignee of a chose in action takes subject to all the equities, including such rights of set-off
and other defences which may have been available against the assignor. A debtor can, therefore, plead set-off against an assignee
of a debt up until such time as the debtor receives notice of the assignment.
The mutuality necessary for set-off under the Statutes of Set-off is not, in such circumstances, destroyed.
Counterclaim, on the other hand, is not available to a debtor against an assignee of a creditor’s claim because while a debtor
usually has a cross claim against the creditor he or she generally does not have one against the assignee. Set-off under the Statutes
of Set-off may, therefore, be the only remedy available to debtors in such a situation,
although equitable set-off and other analogous rights may be available in some cases.
Wood considers this to be the most important reason for the existence of set-off:
In practice, the non-availability of counterclaims against an intervener is by far the most important distinguishing characteristic
between set-off and counterclaim: otherwise there is often little difference in the actual result if both claims are for the payment
3.21 In Canada, however, it has been held that any assignment destroys the necessary mutuality so that the assignment of a debt prevents
a debtor from raising set-off against an assignee.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Select bibliography
Table of contents
. 9 Geo IV c 83. Early New South Wales cases in which set-off under the Statutes of Set-off was referred to include:
R v Mackaness
(NSW Supreme Court, Full Court, January 1829: Dowling J,
Select Cases
(NSW AO 2/3462) 123) at 127; and
Belcher v Dences
(NSW Supreme Court, Full Court, 29 December 1829: Dowling J,
Select Cases: Volume 2
(NSW AO 2/3462) 264 at 266. The early decisions of the Supreme Court of New South Wales are being made available on the internet
by Associate Professor Bruce Kercher of Macquarie University at
http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/special/1824/
. 2 Geo II c 22 (1729) and 8 Geo II c 24 (1735).
. New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Application of Imperial Acts
(Report 4, 1967) at 107 and 108.
. See para 3.5 on “Westbury savings” clauses.
. New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Supreme Court Procedure
(Report 7, 1969) at 21-22.
. Cf S R Derham,
(2nd edition, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1996) at 137.
Supreme Court Rules
(Amendment No 154) 1984
Stehar Knitting Mills Pty Ltd
v Southern Textile Converters Pty Ltd
[1980]2 NSWLR 514 at 522-524 per Glass JA.
Stehar Knitting Mills Pty Ltd
v Southern Textile Converters Pty Ltd
[1980]2 NSWLR 514 at 520 per Hutley JA.
Wentworth v Wentworth
(NSW, Supreme Court, ED 3748/89, Young J, 12 December 1994, unreported).
. R P Meagher, W M C Gummow and J R F Lehane,
Equity: Doctrines and Remedies
(3rd edition, Butterworths, Sydney, 1992 at para 3704.
[1979] 1 NSWLR 692.
Imperial Acts Application Act 1969
(NSW). The option was not pursued because the re-introduction of the Statutes may have only had a future effect.
. “Westbury Savings” clauses are so named after Lord Westbury, the sponsor of the first Act to contain such a proviso:
Statute Law Revision Act 1863
(Eng) s 1. On Westbury Savings clauses generally see New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Application of Imperial Acts
(Report 4, 1967) at 33-34; and P M McDermott, “Statute Law Revision Statutes-Westbury Savings”
Statute Law Review
Statute Law Revision and Civil Procedure Act 1883
(Eng) s 4 which applied to courts other than the Supreme Court of Judicature.
. Victoria,
Imperial Acts Application Act 1922
passed in the thirteenth year of the reign of his Majesty King George the Fifth being the second session of the twenty-seventh Parliament
of the State of Victoria together with an explanatory paper on the bill, the report from the joint select committee of the Legislative
Council and the Legislative Assembly, and a general index of subject-matters in the Act and the explanatory paper
(Government Printer, Melbourne, 1923) at 88.
Walker v Department of Social Security
[1995] FCA 1136
(1995) 56 FCR 354
at 374-375 per Cooper J; See also
Cockerill v Westpac Banking Corporation
(Australia, Federal Court, NG29/1991, 20 December 1996, Cooper J, unreported) at 93; and S R Derham,
(2nd edition, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1996) at 136-137. The Statutes of Set-off had been held to apply in Queensland before the passage
Imperial Acts Application Act 1984
Phillips v Mineral Resources Developments Pty Ltd
[1983] 2 QdR 138 (FC) at 147 and 148.
. New Zealand, Law Commission,
Imperial Legislation in Force in New Zealand
(Report 1, 1987).
. New Zealand, Law Commission,
Imperial Legislation in Force in New Zealand
(Report 1, 1987) at 138-161.
. Law Reform Commission of Saskatchewan,
The Status of English Statute Law in Saskatchewan
(1990) at 221-223.
. See Hutley JA in
Stehar Knitting Mills Pty Ltd v Southern Textile Converters Pty Ltd
[1980] 2 NSWLR 514
. The effect of set-off on costs was noted by Morris LJ in
Hanak v Green
[1958] 2 QB 9 at 16. See also P R Wood,
English and International Set-off
(Sweet & Maxwell, London, 1989) at para 6-42.
. The availability of insolvency set-off would mean that the guaranteed debt is extinguished to the extent of the set-off which occurs
automatically on the date of liquidation: S R Derham,
(2nd edition, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1996) at 641. See also
Langford Concrete Pty Ltd v Finlay
[1978] 1 NSWLR 14
. J O’Donovan and J Phillips,
The Modern Contract of Guarantee
(3rd edition, LBC Information Services, Sydney, 1996) at 551 suggest that
Bechervaise v Lewis
(1872) LR 7 CP 372 especially at 377 and
Murphy v Glass
(1869) LR 2 PC 408 provide some support for this proposition. But see S R Derham,
(2nd edition, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1996) at 649-652.
Cellulose Products Pty Ltd v Truda
(1970) 92 WN (NSW) 561.
The position in England may be different: see
National Westminster Bank plc v Skelton
[1993] 1 All ER 242 at 250-251.
. K R Handley,
Letter to the Chairman of the NSW Law Reform Commission
(28 February 1994) at 5 (attachment). Justice Handley has also suggested that, although no authority exists on this point, where there
has been a voluntary release of a liquidated claim by the principal debtor, a guarantor could, before the repeal of the Statutes
of Set-off, have relied upon set-off of that claim.
. J O’Donovan and J Phillips,
The Modern Contract of Guarantee
(3rd edition, LBC Information Services, Sydney, 1996) at 549.
Murphy v Glass
(1867) 4 WW &
’B (L) 199 at 203. The case was affirmed on appeal to the Privy Council which considered the set-off point immaterial:
Murphy v Glass
(1869) LR 2 PC 408 at 418.
. S R Derham,
(2nd edition, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1996) at 642.
. J O’Donovan and J Phillips,
The Modern Contract of Guarantee
(3rd edition, LBC Information Services, Sydney, 1996) at 552.
. J O’Donovan and J Phillips,
The Modern Contract of Guarantee
(3rd edition, LBC Information Services, Sydney, 1996) at 552.
. See S Rowlatt,
Rowlatt on the Law of Principal and Surety
(4th edition, Sweet & Maxwell, London, 1982) at 131; J O’Donovan and J Phillips,
The Modern Contract of Guarantee
(3rd edition, LBC Information Services, Sydney, 1996) at 533-534.
McDonnell & East Ltd v McGregor
[1936] HCA 28
(1936) 56 CLR 50
at 57 per Dixon J (McTiernan J agreeing).
Roxburge v Cox
(1881) 17 ChD 520
at 526 per James LJ;
Edward Nelson & Co Ltd v Faber & Co
[1903] 2 KB 367 at 375 per Joyce J. See also R P Meagher, W M C Gummow and J R F Lehane,
Equity: Doctrines and Remedies
(3rd edition, Butterworths, Sydney, 1992) at [699]. For a discussion of a number of English cases involving set-off by a debtor after
an assignment of a debt see
Business Computers Ltd v Anglo-African Leasing Ltd
[1977] 1 WLR 578 at 583-585.
. The requirements to maintain set-off are summarised by P R Wood,
English and International Set-off
(Sweet & Maxwell, London, 1989) at para 16-38.
. P R Wood,
English and International Set-off
(Sweet & Maxwell, London, 1989) at paras 6-35 and 14-83.
. S R Derham,
(2nd edition, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1996) at 573.
Holt v Telford
(1987) 41 DLR (4th) 385
at 394. See also P R Wood,
English and International Set-off
(Sweet & Maxwell, London, 1989) at para 14-29.
Discussion Paper 40 (1998) : Set-Off
4. Proposals for Reform
History of this Reference (Digest)
OPTIONS FOR REFORM
4.1 The Commission considers that there are four options for reform:
insert a savings provision in the
Imperial Acts Application Act 1969
revive the Statutes of Set-off by proclamation;
re-insert a provision in the
Supreme Court Rules 1970
introduce a new limited statutory form of set-off.
Insert a savings provision in the
Imperial Acts Application Act 1969
4.2 This is the option preferred by Justice Handley:
Imperial Acts Application Act 1969
by including a provision similar to the savings provisions included in the
Civil Procedure Acts Repeal Act 1879
(UK) and the
Statute Law Revision and Civil Procedure Act 1883
This would mean framing a “Westbury Savings” provision which preserves the doctrines and principles of law established
by the Statutes of Set-off and would involve a near complete revival of the type of set-off established by the former statutes. In
its 1967 report on the application of Imperial Acts, the Commission noted the wide-reaching effects of such a clause and recommended
against the general enactment of one as part of the
Imperial Acts Application Act 1969
on a number of grounds, including that:
(2) The wider the saving clauses, the greater the problems will be of ascertaining the extent of the repeal.
(3) The wider the saving clauses, the more need there will be to refer to the repealed Imperial Acts. The utility of the Bill will
be measured by the extent to which it makes such reference unnecessary.
4.3 Justice Handley has further suggested the drafting of a limited savings clause confined to the law established by the Statutes
of Set-off which would become
Imperial Acts Application Act 1969
The repeal of the Imperial Act 2 Geo II c 22 s 13 and 8 Geo II c 24 ss 1, 5. (The Statutes of Set-off 1729 and 1735) shall not affect
and be deemed never to have affected any jurisdiction or principle or rule of law or equity established or confirmed.
Revive the Statutes of Set-off by proclamation
4.4 The fourth ground given by the Commission for not including a comprehensive Westbury Savings clause in the
Imperial Acts Application Act 1969
If, despite the attention which we have given to the problems, the repeals turn out to have gone too far, the position can be restored
by proclamation under clause 11. This is better than reliance on the necessarily vague words of a saving clause.
Imperial Acts Application Act 1969
(NSW) accordingly provides that the Governor may, by proclamation, declare that the whole or any part of a repealed Imperial enactment
shall be revived.
The proclamation is, however, subject, under certain conditions, to disallowance by resolution of either House of the New South Wales
Parliament.
Any provision revived in this way will have such effect as it had in New South Wales immediately before the commencement of the
Imperial Acts Application Act 1969
Counsel for the defendant at first instance in
Southern Textile Converters Pty Ltd v Stehar Knitting Mills Pty Ltd
had contemplated seeking an adjournment to make application for such a proclamation.
This course was ultimately not taken because the proclamation would only have had prospective application and could not have assisted
his client.
4.5 If mere revival of the Statutes of Set-off is all that is required, then the procedure under
Imperial Acts Application Act 1969
(NSW) has much to commend it, since it will not require legislative action to effect the change.
Re-insert a provision in the rules of court
4.6 The re-insertion of a provision similar to
r 25 of the
Supreme Court Rules 1970
(NSW) was also suggested by Justice Handley. However, he also acknowledged that this would not deal with situations such as that in
Southern Textile Converters Pty Ltd v Stehar Knitting Mills Pty Ltd
or with the position of guarantors. It may also have the wide-ranging effect suggested by Derham in extending the right of set-off
beyond anything presently contemplated.
New limited statutory form of set-off
4.7 A new limited statutory form of set-off has been proposed by McCracken, essentially to give statutory recognition to contractual
rights analogous to set-off. The proposed statutory provision would be in addition to existing rights to set-off and would imply
the statutory right into particular specified contracts in absence of an agreement to the contrary. This would be similar to, and
probably a broader expression of, the netting proposals already discussed.
4.8 Is there a demonstrated need for this? The Netting Sub-Committee of the Companies and Securities Advisory Committee, while observing
that there was experienced legal opinion to the effect that there was no basis for doubting the effectiveness of netting arrangements,
stated that it was “very desirable that the legal position be clarified beyond doubt”:
This is because of the high value of many of the transactions which are subject to netting arrangements, and the potentially disastrous
consequences of adverse rulings by the courts.
Such arguments may not, however, apply to many areas in which New South Wales is competent to legislate, given that insolvency, banking,
corporate law and insurance lie in the realm of the Commonwealth’s legislative power. However, a new statutory form of set-off
could be useful in the areas of personal finance and non-bank financial institutions. The Netting Sub-committee favoured limiting
their proposed legislation to financial contracts or transactions because the effect of a more broadly expressed law was uncertain.
CONCLUSIONS OF OTHER LAW REFORM AGENCIES
Law Reform Committee of South Australia
4.9 In South Australia, a State where the Statutes of Set-off continue in force, the Law Reform Committee produced a report on set-off
having excepted the Statutes of Set-off from a prior review of Imperial Statutes in force in South Australia. The Committee recognised
the tendency in England, Australia and New Zealand for courts to widen the categories of cases in which set-off is available, especially
since the decision in
Hanak v Green
, and concluded that once some unliquidated demands could be subject to set-off, there was no logical reason why all unliquidated
demands could not be subject to set-off.
The following recommendation was, therefore, made:
that the statutes of set-off be repealed as part of the repeal of imperial law in this State and that ... it be enacted that set-off
be an allowable plea in relation to all cross-claims, liquidated or unliquidated, whether assessed or not assessed at the date of
the plea, and whether arising out of the same transaction or series of transactions or not.
However, the Committee specifically excepted any set-off claimed against money due under a negotiable instrument or letter of credit,
owing to their particular status in mercantile usage.
Law Reform Commission of Western Australia
4.10 The Law Reform Commission of Western Australia, in its report on imperial statutes in force in Western Australia, concluded that
the Statutes of Set-off could be repealed without affecting the principles already established so long as the repeal was accompanied
by something in the nature of a “Westbury savings” clause.
The Western Australian proposals have not yet been implemented although they are being actively considered by the Western Australian
government.
Law Reform Commission of British Columbia
4.11 The Law Reform Commission of British Columbia, on the basis of in principle support for there being only one method of raising
a cross demand concluded that rights of set-off “should be subsumed by rights of counterclaim”.
This would be achieved by passing legislation which would provide that “a cross demand raised as a set-off is deemed to be
a counterclaim”.
4.12 In relation to the rights of defendants to claim set-off against assignees (“successors in interest”) of a creditor’s
(“assignee’s”) rights, the Commission concluded that rights of counterclaim should be altered to ensure that:
When a successor in interest sues on a demand, the obligor should be able to raise any matter which could have been raised against
the assignor to diminish or extinguish the claim of the successor in interest.
Australian Law Reform Commission
4.13 The Australian Law Reform Commission gave some brief consideration to set-off in part of its Report on legal risk in international
transactions.
In a section dealing with netting and set-off as part of finance law reform,
although dealing largely with issues relating to companies and securities law and remedies in cross border banking, the Commission
expressed its agreement with a submission which suggested a review of the law of set-off in Australia with a view to creating a “new
right to set off pre-insolvency.”
It was noted that:
This would make the law on set off simpler and more certain and would extend the benefits of set off to firms which had not considered
including it in their contracts.
THE COMMISSION’S CONCLUSION
4.14 The Commission’s tentative conclusion is that there is sufficient reason to support the qualified reintroduction of set-off
under the Statutes of Set-off, particularly in light of the concerns raised by Justice Handley. However, because of the relative
obscurity of the Statutes, and to ensure easy access to the law by practitioners, the Commission would recommend a restatement of
the provisions in plain English listing, for example, the points outlined at paragraph 2.8 above.
That a plain English restatement of the law of set-off as established by the Statutes of Set-off be enacted in New South Wales.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Select bibliography
Table of contents
. K R Handley,
Letter to the Chairman of the New South Wales Law Reform Commission
(28 February 1994).
. New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Application of Imperial Acts
(Report 4, 1967) at 34.
. Attachment to J W Shaw,
Letter to the Chairman of the New South Wales Law Reform Commission
(26 September 1997).
. New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Application of Imperial Acts
(Report 4, 1967) at 34.
. Imperial Acts listed in Schedule 1 to the Act are excluded from the operation of s 11.
Imperial Acts Application Act 1969
Imperial Acts Application Act 1969
Southern Textile Converters Pty Ltd v Stehar Knitting Mills Pty Ltd
[1979] 1 NSWLR 692
. See above at para 1.17.
. See above at paras 1.7-1.10.
. Australia, Netting Sub-Committee of the Companies and Securities Advisory Committee,
Netting in Financial Markets Transactions
(Final Report, June 1997) at para 3.1. See also Australia, Corporate Law Economic Reform Program,
Electronic Commerce: Cutting Cybertape - Building Business
(Proposals for Reform: Paper No 5, 1997) at 37-40.
. Australia, Netting Sub-committee of the Companies and Securities Advisory Committee,
Netting in Financial Markets Transactions
(Background Paper, December 1996) at 24.
. Law Reform Committee of South Australia,
Relating to the Reform of the Law of Set-off
(Report 75, 1983).
. Law Reform Committee of South Australia,
Relating to the Reform of the Law of Set-off
(Report 75, 1983) at 9.
. Law Reform Committee of South Australia,
Relating to the Reform of the Law of Set-off
(Report 75, 1983) at 9.
. Law Reform Commission of Western Australia,
Report on United Kingdom Statutes in Force in Western Australia
(Project 75, 1994) at 63.
. Law Reform Commission of Western Australia,
Annual Report, 1 July 1996 - 30 June 1997
. Law Reform Commission of British Columbia,
Report on Set-Off
(Report 97, 1988) at 25.
. Law Reform Commission of British Columbia,
Report on Set-Off
(Report 97, 1988) at 26.
. Law Reform Commission of British Columbia,
Report on Set-Off
(Report 97, 1988) at 46.
. Australian Law Reform Commission,
Legal Risk in International Transactions
(Report 80, 1996).
. Australian Law Reform Commission,
Legal Risk in International Transactions
(Report 80, 1996) at paras 5.40-5.45.
. Australian Law Reform Commission,
Legal Risk in International Transactions
(Report 80, 1996) at para 5.45.
. Australian Law Reform Commission,
Legal Risk in International Transactions
(Report 80, 1996) at para 5.45. See also the proposals of McCracken at paras 4.7-4.8.
Discussion Paper 40 (1998) : Set-Off
Table of Legislation
History of this Reference (Digest)
Commonwealth
Bankruptcy Act 1966
Corporations Law
New South Wales
Crown Proceedings Act 1988
Imperial Acts Application Act 1969
1.1, 1.2, 1.14, 3.7, 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.4
189">3.3, 4.4, 4.5
Limitation Act 1969
Sale of Goods Act 1923
Supreme Court Act 1970
Supreme Court Rules
(Amendment No 154) 1984
Supreme Court Rules 1970
1.15, 1.17, 1.18, 3.2, 4.6
Imperial Acts Application Act 1984
Imperial Acts Application Act 1922
Australian Capital Territory
Imperial Acts Application Ordinance 1986
New Zealand
Imperial Laws Application Act 1988
Imperial Laws Application Bill 1986
United Kingdom
4 & 5 Anne c 4 (1705)
4 & 5 Anne c 17 (1705)
2 Geo II c 22 (1729)
1.2, 1.14, 2.1, 2.5
8 Geo II c 24 (1735)
1.2, 1.14, 2.2
1.2, 1.14, 2.2
Australian Courts Act 1828 (Imp) 9 Geo IV c 83
Civil Procedure Repeal Act 1879
Rules of the Supreme Court 1883
Rules of the Supreme Court 1962
Rules of the Supreme Court 1965
Statute Law Revision Act 1863
Statute Law Revision and Civil Procedure Act 1883
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Select bibliography
Table of contents
Discussion Paper 40 (1998) : Set-Off
Table of Cases
History of this Reference (Digest)
Anonymous (1676)
Attorney-General v Guy Motors Ltd (1928)
AWA Ltd v Exicom Australia Pty Ltd (1990)
Axel Johnson Petroleum AB v M G Mineral Group AG (1992)
Bechervaise v Lewis (1872)
Belcher v Dences (1829)
Business Computers Ltd v Anglo-African Leasing Ltd (1977)
Cellulose Products Pty Ltd v Truda (1970)
Chapman v Derby (1689)
Cherry v Boultbee (1839)
Cockerill v Westpac Banking Corporation (1996)
Collins v Collins (1759)
Covino v Bandag Manufacturing Pty Ltd (1983)
D Galambos & Son Pty Ltd v McIntyre (1975)
Day & Dent Constructions Pty Ltd v North Australian Properties Pty Ltd (1981)
De Lancey v R (1871)
Edward Nelson & Co Ltd v Faber & Co (1903)
Forster v Wilson (1843)
Gilbert-Ash (Northern) Ltd v Modern Engineering (Bristol) Ltd (1974)
Green v Farmer (1768)
Gye v Davies (1995)
Gye v McIntyre (1991)
Hanak v Green (1958)
1.16, 1.17, 2.8, 3.12, 4.9
Holt v Telford (1987)
Hutchinson v Sturges (1741)
Langford Concrete Pty Ltd v Finlay (1978)
Lord v Direct Acceptance Corporation Ltd (1993)
McDonnell & East Ltd v McGregor (1936)
McIntyre v Perkes (1990)
Mitchell v Oldfield (1791)
Mondel v Steel (1841)
Murphy v Glass (1867)
Murphy v Glass (1869)
Myer v Dresser (1864)
National Westminster Bank plc v Skelton (1993)
P Rowe Graphics Pty Ltd v Scanagraphix Pty Ltd (1988)
1.6, 1.26, 1.28
Phillips v Mineral Resources Developments Pty Ltd (1983)
Pilgrim v Kinder (1744)
Pro-image Studios v Commonwealth Bank of Australia (1991)
R v Mackaness (1829)
Rawson v Samuel (1841)
Re application of Keith Bray Pty Ltd (1991)
Re John Dillon Ltd (In Liq); ex parte Jefferies (1960)
Roadshow Entertainment Pty Ltd v (CAN 053 006 269) Pty Ltd (1997)
Roxburge v Cox (1881)
Saltergate Insurance Co Ltd and the Companies Act (No 2) (1984)
Sir William Darcy’s Case (1677)
Southern Textile Converters Pty Ltd v Stehar Knitting Mills Pty Ltd (1979)
1.17, 1.19, 4.4, 4.6
Stehar Knitting Mills Pty Ltd v Southern Textile Converters Pty Ltd (1980)
1.17, 2.7, 2.8, 2.9, 3.3, 3.11
Stooke v Taylor (1880)
Vale of Clwydd Coal Co v Garsed (1885)
Walker v Department of Social Security (1995)
Wentworth v Wentworth (1994)
West Street Properties Pty Ltd v Jamison (1974)
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Select bibliography
Table of contents
Discussion Paper 40 (1998) : Set-Off
Select Bibliography
History of this Reference (Digest)
ANDREWS, N H, “The Proper Limits of Set-off”
Cambridge Law Journal
AUSTRALIA, Corporate Law Economic Reform Program,
Electronic Commerce: Cutting Cybertape - Building Business
(Proposals for Reform: Paper No 5, 1997).
AUSTRALIA, Netting Sub-Committee of the Companies and Securities Advisory Committee,
Netting in Financial Markets Transactions
(Final Report, June 1997).
AUSTRALIA, Netting Sub-committee of the Companies and Securities Advisory Committee,
Netting in Financial Markets Transactions
(Background Paper, December 1996).
AUSTRALIAN LAW REFORM COMMISSION,
Legal Risk in International Transactions
(Report 80, 1996).
Guide to the Records of Parliament
(HMSO, London, 1971).
DERHAM, S R,
(2nd edition, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1996).
LAW REFORM COMMISSION OF BRITISH COLUMBIA,
Report on Set-Off
(Report 97, 1988).
LAW REFORM COMMISSION OF SASKATCHEWAN,
The Status of English Statute Law in Saskatchewan
LAW REFORM COMMISSION OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA,
Report on United Kingdom Statutes in Force in Western Australia
(Project 75, 1994).
LAW REFORM COMMITTEE OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA,
Relating to the Reform of the Law of Set-off
(Report 75, 1983).
LOYD, W H, “The development of set-off” (1916) 64
University of Pennsylvania Law Review
McCRACKEN, S,
The Banker’s Remedy of Set-Off
(Butterworths, London, 1993).
McDERMOTT, P M, “Statute Law Revision Statutes-Westbury Savings”
Statute Law Review
MEAGHER, R P, GUMMOW, W M C, and LEHANE, J R F,
Equity: Doctrines and Remedies
(3rd edition, Butterworths, Sydney, 1992).
NEATE, F W (ed),
Using Set-off as Security
(Graham & Trotman, London, 1990).
NEW SOUTH WALES LAW REFORM COMMISSION,
Application of Imperial Acts
(Report 4, 1967).
NEW SOUTH WALES LAW REFORM COMMISSION,
Proceedings by and against the Crown
(Report 24, 1975).
NEW SOUTH WALES LAW REFORM COMMISSION,
Supreme Court Procedure
(Report 7, 1969).
NEW ZEALAND, Law Commission,
Imperial Legislation in Force in New Zealand
(Report 1, 1987).
O’DONOVAN, J, and PHILLIPS, J,
The Modern Contract of Guarantee
(3rd edition, LBC Information Services, Sydney, 1996).
ROWLATT, S,
Rowlatt on the Law of Principal and Surety
(4th edition, Sweet & Maxwell, London, 1982).
Supreme Court Practice 1967
(Sweet & Maxwell et al, London, 1966).
Imperial Acts Application Act 1922
passed in the thirteenth year of the reign of his Majesty King George the Fifth being the second session of the twenty-seventh Parliament
of the State of Victoria together with an explanatory paper on the bill, the report from the joint select committee of the Legislative
Council and the Legislative Assembly, and a general index of subject-matters in the Act and the explanatory paper
(Government Printer, Melbourne, 1923).
English and International Set-off
(Sweet & Maxwell, London, 1989).
YOUNG, P W, O’LEARY, K F and HOGAN, A E,
Supreme Court Civil Procedures: New South Wales
(2nd edition, Butterworths, Sydney, 1987).
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Select bibliography
Table of contents
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter