URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/lawreform/ACTLRAC/2012/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:29:32
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Beyond the Binary: Legal Recognition of Sex and Gender Diversity in the ACT [2012] ACTLRAC 2
PART I – BACKGROUND
1.1 ACT Law Reform Advisory Council
1.2 Terms used in this report
1.3 Inquiry into the legal recognition of transgender and intersex people in the Australian Capital Territory
Terms of reference
Current position in the ACT
Provisions that recognise transgender and intersex people
Provisions that protect against discrimination
1.4 Human rights context
International human rights treaties
The Yogyakarta Principles
The United Nations
European Union Agency for Fundamental Human Rights
The European Court of Human Rights
Council of Europe
Australian Capital Territory
Other Australian jurisdictions
1.5 International recognition of sex and gender diversity
European Union
United Kingdom
United States of America
1.6 Australian context
Birth certificates and sexual reassignment
Criteria for requesting a change in sex noted on birth certificate16
1.7 Previous reports on sex and gender diversity in Australia
Previous reports and inquiries
2003 ACT Government Discrimination report
2007 Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission report Same-Sex: Same Entitlements
2008 Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission Issues Paper
2008 Australian Human Rights Commission report Sex and gender diversity - initial consultation
2008 Australian Human Rights Commission Sex Files blog and discussion board
2009 Australian Human Rights Commission report Sex Files
2010 ACT Human Rights Commissioner’s advice
2011 A Gender Agenda report Gender Diversity in the ACT: A Survey of Trans Experiences
1.8 Recent developments in Australia
PART 2 – THE CURRENT INQUIRY
2.1 The inquiry process
Aim of the inquiry
Conduct of the inquiry
2.2 Issues for sex and gender diverse people in the ACT
Terminology
Definitions in ACT laws
Self-identification
Notification and registration of births generally
Notification and registration of intersex births
Intersex decisions at birth
Correcting the register
Changing the record of sex and gender identity
Sexual reassignment surgery
Relevance of sex and gender identity
Sex identity in ACT records
Change of name
Access to the record of sex identity
Reciprocal recognition
Sex and gender recognition certificates
Commonwealth government functions, services and records
Practical recognition and acceptance
2.3 Public submissions
Submissions
2.4 Further consultations
2.5 Discussion of the issues
Terminology
Definitions in ACT laws
Self-identification
Notification and registration of births generally
Notification and registration of intersex births, and decisions at birth
Correcting the register
Changing the record of sex and gender identity
Sexual reassignment surgery
The current requirement
Policy of the Passport Office
Proposed criteria of changing sex and gender identity in the ACT
Relevance of sex and gender identity in ACT records
Requesting sex and gender identity
The need to know sex and gender identity
Statistical categories of sex and gender identity
Implications of changed sex and gender identity for ACT records
Change of name
Access to the record of sex identity
Reciprocal recognition
International recognition
Interstate recognition
Sex and gender recognition certificates
Commonwealth government functions, services and documents
Practical recognition and acceptance
2.6 Implementation
the Binary:
Legal Recognition of Sex and Gender Diversity in the ACT
I – BACKGROUND
Law Reform Advisory Council
The ACT Law Reform Advisory Council (LRAC) was established by the ACT
Attorney-General the Hon Simon Corbell MLA to provide expert
recommendations to the Attorney-General.
LRAC operates as a collaborative undertaking between the ACT Government and
the ANU College of Law at the Australian National University.
Together they
provide the funds, resources, infrastructure and staff necessary for
LRAC’s operation. Academic staff of the
ANU College of Law contribute
their expertise to inquiries conducted by LRAC.
Members of LRAC are appointed by the Attorney-General for a period of up to
three years, on the basis of their relevant experience
and expertise. Members
contribute to the work of LRAC on a voluntary basis.
Members of LRAC during the period of this inquiry (January 2011 –
February 2012) were (alphabetically):
Mr Andrew Crockett (to February 2012)
Professor Murray Raff
Magistrate Karen Fryar (to October 2011)
Mr Simon Rice, OAM (Chair)
Ms Robyn Holder
Mr Peter Sutherland
Ms Kate McMullan
Chief Magistrate Lorraine Walker (from October 2011)
Mr Athol Opas
Ms Karen Wandmaker (to April 2011)
Mr Stuart Pilkinton
Ms Helen Watchirs, OAM
Assistant Commissioner Roman Quaedvlieg
Ms Veronica Wensing
Justice Richard Refshauge
Mr Jon White
Ms Agata Pukiewicz
Ms Heidi Yates (from April 2011)
used in this report
Cardinal document
is intended to identify documents which are widely
accepted as being a definitive statement of a person’s identity (eg, a
or a birth certificate).
, when it is not used in conjunction with ‘sex’ (eg
‘sex and gender’), is intended to refer to a person’s
self-identification with the presentation and lifestyle of a particular sex.
is intended to identify the sex and gender identity of people
who, because of their physiological characteristics at birth, do not
identify as
only female or only male. It does not refer to people who have changed or are
changing their identity from one sex and
gender to another. Other terms
commonly used, though not necessarily accepted as accurate by intersex people,
are androgynous and
hermaphrodite. Another common term is ‘intersex
condition’, which is objected to by some intersex people as suggesting
that intersex is an abnormal departure from the female/male norm, requiring
remedial treatment.
Reassignment surgery
is intended to refer to any surgical procedure to
effect a change to a person’s reproductive organs that is undertaken
voluntarily
by a person who wishes to change their sex and gender identity.
Another term that is commonly used is ‘sex affirmation surgery’.
, when it is not used in conjunction with ‘gender’ (eg
‘sex and gender’), is intended to refer to a person’s
biological sex, which can be any of female, male and intersex.
Sex and gender diverse
is intended to be an inclusive term to
encompass people whose sex and gender identity is something other than simply
or female’, such as intersex, transgender, transsexual,
transitioning, and not identifying as having a gender.
Transgender
, is intended to identify the sex and gender identity of
people who, having been born as physiologically either male or female, have
changed or are changing their identity from one sex and gender to another. A
transgender person is not intersex.
Inquiry into
the legal recognition of transgender and intersex people in the Australian
Capital Territory
of reference
The terms of reference for the inquiry are:
TERMS OF REFERENCE
Law Reform Advisory Council
The legal recognition of transgender and intersex people in
the Territory
January 2011
I, Simon Corbell, ask the Law Reform Advisory Council to inquire into and
report on steps necessary to provide for legal recognition
of transgender and
intersex people in the Territory, and to ensure that any such provision is
compliant with the
Human Rights Act 2004
, with particular regard to:
(a) the existing provisions of the
Births, Deaths, and Marriages
Registration Act
(b) the potential implications of legal recognition of transgender and
intersex people in the Territory for public functions or documentation
Territory and Commonwealth law, and
(c) the potential implications of legal recognition of transgender and
intersex people in the Territory for mutual recognition of
a persons’ sex
by and among the States, Territories, and Commonwealth.
position in the ACT
Sex and gender diverse people currently have
limited legal recognition in the ACT, and the coverage uses inconsistent terms.
Provisions that recognise
transgender and intersex people
The terms ‘transgender’ and ‘intersex’ are defined
sections 169A
Legislation Act 2001
ACT (amended by
Legislation (Gay, Lesbian and Transgender) Amendment Act 2003
Section 169A
transgender person
is a person who
(a) identifies as a member of a different sex by living, or seeking to live,
as a member of that sex; or
(b) has identified as a member of a different sex by living as a member of
whether or not the person is a recognised transgender person.
transgender person
includes a person who is thought of as a
transgender person, whether or not the person is a recognised transgender
recognised transgender person
is a person the record of whose
sex is altered under the
Births, Deaths and Marriages Registration Act
or the corresponding provisions of a law of a State or another
Section 169B
intersex person
is a person who, because of a genetic condition,
was born with reproductive organs or sex chromosomes that are not exclusively
The definitions support recognition that is given to sex and gender diverse
people in some circumstances in the ACT, most commonly
relating to a choice the
person can make as to the sex of a person who will conduct a body search,
Casino Control Act 2006
• ss250 and 592
Children And Young People Act 2008
Confiscation of Criminal Assets Act 2003
Corrections Management Act 2007
and as well relating to considerations when registering and managing
detainees (eg
Children And Young People Act 2008
Corrections Management Act 2007
) and when engaging in forensic
procedures (
Crimes (Forensic Procedures) Act 2000
Two things are noteworthy about these definitions. First, the definition of
a transgender person does not limit a person’s
identity to circumstances
where the person has had the record of their sex altered; self-identity is
sufficient. Secondly, the definition
of an intersex person characterises their
sex as a medical ‘condition’ which departs from the binary sexual
of female and male.
Provisions that protect
against discrimination
Discrimination 1991
(ACT) discrimination because of
‘gender identity’ is unlawful in the areas of work, education,
access to premises, provision
of goods, services, facilities and
accommodation, and club membership and benefits. ‘Gender
identity’ is defined as
(a) the identification on a genuine basis by a person of one sex as a member
of the other sex (whether or not the person is recognised
(i) by assuming characteristics of the other sex, whether by way of medical
intervention, style of dressing or otherwise; or
(ii) by living, or seeking to live, as a member of the other sex; or
(b) the identification on a genuine basis by a person of indeterminate sex as
a member of a particular sex (whether or not the person
is recognised as
(i) by assuming characteristics of that sex, whether by way of medical
intervention, style of dressing or otherwise; or
(ii) by living, or seeking to live, as a member of that sex.
Discrimination 1991
(ACT) vilification because of
‘gender identity’ is unlawful, and serious vilification because of
‘gender identity’
is an offence.
It is noteworthy that ‘gender identity’ is defined differently
from ‘transgender’ and ‘intersex’
Legislation
, but that the definition assumes that a person’s gender
identity is limited by reference to the binary sexual identity of female
Human rights
International
human rights treaties
Human rights in the
International Covenant on Civil and Political
(ICCPR) that are specifically relevant to people in the sex and
gender diverse communities include:
• the right to non-discrimination (articles 2(1) and 26)
• the right to protection from torture, cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment (article 7)
• the right of persons deprived of their liberty to be treated with
humanity and dignity (article 10(1))
• freedom of movement and travel (article 12)
• the right to recognition before the law (article 16)
• freedom from arbitrary interference with privacy and/or family life
(article 17)
• freedom of expression (article 19)
• the right to marry and found a family (article 23).
Convention on the Rights of the Child
(CRC) is broader than the
ICCPR and includes economic, social and cultural rights as well as civil and
political rights. Several
human rights in the CRC are specifically relevant to
people under the age of 18 in the sex and gender diverse communities,
• the right to non-discrimination (article 2)
• a child’s right to have their best interests as a primary
consideration in all actions concerning them (article 3)
• the right to survival and development (article 6(2))
• the preservation of identity (article 8)
• the right to express views and have those views respected (article
• the right to freedom of expression (article 13)
• the right of freedom of thought (article 14)
• the right to privacy (article 16)
• the right to protection from physical or mental violence, injury,
abuse or exploitation (article 19)
• the right to health (article 24)
• the right to an adequate standard of living (article 27).
an issues paper on human rights and gender identity, the Council of Europe
Commissioner for Human Rights, Thomas Hammarberg, said:
In principle, international human rights instruments protect everybody
without discrimination. Despite the fact that gender identity
discrimination ground, along with sexual orientation, is often not explicitly
mentioned in international human rights treaties,
these treaties do apply to all
persons through their open-ended discrimination clauses. As for the UN Covenant
on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights, this was recently confirmed by the UN
Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights which stated that
identity is recognized as among the prohibited grounds of
discrimination; for example, persons who are transgender, transsexual or
intersex often face serious human rights violations, such as harassment in
schools or in the work
Yogyakarta Principles
The Yogyakarta Principles on the application of international human rights
law in relation to sexual orientation and gender
were adopted by a group of
human rights experts in March 2007. The principles provide guidance on how
international human rights
treaties should be interpreted in relation to the
protection of gender diversity. They are not legally binding, but are an
interpretation
of existing human rights treaties from the view point of sexual
orientation and gender identity.
Yogyakarta Principle 3 outlines the right to recognition before the law for
all people regardless of gender identity:
Everyone has the right to recognition everywhere as a person before the
Persons of diverse sexual orientations and gender identities shall enjoy
legal capacity in all aspects of life.
Each person’s self-defined sexual orientation and gender identity is
integral to their personality and is one of the most basic
self-determination, dignity and freedom.
No one shall be forced to undergo medical procedures, including sex
reassignment surgery, sterilization or hormonal therapy, as a
requirement for
legal recognition of their gender identity.
No status, such as marriage or parenthood, may be invoked as such to prevent
the legal recognition of a person’s gender identity.
No one shall be subjected to pressure to conceal, suppress or deny their
sexual orientation or gender
Yogyakarta Principle 3 details actions that countries should undertake to
ensure they are not in breach of their human rights obligations.
Some actions
that are directly relevant to the legal recognition of sex include:
• taking all necessary legislative, administrative and other measures
to fully respect and legally recognise each person’s
self-defined gender
• taking all necessary legislative, administrative and other measures
to ensure that procedures exist whereby all government-issued
identity papers
which indicate a person’s gender/sex — including birth certificates,
passports, electoral records and
other documents — reflect the
person’s profound self-defined gender identity
• ensuring that such procedures are efficient, fair and
non-discriminatory, and respect the dignity and privacy of the person
• ensuring that changes to identity documents will be recognised in all
contexts where the identification or disaggregation
of people by gender is
required by law or policy.
The United Nations
In December 2008, 66 nations at the United National General Assembly,
including Australia, voted to adopt a
Statement on Human Rights, Sexual
Orientation and Gender Identity
. The Statement reaffirmed that everyone is
entitled to the enjoyment of human rights without distinction of any kind,
the principle of non-discrimination which requires that human rights
apply equally to every human being regardless of sexual orientation
identity, and called on states commit promote and protect the human rights of
all persons, regardless of sexual orientation
and gender identity.
On 17 June 2011 the United Nations Human Rights Council adopted a resolution
on the human rights of lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender
and requested the UN High
Commissioner for Human Rights to report on ‘discriminatory laws and
practices and acts of violence
against individuals based on their sexual
orientation and gender identity’. In November 2011 the UN High
Commissioner reported,
Human Rights Council will discuss that report in its 19th session, February
– March 2011.
Union Agency for Fundamental Human Rights
In June 2007 asked the European Union Agency for Fundamental Human Rights
(FRA) launched a two part project in response to a request
from the European
Parliament to develop a comparative report on homophobia and sexual orientation
discrimination in the European
Union (EU) Member States.
The first part is
legal analysis of homophobia and discrimination on grounds of sexual orientation
in the EU member states
. The resulting report,
Homophobia and
Discrimination on Grounds of Sexual Orientation in the EU Member States
– Legal Analysis
comparative
legal analysis
of the situation in the EU Member States. The FRA found that
there has been a moderate expansion of legal protection. There has been
extension of non-discrimination legislation covering sexual orientation beyond
employment in the Czech Republic and the UK. In
relation to the recognition of
gender identity as autonomous grounds or as ‘sex’ discrimination,
positive changes took
place in the Czech Republic, Sweden and the UK. Equality
bodies in Denmark and Estonia extended their mandate to cover sexual orientation
discrimination. Homophobia, transphobia and discrimination on grounds of sexual
orientation and gender identity.
The second part of the project is a comparative social analysis,
and Discrimination on Grounds of Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity in the
EU Member States: Part II - The Social
, based on data
available throughout the EU. The report covered lesbian, gay, bisexual and
transgender (LGBT) people in various areas
of social and economic life such as
access to employment, education and health care. It found that discrimination,
harassment and
violence against LGBT persons are widespread throughout the EU.
The FRA called on political decision-makers to further improve equality
legislation and ensure accurate reporting, in order to improve the
European Court of Human Rights
The European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR), applying the
Convention on Human Rights
, has ruled that states should provide transgender
persons with the possibility of undergoing surgery leading to full gender
reassignment,
and that this surgery should be covered by insurance plans as
‘medically necessary’
The Court has also ruled
that states should recognise the change of sex in identity documents.
Case of Christine Goodwin v. The United Kingdom
the Court accepted that there had been
a breach of the applicant’s rights to privacy and marriage due to her
inability to gain
legal recognition of her post-operative sex. The Court
emphasised the significant impact on the life of the applicant (and others
similar position) arising from the failure of the domestic legal system to
properly recognise a change in sex following gender
reassignment surgery. The
Court said (at para 77):
It must also be recognised that serious interference with private life can
arise when the state of domestic law conflicts with an
important aspect of
personal identity. The stress and alienation arising from a discordance between
the position in society assumed
by a post-operative transsexual and the status
imposed by law which refuses to recognise the change in gender cannot, in the
view, be regarded as a minor inconvenience arising from a
formality. A conflict between social reality and law arises which places
transsexual in an
anomalous position, in which he or she may experience feelings of
vulnerability, humiliation and anxiety.
In July 2009 the Council of Europe Commissioner for Human Rights published an
Issues Paper entitled
Human Rights and Gender Identity
. The Issue Paper
reviewed existing practices on gender reassignment and emphasised how
transgender people suffer from violations
of their human rights as a result of
the combination of cumbersome and sometimes vague legal and medical
requirements, and lengthy
processes of psychological, psychiatric and physical
tests, such as genital examinations. It concludes that:
often transgender people choose not to enter the official procedures at all
due to discriminatory medical processes and inappropriate
treatment, or due to
the fact that only one course of treatment is available. They are then, in turn,
denied legal recognition of
their preferred gender and name, or gender
reassignment treatment that fits their own wishes and personal health
The paper recommends the enactment of hate crime legislation, expeditious and
transparent procedures for changing name and sex, and
the abolishment of
sterilisation and other compulsory medical treatment as a legal requirement to
recognise a person’s gender
Capital Territory
Human Rights Act 2004
(ACT) (‘ACT HR Act’) guarantees
recognition of certain civil and political rights in the Territory. Those
relevant to
people in the sex and gender diverse communities include:
Section 8 – the right to enjoy human rights without distinction or
discrimination of any kind, and to equal and effective protection
discrimination on any ground.
Section 10 – the right not to be treated or punished in a cruel,
inhuman or degrading way.
Section 12 – right not to have privacy, family, home or correspondence
interfered with unlawfully or arbitrarily, nor to have
reputation unlawfully
Section 16 – the right to freedom of expression.
Section 16 – the right when deprived of liberty to be treated with
humanity and with respect for the inherent dignity of the
human person.
Under s40B of the HR Act, a public authority must act in a way that is
compatible with a human right, and when making a decision must
give proper
consideration to a relevant human right, unless required by law to do
Discrimination Act
, described above, is the extent to which
there is provision for the right of sex and gender diverse people in the ACT to
‘equal and effective protection against discrimination’.
Other Australian
Apart from the ACT, only Victoria guarantees recognition of certain civil and
political rights, and the relevant provisions of the
Charter of Rights and
Responsibilities Act 2006
are substantially similar to those of
the ACT HR Act.
In different terms, all jurisdictions make discrimination because of a
person’s sex and gender diversity unlawful, although
the different terms
used may limit the scope of the protection.
International
recognition of sex and gender diversity
The approach to protecting the human rights of people in the sex and gender
diverse communities is gathering momentum. Several countries
have introduced
schemes allowing individuals to change their legal sex without requiring
reassignment surgery. The following overview
deals with the some of those
countries, alphabetically.
On 30 November 2011 Argentina’s new Gender Identity law defined
‘gender identity’ as ‘the internal and individual
way in which
gender is perceived by persons, that can correspond or not to the gender
assigned at birth, including the personal experience
of the body.
This can involve modifying bodily
appearance or functions through pharmacological, surgical or other means,
provided it is freely
chosen. It also includes other expressions of gender such
as dress, ways of speaking and gestures’.
The law recognises a person’s right: to recognition of their gender
identity, to the free development of their person according
to their gender
identity, to be treated according to their gender identity, and to be identified
in that way in the documents proving
their identity in terms of the first
name/s, image and sex recorded there. To change the record of their sex, a
person must be 18
or, if under 18, must consent to have the application made by
their legal representative. They must make a formal request for amendment
their birth certificate in the records and a new national identity card (with
the same number as previously). The law is explicit
in saying that ‘in no
case will it be needed to prove that a surgical procedure for total or partial
genital reassignment,
hormonal therapies or any other psychological or medical
treatment has taken place’.
In November 2010 the FRA presented its report on
homophobia,
transphobia and discrimination on grounds of sexual orientation and gender
to Members of the European
Parliament.
It is clear that many transgender persons do not fully enjoy their
fundamental rights both at the level of legal guarantees and that
of everyday
Council of Europe Commissioner for Human Rights July 2009
The report revealed that in some EU countries, legislation and practice is
increasing the protection of lesbian, gay, bisexual and
transgender (LGBT)
persons, while in others the rights of LGBT persons are being restricted or
neglected. It found that some countries
have amended their legislation and
practice concerning access to gender reassignment treatment, and alteration of
the recorded name
or sex on official documents for those who have undergone or
intend to undergo gender reassignment.
In an updated Fact Sheet ‘Key legal trends in the protection of LGBT
rights in the European Union 2008-2010’, the FRA
noted ‘In relation
to the recognition of gender identity as autonomous ground or as
‘sex’ discrimination, positive
changes have been observed in the
Czech Republic, Sweden and the UK.’
In 2008 German Federal Constitutional Court struck down the provisions of the
German ‘transsexuellengesetz’ or ‘Transsexuals
which required proof of sex reassignment surgery and permanent infertility
before a person could legally change their
sex. The Court found that requiring
reassignment surgery was a breach of the German
Constitution
specifically in
relation to an individual’s right to sexual self-determination and
physical integrity.
The finding of the German Federal Constitutional Court reflects the March
2010 statement of the Committee of Ministers of the Council
of Europe, which
recommends that member states:
...take appropriate measures to guarantee the full legal recognition of a
person’s gender reassignment in all areas of life,
in particular by making
possible the change of name and gender in official documents in a quick,
transparent and accessible
The Committee also emphasises that ‘[p]rior requirements, including
changes of a physical nature, for legal recognition of a
gender reassignment,
should be regularly reviewed in order to remove abusive requirements’.
On 16 March 2011,
law No.7/2011
established procedures for change of name and sex in the civil register
Portugal. The law does not require divorce, sterilisation, hormonal treatment or
surgery as a condition for a person to officially
change their gender. A report
from a multidisciplinary team of experts, and subscribed by at least a physician
and a psychologist,
is required and can be presented to the civil registry with
a request for an amended birth certificate. The civil registry officers
days in which to grant the request, ask for amendments or deny the request if it
does not meet requirements. The new law conforms
Yogyakarta Principles
Since March 15, 2007, the law in Spain allows transsexual people to modify
their name and legal gender in all public documents and
records on the basis of
a personal request, regardless of whether they had genital reassignment surgery
or not. However, medical
(hormonal) treatment for at least two years and a
gender dysphoria diagnosis are a prerequisite. The hormonal treatment is not a
prerequisite if there are health or age reasons not to follow it.
United Kingdom
Gender Recognition Act 2004
was drafted in response to court
rulings from the European Court of Human Rights. The UK Act gives
and gender diverse
people legal recognition as members of the sex appropriate to their
(male or female) allowing
them to acquire a new
birth certificate
affording them full recognition of their acquired sex in law for all purposes,
including marriage. The gender recognition process
does not require applicants
to undergo reassignment surgery. They do, however, need to demonstrate that
they have suffered the medical
condition of ‘
’, that they have lived in the ‘acquired gender’
for two years, and that they intend to continue doing so until
People who have obtained
legal recognition in recognised overseas jurisdictions may obtain recognition
under the UK Act with reduced
evidentiary requirements.
Applicants present evidence to a
Gender Recognition
, which considers their case and issues a Gender Recognition
Certificate. Successful applicants are entered onto a Gender Recognition
Register, held by the Registrar General, similar in operation to the Adoptions
Register for those who have been adopted.
If the person involved is in a legally-recognised marriage they will be
issued an ‘Interim Gender Recognition Certificate’,
which can then
be used as grounds for annulment of the marriage, but otherwise has no status.
After annulment, a full Certificate
A Birth Certificate drawn from the Gender Recognition Register is
indistinguishable from any other birth certificate, and indicates
the new legal
sex and name. It can be used whenever a birth certificate is used, such as for
issue of a passport. The record of birth
that shows the previous legal gender
continues to exist, and will carry no indication that there is an associated
Gender Recognition
Certificate or alternative birth certificate. Certain
authorised agencies, with court permission, may have access to the Gender
Recognition
Register showing the links between these certificates, but the link
is not accessible to the general public. This is the same approach
as is taken
under the UK Adoption Register.
United States of America
In October 2009, Uruguay legislated to permit sex and gender diverse people
to register a change of name and gender identity, and
to obtain official
document s such as a birth certificate and passport in that name and gender.
There are no nationally consistent procedures to
assist transgender, transsexual or intersex people who wish to change the record
of their sex in official documents such as birth certificates, medical records,
bank statements or employment records. The Australian
Human Rights Commission
Sex Files Report
recommended that States and Territories adopt a
consistent approach to legal recognition through a national approach to law
A consistent approach across Australia that enables sex and gender
diverse people confirm their identity a cardinal document will
make it simpler
to amend the record of their sex on secondary documents and records.
Birth certificates and
sexual reassignment
All Australian State and Territory jurisdictions
require some form of sexual reassignment surgery to alter birth certificates.
High Court decision in
AB v Western Australia
, discussed below, has
raised questions about the relevance of a surgery requirement to recognition of
a person’s gender identity.
The following table of Australian provisions for changing the record of sex
is based on a table in the Australian Human Rights Commission’s
Criteria for requesting
a change in sex noted on birth
certificate
State/Territory
Adults (18 or over) can apply?
Guardian of children (under 18) can apply?
Birth must be registered in the jurisdiction?
Must have undergone surgery to alter reproductive organs?
Must first obtain a gender recognition certificate
Authority must be satisfied as to other factors
Must be unmarried?
Yes, or the relevant surgery was carried out in SA
Yes, or the person must be a resident of Vic who lives in Vic and has done
so for 12 months
Yes, or the person must be a resident of WA who lives in WA and has done so
for 12 months, or the relevant surgery was carried out
reports on sex and gender diversity in Australia
reports and inquiries
The issue of legal recognition of sex and gender diversity has been the
subject of a number of reports and inquiries in the ACT and
nationally.
ACT Government Discrimination report
In 2003 the ACT Government tabled a report in the Legislative Assembly titled
Discrimination and Gay, Lesbian, Bisexual, Transgender and Intersex People in
(‘2003 ACT report’). This report followed community
consultations in the ACT and, among other issues, reported on the
community’s views on legal recognition.
Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission report
Same-Sex: Same
Entitlements
In 2006-7, the then Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission (now the
Australian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) undertook a
National Inquiry into
Discrimination against People in Same-Sex Relationships: Financial and
Work-Related Entitlements and Benefits
(‘Same-Sex: Same Entitlements
Inquiry’). The final report of the Same-Sex: Same Entitlements Inquiry was
tabled in Parliament
on 21 June 2007.
During the inquiry the AHRC received submissions from members of the sex and
gender diverse communities about the discrimination they
experienced. One of the
principal concerns was that many people in the sex and gender diverse
communities are not able to change
the record of their sex in official documents
or government records.
Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission
Issues Paper
On 9 May 2008, the Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission (HREOC)
released an issues paper on sex and gender
. The paper sought the
views of the sex and gender diverse communities about the most pressing human
rights issues faced by people
who are transgender, transsexual or intersex.
The Issues Paper outlined four broad areas of concern:
• the ability to change or correct official and identity documents
• health policy and services
• protection from discrimination, and
• education and awareness.
Responses to the Issues Paper noted that the issues are interrelated. For
example, a discussion on the need for legal recognition
and the ability to
change documents also requires discussion about current health policy and a
requirement for sexual re-assignment
surgery. A majority of responses reported
that having their sex or gender appropriately recorded (including the ability to
not conform
solely to a particular sex or gender) on official documents and
records is principal concern.
Australian Human Rights Commission report
Sex and gender diversity - initial
consultation
In July 2008, the then Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission (now the
AHRC) released a report titled
Sex and gender diversity - Report of initial
consultation
followed a series of public meetings held in Melbourne, Brisbane, Sydney, Perth
and Canberra by the Human Rights Commissioner,
Graeme Innes. These meetings were
an opportunity for the Commissioner to report on the material gathered during
the initial consultation
and for members of the sex and gender diverse
communities to raise specific issues. AHRC received 51 written responses from a
of individuals and organisations from the sex and gender diverse
communities.
The responses relating to official and identity documents revealed that there
are many situations when people in the sex and gender
diverse communities need
to present documents that contain information about their sex or gender. While
Australia does have systems
that enable the record on official documents to be
changed, not all people in the sex and gender diverse communities can make use
of those systems. For example the systems may:
• not allow people who are married to change some or all of their
• not allow a change without having undergone reassignment surgery.
• not offer legal recognition for people who do not identify as
strictly male or female.
Respondents suggested that the process for changing documents needs to be
streamlined through a central agency, that the laws should
be changed to follow
the UK or Spanish system, and that documents should provide multiple options for
sex or gender.
Australian Human Rights Commission
blog and discussion board
In August 2008, the AHRC launched an online blog and discussion board known
blog provided an innovative online consultation with people in the sex and
gender diverse communities and specifically sought
discussion and debate on
contentious issues concerning sex and gender diversity. Participants were able
to post anonymously as a
guest to the blog or to register as a participant and
receive updates about the discussions. Over 9,000 unique visitors visited the
Sex Files site, 389 comments were posted and 94 participants were listed as
registered to the site.
Australian Human Rights Commission report
In March 2009, the AHRC published the Sex Files
The report made 15
recommendations:
1. Marital status should not be a relevant consideration as to whether or not
a person can request a change in legal sex.
2. The definition of sex affirmation treatment should be broadened so that
surgery is not the only criteria for a change in legal
Sex and/or gender
identity defines a person’s sense of self and positions them in a social
and political context. Every person
has the right for their sex and/or gender
identity to be recognised and respected.
Sex Files Report 4.1
The evidentiary requirements for the legal recognition of sex should be
relaxed by reducing the quantity of medical evidence required
and making greater
allowance for people to self-identify their sex.
The special needs of children and young people who wish to amend their
documents and records should be considered.
A person over the age of 18 years should be able to choose to have an
unspecified sex noted on documents and records.
Information on the process and criteria for the legal recognition of sex
should be easily accessible and user-friendly.
Documents of identity and processes required for the legal recognition of sex
should not reveal personal information about a person’s
past identity in
relation to sex.
Laws and processes for the legal recognition of sex should use empowering
terminology.
Where possible, sex or gender should be removed from government forms and
The federal government should consider the development of national guidelines
concerning the collection of sex and gender information
from individuals.
The federal government should take a leadership role in ensuring that there
is a nationally consistent approach to the legal recognition
accordance with the recommendations of this paper, by either:
(i) working cooperatively with state and territory governments through the
Council of Australian Governments (COAG) process to amend
their respective
legislation and policies in line with the recommendations in this paper,
particularly in relation to birth certificates,
(ii) establishing a national board with responsibility for receiving and
determining applications for official recognition of a change
in sex.........as
well as securing agreement from states and territories to recognise certificates
of recognition issued by such
12. The federal government should consider establishing a national office to
advise and assist the public and federal government in
relation to changing
legal recognition of sex, as an alternative or precursor to the national board
put forward in Recommendation
13. In the event that Recommendation 11 fails to result in sufficient support
from state and territory governments, the federal government
should consider
legislation to:
(i) amend the
Sex Discrimination Act 1984
(Cth) to ensure that the protection
against marital status discrimination applies in the context of married persons
seeking to amend
their birth certificates, to effectively override the existing
discrimination under state and territory births registration legislation
(ii) establish a minimum national standard in respect of legal recognition of
sex in documents and government records in line with
the recommendations in this
14. The federal government should harmonise policies, procedures and
legislation relevant to the legal recognition of sex in federal
documents and
15. The federal government should take immediate steps to ensure that all
federal government departments and agencies provide clear
and accessible
information relevant to legal recognition of sex in documents and records and
how those documents and records can
be amended, such as by including a page on
the department or agency’s website dedicated to this topic.
ACT Human Rights Commissioner’s advice
In 2009, the ACT Attorney-General asked the ACT Human Rights Commissioner, Dr
Helen Watchirs, inquire into human rights and discrimination
issues faced by
people in the ACT sex and gender diverse communities, and on 16 March 2010 the
Commissioner advised about issues
relevant to the operation of the
Rights Act 2004
focussed on a particular aspect of the official recognition of change of sex
Births Deaths and Marriages Registration Act 1997
Act’), and options for law reform to ensure consistency with international
human rights standards.
A Gender Agenda report
Gender Diversity in the ACT: A Survey of Trans
Experiences
In May 2011, the organisation A Gender Agenda (‘AGA’) released a
survey and report
Gender Diversity in the ACT: A Survey of Trans
Experiences.
The report was
based on a community-based survey of the issues facing people in the sex and
gender diverse communities in the ACT,
including access to health care services
and legal recognition of sex and/or gender and identity documents. There were 83
respondents
to the survey, all of whom self- identified as sex and gender
diverse. Respondents ranged from 16 to 61 years of age, with most respondents
aged between 19 and 44 years; six respondents were under 18 years of age.
Issues that emerged concern:
• access to informed and respectfully-delivered medical and
psychological services
• inadequate access to appropriate identity documentation
• the need for protection from discrimination
• lack of social connection with family and the broader community,
• over-representation in low income categories despite above average
levels of education.
developments in Australia
In October 2011, the High Court decided that under the
Gender Reassignment
legislation, transgender people have the right to have their
gender recognised after undergoing medical or surgical procedures, even
all of their reproductive organs have been
The Court decided that
the test for receiving a gender recognition certificate is not whether a person
has undertaken every surgical
procedure available, but whether they have altered
their gender characteristics sufficiently to be identified as the opposite sex;
this requires consideration of their physical characteristics (including
appearance, behaviour and lifestyle) both in private and
public, but does not
require knowledge of their bodily state or ‘remnant sexual
In 2011, the Australian Passport Office issued a policy which enables people
to obtain a passport that records their chosen sex and
gender identity. The
policy is of considerable relevance to this inquiry, and is discussed in detail
2 – THE CURRENT INQUIRY
inquiry process
Aim of the inquiry
LRAC’s terms of reference for this inquiry required it to:
1) identify the legal difficulties facing the gender and sex diverse
community in the ACT; and
2) recommend legal steps which can be taken to achieve legal recognition of
the gender and sex diverse community in the ACT.
The ACT Government has made the policy decision that the equal rights of all
transgender and intersex people will be recognised.
The question for the
inquiry is how best to do that.
The idea of ‘legal recognition’ goes beyond defining transgender,
intersex and gender identity in the
Legislation Act 2001
Discrimination Act 1991
. The import of legal recognition is that a
person’s stated sex and gender identity is formally recognised by the
and can be relied on by the person as a definitive statement of their
sex and gender identity in all circumstances, entitling the
person to access to
services, benefits and treatment in accordance with that sex and gender
of the inquiry
The inquiry was conducted by Simon Rice, with research assistance from John
Croker, Arjuna Dibley and Farah Ibrahim. John Croker,
Arjuna Dibley and
officers of the ACT Justice and Community Safety Directorate provided
administrative support.
The inquiry was overseen by a sub-committee of LRAC comprising Simon Rice,
Heidi Yates, Roman Quadvlieg, Kate McMullan and Veronica
Wensing, reporting to
LRAC as a whole.
LRAC was advised by an
subcommittee comprising Peta Bourne (ANU
College of Law), Wayne Morgan (ANU College of Law), Elizabeth Keogh (ANU College
and Zoe Brain..
The Australian National University approved the proposed ethical framework
for the conduct of the inquiry.
The inquiry was promoted on the LRAC website
<www.lawreform.act.gov.au>, and advertised in the
Canberra Times
(20 March 2011) in City News Publications in the ACT (March 2011), and in the
ANU student newspaper
(June 2011). It was discussed on two
occasions on ABC Radio 666, and on Radio National’s ‘The Law
Report’ (5 Dec
In May 2011 an Issues Paper was published and distributed for comment. The
public was invited to participate by making submissions
to the inquiry, by post,
email or telephone. The inquiry consulted with ACT public authorities. As well
it consulted confidentially
with medical practitioners and people in the sex and
gender diverse community in the ACT.
sex and gender diverse people in the ACT
Reports and inquiries since 2003 make it clear that people in the sex and
gender diverse communities – in the ACT no less than
elsewhere in
Australia – are adversely affected by a number of statutory provisions,
such as those relating to identity, to
recognition, and to access to government
On 16 May 2011, as part of its inquiry, the ACT Law Reform Advisory Council
(LRAC) published an issues paper,
Legal Recognition of the Sex and Gender
Diverse Community in the ACT.
Based on the reports and inquiries noted above, the Issues Paper identified
the following matters that relate to the terms of reference
of the inquiry, that
is, to ‘steps necessary to provide for legal recognition of transgender
and intersex people’ in
Terminology
Whether the term ‘sex and gender diversity’ adequately captures
the diversity of ways in which people may wish to identify
themselves, and
whether there are other terms which capture this diversity.
Definitions
in ACT laws
Whether the current definitions in ACT law exclude any sex and gender diverse
people and, if so, whether the definitions be more inclusive
and whether the
other terms which could be defined
Whether it is necessary to define different genders and sexes in ACT
legislation.
Self-identification
Whether self-identification – such as the measures introduced through
Legislation (Gay, Lesbian and Transgender) Amendment Act -
effective way to recognise sex and gender identity.
Notification
and registration of births generally
Whether it is necessary, when notifying the Registrar-General of a birth or
registering that birth, to specify the sex of a child.
Whether it is necessary, when notifying or registering a birth, to specify
the child’s sex within the same time limits.
Notification
and registration of intersex births
Whether, when notifying the Registrar-General of a birth or registering that
birth, there should be the option of recording the child’s
something other than ‘male’ or female’ and if so, what other
category is appropriate.
decisions at birth
When, how and by whom a decision about surgery for an intersex child should
Correcting the
Whether the provisions of the
Act which allow for change of sex,
and for correcting the register, provide sufficient opportunities for intersex
people to correct
the birth registry in the event their sex is incorrectly
identified at birth.
the record of sex and gender identity
Whether it should it be possible for a person to change the record of their
sex on the register to another category other than ‘male’
‘female’, or to remove the record of their sex and, if another
category, what that other category should be.
Whether the Registrar-General should be able to issue a certificate of change
of sexual identity only for people whose births are
registered in the ACT and if
so, how an alternative system could work.
reassignment surgery
Whether the current requirement of ‘sexual reassignment surgery’
for a person to change their sex on the birth register
should continue and, if
not, what evidence a person should be required to provide in order to change the
record of their sex on the
birth register.
of sex and gender identity
Whether sex- or gender-specific services are appropriate in some
circumstances (eg. housing, sports, health services) and, if so,
what evidence
of a person’s sex or gender identity should be required to access such
identity in ACT records
Whether, it is necessary for ACT government documents other than a birth
certificate to record a person’s sex.
Whether there is a risk that a person’s sex or gender status will be
revealed as a consequence of their having a change of name.
to the record of sex identity
Whether anyone should have access to the record of a person’s sex as it
was recorded in the register before the record was changed
and, if so, who.
recognition
Whether a person who has changed of the registration of their sex in one
State or Territory has difficulty having that change recognised
in another.
and gender recognition certificates
Whether the ACT should introduce a sex and gender recognition certificate for
people born in the ACT which can be used a conclusive
proof of a person's sex
identity among other State and Territory governments.
Whether a person who wants to apply for such a certificate should have some
specified status in the ACT (eg born in the ACT, resident
for a period, visitor,
What evidence a person applying for such a certificate should be required to
prove of their change of sex and gender.
Whether this sex and gender recognition certificate should be instead of, or
in addition to, reforms to allow change of sex to ACT
birth certificates.
Commonwealth
government functions, services and records
What Commonwealth government functions and services take notice of the
ACT’s record of a person’s sex and gender identity.
For what Commonwealth government records might a person who was born in the
ACT want to change their sex and gender identification.
recognition and acceptance
What steps other than reforms to the law will promote recognition and
acceptance of people’s sex and gender identity?
submissions
Submissions
In the period 16 May– 22 June 2011, 24 submissions were received by
post and by email; no submissions were received on the telephone
line. A public meeting was convened on 11 May 2011 at the Griffin Centre,
Canberra City, and was attended by 27 members
of the public.
Many submissions were made in confidence, on condition that the submitter is
not identified. Nevertheless, some of those submitters
agreed to their
submissions being published online, and they are available at
<www.lawreform.act.gov.au>. As well as confidential
submissions,
submissions were made by:
• ACT Human Rights and Discrimination Commissioner
• Australian Christian Lobby
• AIDS Action Council ACT
• AIS Support Group Australia
• ACT Greens
• A Gender Agenda, jointly with the Women’s Legal Centre
The majority of submissions received object to the male/female binary in
government documents and requirements; these submissions
generally relied on a
distinction between ‘sex’, referring to physical and biological
indicators elements, and ‘gender’,
referring to social construct
that need not be limited to the male/female binary.
Submissions consistently emphasise the important distinction between intersex
people and people with transgender identities. Some
submissions that oppose
broadening gender identity beyond the male/female binary nevertheless support
recognition of the identity
of intersex people.
Some submissions note the discrimination faced by people who identify as
intersex or as transgender. Submissions complain that requests
identity occur frequently, and often unnecessarily, leading to discrimination.
The unfairness of being asked about gender
identity is exacerbated by the
onerous legal requirements that exist to allow for a formal change of gender
For a long time our governments and society have viewed sex/gender
as a binary system which is fixed for life. There has been some
recognition that
intersex states exist and that individuals may change gender
expression/presentation over time. The reality is very
complex and viewing a
complex reality through a binary M/F lens results in ambiguities, absurdities
and injustices.
Individual Submission
A number of submissions address issues around the recording of sex at birth,
arising especially when it is apparent at birth that
a child is intersex. Some
submissions called for a relaxation of the time period required to register a
new-born child’s sex,
and some called for allowing the decision to
register a child’s sex to be made by child perhaps as late as when they
adolescence. A minority of submissions received called for the current
system of registration of sex at birth to be maintained.
[A]ny departure from
a traditional understanding [of gender] is to be avoided where possible and
approached with extreme caution where
Submission from Australian Christian Lobby
A significant majority of submissions call for the abolition of the current
condition of reassignment surgery for the registration
of a change of sex.
Submissions were received from individuals who have had the ‘expensive,
unnecessary and dangerous’
surgery, and from those who have not had the
surgery because of cost and health concerns. A number of submissions refer to
the ‘socially
constructed’ nature of gender, and point out that
surgery makes no difference to actual gender presentation or to a person’s
own gender identity. This foreshadowed the view taken by the High Court,
described above.
A few submissions oppose any change to the existing legislative provisions
for registration of a change of sex. This objection is
based on the
‘clinical’ classification of transgender identity as a psychological
‘disorder’, and an argument
that such a disorder should not be
entrenched in legal provisions.
A number of submissions raise issues that were beyond the ambit of the
reference for this enquiry. People identifying as being transgender
importance that local groups such as
A Gender Agenda
play in providing
support services, education to the broader ACT community, and social
opportunities for transgender people in Canberra.
Some submissions call for
financial support to be provided by the ACT government to allow this work to
It’s cruel, inhumane and totally unjust to make people have
surgery to be recognized , when surgery isn't an option for so many
medical or monetary reasons or whatever their self-belief. Not being able to
have the correct gender on certain documentation
makes me feel uncomfortable and
apprehensive about entering certain services. Which services? Anything I’d
have to show my
drivers licence for!
Individual submission
Some submissions raise experiences of discrimination and hardship experienced
in other jurisdictions. One submission provides lengthy
documentation of
discrimination experienced when applying for access to services and a change in
name and gender in Victoria.
Another submission records what was required when the person changed their
gender in the United Kingdom, and how this change was then
treated by the
Australian government.
Some submissions did not address the issues raised in the paper but instead
noted either their broad support or broad opposition to
changes being
implemented by the ACT.
2.4 Further
consultations
LRAC consulted confidentially with medical practitioners, and with ACT public
authorities including the Office of Regulatory Services,
and the Directorates of
Health, Justice and Community Safety, Education and Training, Community
Services, and Territory and Municipal
Services. These consultations were an
important step towards understanding the practical considerations that arise
when giving effect
to a principled commitment to legal recognition.
Discussion of
Terminology
In general discussion and in legislation, it is desirable that consistent
terms are used to adequately and appropriately refer to
people who identify as
other than simply ‘male’ and ‘female’.
The terms of reference for the current inquiry refer to ‘transgender
and intersex people’, which are terms currently used
in ACT law. The term
‘gender and sex diverse community’ was used in the 2009 Australian
Human Rights Commission
‘Gender diversity’ is the term used by the community group A
Gender Agenda, and the term ‘gender diverse’
is used by the ACT
Human Rights Commissioner in her submission to this
Current United Nations
human rights terminology is limited to ‘transgender’.
The constitution of the National LGBTI Health Alliance uses the term
‘sex and gender diversity’, and a majority of submissions
inquiry agreed that the term ‘sex and gender diverse’ is appropriate
terminology.
It is the view of the Council
that reference should consistently be
made to ‘sex and gender diversity’, ‘sex and gender diverse
and ‘people in sex and gender diverse communities’.
When necessary, specific reference should be made to
‘transgender’, a ‘transgender person’, and
‘transgender
people’ to refer to people who, having been born as
physiologically either male or female, have changed or are changing their
identity from one sex and gender to another.
When necessary, specific reference should be made to ‘intersex’,
an ‘intersex person’, and ‘intersex
people’ to refer to
people who, because of their physiological characteristics at birth, do not
identify as only female or
only male. The term intersex should not be used to
refer to or include people who have changed or are changing their identity from
one sex and gender to another.
It is necessary therefore to amend, at least, the BDMR Act, which refers
throughout to ‘transsexual’ people, and the
Discrimination
which refers in
to the attribute of ‘gender
Definitions
in ACT laws
The terms ‘transgender’ and ‘intersex’ are defined
sections 169A
and 69B of the
Legislation Act 2001
Section 169A
(1) A transgender person is a person who
(a) identifies as a member of a different sex by living, or seeking to live,
as a member of that sex; or
(b) has identified as a member of a different sex by living as a member of
whether or not the person is a recognised transgender person.
(2) A transgender person includes a person who is thought of as a transgender
person, whether or not the person is a recognised transgender
(3) A recognised transgender person is a person the record of whose sex is
altered under the
Births, Deaths and Marriages Registration Act 1997
or the corresponding provisions of a law of a State or another
Section 169B
An intersex person is a person who, because of a genetic condition, was born
with reproductive organs or sex chromosomes that are
not exclusively male or
As noted above, the definition of an intersex person characterises their sex
as a medical ‘condition’ which departs from
the binary sexual
identity of female and male.
Submissions to this inquiry are consistent with previous reports, which note
the limitations of the binary approach to defining sexual
identity. The binary
fails to recognise people who are intersex and whose identity is beyond the
There are currently no definitions of ‘male’ or
‘female’ in ACT legislation. In her submission to the inquiry,
ACT Human Rights Commissioner noted that this exclusion normalises these two
genders, which are then given their ordinary binary
meaning. As noted above, the
Discrimination Act 1991
similarly relies on the female/male binary when
defining ‘gender identity’. In the Commissioner’s view,
would improve the integrity of demographic measurements to expand
the definitions of gender and sex in ACT
legislation’.
Despite extensive calls in submissions to this inquiry to ‘break the
binary’, there is a significant need for people who
have changed their sex
and gender identity to have their chosen sexual identity recognised within the
binary. A person who has transitioned
from one sex to another usually wants
their ‘new’ sexual identity to be respected. As well, submissions
show that some
people who are in the process of transitioning from one sex to
another also want their transitioning sexual identity to be respected,
those who are not intersex but who choose to live with no sexual identity or
officially as ‘no sex’.
It is the view of the Council
that it is not necessary or appropriate
to define ‘female’ or ‘male’ in ACT legislation. Those
have an ordinary binary meaning and legislation is not necessary
confirm that. It is, however, appropriate to define terms of sex
diversity that are outside these binary terms, so that diverse sex and gender
identity is given recognition as a part
of a process of its being
normalised.
It is the view of the Council
that the definition of
‘transgender’ in the
Legislation Act 2001
is appropriate and
sufficient.
It is the view of the Council
that in the definition of
‘intersex’ in the
Legislation Act 2001
, reference to a
‘a genetic condition’ as the reason for a person’s intersex
status is inappropriate, and that it
is sufficient to refer to the fact that an
intersex person’s reproductive organs or sex chromosomes that are not
exclusively
male or female.
It is the view of the Council
that it is not possible to give legal
recognition to people who are in the process of changing their identity from one
sex and gender
to another (‘transitioning’), or to those who want
‘no sex’ status.
Legal status requires a higher degree of certainty of identity than the
statuses of ‘transitioning’, and ‘no sex’
example, if allowance were made for a person who does not identify as any sex,
provision would have to be made for a
person to receive a new birth certificate
which showed their sex as ‘unspecified’, or as a blank. Advice from
of Regulatory Services is that this would significantly undermine the
validity of a birth certificate as a cardinal document of identity.
comply with the national framework for registry documentation, which requires
consistency across jurisdictions in the
way in which secondary documents
accurately reflect the cardinal record. The Council does not recommend that a
new birth certificate
can be issued which shows a person’s sex as
‘unspecified’, or as a blank.
Although transitional and ‘no sex’ status cannot be captured in
law in a meaningful way, the Council notes that anti-discrimination
ACT does give protection to people on the basis of their ‘gender
identity’. The terms should be replaced,
as noted above, and should
extend to cover people who are transitioning, or who identify as having no sex.
The Council further notes
that the Council will review the
Discrimination
It is the view of the Council
that, to give legal recognition to
people who are not defined by the female/male binary, sex and gender diversity,
the BDMR ACT and
Regulations should be amended to recognise three sex and gender
identities: female, male and intersex. As a a result,
Self-identification
Self-identification alone is not accepted under any Australian law as
evidence of change of sex.
Research conducted by A Gender Agenda, in their 2011 study of experiences of
the sex and gender diverse communities in the ACT, reveals
that most respondents
(64 per cent) believe that the record of a person’s sex should be changed
on the basis of making a statutory
declaration stating their self-identification
as a particular gender; 27 per cent of respondents felt that, in addition, the
of some form of ‘letter of support’ from a medical or
psychological professional should be required; and 6 per cent of
respondents
believed that some non-surgical medical intervention should also be required.
As noted above, self-identification is sufficient in the ACT for purposes of
meeting the definitions of transgender in the
Legislation Act 2001
gender identity in the
Discrimination Act 1991
It is the view of the Council
that, while it is proposed to remove the
requirements for sexual reassignment surgery for recognising a change in a
sexual identity (see below), self-identification alone is not a
sufficient threshold for legally recognising the change. Some additional
of independent confirmation will be necessary to give sufficient assurance to
those who will provide services and benefits the
basis of a person’s sex
and gender identity. The form of independent confirmation is discussed below
Notification
and registration of births generally
Under s.5 of the BDMR Act, the birth of a child in the ACT must be notified
to the Registrar-General within seven days, and within
48 hours for stillbirths.
It is an offence to not notify the Registrar-General of a birth with the
specified information. The notification
must provide specified information which
includes the child’s sex (BDMR Regulation clause 4(1)(b)).
Under ss.7-14 of the BDMR Act, the birth of a child in the ACT must be
registered (as well, the birth of a child born during a flight
airport, and of a child born outside Australia whose birth has not been
registered in another country and who becomes a
resident of the ACT, may be
registered in the ACT). It is an offence to not register the birth of a child
born in the ACT within
60 days. The entry in the register must record the
child’s sex (BDMR Regulation clause 4(1)(b)).
Under s.69 of the
Act, the forms for notification and
registration of a birth – ‘Notification of Birth not Occurring in a
(Form 218) and ‘Birth Registration Statement’ (Form
201) – are legislative instruments that must be complied with.
currently require that the sex of a child be marked as either ‘male’
or ‘female’. Similarly, hospitals
must electronically notify the
Registrar-General
of a birth. The electronic notification protocol
requires a hospital to enter the sex of the newborn child as ‘male’
or ‘female’.
The birth notification and registration requirements are unremarkable, except
for some intersex children, discussed below. Recognition
of intersex people
raises the issue of reliance in the notification and registration on the
female/male binary, and that is dealt
with below.
It was submitted to this inquiry that the sex of a child not be recorded at
all. The Council is aware, however, of the requirements
of the national
framework for registry documentation, under which all Australian jurisdictions
mutually recognise each other’s
cardinal documents, and of the use made by
governments of data relating to the distribution of sex and gender identities in
public services [insert Women’s data requirement reference].
It is clear that any provisions for registering a child’s sex at or
soon after their birth must be complemented by the opportunity
to later amend
that record. That is in fact the case in the ACT, but the options at this stage
are limited to the female/male binary.
As a result, an intersex person who does
not identify with the sex recorded for them at birth is able to change the
record of their
sex to the other sex in the binary, but not to
‘intersex’.
Notification
and registration of intersex births, and decisions at birth
As noted above, there is currently no option
Act to notify or register an intersex birth. The birth
notification and registration requirements limit the recording of a
sex to the female/male binary, precluding the opportunity for
parents to register a child’s sex as ‘intersex’.
in the register persists during a person’s life so that a person who later
learns that they are intersex, and wants
their intersex status to be recognised,
cannot later change their sex to ‘intersex’.
It is not always apparent from physical observation that a child is intersex,
and a child’s being intersex may not be known
until the results of tests
are known. Intersex status can be a question of degree, and many intersex
people comfortably identify
as either female or male; some people living as
female or male are unaware of their being intersex.
There are occasions when a child’s intersex status is known at or soon
after their birth. Immediate surgery may be required
for any intersex child to
address a health- or life-threatening physiological phenomenon, such as not
having a functioning urinary
tract. But leaving aside that necessary medical
intervention, for a child who is known to be intersex at or soon after their
the time limits for recording a child’s sex mean that when it is
known at or soon after their birth that a child is intersex,
a decision must be
made within the time limit to record their sex within the female/male binary.
Parents may choose not to register their child as intersex, and it is common
for parents, in consultation with medical practitioners,
to assign a gender
identity to an intersex child; this often involves surgery and medical treatment
to ‘confirm’ the
chosen gender identity. The chosen gender identity
is the ‘sex’ that is recorded when formally notifying and
registering
the child’s birth. It will not be known until the child
matures whether the choice as to their gender identity, made at birth
implemented through surgery and medical treatment, was in fact correct.
There are no specific laws or policies in the ACT law or in the ACT public
health system about procedures in relation to intersex
surgery for children.
Decisions on this issue are made by the person with long-term care
responsibilities for the child, usually
the parents (s.20 of the
Young People Act 2008
) in consultation with a medical practitioner
Submissions to this inquiry, previous reports, and research suggest that parents
given the opportunity to inform themselves about intersex status, and to
obtain advice about what if any steps they should take to
confirm a particular
sex and gender identity for their child, and at what stage if at all those steps
should be taken (see below).
The current time limits adds considerably to any
stress that parents feel in having to make unexpected decisions about their
sex and gender identity.
Under the Act, the Registrar-General may accept a birth registration
statement which does not record the child’s sex when it
practicable to obtain the missing particulars’ (s.9 (2)(b)). In those
circumstances, the child’s sex can
be recorded as
‘Indeterminate’ in the birth register, and a birth certificate can
also be issued to that effect. However,
in practice, this provision is used only
to register the birth of a stillborn child who dies so prematurely that their
readily be determined.
It may be that a child who is intersex will not be aware of their actual sex
and gender identity at least until they are in adolescence.
From time to time
the Family Court is asked to make decisions relating to medical treatment that
will help a child change their
sex and gender
Clearly any
provisions for registering a child’s sex at or soon after their birth must
be complemented by the opportunity
to later amend that record. That is in fact
the case in the ACT, but the options are currently limited to the female/male
As a result, an intersex person who does not identify with the sex
recorded for them at birth is able to change the record of their
other sex in the binary, but not to ‘intersex’.
It is the view of the Council
that the sex of a child when it is
(Regulation 4(1)
BDMR Regulation
) should be any of
female, male, intersex or ‘to be advised’. These four options allow
time for parents and guardians
time to understand more fully their child’s
sex and gender in cases when it is apparent that the child is intersex. The
‘to be advised’ allows parents and guardians to consult with
medical practitioners and decide on a child’s sex
at some time after the
birth. It is not appropriate to rely on s9(2)(b) which allows the recording of
a child’s sex as ‘Indeterminate’
as that fails to give legal
recognition to intersex status.
It is the view of the Council
that the current 60 days allowed for the
registration
of the sex of child (Regulation 5
BDMR Regulation
should be extended to 180 days. This allows parents the opportunity to inform
themselves about intersex status, and to obtain advice
they should take to confirm a particular sex and gender identity for their
child, and at what stage if at
all those steps should be taken. At any stage
thereafter, the parents or child will be able to amend the recorded sex by
the register (see below).
It is the view of the Council
that to give legal recognition to
intersex people, the available categories for the registration of a
person’s sex should be
any of female, male, or intersex. This will ensure
that if a decision was made to assign a sex to an intersex child, and it later
becomes apparent that the assigned sex does not align with the person’s
sex and gender identity, it is possible for the person
to alter the record of
their sex not only to male or female as the case may be, but also to
the register
Under Section 24 of the BDMR Act a person is able to change the record of
their birth sex only if they were born in the ACT and have
‘sexual reassignment surgery’; similarly, a parent or guardian of a
child may apply to change the record of
a child’s sex when the
child’s birth is registered in the ACT and the child has undergone sexual
reassignment surgery.
An application can be made to change the record of sex from male to female or
from female to male. The Registrar-General must decide
to refuse or agree to an
application, and a decision to refuse can be reviewed by the ACT Civil and
Administrative Tribunal (Schedule
1 BDMR Act).
Under s.40 of the
Act the birth register can be corrected by the
Registrar-General to bring an entry ‘into conformity with the most
information available’. Although this allows an intersex person
whose birth is registered in the ACT to change the record of
their sex which was
made at birth, if they provide reliable information as to their intersex status
at birth, it is not possible
for an intersex person to identify their sex as
‘intersex’.
If effect is given to the Council’s view, above, that the available
categories for the registration of a person’s sex
should be any of female,
male, or intersex, an intersex person will be able to change the record of their
birth sex appropriately.
Alternatively, an intersex person will be able to rely
on the procedures for changing the record of their sex, discussed below.
the record of sex and gender identity
Section 24 of the BDMR Act allows a person to apply to change the record of
their birth sex under certain conditions. The conditions
under which a person
may apply to change the record of their birth sex are that they were born in the
ACT, they are at least 18 years
old or are represented by their parent or
guardian, and they have undergone ‘sexual reassignment surgery’. A
requirement that the person be ‘unmarried’ was removed in
The requirement that the person was born in the ACT is necessary, as the
Registrar-General has the power to change the records only
of people born in the
ACT. The position of people in the ACT who were born outside the ACT is
discussed below, where the Council
suggests a certification procedure. The
requirement that a person undergo sexual reassignment surgery is highly
controversial, and
is discussed below, where the Council states its view that
the requirement should be abolished.
Under s.27, if the Registrar-General agrees to change the record of sex, a
new birth certificate is issued which records that changed
sex, but which does
not include words which indicate that the person has changed sex. This revised
birth certificate can be used
as conclusive evidence of a person’s sex for
any law in the ACT (s.29(1)
Because of the currently high threshold for establishing a new sex and gender
identity (reassignment surgery), the Office of Regulatory
Services is
comfortable that there is a low risk of fraud when it issues a birth certificate
that does not track the history of changed
gender identity, that is, a low risk
of someone obtaining a new certificate with a new identity while still able to
present as a
person of the birth sex. The original certificate showing their
birth sex is invalidated for purposes of the national Certification
Service (CVS), although that invalidation will only be known to agencies with
access to the CVS; agencies which accept
a birth certificate on its face are
always vulnerable to fraud.
If effect is given to the Council’s view, above, that the available
categories for the registration of a person’s sex
should be any of female,
male, or intersex, a person will be able to apply to change the record of their
birth sex to any of those
categories. The current Application Form (Form 204
– approved form AF 2011-118 under the BDMR Act (s69)), for example, will
require re-drafting as it currently recognises only two sexes, male and female.
It is the view of the Council
that the scope of s.29(1)
Act, which states that a certificate is conclusive evidence of the
person’s sex ‘for the purposes of any territory law’
state, as well, that a certificate is conclusive evidence of the person’s
sex in all areas of activity described in
Discrimination
The Council rejected a proposal that a birth certificate could, at the
person’s option, not record any sex identity for the
person. The Office
of Regulatory Services cautioned that a birth certificate that does not record a
person’s sex (at birth
or as changed), may not be recognised by the CVS.
As well, and ACT public authorities advised that they would not be comfortable
relying on such certificates as proof of identity.
reassignment
The current
requirement
Under Section 24 of the BDMR Act a person must undergo ‘sexual
reassignment surgery’ to apply to alter the record of their
‘Sexual reassignment surgery’ is defined to mean:
a surgical procedure involving the alteration of a person’s
reproductive organs that is carried out (a) for the purpose of assisting
person to be considered to be a member of the opposite sex; or (b) to correct or
eliminate an ambiguity relating to the sex of
the person.
This is more onerous than, for example, the Western Australian requirement
that was considered by the High Court in the case of
(above), because
requires ‘a surgical procedure’ rather than allowing ‘a
medical or surgical procedure’.
A person must provide the Registrar-General with a statutory declaration from
each of two doctors verifying that the person has had
‘sexual reassignment
surgery’, and some additional information (clause 6 of the
Regulations).
Previous reports, international developments, human rights considerations,
the recent High Court case of
, and submissions to and consultations by
this inquiry leave the Council in no doubt that the requirement for sexual
reassignment
surgery as a prerequisite for legal recognition of a change of sex
should be abolished. The surgery is expensive, invasive and discriminates
against people who choose not to – or are unable to – have surgery.
In any event, as evidence canvassed in the High
Court case makes clear, the
surgery cannot fully re-assign sexual organs. The requirement that a person
must undergo ‘sexual
reassignment surgery’ to apply to alter the
record of their sex can rightly be said to be
‘inhumane’;
violates a person’s human rights, most seriously by denying them equal
legal status unless they submit to invasive medical
procedures.
It is the view of the Council
that the requirement in the ACT for a
person to undergo sexual reassignment surgery change the record of their sex be
Although not as high as requiring surgery, the threshold for changing the
record of a person’s sex must be high enough to maintain
comfort as to risk of fraud, to be recognised within the national network of
registries, and to be accepted by public
authorities and generally in the
community. As discussed above, self-identification alone is not a sufficient
threshold. Some additional
form of independent confirmation will be necessary
to give sufficient assurance to those who will provide services and benefits the
basis of a person’s sex and gender identity.
Policy of the Passport
While this inquiry was underway, the Australian Passport Office announced
significant and relevant policy changes.
A passport is a cardinal identity document in Australia. Australia issues
passports in accordance with International Civil Aviation
Organisation (ICAO)
requirements, and current policy is to issue passports with a sex shown in
accordance with the sex shown on the
applicant’s birth certificate. The
Passport Office and the ICAO are both currently operating within a non-binary
which allows passport holders to identify as male/female/X.
It is now possible for an eligible person to obtain an Australian passport
(or Document of Identity
shows their sex and gender identity when it is different from the sex recorded
on their birth certificate, without requiring
reassignment surgery, and which
shows an X for the sex of an intersex person.
Sex and Gender Diverse Passport Applicants
Sex reassignment surgery is not a prerequisite to issue a passport in a new
gender. Birth or citizenship certificates do not need
to be amended for sex and
gender diverse applicants to be issued a passport in their preferred gender.
A letter from a medical practitioner certifying that the person has had, or
is receiving, appropriate clinical treatment for gender
transition to a new
gender, or that they are intersex and do not identify with the sex assigned to
them at birth, is acceptable.
The letter will only be accepted from practitioners registered with the
Medical Board of Australia (or equivalent overseas authority).
‘Appropriate clinical treatment’ does not have to be specified.
A full validity passport in a new sex may also be issued to applicants who
have undergone sex reassignment surgery and have registered
their change of sex
with Registrars of Births, Deaths and Marriages (RBDM) or the Department of
Immigration and Citizenship (DIAC).
A passport may be issued to sex and gender diverse applicants in M (male), F
(female) or X (indeterminate/unspecified/intersex).
Applicants must meet all other normal passport requirements, such as
providing proof of identity documents to support their identity
in the wider
The policy removes unnecessary obstacles to recording a person’s
preferred gender in their passport and was developed in close
consultation with
sex and gender diverse community organisations in Australia.
This initiative is in line with the Australian Government’s commitment
to remove discrimination on the grounds of sexual orientation
or sex and gender
In practical terms, the policy of the Passports Office is a benchmark for all
Australian jurisdictions. To the considerable extent
to which a passport is a
cardinal identity document, it can operate instead of a birth certificate as a
statement of a person’s
sex and gender identity. As well, it is available
to Australian citizens regardless of their place of birth.
As a result, regardless of reforms in the ACT, many people now have access to
a cardinal identity document – a passport –
which recognises their
sex and gender identity. The continuing relevance of a birth certificate as a
statement of a person’s
sex and gender identity will be limited to those
occasions when an agency chooses to rely on it and not on a passport, when a
has not obtained or is not eligible for a passport. It can be assumed
that an eligible person who wants a cardinal identity document
that states their
changed sex and gender identity will apply for a passport.
Although it is not intended, it seems likely that the policy of the Passports
Office will be the benchmark for at least all Commonwealth
agencies, and
possibly nationally, for whenever a person wishes to change their sex and gender
It is the view of the Council
that the requirement in the ACT for a
person’s changing the record of a their sex should be no higher than the
requirement
of the Commonwealth Government for a person’s recording their
sex on a passport.
Proposed criteria of
changing sex and gender identity in the ACT
It is the view of the Council
that the current requirement for sexual
reassignment surgery be removed from the
Births, Deaths and Marriages
Registration Act
and that the Act be amended in terms that are substantially
similar to the policy of the Passport Office. The proposed amendments
(1) A person may apply to the registrar-general for alteration of the record
of the person’s sex in the registration of the
person’s birth
(a) the person is at least 18 years old; and
(b) the person’s birth is registered in the ACT; and
the person has undergone sexual reassignment surgery
the application is supported by a letter from a medical practitioner, nurse
or psychologist (registered as a health practitioner with
the relevant National
Health Practitioner Board under the National Registration and Accreditation
Scheme, or equivalent overseas
authority) certifying that the person has had, or
is receiving, appropriate clinical treatment for gender transition to a new
or that they are intersex and do not identify with the sex assigned to
them at birth.
(1A) ‘Appropriate clinical treatment’ does not have to be
(2) The parents or guardian of a child may apply to the Registrar-General for
alteration of the record of the child’s sex in
the registration of the
child’s birth if—
(a) the child’s birth is registered in the ACT; and
the child has undergone sexual reassignment surgery
the application is supported by a letter from a medical practitioner, nurse
or psychologist (registered as a health practitioner with
the relevant National
Health Practitioner Board under the National Registration and Accreditation
Scheme, or equivalent overseas
authority) certifying that the child is intersex
and does not identify with the sex assigned to them at birth
The proposed amendments differ from the policy of the Passport Office only in
that reference to ‘medical practitioner’
has been extended to
include reference to ‘nurse or psychologist’. This recognises that
the nature of what is being
certified is not uniquely known by a medical
practitioner, that some people will not have ready access to a medical
practitioner,
and that some people may find those health professionals more
accessible or sympathetic.
Reliance on health practitioners to establish sex and gender identity is a
step beyond self-recognition, discussed above, and suggests
a medicalising of
non-binary sex and gender identity. There is, however, no realistic alternative
– realistic in that the
procedure sufficiently robust to be accepted as
reliable and not likely to be subject to fraud. It is essential to the
acceptability
of the scheme that a person’s self-identification is
corroborated in some meaningful way.
It is noted above that the high threshold of reassignment surgery to
establish a new sex and gender identity gives the Office of Regulatory
comfort that there is a low risk of fraud through a person’s obtaining a
new certificate with a new sex while still
able to present as a person of their
birth sex. If the threshold for establishing a new gender identity is not as
high as requiring
surgery, it nevertheless needs to be high enough to maintain a
level of comfort as to risk of fraud, to be accepted within the national
of registries, and to be relied on generally. In consultations, the Office of
Regulatory Services that there is a low risk
of fraud under the policy of the
Passport Office, and ACT public authorities agreed that they would be
comfortable relying on certificates
issued by the Office of Regulatory Services
according to a policy such as that of the Passport Office.
An alternative to corroboration by health professionals could be, for
example, corroboration by people recognised under the
Oaths and Affirmations
. But in the absence of any standard against which they can say a person
has changed their sex (where a health professionals can refer
‘appropriate treatment’), people recognised under the
Affirmations Act
can only say what the person themselves has said about
their change of sex. This is not sufficiently removed from self-identification,
and is not robust enough to satisfy the public authorities of the reliability of
the claimed change of sex.
Overall, the Passport office standard offers objective verification of a
change of sex at a low level of ‘medicalisation’,
and has been
accepted by representatives of the sex and gender diverse community.
of sex and gender identity in ACT
sex and gender identity
There are occasions when a person’s sex and gender identification is
taken into consideration, on forms and documents, for access
to services and
benefits, and when being dealt with by the criminal legal system. Some of these
requirements for sex identification
appear to be irrelevant. The Human Rights
Commissioner notes, for example, the requirement that the sex of electors must
be included
on the electoral role (
Electoral Act 1992
(ACT)). The Human
Rights Commissioner has suggested that requests for disclosure of sex and gender
identity be prohibited except
where the requestor can demonstrate a legitimate
purpose for the information.
Discrimination Act
currently prohibits requesting or requiring
information from a person in connection with discriminatory conduct because of a
gender identity.
It is the view of the Council
that it is not appropriate at this stage
to prohibit, more broadly than the
Discrimination Act
already does,
requests for disclosure of gender identity unless a legitimate need can
demonstrated. To do so would hamper the necessary
collection and use of such
information for purposes of efficient service provision, effective planning, and
accurate monitoring of
different sexes participation. Further, it would require
a very extensive and continuing monitoring and enforcement capacity, even
limited to public authorities and not extending to private conduct.
The desired end of ensuring that a person’s sex and gender identity is
sought only when relevant can be achieved by other means,
such as the educative
value of the adoption of the recommendations in this report, and the conduct of
the audit – see next.
The need to know sex and
gender identity
Consultations with public authorities for this inquiry illustrated occasions
when it is necessary to know a person’s sex and
gender identity, such in
the provision of certain emergency, health and education services. On some such
occasions, particularly
in emergency situations when a person is unconscious or
otherwise unable to communicate, an officer of a public may have to make
own judgement in recording a person’s sex and gender identity.
When a person is required to disclose their sex and gender identity by a
public authority, it is appropriate that the person knows
what has been
recorded, that it is accurate, and that it can be amended. This is recognised
by, for example, the Information Privacy
Principles under the
(Cth), and the
Health Records (Privacy and Access) Act 1997
At the same time, officers of public authorities need to be confident that
they can request a person to disclosure their sex and gender
identity, and that
they can, if circumstances dictate, make their own judgement in recording a
person’s sex and gender identity.
It is the view of the Council
that 2003 ACT Report audit of ACT laws
which require a person to identify their sex and gender should be updated and
extended to
laws and practices, and that the need for those requirements should
be reviewed with the intention of removing whenever possible
a requirement that
a person identify their sex and gender.
It is the view of the Council
that when an ACT public authority
identifies and/or records a person’s sex
• the person is entitled to inspect the record, and to have their sex
identified and/or recorded (and if necessary amended)
in accordance with their
sex as registered under the
Births Deaths and Marriages Act
• no liability should attach to a person who, on behalf of an ACT
public authority, incorrectly records a person’s sex.
Statistical categories
of sex and gender identity
A record of sex identity is still required in binary terms (male or female)
under the BDMR Act.
Domestic partnerships are defined under the
Legislation (Gay, Lesbian and
Transgender) Amendment Bill 2002
without any presumption as to the sex and
gender identities of the people in the partnership, and ACT drivers’
licences make
no reference to the holder’s sex and gender identity. It
has been suggested that all ACT laws should be amended to remove
any presumption
of sexual identity.
Whether and how to record a person’s sex and gender identity in
government records is a difficult issue. Sex and gender is recorded
statistical and operational reasons, and those two reasons give rise to
different considerations which are difficult to
accommodate in a short and
straightforward ‘form-filling’ exercise. The former requires simple
and useful categorisation
to enable the recording of social profile and
activity; the latter requires more detail to enable the respectful and
appropriate
provision of a service.
As well, whether for statistical and or operational reasons, information
is sometimes
‘allocated’ or described by a third party. Further, when the
information is provided by the person, they
sometimes do so remotely by form,
and sometimes directly in a conversation. These different circumstances and
means of collection
complicate attempts at simple categorisation.
It is the view of the Council
that if the available categories for the
registration of a person’s sex are to be any of female, male, or intersex,
least those three categories should be used in all ACT government
The categories of female, male, or intersex are, however, definitive
categories which are appropriate of registration and certification,
but are not
comprehensive when describing the various stages of sex and gender identity that
people may be in at a particular time.
For example, a person who is
transitioning from a male to a female identity (or conversely) may not be
intersex, and may not at
the time identify as either male or female – they
are transitioning. A person who has transitioned and, for example, now
as male, may nevertheless want to identify at the time as a
transgender person.
It is the view of the Council
that when it is relevant for an ACT
public authority to require a person to identify their sex – other than
for notifying and
registering a birth and for changing the birth record of their
sex – the person should be asked their ‘sex and gender
identity’, and should be given the option of identifying as any of:
c) intersex
d) none of the above.
The category ‘none of the above’ should prompt further inquiry,
enabling person to identify themselves as, for example,
transgender if they
choose, and precipitating a discussion about how their needs can best be met.
Through government ‘best
practice’, the private sector might adopt
these categories voluntarily.
The Council considered and rejected an alternative proposal to give the
option of ‘other’ or an open field, concerned
uncertainty and the administrative burden of a plethora of options that might
Implications of changed
sex and gender identity for ACT records
A person’s change of sex and gender identity may have implications for
status, entitlements and benefits that a person holds
because of their previous
sex, which is most likely to be their birth sex. For example, the Office of
Regulatory Services ORS has
noted that registration of a birth in the ACT
requires recording of the name of the child’s ‘mother’. A
whose birth sex was female, but whose changed registered sex is male may
be able to give birth, because reassignment surgery –
which results in
sterility – is not a requirement for their having changed the registration
of their sex. In those circumstances,
a person whose registered sex is male
could be registered as the ‘mother’.
It is the view of the Council
anomalies, should they arise can be managed at the time within the existing law
and policy framework, and are not impediments
to giving legal recognition to sex
and gender diverse people.
Under s.18 of the
Act a person can apply to the Registrar-General
to register a change of their name if they are an adult whose birth is
in the ACT, a parent on behalf of a child born or resident in the
ACT, or an adult who is ‘domiciled or resident in the ACT’.
If the person’s birth was registered outside the ACT, the
Registrar-General must inform the relevant birth registration office
change of name. If the person’s birth was registered in the ACT, the
Registrar-General must alter the birth register
with certain information (clause
Regulations), including:
• the name of the person immediately prior to their registering their
changed name
• the name shown on the person’s original birth certificate,
• the person’s sex.
The Registrar General may issue the person who changes their name with a
revised birth certificate showing their changed name (s.21(3)).
Registrar-General does so, the only requirement is that the certificate must
show the person’s name as changed. It
does not have to show the
person’s sex or former name, and it is the practice of the
Registrar-General to issue a change of
name certificate which does not show the
person’s sex or former name.
In this inquiry’s in consultations with the sex and gender diverse
communities, privacy and fear of being ‘outed’
were an important
It is the view of the Council
that in light of the practice of the
Registrar-General to issue a change of name certificate which does not show the
sex or former name, no changes to current law and practice need
to be made to ensure protection of the privacy of a person who has
changed their
sex and gender identity.
to the record of sex identity
After a person has changed the record of their sex, the Registrar-General
will retain a record of the person’s sex as it was
recorded in the
register before the alteration. That information is available only to certain
specified people (Regulation 7,
Regulation, and ACT Office of
Regulatory Services,
Births, Deaths and Marriages Certificate Access
, Version 2.0, 17 April 2008) including to the person who changed
their sex if they are over 18 years old.
As noted above, the sex and gender diverse communities are concerned with
risks to their privacy, and with being ‘outed’.
The Human Rights
Commissioner has suggested that only circumstances of medical necessity should
justify access to the record on the
register of a person’s sex.
The Information Privacy Principles (IPP) under the
(Cth) prohibit unauthorised disclosure of personal information. This means that
the Registrar has a duty not to disclose the information
unless one of the
limited exceptions applies (such as consent by the person concerned, serious or
imminent threat to life or health,
or that it is essential to a criminal
investigation). However,
provides a general
exemption if an action is authorised by an enactment, and s.66 of the BDMR Act
allows States and Territories to
make arrangements to exchange information. As a
result, the Registrar-General can disclose information about a change of sex or
to another Registry without breaching the IPP.
It is the view of the Council
that the current restrictions – in
Regulation and ORS Policy – on access to a record of a
person’s sex in the register are adequate, but that information
by the Territory from its register to another State or Territory, and access to
the register provided by the Territory to
another State or Territory, should be
subject to the same restrictions on access as are set out in the
Regulation and ORS Policy.
recognition
International
recognition
A birth certificate is a cardinal identity document. The ACT will accept a
birth certificate as conclusive evidence of a person’s
sex (s29(1) BDMR
Act). As well, it will accept as conclusive evidence of a person’s sex a
‘certificate in relation to
a person who has undergone sexual reassignment
surgery’, issued in NSW, NT, SA, Tasmania and WA, (s29(2) BDMR Act and
8); the BDMR Act refers to these certificates as ‘interstate
recognition certificates’.
Submissions to this inquiry point out an
Recognition of a birth
certificate is not limited, but recognition of another form of certificate is
limited to certificates from
Australian jurisdictions. For example, people born
in the UK who change their sex are issued with both a Gender Recognition
Certificate
and an amended birth certificate, while people not born in the UK
who change their sex are issued only with a Gender Recognition
Certificate. The
former will have their sex and gender identity recognised in the ACT on the
basis of their amended birth certificate,
while the latter will not have their
sex and gender identity recognised in the ACT on the basis of their Gender
Recognition Certificate,
even though holders of a similar certificate from an
Australian jurisdiction will have their sex and gender identity recognised in
Submissions to this inquiry recommend that people who have had their legal
sex recognised in an overseas jurisdiction should be recognised
as that sex for
all purposes under ACT law.
recognition
As noted above, the ACT accepts an ‘interstate recognition
certificate’ issued in NSW, NT, SA, Tasmania and WA as conclusive
of a person’s sex. Currently, such certificates are issued only if the
person undergoes medical or surgical procedures
for sex and gender reassignment.
In other States – Queensland and Victoria – a change to a birth
certificate is currently
subject to the same condition (see table above). If
the Council’s view is accepted, the ACT will reject reliance on a
requirement
for recognition of sex and gender identity that is expensive,
invasive, discriminatory, inhumane and a violation of a person’s
For some people, the policy of the Passport Office (above) provides an
alternative and acceptable means by which a person can establish
their sex and
gender identity. It may be that in future, the some of all of the interstate
recognition certificates, and amended
birth certificates, will be available
without a requirement for reassignment surgery, in which the ACT will be less
concerned about
relying on them.
It is the view of the Council
that s29 BDMR Act should accept an
Australian passport or Document of Identity, in addition to an ‘interstate
recognition certificate’,
as evidence that the person mentioned is of the
sex as stated in it. Further, reference in s29(3) to an ‘interstate
recognition
certificate’ should not be limited to a certificate ‘in
relation to a person who has undergone sexual reassignment surgery’.
This arrangement will assist the legal recognition in the ACT of people who,
through resident in the ACT were not born in the ACT,
and who are not eligible
for an Australian passport or Document of Identity or whose need to establish
their sexual identity is not
met by a such a document. Unless another
arrangement is made, people in that situation will have to rely on whatever
access they
have to mechanisms for changing their sex in the jurisdiction of
their birth (probably involving reassignment surgery) to have their
gender identity recognised in the ACT. Another arrangement is discussed
and gender recognition certificates
As discussed above, a person in the ACT whose birth is not registered in the
ACT will not benefit from changes in the ACT to the criteria
for changing the
record of their sex. They may have access to an Australian passport, but
otherwise they are dependent on the ACT’s
recognition of certification
from another jurisdiction, access to which is likely to require reassignment
An option is to provide a person who is resident in the ACT with
certification which recognises their change of sex. To certify this
– even if the certification stated only the person’s sex and no
history – would, however, carry a strong implication
to anyone reading the
certificate that the person had transitioned their sex. Such certification may
be of limited use.
An alternative option is to state the person’s sex as part of a general
statement about the person, by way of a Certificate
of Particulars issued on
application under the BDMR Act. Such a certificate would, for the purposes of
any Territory law and in
all areas of activity described in
Discrimination Act
, be conclusive evidence of a person’s
identifying particulars for example: name, date of birth, place of birth, sex,
of residence as at the date of the certificate. A person would be
eligible to apply if they meet the requirements for change of
sex, and are
‘domiciled or resident in the ACT’ (see s18 BDMR for entitlement to
apply for a change of name). A certificate
of this type is available in
Victoria, for example (a ‘document acknowledging identity’ –
Births, Deaths and Marriages Registration Act 1996
(Vic)) although
the change of sex recorded on that document is possible only after reassignment
While such a Certificate of Particulars would be recognised under ACT law for
the purposes outlined above, it is not clear whether
or on what terms it would
accepted in other jurisdictions.
It is the view of the Council
that a Certificate of Particulars, as
described, is a desirable mechanism to ensure equal access for ACT residents to
reforms that
are designed to guarantee legal recognition of sex and gender
diverse people without reliance on inhumane eligibility requirements.
Commonwealth
government functions, services and documents
There are several ways that the ACT’s legal recognition of sex and
gender status interacts with Commonwealth government functions
and agencies.
The Council has, for example, been advised that in the view of the Commonwealth,
a marriage remains valid despite
one party to the marriage changing their sex
and gender identity. There are practical daily issues in dealings with, for
Medicare benefits, Centrelink payments, migration sponsorship,
corporations law and taxation.
ACT resident Peter Hyndal, who was born female but who now identifies as a
man, has publicly drawn attention to the confusion and
frustration that he
encounters. Medicare recognises him as a man for some claims and as a woman for
others. Centrelink insists on
using his female identity. He explained that it
took 57 phone calls, 4 letters, three interviews, two Freedom of Information
and a formal appeal for him to retain the word male on his passport
because it did not match the sex on his birth
certificate.
Submissions from members of the sex and gender diverse communities have
complained of difficulties in changing gender identity on
documents including
Medicare and other health records, Centrelink records and taxation records. The
proposed reforms to ACT law
will give people conclusive evidence of their sex
and gender identity which should be accepted by Commonwealth government
The Australian government has a commitment to the removal of discrimination
on the grounds of sex and gender identity, and the new
policy of Passports
Office is indicative of that. Although the policy of the Passport Office may be
promoted as the preferred approach
to sex and gender identity across the
Commonwealth public sector, ACT measures for changing sex will continue to be
relevant until
and unless such a policy is widely adopted.
Even if the policy of the Passport Office is widely adopted, it will remain
necessary for people to show that they meet the required
threshold. The
proposed reforms to ACT law will give people conclusive evidence of their sex
and gender identity to the required
There are occasions when a person is required to state their sex and gender
identification, but the requirement appears to be irrelevant.
discrimination law prohibits requesting or requiring information from a person
in connection with discriminatory conduct
because of a person’s gender
It is the view of the Council
that it is desirable for the governments
of the States, Territories and Commonwealth audit their laws and practices for
which require a person to identify their sex and gender, and reviewed
the need for those requirements with the intention of removing
whenever possible
a requirement that a person identify their sex and gender.
recognition and acceptance
Legal reforms alone will not achieve practical recognition and acceptance of
people’s sex and gender identity in the ACT. Whatever
the law says about
equality, some people will maintain their own biases and prejudices. Law reform
is a significant part of achieving
attitudinal change, giving a signal to the
community about the general policy direction. Real change requires leadership
and education
to promote public acceptance the intention behind the law.
As well as access to legal recognition and appropriate identity
documentation, respondents to the
A Gender Agenda
survey in 2011 reported
a range of difficulties they face in society: being protected from
discrimination, getting access to informed,
respectfully delivered medical and
psychological services, suffering lack of social connection with family and the
broader community,
and being over-represented in low income categories despite
their above-average levels of
The 2003 ACT report included proposals for greater education and training for
government employees about being respectful of gender
diverse people. Education
and training across ACT public authorities, particularly with a human rights
perspective, are essential
to any law reforms being successful.
The Human Rights Commissioner submits that a public education campaign will
also be a vital to raise awareness of the issues and to
build support for any
changes. Increased resources will be needed for services which offer
information and community support for
people in the sex and gender diverse
communities and their
partners/families.
Anti-discrimination law serves an important educative function, quite apart
from providing individual remedies for unlawful treatment.
The existence of a
protected attribute is a public statement that people with that attribute are
vulnerable, and are deserving of
protection. The current protected attribute in
Discrimination Act
is ‘gender identity’. This term does
not adequately express the attributes which are the reasons for discriminatory
treatment, one of the most persistent of which is a sex and gender diverse
person’s physical appearance. Even if a person’s
sex and gender is
legally recognised, they may continue to be discriminated against and vilified
because of their physical appearance.
It is the view of the Council
that for purposes of anti-discrimination
law in the ACT, protected attributes should include
• a person’s identifying as intersex, as a sex other than their
registered sex, as having no sex, and as being in transition
for one sex to
• the record of a person’s sex having been altered under the BDMR
Act or equivalent law or practice, and
• a person’s physical presentation (including physical features,
manner of speech, and dress) when it is not consistent
with the person’s
recorded birth sex or with the conventional physical presentation of a person of
a particular sex.
2.6 Implementation
These concluding comments from the
A Gender Agenda
report highlight
the importance of the timing of the proposed changes to the law in the ACT:
At this time in history, the Government lists social inclusion as one of its
highest priorities. As part of its social inclusion agenda
the Government is
looking at ways to build strong, diverse communities, free from discrimination,
violence and abuse, by confronting
intolerance and promoting respect and a sense
of belonging for everyone. The timing is right to walk the talk for a better
SGD people at both local and national
The Council’s proposed reforms to the BDMR Act and Regulations and to
Discrimination Act
will be a first and important step in
‘promoting respect and a sense of belonging for everyone’. However
other essential
steps are also involved.
While the ACT is acting to remove legal obstacles for sex and gender diverse
people across all its legislation, cooperation with the
Commonwealth and with
other State and Territory governments will be important in developing a national
approach that addresses both
the legal and social recognition difficulties faced
by the gender diverse community.
The Council’s consultations and submissions indicate that the proposed
changes will need to be accompanied by investment in
public authorities for:
• programs of education and training about sex and gender diversity
• the conversion of systems and documents to reflect the formal
recognition of sex and gender diversity
• funding to ensure that the legislative changes are part of a broader
program of social inclusion.
To monitor and report on progress towards legal recognition for sex and
gender diverse people in the ACT, the ACT Human Rights Commission
sufficiently resourced to address the underreporting of discrimination against
transgender and intersex people, and to support
employers and service providers
with information about their legal obligations under the
Discrimination Act
Human Rights Act 2004
Finally, in the community, to address issues of unemployment, discrimination,
poor physical and mental health outcomes, and low rates
of social inclusion and
participation for sex and gender diverse people:
• support and advisory services should be provided to sex and gender
diverse people and their families
• recurrent education and training programs should be provided to
service providers, employers, workplaces and educational institutions.
Thomas Hammarberg, Council of Europe
Commissioner for Human Rights, Human Rights and Gender Identity. July 2009.
Available at:
http://wcd.coe.int/ViewDoc.jsp?id=1476365
More information on the Yogyakarta
Principles can be found at:
http://www.yogyakartaprinciples.org/
Yogyakarta Principles on the Application
of International Human Rights Law in relation to Sexual Orientation and Gender
A/HRC/17/L.9/Rev.1
A/HRC/19/41
FRA, Homophobia and Discrimination on
Grounds of Sexual Orientation in the EU Member States
Analysis, June 2008. Available at:
http://fra.europa.eu/fraWebsite/lgbt-rights/pub_cr_homophobia_0608_en.htm
See also the 2011 update report at:
http://fra.europa.eu/fraWebsite/attachments/FRA-2011-Homophobia-Update-Report_EN.pdf
FRA, Homophobia and Discrimination on
Grounds of Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity in the EU Member States:
- The Social Situation, updated June 2009. Available at:
http://fra.europa.eu/fraWebsite/research/publications/publications_per_year/2009/pub_cr_homophobia_p2_0309_en.htm
Van Kuck v. Germany - 35968/97
[2003] ECHR
Available at: http://www.bailii.org/eu/cases/ECHR/2003/285.html
Case of Christine Goodwin v. The United
Kingdom, (Application no. 28957/95) 11 July 2002. Available at:
http://www.worldlii.org/eu/cases/ECHR/2002/588.html
Thomas Hammarberg, Council of Europe
Commissioner for Human Rights, Human Rights and Gender Identity. July 2009.
Available at:
http://wcd.coe.int/ViewDoc.jsp?id=1476365
translation source: Global Action for
Trans* Equality <www.transactivists.org>
FRA, Homophobia, transphobia and
discrimination on grounds of sexual orientation and gender identity. Available
http://fra.europa.eu/fraWebsite/research/publications/publications_per_year/pub-lgbt-2010-update_en.htm
Key legal trends in the protection of
LGBT rights in the European Union 2008-2010. Available at:
http://fra.europa.eu/fraWebsite/attachments/FRA-Factsheet-Homophobia-Study-2010-FS2_EN.pdf
Recommendation CM/Rec (2010)5 of the
Committee of Ministers to member states on measures to combat discrimination on
grounds of sexual
orientation or gender identity No IV(21). (Adopted by the
Committee of Ministers on 31 March 2010 at the 1081st meeting of the Ministers'
The two main exceptions are a right of
conscience for
clergy (who are normally obliged to marry any two eligible people
by law), and that the descent of
will remain unchanged.
Additionally, sports organisations are allowed to exclude transsexual people if
it is necessary for 'fair
competition or the safety of the competitors'.
Australian Human Rights Commission, Sex
Files: The Legal Recognition of Sex in Documents and Government Records,
Concluding Paper
(March 2009), 16.
Sex and gender diversity: Issues
paper. May 2008. Available at:
http://www.hreoc.gov.au/human_rights/lgbti/gender_diversity_paper.html
AHRC, Sex and gender diversity: Report
of initital consultation. July 2008. Available at:
http://www.hreoc.gov.au/genderdiversity/consultation_report2008.html
The Sex Files blog closed on 5 December
2008. Past posts are available at:
http://www.hreocblog.com/genderdiversity/viewforum.php?f=2
HREOC, Sex Files: the legal recognition
of sex in documents and government records. Concluding paper of the sex
diversity project. March 2009. Available at
http://www.hreoc.gov.au/genderdiversity/sex_files2009.html
Gender Diversity and the
Births, Deaths
and Marriages Registration Act 1997
(ACT). March 2010. Available at:
http://www.hrc.act.gov.au/res/Advice%20on%20births%20deaths%20and%20marriages%20provisions%20Public%20Copy.pdf
A Gender Agenda, Gender Diversity in
the ACT: A survey of Trans Experiences. May 2011. Available at:
http://www.genderrights.org.au/Downloads/Gender_Diversity_in_the_ACT.pdf
AB v Western Australia
see a summary at
http://www.hrlc.org.au/jurisdiction/australia/b-v-western-australia-2011-hca-42-6-october-2011/
LRAC, Legal Recognition of the
Sex and Gender Diverse Community in the ACT. May 2011. Available at:
http://justice.act.gov.au/page/view/2188
ACT Human Rights and Discrimination
Commissioner, Submission to LRAC 2 IP: Legal Recognition of the Sex and Gender
Diverse Community
in the ACT. July 2011. p1
ACT Human Rights and Discrimination
Commissioner, Submission to LRAC 2 IP: Legal Recognition of the Sex and Gender
Diverse Community
in the ACT. July 2011. p13
eg, Re: Jamie (Special medical
[2011] FamCA 248
www.smh.com.au/national/health/turning-point-for-sexchange-teens-20120210-1sic4.html
www.smh.com.au/national/parents-fight-for-right-to-manage-childs-gender-20120206-1r1wp.html
Re: Bernadette [2010 ] FamCA 94, and see
www.smh.com.au/nsw/court-gave-teen-the-right-to-change-gender-from-boy-to-girl-20100305-popg.html
Re:Alex [2009 ] FamCA 1292, and see
http://www.smh.com.au/national/court-supports-girls-wish-to-be-a-boy-20090503-arga.html
Focus group, 2003 ACT Government Report
on Discrimination and Gay, Lesbian, Bisexual, Transgender and Intersex People in
A Document of Identity (DOI)
is issued under s9
Australian Passports Act 2005
, when the issue of an
Australian passport is unnecessary or undesirable, and in compassionate
circumstances, to nationals of a Commonwealth
country with an urgent need to
Australian Passport Office at:
https://www.passports.gov.au/web/sexgenderapplicants.aspx
Peta Bourne and Tracie O’Keefe,
Sex and Gender Education (SAGE) Response Document to Gay, Lesbian, Bisexual,
Transgender and
Intersex People in the ACT: An Issues Paper, January 2003.
Available at:
http://www.sageaustralia.org/linked/actsubmission%20feb%2003.pdf
A Gender Agenda & Women’s
Legal Centre, Legal Recognition of the Sex and Gender Diverse Community in the
ACT. June 2011
Henrietta Cook, Govt gender muddle
blurring my identity, Sunday Canberra Times. 24 April 2011. P 4.
A Gender Agenda, Gender Diversity in
the ACT: A survey of Trans Experiences. May 2011. Available at:
http://www.genderrights.org.au/Downloads/Gender_Diversity_in_the_ACT.pdf
ACT Human Rights and Discrimination
Commissioner, Submission to LRAC 2 IP: Legal Recognition of the Sex and Gender
Diverse Community
in the ACT. July 2011. p13
A Gender Agenda, Gender Diversity in
the ACT: A Survey of Trans Experiences, May 2011, p 31. Available at:
http://www.genderrights.org.au/Downloads/Gender_Diversity_in_the_ACT.pdf
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (916 KB)
PDF format (897 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter