URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/lawreform/ALRCIntroP/2000/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:33:33
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Introductory Pamphlet 3 � Civil and Administrative Penalties [2000] ALRCIntroP 3
Introductory Pamphlet 3 — Civil and
Administrative Penalties
Introduction
Publications
Submissions
Purpose of consultation
Scope and definitions
Terms of reference
Legislation mapping
Issues and questions arising from analysis
Introductory Pamphlet 3 — Civil and
Administrative Penalties
December 2000
Comments or queries may be made by post to the Australian Law Reform
Commission, GPO Box 3708, NSW 1044; by email to
civiladmin@alrc.gov.au
; by phone on
(02) 9284 6333 or by fax on (02) 9284 6363.
Introduction
The purpose of this paper is to set out the key issues that have been
identified as the focus of the inquiry into civil and administrative
and to outline the Commission's activities to date. The Commission's
approach to law reform is to consult extensively
with key stakeholders and
experts and with interested members of the public.
Where this paper draws tentative conclusions, this is to promote discussion
rather than to predetermine issues or policy choices before
the program of
research and consultation is completed. The Commission hopes that the paper will
provoke a full and open discussion
The terms of reference of this inquiry reflect the expanding and developing
field of regulatory activity. The Commission has been
asked to consider the
place of civil and administrative penalties within our legal system, including
the relationship between criminal,
civil and administrative penalties and the
principles that should guide the formulation and application of civil and
administrative
sanctions. The purpose of the inquiry is to explore the range of
penalising procedures and, ultimately, to systematise them. These
major tasks
are formulated in the terms of reference, namely:
to enunciate principles relevant to the workings of civil and
administrative penalties
to formulate the relationship between civil and administrative penalties
and criminal liability and
to report upon the kinds of areas where provision for civil and
administrative penalties is appropriate, how circumstances and conduct
rise to such penalties should be expressed and the limitations, if any, to be
imposed on the pursuit and provision of such
Publications
The Commission plans to produce a discussion paper by April 2001 analysing
the current regulatory arrangements for civil and administrative
penalties and
advancing options for debate and reform. The Commission will consult extensively
with a focus on this publication.
The final report is due to be submitted to the
Attorney-General in March 2002.
The Commission is bringing together leading Australian and international
experts in regulatory theory and practice for its conference
Penalties: Policy, Principles and Practice in Government
' to be held in Sydney on Friday 8 and Saturday 9 June 2001.
The conference will form part of the Commission's broad program of
and consultation for the reference.
Submissions
We would welcome a formal submission at any stage of the inquiry. Copies of
submissions are, unless marked otherwise, normally made
available to others upon
request. Submissions may also be referred to and quoted in the final report.
Purpose of consultation
In conducting this reference, the Commission will consult widely with
government agencies and departments that have responsibilities
for imposing
administrative and civil penalties, as well as with legal and compliance
professional bodies, community and business
groups, academics and individuals or
organizations with an interest or expertise in this area.
Commission's primary tasks in consultation is to ascertain how the
identified provisions work in practice. This is essential
if we are to formulate
principles for the design and practice of penalty provisions, as our terms of
reference require.
The Commission ultimately aims to produce a reference for legislators and
regulators on policy and practice with respect to the design
and enforcement of
penalty provisions. The Commission will draw on the writings of social
scientists and regulatory theorists, government
reports here and abroad,
regulator practice and the experience of the regulators and the regulated
concerning the appropriate and
efficacious design of regulatory provisions.
Issues that will be considered in consultation include whether the various
provisions engender structural compliance by controlling the
opportunities for evasion, assist the development of a normative commitment
the creation of appropriate role expectations, and reinforce the belief that the
exchange relationship between the regulated and
government is
Scope and definitions
The Commission has yet to settle a precise definition of the term
‘penalty'. The term ‘penalty' is generally defined as
punishment, most often in the form of the payment of a sum of money, although
case law has it that the word ‘is large enough
to mean, is intended to
mean, and does mean, any punishment, whether by imprisonment or
otherwise.'
At this stage we
have adopted a broad definition, to ensure our discussion is comprehensive. In
our current analysis, a sanction
or remedy is treated as a ‘penalty'
wherever a person is required to pay an amount of money, is required to take an
or has any activities restricted, as a result of a contravention of
legislation or a failure to meet set standards. Thus, a number
of sanctions not
normally regarded as imposing punishment but as aiming to deter, compensate or
make reparation for certain unlawful
activity — such as revocation of
licences or quasi-contractual remedies such as enforceable undertakings —
are included
in the range of sanctions examined by the Commission. Simple debt
recovery arrangements were excluded from our analysis, but tax
requiring defaulters to pay a general interest charge for late payment, for
example, are included as penalties.
Traditionally sanctions have been divided into criminal punishments or
penalties on the one hand, and civil remedies or penalties
on the other. A
further, more recent development, is the use of ‘administrative'
penalties imposed by the administrative body,
without the need for court
intervention. Most administrative penalties carry a right of review (merits and
judicial review). Administrative
penalties are negotiated or imposed in the
shadow of the formal legal system. They are increasingly used to engender
compliance and
cooperation from the ‘regulated community', to secure
environmental or consumer protection and timely rectification of market
problems. There are important constitutional and due process issues associated
with the use of administrative penalties.
There has been a working assumption that civil penalties are less onerous
when compared with punishments meted out at criminal law.
This is by no means
inevitable. The greater procedural flexibility and range of civil and
administrative sanctions make them the
preferred mode of social control where
persuasion and negotiation can secure compliance.
The major identifiable distinction achieved by characterisation of a penalty
is the practical consequences. Procedures, privileges
and standard of proof are
affected by the characterisation of the penalty. There are also social
consequences to the characterisation.
Criminal conviction carries a social
stigma and may lead to other civil disabilities, such as being barred from
serving as a company
director or public
The traditional dichotomy between civil and criminal procedures and penalties
no longer describes the modern position. The functions
and purposes of civil,
administrative and criminal penalties overlap in several respects, and even some
procedural aspects, such
as the different standards of proof for civil and
criminal sanctions, are not always clearly distinguishable.
The Commission is considering the range of regulatory penalties available to
regulators and government departments to promote compliance
and enforce
sanctions for non-compliance, including negotiated agreements such as
enforceable undertakings. In its exposition of
principles, the Commission may
need to formulate a taxonomy to clarify the variety and application of
penalties, including non-punitive,
consensual and administrative penalties.
Terms of reference
The matters covered by the review are set out in the terms of reference
(attached). In summary, the Commission is required to address
the following.
The terms of reference direct the Commission to articulate and evaluate
principles relevant to civil and administrative penalties,
the need for civil and administrative penalty systems to be based upon
clear and consistent principles
how circumstances and conduct giving rise to administrative and civil
penalties should be expressed
the general principles relating to the issue of infringement notices
the principles for determining and setting maximum penalties
the relevance and applicability of the general principles in the
Criminal Code
(Chapter 2) to civil, administrative and criminal penalties
and processes.
In addition to such principles explicitly mentioned in the terms of
reference, the Commission considers the need for principles with
reference to
the following processes is subsumed in the reference terms:
decisions to proceed against a non-compliant individual or entity
the procedures for, and the imposition of, penalties
principles relevant to investigation, the negotiation and enforcement of
The principles are not rules of procedure but the foundation upon which
agency rules are based. The principles to be articulated and
developed have a
legal character but evolve from community values and practices. Among other
things they have an educational role
for agencies and the public. Principles set
the direction for compliance action and for negotiation between players.
Principles can
be weighted and balanced against other countervailing principles,
reflecting the competing influence of a variety of players and
their values,
interests and goals.
The Commission
sees this review as directed to the development of such general principles.
In developing general principles, the Commission understands the need for
caution against assuming that particular regulatory models
can be applied
readily to different fields of activity. The applicability of particular
arrangements requires consideration of the
mandates, objectives, the players,
activity, resources available and the supporting legal regime for individual
civil and administrative
regulators. It may be that certain core principles are
generally applicable to the range of market place regulation in securities
investment, competition and trade practices, financial services, insurance and
broadcasting, but where the regulatory activity
is directed at, say, the
protection of the environment or border security, the principles and objectives
of marketplace regulation
may have limited applicability. The Commission is keen
to obtain examples of working sets of principles, and information concerning
their applicability, utility and effectiveness. The Commission wants to
understand the role and application of such principles, that
how regulators apply, and courts and tribunals interpret principles
how the regulated community responds to formal statements of
whether the formulation of general principles can help to engender
cooperation or provide a basis for challenge and dispute —
whether principles improve or impede effective compliance.
Administrative sanctions
In 1982, the Law Reform Commission of Canada observed that administrative
sanctions were a type of legal ‘stepchild, if not
an orphan.' They
‘were not well understood or studied anywhere' and criminal and
administrative lawyers and academics denied
that such schemes ‘were
properly part of their
Times have changed in
regulatory theory and practice. There is now an extensive array of literature
from criminologists, economists,
political and other social scientists analysing
the design, practice and efficacy of government regulation and compliance. Even
administrative
lawyers, traditionally more concerned with grievance remedies and
review, have begun to focus on the growing numbers of administrative
penalties. An examination of the use of administrative penalties will therefore
be a key focus of the Commission‘s
Australian federal legislation imposes administrative penalties in areas such
as taxation, social security, financial institutions
and services, corporations
law, insurance, broadcasting, customs, immigration, and the licensing of nursing
fishing and most recently, food technology.
State and territory administrative
penalty regimes cover an even broader range of activities. Administrative
penalties are often
the most frequently used sanctions in a regime. In
1998–99, for example, the Tax Department imposed administrative penalties
totalling $1.122 billion, with penalty remissions of $139 million allowed by the
Department.
In social security in
the same year, ACOSS cites over 300 000 administrative penalties imposed on over
200 000 people.
Robert Baldwin noted of this changing administrative law practice
Regulation has ... become a central form of state intervention ..., and it has
grown towards maturity in two senses. One is an intellectual
maturation,
reflected in the development of distinct analytic approaches and generic
understandings of regulatory processes that
are capable of being applied across
different regulatory sectors. The other is a maturation of practice:
administrative processes
which were once seen as sector specific, and peculiar
to individual domains such as consumer protection, financial services,
or occupational health and safety, are coming to be seen as part of a
generic ‘set' of instruments and strategies employed
The Commission analysis of administrative penalty provisions found a range of
conduct subject to administrative penalties, and of
forms these penalties can
take. By far the largest group of administrative penalties concerned the varied
licensing and registration
regimes. Monetary penalties had different forms, such
as withholding social security benefits, interest charges or penalty tax, levies
or other charges. Other administrative penalties include banning orders,
forfeiture of assets and directions restricting the way
entities can do
Some notable features of administrative penalty regimes included the
most of the penalties can be imposed without the penalised person having
a right to be heard;
many can be imposed without giving notice to the person penalised;
in a few cases, the person's right to review the penalty decision is
One important issue relevant to the design and operation of rules concerns
the delegation of discretion. This is a significant matter
in administrative law
and practice, although there is limited research to document how discretion is
exercised, whether the devolution
of judgemental discretion leads to higher
adjudicative and administration costs and what compliance outcomes are achieved
if judgemental
and discretionary responsibilities are, or are not delegated down
the line of decision-makers.
Questions arising from the Commission's analysis include the
should there be certain minimum rights in relation to administrative penalties
(such as a right to receive notice)?
should there be restrictions on the kind of penalty that can be imposed administratively
(such as forfeiture of assets or revocation
of licence to carry on business)?
the Commission welcomes comments on the extent to which particular administrative
penalties are used in practice, and on practical
issues concerning their use.
Liability for, and the levels of penalties
The terms of reference ask the Commission to consider:
how the circumstances and conduct giving rise to administrative and civil
penalties should be expressed and, in particular, whether
principles relating
to criminal liability, including fault elements, corporate criminal responsibility,
vicarious responsibility,
and strict responsibility, should apply to liability
for administrative and civil penalties;
the relationship between administrative and civil penalties and criminal
liability in respect of the same conduct, including joint
proceedings, double
jeopardy, elections, bars to proceedings.
In its report on general principles of criminal responsibility, SCAG's
Criminal Law Officers' Committee
recommended that, as a general principle, criminal offences should consist
of a physical and a fault element.
There are some strict liability criminal offences, but most such are civil
and administrative penalty offences.
Regulatory law is primarily concerned to facilitate the achievement of collectivist
goals by discouraging behaviour which is
considered to be inimical to those
goals and thus detrimental to collective welfare. The punishment of regulatory
is a practical means of controlling activity, without necessarily
implying the element of social condemnation which is characteristic
of traditional
In considering the liability principles for civil and administrative penalties,
the Commission will analyse the working context
for imposing penalties including
an examination of any practical difficulties encountered in ascribing or obtaining
Principles for quantifying pecuniary penalties
The terms of reference direct the Commission to consider:
the level of administrative and civil penalties, including:
(a) the principles for setting maximum penalties (having regard to, inter
alia, relevant scientific and social scientific
data and literature, including
data and literature relating to harm caused by environmental, corporate
and other forms
of crime); and
(b) the principles for determining penalties in particular cases.
The ACCC has suggested that the
Trade Practices Act
include factors
giving the courts further direction for quantifying penalties. It has suggested
that the so called ‘French
factors' be used.
According to Justice French:
The assessment of a penalty of appropriate deterrent value will
have regard to a number of factors which canvassed in cases
including the
1. The nature and extent of the contravening conduct.
2. The amount of loss or damage caused.
3. The circumstances in which the conduct took place.
4. The size of the contravening company.
5. The degree of power it has, as evidenced by its market share and ease
of entry into the market.
6. The deliberateness of the contravention and the period over which it
7. Whether the contravention arose out of the conduct of senior management
or at a lower level.
8. Whether the company has a corporate culture conducive to compliance
with the Act, as evidenced by educational programs
and disciplinary or other
corrective measures in response to an acknowledged contravention.
9. Whether the company has shown a disposition to cooperate with the authorities
responsible for the enforcement of the Act
in relation to the contravention.
Recent penalty innovations utilise principles of ‘restorative justice'
or ‘reactive discipline' to allow consideration
of the individual
or corporate response to non-compliance when determining the appropriate penalty.
Where the offenders are corporations, Chris Dellit and Brent Fisse have suggested
recasting the provisions authorising
probation and community service projects
to impose the supervisory burden on a named principal or executive director
the organisation under a certification procedure, backed by liability for
contempt of court in the event of the supervisor falsely
certifying that the
job had been done.
The underlying economic principle is that social costs of corporate
crime should be internalised by the organization on whose
behalf an offence
is committed.
Issues of equity in relation to the quantum of penalties arise specifically
in relation to administrative penalties. Where administrative
penalties apply
under taxation law, tax officers have discretion to remit all or part of the
— within guidelines
set out in taxation rulings.
Under social security legislation officers do not have power to remit penalties,
but the Secretary has the power to exempt
claimants from, for example, requirements
under an activity test, in certain circumstances.
A decision that a person is or is not exempt from the requirements is open
to review by the SSAT which, with certain exceptions,
has the power to make
any decision open to the Secretary (see ss 140–144 SSAA). Again such
arrangements give rise
to equity and efficacy questions which the Commission
intends to consider.
Enforcement strategies and procedures
In all fields of regulation and administration rules are regularly ignored
or flouted. Inevitably, only a small proportion of
non-compliance comes to
the attention of regulators. An even smaller proportion of cases result in
the imposition of penalties.
There are issues of equity associated with the
exercise of the discretion to proceed against particular offenders or to target
particular examples of non-compliance. A 1996–97 report of the Australian
National Audit Office (ANAO) into the ATO's
tax debt collection found
that additional tax for late payment was not collected in 35 per cent (amounting
to 41 000 cases)
of the cases examined.
As the Ombudsman stated in a submission to the ANAO:
[t]he significance of this statistic for equitable decision-making
is obvious: some taxpayers have paid a penalty in cases where
someone in identical
or nearly identical circumstances may not. It is significant that such a system
has been permitted
to exist for a considerable time given the revenue and
equity implications.
The Commission proposes to consider these issues as part of its analysis
of the principles and arrangements for penalties.
The Commission is specifically directed to report on:
any limitations which apply or should apply to the use of State and Territory
infringement notice enforcement procedures such
as the SETONS (‘Self-enforcing
ticketable offence notice system') procedure in Queensland,
and the PERIN (‘Procedure for enforcement and registration of infringement
notices') procedure in Victoria;
limitations to the recovery of the costs of investigating contraventions
of civil and administrative penalty provisions; and
the effect of insolvency upon a liability to pay a civil or administrative
The SETONS and PERIN procedures permit penalties to be registered with a
local or magistrates' court and enforced by that court,
without a requirement
that the court make findings on the person's liability for the penalty
(unless the person exercises
a right to a trial to determine liability). The
systems are built around summary offences with set financial penalties, such
as traffic offences. In each of the years 1994–1997, around 350 000
cases were initiated under the PERIN system in
the Magistrates' Court
of Victoria.
The types of penalties enforced under the SETONS and PERIN systems are not
common in the Commonwealth jurisdiction, although
procedures could be adapted
for tax and some consumer, customs and environmental law penalties. The Commission
will consider
the application of these enforcement arrangements.
Double jeopardy
Some legislation permits criminal and civil proceedings to be undertaken
simultaneously or sequentially in respect of the same
unlawful conduct.
In such cases the regulator and the DPP may each have an interest in deciding
whether and when to initiate proceedings.
Decisions about whether to proceed
under criminal and/or civil or administrative penalty arrangements are matters
of judgment
for regulators and prosecutors. There are a number of factors
that direct such decisions, including the nature of the conduct,
the availability
of resources and risk management evaluations. Regulators generally have compliance
strategies. Timeliness
can be a first priority. For these reasons the ACCC
and ASIC often seek injunctions to stop offending conduct, and then obtain
redress and long-term orders where necessary and appropriate.
To assist with decision-making in such interrelated matters, memoranda of
understanding or protocols between agencies are drawn
setting down guidelines
on investigations, joint or associated proceedings and information sharing
in respect of the same
conduct. The Commission proposes to focus on the arrangements
between and among regulators, government departments and the DPP
as one area
where there is a need for clearer cooperative practices.
Legislation mapping
The Commission has undertaken the mapping of federal legislation in order
to determine the current range, design and formulation
of federal penalty
provisions. To date we have examined 144 statutes and ‘mapped'
2122 penalty provisions from the
70 statutes with penalty provisions. Some
of the legislation contains few penalty clauses. This was the case with certain
of the licensing arrangements. These statutes were included to give a sufficient
sample of licensing provisions. The Commission
will continue to scan federal
legislation and may include additional provisions in the database. The Commission
suggestions in this regard.
Of the 70 Acts mapped by the Commission, most included at least one criminal
penalty (one exception was the
Telecommunications (Consumer Protection
and Service Standards) Act 1999
(Cth) with only civil and administrative
penalties). Fifty of the statutes included administrative penalties, and 20
civil penalties.
Most of the penalties identified in our selection of Commonwealth legislation
are criminal penalties (1582 of 2122 = 74%). Of
the criminal penalties the
vast majority (91%) involved a fine (736 of 1582 = 47%); imprisonment (285
of 1582 = 18%) or
the option of a fine and/or imprisonment (415 of 1582 =
26%). This analysis of the penalty provisions is subject to s4B of the
Act (Cth). Most of the remainder are administrative penalties (374 of 2122
= 18%) with civil penalties forming the
smallest group (164 of 2122 = 8%).
Close to half of the administrative penalties in Commonwealth legislation
concern licensing regimes relating to a number of areas
of legislation including
aviation, communications, broadcasting, aged care, navigation and fisheries.
The majority of administrative
penalties not related to licensing regimes
are found in tax and social security law, and a smaller proportion in corporations,
trade practices and banking legislation. The large majority of civil penalties
were in the Corporations Law (90 of 164);
the remainder were distributed between
environmental, superannuation, communications, trade practices and workplace
legislation.
Each penalty provision was entered into the database and categorised according
to the type and level of penalty, the target(s)
of the penalty, the description
of the proscribed conduct, expression of liability, availability of repeat
or alternative
penalties, review provisions, rights and protections for the
regulated and the investigatory powers given to agencies and regulators.
data shows what the penalty provisions look like.
We analysed the data by searching under the various fields and filtering
entries according to specified criteria. This revealed
certain patterns in
the design and form of particular penalty types and penalty procedures. An
analysis of the legislation
according to various sub-groups listed below proved
useful as it revealed certain trends and similarities in the use of civil
and administrative penalties.
Analysis of mapped legislation
The categories listed below represent our analysis to date. The Commission
welcomes discussion concerning the categorisation
and the choice of legislation
to include in each category.
1. Analysis by reference to the utility and design of penalty provisions.
The data was analysed by grouping the provisions in accordance with whether
they were penalties for substantive wrongs
(the failure to pay tax) or were
penalties directed to encourage cooperation with the regulator (we have termed
these ‘support'
penalties. For example, those for failure to produce
information or documentation to the regulator).
2. Analysis by reference to the working context of the penalty provisions.
The legislation was divided into three groups according to the operational
context of (a) border control and environment,
(b) marketplace legislation
and (c) legislation directed to revenue protection (whether tax or cost recovery
legislation,
such as social security legislation).
3. Analysis by reference to the type of penalty.
The data was
also analysed according to the type of penalty, with a particular focus on
administrative penalties and the
use of penalties under the licensing regimes.
4. Analysis by reference to procedural arrangements.
The Commission
selected and analysed certain procedural rules in particular provisions –
that is, those clauses dealing
with the expression of liability, the privilege
against self-incrimination, ‘double jeopardy' protections, and
operation of penalty notices.
The analysis shows whether or not the grouped legislation or provisions exhibited
similarities sufficient to justify treating
them as particular categories.
At this stage the Commission sees value in retaining these categories. As
stated above,
there may be additional categories that should be added and
tested against the data.
Issues and questions arising from analysis
Penalty provisions analysed by reference
to their utility and design
The Commission found a clear pattern in the design of penalty clauses, with
most acts having certain provisions directed at the
substantive wrong associated
with the regulated activity (failing to pay tax as required or on time) and
other ‘support'
penalty provisions directed to encouraging cooperation
with and, for example, providing information to the regulators. However,
Commission notes that it is not always easy to distinguish between substantive
and ‘support' provisions, particularly
where an Act's objectives
are unclear or multi-faceted.
The analysis to date has revealed an inconsistent arrangement for certain
penalty clauses. In these clauses the proscribed conduct
is framed in a similar
fashion but the penalties for such conduct may be administrative, civil or
criminal penalties. On
the analysis to date, the choice of penalty appears
to follow the dominant penalty regime in the statute as a whole, for example
— statutes relying on civil penalties setting a civil penalty for the
proscribed conduct. Statutes are therefore
internally consistent in their
choice of penalty type but inconsistent when compared with similar proscribed
conduct penalties
in other legislation. The Commission will further investigate
this issue and seek clarification for the penalty choice, and
whether there
are certain behaviours that should be consistently characterised as attracting
a certain type of penalty.
In addition, this analysis raises core questions about the design of penalty
provisions, about the need for objects clauses and
whether the provisions
should be in the primary or delegated legislation. Another important issue
concerns the scope and
exercise of discretion by regulators: who decides to
proceed to a penalty; at what level of the agency; on what basis; whether
in accordance with express and accessible guidelines; and whether reasons
for such decisions are offered. The Commission
will analyse such matters where
they arise in legislation and raise these issues in our consultations.
Revenue protection
As stated, the Commission grouped the taxation and social security regimes
together because of their joint objective to protect
state revenue. The Commission
also plans to include customs and excise in this category in future analysis.
On analysis
of the provisions, there were clear similarities in the types
of penalties used and the forms of liability and methods of dealing
with repeated
contraventions. However, the regimes differed significantly in the way compliance
was encouraged or enforced
and in the discretion provided to officers of the
regulator to modify, tailor or ameliorate the penalty provision.
Issues and questions arising from this analysis include:
consideration of different compliance models (for example voluntary compliance,
contractual models etc) and how they are used
for different targets. The Commission's
data will allow analysis of particular provisions by reference to the target
We should be able to evaluate and compare the types of requirements
imposed and the consequences that attach to non-compliance
by reference to the
different regulated groups.
should the Commission seek to develop principles for dealing with particular
recipients? As stated,
the discretion given to the range of regulator officers and review authorities
also bears consideration
and comparative analysis. The Commission welcomes comments
concerning this task.
Licensing regimes
Licensing regimes are an increasingly popular regulatory arrangement. Licensing
administrative penalties can have quite serious
outcomes (eg the cancellation
of a licence and loss of livelihood). Many such penalties can be applied flexibly
variation to licence conditions). The majority of the penalties for
licensing information offences were criminal.
Issues and questions arising from this analysis include:
should licensing regimes be used only for regulating certain types of activities?
what types of penalties are appropriate for licensing regimes?
should the Commission focus on the adequacy of the review mechanisms in licensing
should a graduated approach to the imposition of penalties be included in
licensing regimes, for example, depending on the severity
of the breach the
regulator issues a warning, followed by directives and administrative fines
before the ultimate administrative
sanction of suspension or cancellation of
the licence?
Expression of liability
The Commission identified 164 civil penalties and 374 administrative penalties
from a total of 2122 penalties. We noted data
on liability — how the
circumstances and conduct giving rise to such penalties — where liability
was explicitly
mentioned. Of the mapped legislation:
over half the civil and around a third of the administrative penalty clauses
do not explicitly state a fault element or mens rea;
absolute liability is found in just under half the administrative penalty
clauses but relatively fewer of the civil;
common fault elements like intention, knowledge and recklessness are specifically
mentioned in 20 penalty provisions.
The Commission has been specifically asked to look at whether the principles
that relate to criminal liability should apply to
civil and administrative
penalties. Further issues for consideration by the Commission include:
is developing (or recommending the development of) a ‘civil code',
along the lines of the Criminal Code Act 1999 (Cth) the
appropriate way to frame
the Commission's task, given the large number of civil and administrative
offences which do not express
a fault element?
is the heavy reliance on absolute and strict liability in administrative
penalties appropriate?
Privilege against self-incrimination and
‘double jeopardy'
The application of the privilege against self-incrimination is different
in almost all the sample legislation examined by the
Commission. Although
it is not unusual for the common law privilege against self-incrimination
to be abrogated by regulatory
legislation, the circumstances where the privilege
is removed and the effects of that removal can vary significantly.
The following issues are raised by the Commission's analysis:
should legislation directly address the issue of the application of the privilege
against self-incrimination?
should any areas of regulation have special rules in relation to the application
of the privilege against self-incrimination?
should the Commission attempt to develop an ‘omnibus' provision
for regulatory regimes relating to privilege against self-incrimination?
Penalty notices
In the legislation examined by the Commission, maximum penalties are set
down for civil penalties imposed by the court, but for
administrative penalties,
where no court involvement is needed, penalty notice provisions and arrangements
are varied.
The use of infringement notice schemes (whereby an administrative
penalty is paid sometimes to avoid a larger penalty and possible
conviction) is increasingly common. The Commission is interested to obtain
information on the workings of such
penalty arrangements.
A Freiberg ‘Enforcement discretion
and taxation offences'
Australian Tax Forum
(1862) Le & Ca 131,
138 CCR, Blackburn J.
Note discussion on this in
[1985] HCA 43
(1985) 157 CLR 523.
See discussion on these issues in J Braithwaite
& P Drahos ‘Global business regulation'
School of Social Sciences Australian National University 2000, 47–50
http://lawrsss.anu.edu.au/
(5 April 2000).
Law Reform Commission of Canada, Sanctions,
Compliance Policy and Administrative Law, Discussion Paper, September 1981,
The development and use of genetically
modified organisms is set to be brought within the federal regulatory ambit.
Gene Technology Bill 2000
(Cth), operating in conjunction with draft amendments
Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999
(Cth), provides for the establishment of the Gene Technology Regulator as
an independent statutory office holder with powers
to regulate research on
and the use of genetically modified organisms.
The Auditor General, Audit Report No 31,
Administration of Tax penalties: Australian Taxation Office, 1999–2000,
para 1.8, Figure 1.
See Sydney Morning Herald, 9th November
R Baldwin, C Scott, C Hood,
on Regulation,
Oxford UP, 1998, 1–2.
Now known as the Model Criminal Code
Officers' Committee.
Criminal Law Officer's Committee
of the Standing-Committee of Attorneys-General
Chapter 2 General principles
of criminal responsibility
Final Report 1992. Some strict or absolute
liability offences were retained and defined in the report and subsequent
Criminal Code Act 1995
(Cth), which is due to commence operation on
15 December 2001. In the Code strict liability is defined as an offence with
no fault element and the availability of the defence of mistake of fact (s
6.1) and an absolute liability offence as having
no defence of mistake of
fact (s 6.2).
K Yeung ‘Quantifying regulatory
penalties: Australian competition law penalties in perspective'
[1960] MelbULawRw 18
Melbourne University Law Review
Trade Practices Commission v CSR
[1991] ATPR 41–076 per French J. Footnotes from original text
not included.
See eg B Fisse ‘The attribution
of criminal liability to corporations: A statutory model'
[1991] SydLawRw 23
Sydney Law Review
C Dellit & B Fisse ‘Civil
and criminal liability under Australian securities regulation: the possibility
of strategic
enforcement' in G Walker & B Fisse
Securities regulation
in Australia and New Zealand
OUP 1994 511–512.
s 8AAG, s 8AAM, s 8AAS, s 48, s 298–20
TAA; s 160ASB ITAA 1936.
See also Practice Statement PS 2000/9
‘Remission of penalties under the new tax system'. Circumstances
in which penalties
may be remitted include the taxpayer having a ‘reasonably
arguable' position on the application of the relevant provisions,
the Commissioner adopts a different interpretation.
For example, where the person has a
temporary incapacity; is about to give birth, or has just given birth; lives
in a remote
area; or has been granted an exemption for doing unpaid voluntary
work, training camp activities, or special circumstances –
See for example
ss 542–542H SSAA.
Tax Debt Collection: Australian
Taxation Office
ANAO Canberra 1996–97, 30 (Audit Report No.13).
Submission no. 80 cited in Audit Report
The procedure is set out in Part 4A
Division 3 of the
Justices Act
The procedure is set out in Schedule
Magistrates' Court Act
Magistrates' Court of Victoria
Annual Report 1999 <http://www.magistratescourt.vic.gov.au/text/annualrepperin.htm>
(27 April 2000).
Under the Corporations Law, for example,
criminal proceedings may be commenced after a civil penalty has been imposed
a civil penalty cannot be imposed if a person has been convicted of an
offence for the same conduct. Where criminal proceedings
have been commenced
in respect of substantially the same conduct, proceedings for the enforcement
of civil penalties must
be stayed. If the person is convicted of the offence
the civil penalty proceedings must be dismissed. However, where no conviction
results, the civil proceedings may be resumed (s 1317N(2)).
Under section 150H of the Trade Practices Act there can be no doubling-up
of liabilities. An offender cannot be punished twice
or liable to pay a pecuniary
penalty twice for an act or omission.
Under the EPBC Act it is possible for both civil and criminal proceedings
to occur simultaneously, removing the need to make
a firm decision between
criminal and civil actions. The Act prevents civil proceedings from being
initiated after a criminal
prosecution. However it is possible for a criminal
prosecution to occur after a civil prosecution. Section 486C of the Act states,
“Criminal proceedings may be started against a person for conduct that
is substantially the same as conduct constituting
a contravention of a civil
penalty provision regardless of whether a pecuniary penalty order has been
made against the
person”. Section 486C ensures that criminal prosecutions
are not excluded when a regulatory agency takes a civil action
expediently
to ensure environmental harm is prevented or quickly remedied. These provisions
attempt to ensure that a regulator
does not have to decide too early whether
to pursue a civil or criminal prosecution. Criminal prosecution may occur
once the scope of the damage is fully understood and the evidence available
has been carefully considered.
CCLSR Study and ACCC
Consultation
Brisbane 13 June 2000.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter