URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/lawreform/NSWLRCIP/1997/12.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:36:39
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Surveillance - Issues Paper [1997] NSWLRCIP 12
Issues Paper 12 (1997) - Surveillance
Table of Contents
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
1. INTRODUCTION
THE COMMISSION'S REFERENCE
The terms of reference
The scope of the reference
The conduct of the reference
Issues Paper and Report
THE STRUCTURE OF THIS ISSUES PAPER
2. WHAT IS SURVEILLANCE?
INTRODUCTION
Aural surveillance
Visual surveillance
Other types of surveillance
Audio-visual surveillance
Tracking devices
Computer surveillance
USES OF SURVEILLANCE
Covert surveillance
Law enforcement
Private investigators
Overt surveillance
POLICY ISSUES
Arguments against surveillance
Other considerations
Justification for surveillance
Law enforcement
Public safety and efficiency
Employer interests
Protection of private property
Conclusions: the policy issues
3. REGULATION OF SURVEILLANCE IN AUSTRALIA
INTRODUCTION
INTERNATIONAL BACKGROUND
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
OECD Guidelines
European Community Directive 1995
NEW SOUTH WALES
Commonwealth/New South Wales areas of overlap
Areas without regulation
4. VISUAL SURVEILLANCE
COVERT VISUAL SURVEILLANCE: A NOTE
OVERT VISUAL SURVEILLANCE
Introduction
Justifying visual surveillance
The case against visual surveillance
Effectiveness of CCTV systems
REGULATION OF OVERT VISUAL SURVEILLANCE
Regulation by codes of practice
Areas for legislative standards
Public and private places
Other matters
Penalties for breach
5. SURVEILLANCE AND THE
LISTENING DEVICES ACT 1984
BACKGROUND TO THE
LISTENING DEVICES ACT
OPERATION OF THE
LISTENING DEVICES ACT
Definition of surveillance
Definition of listening device
Use of the legislation
SCOPE OF THE
LISTENING DEVICES ACT
Offences for which a warrant may be sought
Who may grant an application for a warrant
Grounds for determining whether a warrant may be granted
Contents of an application for a warrant
What a warrant authorises
Entry to premises
Who is authorised to use the device
Emergency warrants
Period of time the warrant can be in force
Reporting procedures
Annual report requirements
What should an annual report on listening devices include?
Suggested changes
Notification and disclosure of surveillance to individuals who have been under surveillance
Destruction of records created following use of a listening device
LISTENING DEVICES ACT
DOES NOT COVER
Installation/repair/maintenance of device
Use of electricity to power the device
No definition of visual, signal or tracking surveillance devices
Protection of legal professional privilege
6. VISUAL SURVEILLANCE IN THE WORKPLACE
INTRODUCTION
Balancing competing interests in the workplace
REVIEW OF WORKPLACE SURVEILLANCE IN NEW SOUTH WALES
Working Party Report
THE COMMISSION'S REFERENCE
Limitations of the Working Party recommendations
TENTATIVE CONCLUSIONS
APPENDIX A: ELECTRONIC SURVEILLANCE: CURRENT AUSTRALIAN LEGISLATION AND GUIDELINES
Issues Paper 12 (1997) - Surveillance
Terms of Reference, Participants and Submissions
History of this Reference (Digest)
Terms of Reference
Pursuant to
Law Reform Commission Act 1967
(NSW), the Attorney General, the Honourable J W Shaw QC MLC, referred, by letter dated 2 July 1996, the following matter to the Law
Reform Commission.
To inquire into and report on the following matters:
the current scope and operation of the
Listening Devices Act 1984
the need to regulate the use of visual surveillance equipment, and
any related matter.
In undertaking this review the Commission should have regard to:
the protection of the privacy of the individual;
the views and interests of users of surveillance technology, including law enforcement agencies, private investigators, and owners
of private premises, such as banks, service stations and shops;
the use of surveillance technology in public places.
In making this reference the Attorney draws the Commission’s attention to the Government’s proposals for the introduction
of privacy and data protection legislation and to the current review of the issue of the regulation of workplace visual surveillance
being conducted by the Department of Industrial Relations.
Participants
Pursuant to
Law Reform Commission Act 1967
the Chairman of the Commission constituted a Division for the purpose of conducting the reference. The members of the Division are:
Mr Michael Adams QC
The Hon Jerrold Cripps QC
The Hon Justice John Dowd AO
Professor Brent Fisse
Professor John Goldring*
Professor David Weisbrot
(* denotes Commissioner-in-Charge)
Officers of the Commission
Executive Director
Mr Peter Hennessy
Legal research
Ms Leonie Armstrong
Ms Judy Maynard
Mrs Sally Riordan
Ms Beverley Caska
Desktop publishing
Ms Julie Freeman
Administrative assistance
Ms Helen Levendakis
Honorary consultant
Mr Peter Homel
Submissions
The Commission invites submissions on the issues relevant to this review, including but not limited to the issues raised in this
Issues Paper
All submissions and inquiries should be directed to:
Mr Peter Hennessy
Executive Director
NSW Law Reform Commission
GPO Box 5199
SYDNEY NSW 2001
[DX 1227 SYDNEY]
Phone: (02) 9228 8230
Fax: (02) 9228 8225
There is no special form required for submissions. If it is inconvenient or impractical to make a written submission you may telephone
the Commission and either direct your comments to a Legal Officer over the telephone, or else arrange to make your submission in
Closing date for submissions
The closing date for submissions is
31 July 1997
. No final decisions will be made by the Commission until after the deadline for submissions has passed.
Use of submissions and confidentiality
If you would like your submission to be treated as confidential, please indicate this in your submission. Submissions made to the
Commission may be used in two ways:
Since the Commission's process of law reform is essentially public, copies of submissions made to the Commission will normally be
made available on request to any person or organisation. However, if you would like all or part of your submission to be treated
as confidential, please indicate this in your submission. Any request for a copy of a submission marked "confidential"
will be determined in accordance with the
Freedom of Information Act 1989
In preparing the final Report, the Commission may also find it useful to refer to and make mention of comments submitted in response
Issues Paper
. However, if a request for confidentiality is made, it will be respected by the Commission in relation to the publication of such
submissions in a Report.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of contents
Issues Paper 12 (1997) - Surveillance
1. Introduction
History of this Reference (Digest)
1.1 This Issues Paper considers the legal regulation of surveillance in New South Wales, particularly aural and visual surveillance.
It discusses whether the current law in relation to aural surveillance, the
Listening Devices Act 1984
(NSW) (“LDA”), should be amended and whether new legislation, or some other form of regulation, is required to cover other
however, the complex interaction of Commonwealth and State legislation in this area must also be considered.
THE COMMISSION’S REFERENCE
The terms of reference
1.2 On 2 July 1996 the Commission received the following reference from the Attorney General, the Hon Jeff Shaw QC MLC, pursuant to
Law Reform Commission Act 1967
To inquire into and report on the following matters:
the current scope and operation of the
Listening Devices Act 1984
the need to regulate the use of visual surveillance equipment, and
any related matter.
In undertaking this review the Commission should have regard to:
the protection of the privacy of the individual;
the views and interests of users of surveillance technology, including law enforcement agencies, private investigators, and owners
of private premises, such as banks, service stations and shops;
the use of surveillance technology in public places.
In making this reference the Attorney draws the Commission’s attention to the Government’s proposals for the introduction
of privacy and data protection legislation and to the current review of the issue of the regulation of workplace visual surveillance
being conducted by the Department of Industrial Relations.
The scope of the reference
1.3 The Commission is required not only to review aural and visual surveillance, but also “any related matter”. Accordingly
the Commission has analysed whether different issues arise for surveillance devices which combine both aural and visual recording,
as well as the increasing amount of surveillance which is neither visual nor aural but which involves the use of computers and technological
developments, such as tracking systems (see Chapter 2). As indicated in the terms of reference, there are a number of imminent developments
in New South Wales in this area, in particular, the proposed introduction of privacy and information protection legislation. Such
developments will be taken into consideration in the Commission’s final recommendations.
The conduct of the reference
1.4 After receipt of the reference, the Commission circulated its terms to relevant organisations both in Australia and overseas and
invited initial submissions, but only commenced substantial work on the reference in October 1996. Apart from the receipt of submissions
from organisations and individuals, the Commission has also met a number of New South Wales organisations actively involved in this
area, including the Police Service, the Privacy Committee and the Crime Commission
These submissions and meetings have assisted the production of this Issues Paper.
Issues Paper and Report
1.5 This Paper is designed to encourage informed comment from those interested in the area of surveillance, including privacy groups,
law enforcement agencies, private investigators, lawyers, employers and the subjects of surveillance, the general public. A number
of issues for consideration are raised throughout the paper. You are invited to respond to those issues, or to make comments about
other issues of concern. For details about how to make a submission and the closing date for submissions, see pages viii-ix. After
a period of consultation, the Commission will release its report for the reference, which, it is currently proposed, will incorporate
draft legislation.
THE STRUCTURE OF THIS ISSUES PAPER
1.6 The remainder of this Paper covers the following areas:
a discussion of the different types of surveillance and their use (Chapter 2);
an overview of New South Wales and Commonwealth legislation and international standards (Chapter 3 and Appendix A);
overt visual surveillance (Chapter 4);
surveillance and the
Listening Devices Act 1984
(NSW) (Chapter 5); and
visual surveillance in the workplace (Chapter 6).
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of contents
Issues Paper 12 (1997) - Surveillance
2. What is Surveillance?
History of this Reference (Digest)
INTRODUCTION
2.1 It has been suggested that individuals generally have the following reasonable privacy expectations in their daily life:
1. that they will not deliberately be observed or overheard;
2. that their communications will not be intercepted, read or recorded deliberately; and
3. that their personal, professional or business data will not be examined, copied or recorded deliberately.
In fact all of these events occur on a regular basis, legally and illegally, for a variety of purposes. The rapid development, availability
and relative cheapness of new technology, for example, sophisticated listening devices and cameras capable of recording distant images,
have made such intrusions into peoples’ private affairs easier. Surveillance appears to be becoming increasingly popular, not
only with law enforcement agencies and private investigators but with commercial enterprises. Additionally, the same surveillance
techniques are used for criminal enterprises.
2.2 The purpose of legal regulation in this area is to prohibit some intrusions and regulate others, taking into account public interests
including the expectations outlined above. Legal regulation will have limited effect in deterring criminal uses of surveillance,
except through the provision of high penalties for illegal use, restrictions on the sale of some items and substantial emphasis on
enforcement in this area.
2.3 Surveillance involves monitoring the movements or affairs of a person or persons. The most common types are aural or visual surveillance
(or a combination of both), using a range of surveillance devices, though some types of surveillance cannot be categorised as either
aural or visual. The different types of surveillance considered by this reference are discussed at paras 2.4-2.8. For the purposes
of this reference, the Commission has also drawn a distinction between
(or concealed) surveillance and
(or open) surveillance. Legislation does not typically use these terms, but it is usually clear from the context which type of surveillance
is under consideration. Covert surveillance is carried out without notice to the subject by concealed devices. Overt surveillance
is carried out in such a way that the subjects of the surveillance are aware that devices are being used in their general proximity,
even if they are not aware when the device is pointed directly at them at a particular time. The policy issues behind both types
of surveillance are different, though the technology used may be identical. It must be acknowledged, however, that the distinction
between the two types of surveillance is not always clear - for example, surveillance which is ostensibly overt may be used later
for purposes which are not disclosed to, nor anticipated by, the targets. Though both overt or covert surveillance may be carried
out by anyone, their most common uses are discussed at paras 2.9-2.13. Surveillance may also be carried out by a person, for example
a police officer, without the aid of any equipment. This is not of concern for this reference. Rather it is the use of increasingly
sophisticated technology to undertake surveillance to which our inquiries are addressed. The law can do little to prevent people
from using their eyes and ears, but the intrusions which occur in this way are more limited and can be more easily minimised by the
Aural surveillance
2.4 Aural surveillance, colloquially known as “bugging”, involves use of a listening device to overhear or record a private
conversation. Such surveillance is governed in New South Wales by the
Listening Devices Act 1984
(“LDA”). Under the LDA, “listening device” means:
any instrument, apparatus, equipment or device capable of being used to record or listen to a private conversation simultaneously
with its taking place.
The operation of the LDA is considered in detail in Chapter 5. As discussed in Chapter 3, the LDA does not cover the interception
of signals passing over the telecommunications netweork, as this is governed by federal legislation. It only covers the recording
of conversations once those signals become words.
Visual surveillance
2.5 Visual surveillance involves observation of a target, primarily through cameras, video cameras or closed circuit television (“CCTV”).
There is currently no legislation to govern either covert or overt visual surveillance, unless the equipment can also be characterised
as a listening device under the LDA. Nor is there any general legal rule to prevent the use of a camera to film a person or private
property, if no trespass is involved.
This lack of regulation does not mean that there is complete freedom in using the technology. For example, the New South Wales Police
Service commented that it believes that a warrant authorising installation and use of a listening device does not also authorise
the entry onto premises and installation of a visual surveillance device.
Other types of surveillance
Audio-visual surveillance
2.6 In many ways the distinction between aural and visual surveillance is artificial. For example, a lip reading expert would be able,
in some cases, to ascertain from a video the words spoken by a target without using a listening device, revealing the possible blurring
of the line between the two types of surveillance. Additionally, many devices can record both sound and pictures simultaneously.
The video element in an audio-visual device does provide important advantages. For example, it allows the speaker to be more readily
identified where there are a number of speakers. It also reveals the hand gestures and facial expressions which may accompany, and
clarify, speech. See also para 5.6 below.
Tracking devices
2.7 Tracking devices can be installed in vehicles, on persons, or attached to movable objects such as containers. Through the monitoring
of signals released by the device, the position of the relevant recipient can be monitored centrally. This has obvious surveillance
and safety advantages, as the devices are less labour intensive than visual surveillance devices and allow operations to be monitored
from great distances. Tracking devices may fall within the definition of listening device under the LDA, for example if it can also
record conversations. However the lack of specific provisions for tracking devices in the LDA may cause difficulties for law enforcement
agencies, particularly in respect of installation. For example, installing a device in a motor vehicle may be a trespass unless the
owner of the vehicle has consented, so that any evidence gained may be challenged as illegally obtained.
This suggests that there may be a need to regulate tracking devices.
Computer surveillance
2.8 Computer surveillance can involve accessing or “reading” the storage mechanism of a suspect’s computer, or monitoring
a person’s operation of a computer.
Although there is scope for overlap with the
Telecommunications (Interception) Act 1979
(Cth) in the area of computer surveillance, the surveillance of information on individual computers which is not received by telephone
lines through a modem, or of networks which do not rely on telephone lines to exchange information, can only be regulated by State
law. The LDA does not appear to extend to this type of surveillance technology (see Chapter 5), though there are “anti-hacking”
computer offences at both the State and Federal level.
USES OF SURVEILLANCE
Covert surveillance
Law enforcement
2.9 The primary, and most accepted, use of covert surveillance is for law enforcement purposes. The Commission is aware that covert
surveillance is carried out in New South Wales by such agencies as the police, the Crime Commission, ICAC and the recently completed
Police Royal Commission, as well as by federal agencies such as ASIO, the Australian Federal Police and the National Crime Authority.
In addition to the use of listening devices (see Chapter 5), the police have used cameras in licensed premises to enforce liquor
licensing laws,
and computer surveillance is valuable in the investigation of fraud offences or in monitoring some paedophilia offences.
Private investigators
2.10 Private investigators carry out surveillance for their clients. Common areas for the use of such surveillance are in cases of
matrimonial disputes and alleged insurance or workers compensation fraud. For example, private investigators regularly follow and
film personal injuries claimants to attempt to gather evidence proving that their injuries are not genuine or are not of the level
of disability claimed. Some concern has been expressed that a large amount of covert surveillance is carried out by private investigators
outside the operation of the law, involving trespass to land or property or the use of listening devices without warrants.
2.11 Covert surveillance is also used by the media - the most notorious examples being the media scrutiny of the British royal family
and other celebrities. Most popular are long distance camera lenses, which allow visual access into private property without trespass,
and hidden cameras.
2.12 Employers are using surveillance technology to protect their premises and merchandise from theft or damage and also to monitor
the actions or performance of their staff. This area has recently been the subject of attention in New South Wales and is therefore
discussed separately in Chapter 6.
Overt surveillance
2.13 Not all surveillance is covert. More and more businesses and public areas are monitored by surveillance devices, usually CCTV
or fixed cameras. Generally the use of such cameras is notified through signs. Autobanks, for example, will often be labelled with
words to the effect of “Warning: you may be photographed while using this machine”. In New South Wales CCTV has been
used recently to prevent and detect crime in certain notorious areas, such as the cinema district near Sydney’s Town Hall or
Bondi Beach on New Year’s Eve, and the effectiveness of such methods is under scrutiny. Currently there is no regulation of
such usage. (See Chapter 4.) Additionally, tracking devices are not only used covertly by law enforcement agencies, but also by organisations
which monitor the positions of their vehicles, such as taxi companies.
POLICY ISSUES
Arguments against surveillance
2.14 The primary argument against surveillance is that it infringes other important interests, in particular, those in the area of
2.15 Australians are concerned about the intrusion of surveillance. For example, a survey conducted by Mastercard,
found that 44% of Australians surveyed were “very concerned” about people video taping their movements in public places,
whereas 25% were “not at all concerned”. In relation to aural surveillance, 77% were “very concerned” about
telephone bugging, while only 10% were “not at all concerned”.
2.16 Many reports have devoted considerable efforts to the difficult task of defining privacy, for example, Judge Cooley’s famous
1888 American definition, the right “to be let alone”
and the Australian Law Reform Commission’s description of privacy as “used to describe a genus of interests for which
there is strong claim to protection”.
The Commonwealth
defines privacy indirectly by setting out what practices are to be considered interferences with privacy.
In essence, privacy involves keeping oneself and one’s affairs removed from public view or knowledge, even if the information
so protected is itself not intrinsically sensitive. It has been argued that the interest in freedom from surveillance is a privacy
2.17 There is no common law right to privacy in Australia, though privacy may incidentally be protected by the laws of defamation
and trespass. Additionally, the Commonwealth
provides some protection from invasions of privacy by Commonwealth government agencies by regulating the handling of personal information
collected by them. This Act also regulates the use of tax file numbers and information collected by private credit reporting agencies.
There is not yet any parallel New South Wales legislation, though a number of Bills have been introduced in recent years
and the Attorney General had announced that privacy and information protection legislation will be introduced in New South Wales.
However, there is no necessary connection between surveillance and the collection of information. As surveillance is considered intrusive
in itself, regardless of any information-collecting purpose, mere regulation of the use of information obtained by surveillance is
likely to be considered insufficient protection of privacy.
Other considerations
2.18 Surveillance raises other concerns apart from privacy. The surveillance may involve trespass, for example, entry onto private
property for the purpose of installing a surveillance device, or the effective theft of electricity to power the device. It may also
involve damage to private property, at installation or retrieval of the device, or use of the device may hamper the effective operation
of its host device, for example a computer. Additionally, surveillance can infringe other private rights, for example, video images
of a celebrity wedding may breach an agreement to provide the exclusive rights to the coverage of the event to a third party.
Justification for surveillance
Law enforcement
2.19 Traditionally, the most common justification for surveillance is in relation to law enforcement purposes. Surveillance is a particularly
effective crime detection tool, especially as the recording can be used in evidence in criminal trials. The issue of illegally obtained
evidence or its admissibility in the court room,
however, will only be discussed briefly in this Paper.
Surveillance devices, particularly listening devices, meet needs other investigative techniques cannot. For example, the New South
Wales Crime Commission argued:
Over the years of its operation, the Commission has found that listening devices are an effective method of gathering evidence in
the investigation of drug crime. Evidence of drug transactions can be difficult to obtain because typically transactions are conducted
covertly, so that visual surveillance is not possible or at least difficult, offenders work in familiar groups and are extremely
wary of infiltration by undercover officers or police agents, and they employ counter surveillance techniques and communicate by
means of digital telephones which cannot be intercepted.
2.20 The argument for surveillance as a crime
tool is less strong. It is argued that the use of video cameras in public places will deter crime and enable speedy intervention
if a crime is observed. However, as Chapter 4 discusses, the effectiveness of such systems is a matter for debate, especially as
much depends on the level of resources backing up the visual surveillance and the possible response time. There is also an argument
that such surveillance merely moves crime from one place to another, rather than prevents it.
Public safety and efficiency
2.21 Surveillance can also be a useful tool in the area of public safety and efficiency. For example, the Roads and Traffic Authority
uses various forms of surveillance to ensure the smooth flow of traffic. It is also used for public safety purposes, particularly
where large crowds are involved and individual policing may be less effective. Most people will accept some form of surveillance,
for example at major sporting events, in exchange for a greater feeling of safety. More controversially, it is also argued that surveillance,
particularly visual, can be used to monitor or control “undesirable” (rather than criminal) behaviour in certain designated
public places.
Employer interests
2.22 Surveillance is used by employers to monitor both staff and customers, primarily to detect stealing and fraud. It may be covert
or overt. Employers argue that they have a right to protect their own property, or, more indirectly, to supervise their employees.
However the countervailing privacy interests of people, such as not being photographed without consent, must also be recognised.
Many laws limit employers’ rights in relation to practices on their own property and surveillance laws should be considered
in this light. The use of covert surveillance as a supervision tool or to assess job performance may be an infringement of workers’
Protection of private property
2.23 The desire to protect private property leads many home owners or businesses to use security companies to provide a variety of
forms of surveillance. Surveillance may include patrols by security guards and the use of fixed cameras. Few would argue that such
surveillance is improper, especially in circumstances where any person caught by such surveillance would be a trespasser. The arguments
are less clear when the surveillance occurs over non-trespassers and where there is no warning about the use of such devices.
Conclusions: the policy issues
2.24 There are arguably legitimate uses for surveillance. However, acceptance of the benefits of surveillance does not mean that the
area should not be regulated nor that all forms of surveillance are equally acceptable for all purposes. Additionally, the general
public may be prepared to trade certain privacy interests for other benefits, such as the detection of criminals and greater personal
security. Thus the regulation of surveillance becomes a delicate balancing act. For example, people may be comforted by the fact
that certain potentially dangerous public places are under surveillance, such as a long pedestrian subway leading to a railway station
where muggings have been a common occurrence, but concerned about the potential misuse of information gained through such surveillance.
Different rules may be appropriate for surveillance in public or private places, or for “targeted” surveillance as compared
to general routine surveillance. The Privacy Committee of New South Wales, for example, argues that routine visual surveillance in
public places:
... should only be permitted when it can be demonstrated clearly that the benefit to the community outweighs to a substantial degree
other competing social interests and individual rights. Whenever possible, priority should be given to preserving the rights and
freedoms of the citizens of this state, including the right to be free from unwarranted surveillance by government and law enforcement
agencies when visiting public places.
2.25 Blanket prohibitions of surveillance in some circumstances, however, present difficulties, because the general community may
accept even quite extreme invasions of privacy for security reasons. For example, hidden video cameras in toilets and change rooms
are generally seen as unacceptable, but there may be occasions, for example, following a series of bombs placed in toilets, where
the community would accept such an intrusion.
All surveillance is likely to constitute a severe invasion of privacy. While at times surveillance may be justified, there are arguments
that restraints are required. The remainder of this Issues Paper discusses possible types of restraint.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of contents
. Law Reform Commission of Hong Kong
Report on Privacy: Regulating the Interception of Communications
(December 1996) at para 53.
Listening Devices Act 1984
(NSW) (“LDA”)
Bathurst City Council v Saban
(1985) 2 NSWLR 704.
See 707-8 for the limited restrictions on taking/using such film.
. New South Wales Police Service
(13 December 1996) at 1.
. New South Wales Police Service
(13 December 1996) at 2.
. New South Wales Police Service
(13 December 1996) at 2.
Crimes Act 1900
Crimes Act 1914
. Privacy Committee of New South Wales
(9 January 1997).
. New South Wales Police Service
(13 December 1996) at 2.
. New South Wales Crime Commission
(October 1995, provided to the New South Wales Law Reform Commission by letter dated 16 September 1996) at 17-18.
. Mastercard International
(1996) at 14.
. L D Brandeis and S D Warren “The Right to Privacy”
Harvard Law Review
. Australian Law Reform Commission
(Report 22, 1983) Vol 1 at para 20. See paras 45-51 for a list of these interests.
were introduced in 1994, 1995 and 1996, however, none was passed.
. Speech by the New South Wales Attorney General, the Hon Jeff Shaw QC MLC to the conference,
The New Privacy Laws: a symposium on preparing privacy laws for the 21st century
(19 February 1997, Sydney).
. See, in particular,
Evidence Act 1995
. See Chapter 5, Issue 15.
. New South Wales Crime Commission
(October 1995, provided to the New South Wales Law Reform Commission by letter dated 16 September 1996) at 1.
. See paras 4.13-4.16.
. Letter from the Privacy Committee of New South Wales to the New South Wales Attorney General dated 2 May 1996.
Issues Paper 12 (1997) - Surveillance
3. Regulation of Surveillance in Australia
History of this Reference (Digest)
INTRODUCTION
3.1 Electronic surveillance is regulated in New South Wales by both Commonwealth and New South Wales legislation. It is also important
to understand the international background in this area, particularly as it affects the regulation of privacy at the Commonwealth
level. Though relevant Commonwealth and New South Wales legislation is discussed briefly in this chapter, a more comprehensive list
of legislation and guidelines in this area is set out in Appendix A. International practice may provide some guidance as to what
is appropriate in New South Wales, and in some cases may establish principles that are integrated into Commonwealth law applicable
in this State.
INTERNATIONAL BACKGROUND
(Cth) refers, in its Preamble, to the fact that Australia is a party to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (“ICCPR”)
and a Member of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (“OECD”) which has prepared privacy guidelines.
Accordingly, both these international developments must be taken into account in the Australian development of legislation in the
area of privacy. Also significant in this area is the recent European Community Directive on Information Privacy.
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
3.3 The key international instrument in this area is the ICCPR. Article 17 provides that:
(1) No one shall be subjected to arbitrary or unlawful interference with his privacy ...
(2) Everyone has the right to the protection of the law against such interference ...
3.4 Australia has ratified the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
and the Covenant is also found in Schedule 2 of the
Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission Act 1986
(Cth). While neither ratification nor the attachment of such documents to the Commonwealth Act automatically incorporates these instruments
into Australian law,
the Commission considers that its recommendations should, as far as possible, be consistent with those international standards recognised
by the Australian government. Additionally, in the early 1990s Australia recognised the operation of the First Optional Protocol
to the ICCPR, which allows Australian complainants who have exhausted all domestic avenues to take their complaints to the Human
Rights Committee of the United Nations. This occurred in the Toonen case,
where the complainant argued that Tasmania’s laws relating to homosexual acts breached the ICCPR. The Committee determined
that Tasmania’s prohibition of consensual homosexual acts in private breached Article 17 and was “arbitrary” in
that it could not be justified as a reasonable or proportionate response to public health and moral concerns.
Surveillance laws do violate the privacy of individuals, therefore it is important that any such interference is not arbitrary but
governed by adequate safeguards and guidelines for use.
OECD Guidelines
3.5 As a member of the OECD, in 1984 Australia adopted the 1981 OECD
Guidelines on the Protection of Privacy and Transborder Flows of Personal Data
. These Guidelines, which include basic privacy principles, were taken into account in the Australian Law Reform Commission’s
Report on Privacy
and in the consequent Commonwealth
European Community Directive 1995
3.6 The European Community Directive
provides an incentive for jurisdictions, including New South Wales, which trade with members of the European community to introduce
appropriate privacy legislation, by threatening to ban the export of personal data to places without adequate data protection legislation
in 1998. Such a ban would have potentially serious economic effects for Australia if business information from Europe could not be
transferred to Australia. Australian businesses wishing to trade with European countries would need to set up their own contractual
NEW SOUTH WALES
3.7 The key legislation in New South Wales is the
Listening Devices Act 1984
which regulates, as its name suggests, the use of listening devices in New South Wales. There is a general prohibition upon the use
of listening devices to record private conversations, except in the circumstances outlined by the Act, in particular through the
granting of a warrant by a Supreme Court judge. The other important piece of legislation in New South Wales is the
which sets out the powers and functions of the Privacy Committee of New South Wales.
3.8 There is currently no legislation dealing with visual surveillance, whether covert or overt, but some guidelines have been prepared,
such as the New South Wales Police Service
Guidelines for Investigation of Potential for, and Implementation of, CCTV by Local Councils
. Other users of visual surveillance, such as service stations, have developed their own codes of practice.
However, a number of new developments are expected in New South Wales, including the proposed introduction of a privacy and information
protection Bill. Privacy and data protection Bills were introduced in 1994, 1995 and 1996, but all lapsed. While the proposed Bill
will deal largely with information protection, which is beyond the scope of this reference, its provisions may affect surveillance,
through the proposed establishment of a Privacy Commissioner in New South Wales.
Commonwealth/New South Wales areas of overlap
3.9 Like many areas of law, surveillance issues are complicated by Australia’s federal system and the fact that offences against
both Commonwealth and State laws will be the subject of investigation, often involving the same set of circumstances. Though generally
a matter of State control, privacy law has been the subject of international instruments, and Australia’s ratification of these
has allowed the Commonwealth government to legislate in the area of privacy under the external affairs power.
Additionally, the Commonwealth government has control over surveillance conducted by the telecommunications system, through its constitutional
telephonic power.
3.10 The current Commonwealth/New South Wales division of responsibility has been usefully summarised
as follows:
The use of aural surveillance devices connected to the telephone system is governed by Commonwealth legislation:
Telecommunications (Interception) Act 1979
The use of aural surveillance devices by Commonwealth agencies in the investigation of Commonwealth drug importation offences is regulated
by Commonwealth law:
Customs Act 1900
(Cth) s 219A-219K.
The use of aural surveillance devices by the Australian Federal Police in the investigation of certain non-narcotics Commonwealth
offences is regulated by Commonwealth law:
Australian Federal Police Act 1979
(Cth) s 12B-12L.
Aural surveillance devices used in New South Wales by State agencies and not connected to the telephone system are regulated by New
South Wales law: LDA.
Aural surveillance devices used in New South Wales by Commonwealth agencies (not including the Australian Federal Police) for offences
which are not Commonwealth narcotic offences are regulated by New South Wales law: LDA.
There is no regulation of visual surveillance, photography or the use of video cameras.
Areas without regulation
3.11 It is anomalous that visual surveillance is not regulated in the same way as aural surveillance. In 1983, the Australian Law
Reform Commission recommended that there be similar rules for both.
The former federal Privacy Commissioner, Kevin O’Connor, said:
The failure of the substantive law to deal with covert optical surveillance is, of course, an illogicality. Use of devices which record
conversations is substantially regulated by the law, but the use of devices which record behaviour and activity is not.
Apart from visual surveillance, other areas not specifically covered by legislation in New South Wales are data or signal surveillance
(including tracking devices) and audio-visual surveillance.
3.12 The lack of regulation leads to concerns on the part of both those who wish to use surveillance and those who are its potential
targets. For the users, lack of regulation leads to:
uncertainty about the allowable level of usage;
concern, within law enforcement agencies, that courts later will find that the evidence was obtained illegally; and
concern, for private enterprises, that the use of the technology will lead to employee and customer complaints and action.
For the targets, lack of regulation allows unacceptable levels of intrusion to occur without sanction or control.
3.13 It has been suggested that the fact that only some areas are the subject of legal regulation further undercuts the effectiveness
of even those areas of regulation:
Once one form is subject to legal regulation, failure to control other forms not only becomes morally indefensible, but also in practice
undermines the protection granted. This arises from the simple behavioural prediction that, assuming equal effectiveness, measures
that can be undertaken free of oversight will be much more attractive to people doing the work than those which are subject to restriction
The remainder of this Paper discusses the Commission’s proposed reforms of overt visual surveillance (Chapter 4) and of the
other types of surveillance (Chapter 5), and whether different issues arise in relation to visual surveillance in the workplace (Chapter
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of contents
. Except to the extent that there may be a legitimate expectation that officers of the executive government will act in conformity
with them pending implementation: see
Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs v Teoh
[1995] HCA 20
(1995) 183 CLR 273.
. The Communication of Nicholas Toonen concerning Australia: Communication No 488/1992.
. See I A Shearer “The Communication of Nicholas Toonen concerning Australia: Communication No 488/1992 - Explanatory Note”
Australian Law Journal
600-609 for a copy and discussion of this decision.
. Australian Law Reform Commission
(Report 22, 1983).
(“Information Privacy Principles”).
Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal
data and on the free movement of such data
(Directive 95/46/EC of 24 October 1995).
. For discussion of the effects of the European Directive see: J Brough “Another key election promise bites the dust”
The Sydney Morning Herald
(31 March 1997) at 11; C Merritt “Australia now offside with Europe on privacy laws”
The Australian Financial Review
(27 March 1997) at 5 and “Warning to EU over Howard line on privacy”
The Australian Financial Review
(7 April 1997) at 9; and N Pullen “Why privacy laws are becoming public enemy number one”
The Australian
(31 March 1997) at 32.
. Service Station Association Ltd
(20 July 1996).
. Speech by the New South Wales Attorney General, the Hon Jeff Shaw QC MLC to the conference,
The New Privacy Laws: a symposium on preparing privacy laws for the 21st century
(19 February 1997, Sydney).
Constitution
s 51(xxix).
Constitution
For example, see
Grollo v Palmer
[1995] HCA 26
(1995) 184 CLR 348.
Criminal Procedure (NSW)
(Loose-leaf Service, LBC Information Services, 1996) at para 8.70.
. Australian Law Reform Commission
(Report 22, 1983) Vol 2 at para 1183.
. Comments made at Australian Institute of Criminology Conference
Administrative Law and Public Administration
(Sydney, 16 November 1993), from transcript provided by the Privacy Branch of the Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission by
letter dated 6 February 1997.
. L Lustgarten and I Leigh
In from the Cold: National Security and Parliamentary Democracy
(Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1994) at 44.
Issues Paper 12 (1997) - Surveillance
4. Visual Surveillance
History of this Reference (Digest)
COVERT VISUAL SURVEILLANCE: A NOTE
4.1 In distinguishing between the
Listening Devices Act 1984
(NSW) (“LDA”) on the one hand, and visual surveillance devices on the other, the Commission’s terms of reference
reflect the demarcation prevailing in the regulation of different types of surveillance device. Technological developments since
the legislation was enacted have made such distinctions artificial. Covert
surveillance operates in the same realm as, and often simultaneously with, covert
surveillance. Therefore, analysis of the issues relevant to the operation and regulation of covert visual surveillance devices more
properly belongs in the discussion of the LDA in Chapter 5.
OVERT VISUAL SURVEILLANCE
Introduction
4.2 We have become accustomed to being watched. In banks, department stores, at major sporting events, or busy traffic intersections,
we know cameras will be monitoring the scene. These are examples of overt visual surveillance. Overt surveillance
generally means the unconcealed use of surveillance equipment, usually signposted to draw to the individual’s attention the
fact that he or she is under observation. Many other examples could be cited of locations where overt visual surveillance equipment
is already being used, such as the foyers of offices, hotels and clubs, bus and railway stations, car parks, service stations, retail
outlets and shopping malls. With the interest shown by government authorities, corporations and private businesses in this technology
it is likely that such usage will only increase. The primary technique used for such surveillance is video cameras without sound.
4.3 Visual surveillance could also include the use of telephoto and other remote camera equipment, even if not in any way concealed,
but directed at people on private property. It is common for media photographers to position themselves where they can photograph
the activities of people in the news. Insurance investigators and law enforcement agencies also use remote telephotography in the
course of their work, although such surveillance is usually covert, not overt.
Should the use of telephoto equipment in a public place be treated in the same way as “covert” visual surveillance?
4.4 In the 1960s, when the market for closed circuit television (“CCTV”) commenced in Australia, its use was restricted
to providing high level security and the monitoring of hazardous production processes. Since then, the falling cost of the equipment,
together with its increasing sophistication, have led to a rapid expansion of the Australian market, with the industry reporting
a growth in retail sales in 1994/5 of 24%, for an estimated total value of over $50 million.
There is some popular concern about the continuing lack of regulation, given the growth of this industry.
4.5 Overt surveillance need not be limited to purely visual devices. A surveillance device, as already noted, can have varied capabilities,
and it is likely that a video camera used as a visual surveillance device also has the potential to be used as a listening device.
However, this chapter is limited to a discussion of overt visual surveillance as overt audio or audio-visual surveillance may contravene
Additionally, the Commission suggests that the recording of sound in public places involves different policy issues and is less likely
to be acceptable to the community. For example the English Model Code for closed circuit television (see below) forbids the recording
of sound in public places.
Justifying visual surveillance
4.6 Arguments justifying the use of surveillance in general were discussed above in Chapter 2. With respect to visual surveillance,
its main goals may be stated, in summary, as enhancing:
law enforcement, by deterring the commission of crime, by facilitating its policing, and by providing evidence for the prosecution
of offenders;
public safety, where this may be jeopardised by criminal activity, road traffic or other transport, and the presence of crowds, such
as gather at sporting venues and other major spectacles;
the protection of private property;
traffic management and efficiency; and
in the case of public and newsworthy events (such as rallies, sports competitions or parades), awareness, and possibly amusement,
on the part of the general public.
4.7 A significant example occurred during 1995 and 1996, when police installed street cameras in George Street in the central business
district of Sydney, a busy thoroughfare characterised by leisure activities, such as cinemas, game parlours and licensed premises.
This was a trial, seeking to ascertain the impact CCTV would have on a heavily congested area, prone to criminal and anti-social
behaviour and difficult to police. Evidently, the trial was adjudged a success,
and more cameras were set up in the Sydney suburb of Cabramatta in September 1996. In February 1997 Sydney City Council announced
its intention to install a number of surveillance cameras linked to video phones at various “hotspots” around the city,
including Circular Quay and Chinatown.
4.8 Further examples of the use of visual surveillance devices can be found at the Belconnen and Woden bus interchanges in the Australian
Capital Territory, where the primary purpose of the cameras is to allow supervisors to observe bus, and to a lesser extent passenger,
The Sydney Football Stadium and the Sydney Cricket Ground are equipped with devices which can focus on, and quickly generate a colour
reproduction of, individual spectators.
Another now well-known application of visual surveillance technology came to light after Sydney’s bid to host the 2000 Olympics
proved successful. It was revealed that while delegates of the International Olympic Committee were being hosted around the city,
traffic monitoring cameras were being utilised to ensure that vehicles ferrying the delegates were given green lights.
These are merely isolated examples of the numerous applications of visual surveillance technology in use today. They also illustrate
the possibility of surveillance equipment being used for purposes other than those envisaged at the time of installation, a phenomenon
sometimes referred to as “function creep”.
4.9 The development of the law with regard to occupiers’ liability is also worth noting in this context. Since 1987 general
principles of negligence now govern the duty owed by occupiers to entrants onto the land.
In its present state, however, the law is unclear as to whether the occupier of “high risk” premises is liable to an
entrant who is injured by the act of a third party. There may be circumstances in which an occupier will be held liable to an entrant
for failing to take sufficient measures to provide security, for example by the provision of sufficient lighting. The susceptibility
of particular locations, such as car parks, to attract undesirable behaviour would be one of many factors to be taken into account.
At present, an occupier has no duty to provide surveillance for the protection of lawful entrants. However, with the trend towards
increasing the use of such technology, it is possible to envisage a future in which the installation of surveillance systems is regarded
as the norm in certain contexts. In those cases, the use of surveillance equipment may become an incident of an evolving legal obligation
to provide adequate security.
The case against visual surveillance
4.10 Chapter 2 discussed the privacy arguments against surveillance in general. These arguments are less cogent for overt surveillance,
as it usually involves recording of an activity taking place in the full glare of public view. Perhaps “privacy” is an
inadequate term to convey the rights which people may feel are threatened. It is not so much that others may, through overt surveillance
in public, obtain some private information about them. Rather, the concern is that some act, quite possibly harmless and best forgotten,
once captured by the surveillance camera and permanently recorded, has the potential to become a source of humiliation, even blackmail.
4.11 Another aspect to consider is that the individual may see nothing untoward in his or her behaviour in public, when he or she
views that occasion as constituting a “one-off”, as far as passing onlookers are concerned. If, however, such video recordings
of an individual were used to chart his or her habits or associates, then such surveillance might be regarded as insidious, again
because of the potential for embarrassment or blackmail.
4.12 Another objection to the use of street cameras may be made simply on the ground that many people do not like being watched, regardless
of whether they are doing something wrong or not. In the absence of wrongdoing, many would endorse the view that they have the right
“to be let alone”,
and that such a right is infringed by indiscriminate mass surveillance.
Effectiveness of CCTV systems
4.13 Behind the burgeoning use of street surveillance is the public’s perception of enhanced security, providing increased personal
and property protection. In Australia no substantive research has been undertaken to indicate whether, in fact, CCTV systems produce
this result.
Even in the United Kingdom, where CCTV systems have been used for a number of years, very few studies have been undertaken. In one
which examined public attitudes towards the use of CCTV, the authors concluded that while the majority of people surveyed reacted
positively to the use of CCTV and assumed it to be effective in crime control, this acceptance was based on “limited, and partly
inaccurate knowledge of the functions and capabilities of CCTV systems in public places”.
4.14 The findings of a later study,
evaluating the effectiveness of CCTV systems operating in three locations in England, could not be regarded as endorsing public confidence
in their capacity to control crime. The study found that the use of surveillance cameras did appear to reduce the incidence of property
crime initially, but to sustain this improvement required bolstering with an increase in the number of resulting arrests.
With regard to personal crime the results were less conclusive, indicating that the benefit of surveillance lay more in providing
the police with assistance in both responding quickly to criminal activity and evidence gathering, than in deterring attacks.
While the presence of cameras may have helped contain the incidence of robbery and theft from the person in targeted areas, it appears
that these sort of acts tended to be displaced to nearby streets not in camera view. The study acknowledged the difficulty in measuring
the degree of displacement, but stated that the evidence suggested it took place.
4.15 In the Australian Capital Territory an inquiry into the efficacy of surveillance cameras in public places concluded that “the
perception of public danger may be overstated and ... the effectiveness of CCTV as the solution ... yet to be demonstrated”.
As a result the Report recommends that Commonwealth co-operation be sought in conducting a nation-wide review into the effectiveness
4.16 Although the Commission is not itself engaged in evaluating the efficacy of CCTV, it notes that there is little evidence from
which to conclude that the enormous expense of establishing such a system will, of itself, provide local authorities with the panacea
to crime and anti-social behaviour. Such authorities would need to question whether other means of controlling crime, such as increasing
the numbers of beat police, might not achieve similar results at lower cost.
Are there arguments of principle, other than those already mentioned, against or in favour of the use of overt visual surveillance?
REGULATION OF OVERT VISUAL SURVEILLANCE
4.17 At present, the law does not prevent anyone from taking photographs with a telephoto lens. So long as that person is not trespassing
on another person’s land, even though the object of the photograph may be in a place to which the photographer could not lawfully
gain access, no offence is committed.
4.18 There is no legislation directly governing the use of visual surveillance equipment. Phillip Bradley, Chairman of the New South
Wales Crime Commission, suggests that this is:
probably due to the fact that people conduct their affairs in public or in circumstances where they are likely to be photographed
in a more circumspect way than they do, for example, on the telephone where the prospect of being heard through a crossed line or
an extension telephone is somewhat greater.
He notes that the only legislative prohibition on the use of visual surveillance is in the
Australian Security Intelligence Organization Act
defines “listening device” to include equipment capable of recording images, and could thus include a camera. This prohibition,
however, is limited to special circumstances relating to the work of the Australian Security Intelligence Organisation.
4.19 The only direct reference in New South Wales legislation to the operation of a visual surveillance system appears to be that
contained in the
Casino Control Act 1992
(NSW), which makes it a condition of a casino licence that the New South Wales Casino Control Authority approves plans relating to
the conduct and monitoring of casino operations, including:
the manner in which a closed circuit television system operates within the casino, including details of the positions and field of
coverage of the cameras and viewing screens and the height of the cameras above the gaming.
Evidence Act 1995
(NSW) gives courts a discretion to exclude evidence, including that obtained by visual surveillance equipment, in certain circumstances.
If, for example, the evidence is unduly prejudicial to a party or if it was obtained illegally, (for example by deception or a trespass
on land) the judge may, but is not required to, exclude it.
This does not provide an adequate safeguard against the abuse of individual privacy, because there are no clear standards governing
the exercise of this discretion.
4.21 There are indications that the community is concerned about the degree of intrusion upon what it regards as its private affairs,
and may be seeking protection from behaviour and the use of technology which tends to be intrusive. The Commission seeks views as
to whether these indications are accurate, and as to what standards for protection from unwarranted intrusions might be appropriate.
Should the use of overt visual surveillance be regulated in any way?
4.22 Protection from privacy intrusion may come in the form of standards which must be complied with in the use of surveillance devices.
Regulation, through legislation, is one way to achieve this. Another is through self-regulation, where the providers and users of
surveillance systems establish the standards by which they are to be bound. This has the advantage of shifting much of the cost of
regulation from government to the regulated, but may be less effective in achieving the protection desired by the public. For this
reason the Commission seeks comment on the desirability of regulation, and the form any such regulation should take.
Regulation by codes of practice
4.23 An alternative to legislation is for users of overt surveillance technology to comply with a code of practice, which could be
enforceable on a purely voluntary basis, or by virtue of being based on a set of legislated standards (also known as “enforced
self-regulation”).
(Cth) contains an example of legislative standards which are not directly enforceable, but which provide a direction and framework
for specific application.
lists 11 “Information Privacy Principles” by which public sector agencies must abide.
The principles are stated in general terms, and can be reflected in rules applying them to specific situations. The Act also requires
the Privacy Commissioner to issue a Code of Conduct in relation to credit information files and credit reports, with which credit
reporting agencies and credit providers must comply.
Once the Commissioner has accepted the rules, which are prepared primarily by those subject to regulation, they have the force of
4.24 In the United Kingdom, where CCTV has been used on a larger scale than in this country, rising concern over the implications
of using surveillance technology has led to the development of a Model Code of Practice,
despite the fact that many local CCTV schemes had already adopted voluntary codes of practice. These voluntary codes had tended to
focus on the needs of the criminal justice system, whereas the designers of the Model Code believe the focus has shifted to public
confidence in the use of surveillance, requiring the extension of “codes to ensure accountability, good quality public information
and effective, well-managed relationships between the owners of schemes and the police”.
The Model Code, while remaining voluntary, foreshadows the possibility of:
the need for a statutory form of control, specifying basic standards which a CCTV scheme covering public places must meet. Liberty
(formerly the National Council for Civil Liberties) argues that the introduction of statutory controls should be introduced (sic)
without delay. Should that point be reached, the most sensible approach would enable the Secretary of State to make decisions within
a basic framework on detailed regulations, which would be coupled with a system of local authority licensing.
4.25 The Model Code introduces elements not normally present in the voluntary codes, most of which concentrate on such items as video
tape handling and other features relevant to the criminal justice system.
These elements also meet criticisms that voluntary codes have not proved to be effective in the long term. Some of these new elements
appear under such heads as “Purpose statement”, “Data Protection implications”, “Responsibilities of
the owner of the scheme”, “Partnership”, “Accountability”, and so on. A number of principles are highlighted
at the start of most sections, followed by a list of practical issues requiring resolution for compliance with those principles.
4.26 The New South Wales Police Service released a paper
at around the same time as the Model Code was published in the United Kingdom. Its aim is to provide a “strategic and responsive
framework” in which local government authorities can implement CCTV systems, drawing on police assistance. It is intended to
operate more as a practical manual for setting up a CCTV scheme than a code of practice, but does address the need for community
consultation. It does not attempt to formulate a comprehensive set of principles informing the installation of visual surveillance
devices, but rather to provide a community service in the form of expertise. The guidelines contain suggestions on such diverse issues
as the steps to be taken before making a decision whether or not to install a CCTV system, including the establishment of safety
committees, and carrying out enquiries as to the environmental and commercial impact of the installation, and camera and monitoring
equipment specifications. While it is called a “code”, it is not enforceable, and the Commission considers that, if regulation
of visual surveillance is found to be desirable, enforceable standards of behaviour, rather than guidelines, are likely to be required.
4.27 The Commission sees possible merit in the establishment in this area of basic standards that also allow for adaptation to local
or specific conditions. With the demand for CCTV increasing, it seems preferable to introduce standards as soon as practicable, rather
than deal with the proliferation of surveillance schemes in a piecemeal fashion. Further, comprehensive and uniform standards should
be seen as a tool benefiting owners of surveillance technology. For example, local councils would receive direction in formulating
their own street surveillance policies, and, as a result, efficient use of resources in establishing such schemes would be facilitated.
In tentatively proposing legislating with respect to standards, the Commission is not suggesting that stringent controls, such as
those pertaining to the use of listening devices, be extended to overt surveillance devices. It is envisaged that, were regulation
to be introduced into this area, it would constitute a regime distinct from that governing covert surveillance devices, although
it could, of course, be contained within the same, albeit expanded, legislation.
4.28 The major advantage of “enforced self-regulation” for those who are regulated is that they make the rules themselves,
drawing on their knowledge of the environment in which they operate. However, the rules do not become enforceable until they receive
the sanction of a public official given specific authority to do so by an Act of Parliament. The advantage to the public is that
whatever rules are established are vetted by a public authority and may be enforced in the same way as other regulatory laws.
4.29 Therefore, as a possible alternative to legislation, the Commission suggests consideration of a set of standards contained in
legislation. These standards would provide the basis for, and would be reflected in, the development of any code of practice developed
by a particular industry/group, such as local councils, operators of shopping centres, department stores or parking stations. Before
any such specific code could become enforceable as a legally binding set of rules it would need approval by a regulatory authority.
The code would be designed by its users but accountability would be provided through certain non-negotiable standards, embodied in
legislation, and by the oversight of the regulator.
4.30 It is important that:
those affected by the regulation participate in its formulation;
before becoming effective, the proposed regulation is scrutinised by a responsible authority and is subject to disallowance in the
same way as other delegated legislation; and
if breach of any provisions attracts sanctions, those provisions be specific and clear.
Should the regulation of overt visual surveillance take the form of an industry/group code of practice based on a set of legislative
standards and approved by a regulatory body with sanctions for breach of these standards?
Areas for legislative standards
4.31 If the need for regulation (whether in the form of legislation, or through enforced self-regulation) is accepted, determining
the areas to be covered becomes important.
Public and private places
4.32 Consent on the part of individual passers-by to being watched and recorded - inferred from the lack of concealment of the cameras
and the posting of signs indicating their presence - makes the overt use of surveillance equipment a less important area for stringent
regulation than that of covert use. Such consent may not, however, be assumed to extend to private property, such as the interiors
of residences which may be filmed unintentionally in the course of surveillance of a public place. While not constituting a physical
trespass, it is arguable that this represents an untenable invasion of privacy which the owner of the system is bound to avoid.
4.33 The distinction between public and private domains is, however, often unclear. There are places to which the public are welcome
and even invited to visit, such as indoor shopping centres. Individuals may consider they are in a public place, and are unlikely
to acknowledge its actual private ownership. Formulating standards on the basis of whether the property on which the surveillance
is taking place is in public or private ownership may lead to artificial and arbitrary distinctions in the way privacy is protected.
Other matters
4.34 The regulation of overt visual surveillance would not need to be as detailed or prescriptive as the measures typically found
in legislation dealing with covert surveillance. Experience in Australia and in other countries suggests that some aspects of overt
visual surveillance commonly create fear of the possibility of unduly intrusive surveillance. Control of these aspects requires attention
to matters including:
the purposes for and conditions in which surveillance equipment may be installed or used;
the nature of warnings or notice that should be given to potential subjects of surveillance;
the training and qualification of those who install, monitor, and control day-to-day operations of surveillance equipment;
access to, periods of retention of, and destruction of tapes and records of surveillance; and
the use of tapes and records as evidence in court proceedings (both civil and criminal).
What areas should be covered by legislative standards? Possible questions for consideration include:
(a) What activities using visual surveillance devices should be regulated?
(b) Should a distinction be drawn between private and public places when considering regulation?
(c) Should some kinds of visual surveillance device be subject to a licensing requirement?
(d) Should there be restrictions with regard to who may own or use visual surveillance equipment?
(e) What procedures and standards should exist for the retention and disposal of tapes?
(f) Should there be a system for authorising individuals or bodies to perform certain functions associated with surveillance activities,
for example installation of equipment, monitoring the recording, and tasks associated with storage and disposal of tapes?
Penalties for breach
4.35 The disadvantage of most codes of practice or sets of legislative standards is the lack of enforcement mechanisms for failure
to comply with them and the lack of any penalty for their breach. The Commission does not favour a purely voluntary code in this
area for several reasons:
the sophistication of the available technology enables a high level of intrusiveness which infringes community privacy interests;
there are a large number of potential users in a variety of situations, which prevents effective self regulation by a particular industry
or group; and
there is enormous scope for unscrupulous use of the material obtained.
The Commission therefore considers that there should be sanctions for the breach of key standards in the area of overt visual surveillance,
though the form of such sanctions is a matter which requires further consideration.
4.36 Sanctions could only be imposed after proper processes had been followed to protect the rights of those charged with failure
to comply, and for breach of clear and specific provisions. The alternatives are that specific provisions are embodied in either
legislation, or in codes formulated by the affected groups but approved by a regulator. If codes are adopted, the legislation would
need to specify which of the principles were considered so important that no code could be approved (and thus become enforceable)
unless it applied that principle specifically. For example, the general principle may be that tapes made by CCTV equipment should
not be retained for more than a reasonable period. The specific provision in a code for car park operators might require destruction
or erasure of the tapes after 14 days unless required for court proceedings. Potential sanctions include: fines, adverse publicity,
annual reporting requirements and withdrawal of permission or cancellation or non-renewal of a licence.
What mechanism should exist to ensure compliance, and what sanctions should there be for breach of legislative standards?
4.37 Balancing the desire for privacy are the freedoms which a civilised society enjoys. These include, subject to the law, freedom
of expression and the individual’s freedom to do as he or she pleases so long as not causing injury to another. In regulating
visual surveillance a definition of that term could be drafted so as to exclude from the scope of any regulatory rules those activities
not requiring regulation, such as recreational photography (including video recording).
Should there be any general exemptions from regulation?
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of contents
. See para 2.3.
. Privacy Committee of New South Wales
Invisible Eyes: Report on Video Surveillance in the Workplace
(Report 67, 1995) at para 1.4.
. See Chapter 5 generally.
. United Kingdom - Local Government Information Unit
A Watching Brief: a Code of Practice for CCTV
(March 1996) at 30.
. New South Wales Police Service
Evaluation of the Closed Circuit Television System in the City of Sydney Patrol Safety Zone
(January 1996).
. N Papadopoulos “Spy cameras get the go-ahead to focus on city troublespots”
The Sydney Morning Herald
(7 February 1997) at 3.
. Legislative Assembly for the Australian Capital Territory - Standing Committee on Legal Affairs
The Electronic Eye: Inquiry into the Efficacy of Surveillance Cameras
(Report 2, September 1996) at paras 3.2, 3.3.
. Privacy Committee of New South Wales at para 1.4.
. Privacy Committee of New South Wales at para 1.4.
Australian Safeway Stores Pty Ltd v Zaluzna
(1987) 162 CLR 479.
. See para 2.16.
. Legislative Assembly for the Australian Capital Territory - Standing Committee on Legal Affairs at para 6.6.
. T Honess and E Charman
Closed Circuit Television in Public Places: Its Acceptability and Perceived Effectiveness
(Home Office Police Research Group, London, 1992) at 25.
CCTV in Town Centres: Three Case Studies
(Home Office Police Research Group, London, 1995).
. Brown at 62-63.
. Brown at 63-64.
. Legislative Assembly for the Australian Capital Territory - Standing Committee on Legal Affairs at para 6.5.
. Legislative Assembly for the Australian Capital Territory - Standing Committee on Legal Affairs at para 6.10.
Victoria Park Racing and Recreation Grounds Co Limited v Taylor
[1937] HCA 45
(1937) 58 CLR 479.
. P Bradley “Recent Extensions of Power”, paper presented at the seminar
Listening Devices and Electronic Surveillance: Police Powers and Citizens’ Rights
(Sydney, 20 April 1987) at 33.
Casino Control Act 1992
, Div 1 and s 125(1)(s).
Evidence Act 1995
. J Braithwaite, “Enforced Self-Regulation: A New Strategy for Corporate Crime Control”
Michigan Law Review
provides examples of “enforced self-regulation” which he considers successful.
Sections 18A
. The Privacy Commissioner has published
Credit Reporting: Code of Conduct and Explanatory Notes
(March 1996).
. United Kingdom - Local Government Information Unit.
. United Kingdom - Local Government Information Unit at 3.
. United Kingdom - Local Government Information Unit at 7.
. United Kingdom - Local Government Information Unit at 6.
. New South Wales Police Service
Guidelines for Investigation of Potential for, and Implementation of, Closed Circuit Television (CCTV) by Local Councils and Shires
(May 1996).
. One possible suggestion is for this function to be vested in the Privacy Commissioner, whose office will be established by the privacy
and information protection legislation which the Attorney General has foreshadowed: Speech by the New South Wales Attorney General,
the Hon Jeff Shaw QC MLC to the conference,
The New Privacy Laws: a symposium on preparing privacy laws for the 21st century
(19 February 1997, Sydney).
Issues Paper 12 (1997) - Surveillance
5. Surveillance and the Listening Devices Act 1984 (NSW)
History of this Reference (Digest)
BACKGROUND TO THE
LISTENING DEVICES ACT
5.1 When the
Listening Devices Act
(LDA) was introduced its primary functions were stated to be the protection and preservation of the right of individual privacy,
while at the same time recognising that listening devices can have legitimate and beneficial uses.
It was recognised then, and continues to be recognised, that electronic surveillance is a legitimate crime fighting tool that can
obtain compelling evidence to assist in securing convictions, but that it is intrusive. Accordingly, the principles of restraint
and privacy must continue to be balanced against the public policy behind the goal of convicting a criminal and increasing levels
of community protection. The legislation does so by prohibiting the use of listening devices, except in limited circumstances. The
Commission’s approach to this review is to suggest reform in this area to accommodate technological changes, but so that such
reform maintains the balance between privacy and the need to use surveillance.
5.2 The Commission has already made proposals in relation to overt visual surveillance in Chapter 4. This chapter examines the existing
provisions of the LDA (which already govern both covert and overt surveillance) and how successful those provisions are in meeting
the competing needs of regulating different types of surveillance and addressing privacy concerns. The Commission also raises issues
that are not covered by the legislation, and makes suggestion for their inclusion.
5.3 As a final introductory point, the Commission highlights the fact that the legislation regulates only the use, not the supply
or sale of surveillance equipment. The Commission does not suggest that the focus of the legislation change.
OPERATION OF THE
LISTENING DEVICES ACT
Definition of surveillance
5.4 The Commission suggests that it may be appropriate for a definition of “surveillance” to be included in any amendment
to the existing legislation. This would be necessary should the LDA be renamed to reflect its wider application. One suggestion is
to rename it the
“Surveillance Act
”. At this stage the Commission favours a wide definition of surveillance, similar to that discussed in Chapter 2,
that surveillance is monitoring peoples’ movements or affairs.
Should a definition of surveillance be contained in the legislation? If so, is it sufficient to define surveillance as “monitoring
a person (or persons’) movements or behaviour”?
Definition of listening device
5.5 To be able to be authorised under the legislation, the actual piece of equipment used to conduct surveillance will have to fall
within a category contained in the legislation. The equipment that is available now is considerably more sophisticated than it was
when the LDA came into force in 1984. The legislation currently provides that:
“listening device” means any instrument, apparatus, equipment or device capable of being used to record or listen to a
private conversation simultaneously with its taking place.
5.6 The Commission’s tentative view (and that of major users of the legislation)
is that the definition in the Act excludes many devices that can now be used as surveillance devices, in particular, visual, signal
and tracking devices.
In practice this means that the often irrefutable evidence that this equipment can capture is inadmissible because it is not authorised
by the warrant as a listening device. Although the Commission is aware of occasions where warrants have been issued authorising the
use of an integrated device, that is a video camera and an audio device combined, these occasions are the exception rather than the
rule. This situation highlights the need for legislation which is designed to regulate this area to be capable of incorporating the
technological advances that have occurred since 1984, and also future developments. The Commission’s suggestions for reform
are discussed in greater detail later in this chapter.
Use of the legislation
5.7 The legislation prohibits the use of listening devices, subject to certain exceptions. Those exceptions are generally justified
on the basis that either the person recording is party to the private conversation, or the public interest in the investigation and
prosecution of criminal activity overrides privacy considerations. To the Commission’s knowledge, the main use of the LDA arises
through judicial authorisation of listening devices. The only recorded applicants for warrants for a listening device under the New
South Wales legislation are law enforcement agencies. This is despite the New South Wales legislation having the widest definition
of applicant, in comparison to other States and Commonwealth legislation.
In New South Wales, “a person” may apply for a warrant to install and use a listening device.
5.8 The 1994
Listening Devices Act
Annual Report
revealed the following breakdown of the number of warrants requested:
New South Wales Police Service
624 warrants
New South Wales Crime Commission
273 warrants
Independent Commission Against Corruption
National Crime Authority
37 warrants
Commission into the Operations of the NSW Police Service
67 warrants
5.9 Anecdotal evidence suggests, that despite the prohibition against the use of surveillance equipment, it is used in the community
by persons without a warrant, or who are not subject to any other exception arising under the LDA. In that context it is used illegally,
and the information obtained might be inadmissible as evidence for legal purposes.
5.10 Apart from judicial authorisation, the LDA
does not permit the use of a listening device by a person who is not a party to the private conversation. An exception may arise permitting
use of a listening device where the person seeking to use the device is a party to the conversation. However that person has to establish:
the consent of all principal parties to the conversation;
the consent of a principal party and the recording of the conversation is reasonably necessary for the protection of the lawful interests
of that principal party; or
the recording of the conversation is not made for the purpose of communicating or publishing the conversation, or a report of the
conversation to persons who are not parties to the conversation.
5.11 Although there are no reported decisions explaining the operation of this exception, the phrase “protecting the lawful
interests of a principal party” is undoubtedly capable of wide interpretation. For instance, such a provision may be useful
where an investigator is working under cover and wishes to record a conversation without the knowledge of the other parties. A similar
exception exists in South Australia, where the legislation permits a party to a conversation to use a listening device if that person
is acting in the course of his or her duty, in the public interest or for the protection of that person’s lawful interests.
5.12 The Commission does not currently propose amendments to the definition of applicant, particularly if the Commission’s proposal
to regulate the use of covert surveillance (to include visual, computer and tracking devices) is accepted. This proposal would require
persons other than law enforcement agencies to have to make an application for a warrant when seeking to use a particular form of
covert surveillance. Retaining a wide definition of applicant removes the need to try and incorporate any number of persons/organisations
who may seek to obtain such a warrant, and the problems that can arise if individuals/groups are excluded.
Should the definition of “applicant” be amended?
Should the operation of the exceptions to the general prohibition against the use of listening devices be clarified in the legislation?
Should a party to a conversation be permitted to use a listening device if acting in the course of their duty or public interest?
SCOPE OF THE
LISTENING DEVICES ACT
Offences for which a warrant may be sought
5.13 In New South Wales the LDA specifically identifies the types of offences for which listening device warrants can be sought. The
offences include:
an imminent threat of serious violence to persons, or of substantial damage to property;
a serious narcotics offence;
a “prescribed offence”, which is an offence (including an offence under a law of the Commonwealth or of another State
or Territory) that is punishable on indictment, or is of a class or description prescribed for the purposes of the Act (whether or
not it is punishable on indictment);
an offence prescribed for the purposes of the LDA-currently these include offences under section 200(1) or (2) of the
Police Service Act 1900
(bribery and corruption of or by a police officer) and offences under section 5, Part 2A or section 44(1) of the
Gaming and Betting Act 1912
(gambling offences of street betting, offences related to unlawful games and gaming-hours, and keeping a betting house).
5.14 Other Australian jurisdictions are not as specific,
and will allow an application for a warrant for a listening device to be made in respect of an “offence”. The most detailed
provision specifying categories of offences for which a listening device may be sought is contained in the
Telecommunications (Interception) Act 1979
(Cth) (hereafter the
Interception Act
). The Act categorises offences into two classes, and identifies a variety of offences under each class.
First class offences include offences such as murder, kidnapping and major narcotics. Second class offences include those punishable
by imprisonment for life or a maximum period of at least seven years. Second class offences also include loss of a person’s
life or serious risk of a person’s life, serious fraud, offences involving planning and organisation, money laundering.
5.15 A recent review
conducted by the Queensland Criminal Justice Commission (“CJC”) into police powers in Queensland included a review of
surveillance devices. In respect of defining offences for which listening device warrants should be available, the CJC recommended
a similar classification to that which exists in the
Interception Act
. The CJC suggested that a further two offences be added, that of organised crime and official corruption. No action has been taken
in respect of that report to date.
5.16 The Commission’s view at this stage is that there is no need to re-classify the existing categories of offences in the
LDA. They sufficiently reflect the fact that a listening device is a particularly intrusive investigative tool, and in reality are
only used in respect of serious offences. Further, in the Commission’s opinion the categories cover the additions suggested
by the CJC. There is always provision in the New South Wales legislation to prescribe certain offences under the Act. In an initial
submission to us,
the New South Wales Police Service have suggested a review of the non-indictable offences prescribed in the LDA
Regulations
for which warrants may be obtained under Part 4.
Do the existing categories of offences for which a listening device warrant can be obtained need revision or expansion? Should any
specific offences (including non-indictable offences) be prescribed under the LDA
Regulations
Who may grant an application for a warrant
5.17 Until recently the LDA provided for the Supreme Court of New South Wales to be able to grant a warrant for a listening device.
However, certain High Court decisions
signalled that it was not permissible for a State Parliament to confer upon a State court powers or functions (that is, administrative
or non-judicial powers) which are incompatible with the exercise of judicial power. This concern resulted in changes to the New South
Wales legislation so that the power to grant a warrant to use listening devices is now conferred upon judges individually as
personae designatae
The State legislation is now in line with the Federal communications legislation.
The practical result is that there is now an “eligible judge” list created by the New South Wales Attorney General for
the specific purpose of authorising the use of listening devices. There is also provision for District Court Judges and Magistrates
to be nominated as an “eligible judicial officer”, who may be required by the regulations to exercise the functions of
an “eligible judge”.
5.18 The Commission is concerned with the issue of which judicial officers should hear applications for listening device warrants.
Warrants in general are intrusive, and a warrant authorising use of a listening device is a significant investigative procedure.
For this reason it is important that the issue of warrants should be given serious consideration. The Commission believes that in
view of the need to maintain public confidence in the listening device warrant system, the seriousness of such an application is
such that it should be decided by a superior court judge.
Should the power to grant warrants for the use of a listening device be limited to judges of the Supreme Court?
Grounds for determining whether a warrant may be granted
5.19 The LDA requires the court to take several matters into consideration before determining whether a warrant for a listening device
should be granted.
The extent to which the privacy of any person is likely to be affected is of particular importance. The court must also consider
the nature of the prescribed offence in respect of which the warrant is sought, the evidentiary value of any evidence sought to be
obtained and any previous warrant sought or granted in connection with the same offence. The court must also consider any alternative
means of obtaining the evidence or information sought.
5.20 In the Commission’s view these criteria provide appropriate checks on whether a warrant should be granted in the circumstances.
They also emphasise the seriousness of the application.
Contents of an application for a warrant
5.21 The requirements set out in s 16 of the LDA in respect of the form of a warrant are mandatory, and failure to comply with those
requirements will render the warrant null and void.
Those seeking a warrant are therefore well advised to ensure the powers they wish to be authorised by the warrant are expressed in
clear and unmistakable terms.
Although the warrant is capable of authorising entry onto private property to install and retrieve a listening device, it does not
provide the holder with power to conduct a search and seize property or to install a video camera.
5.22 Warrants cannot be amended by the court. Any error in a warrant cannot be amended by the “slip rule”,
or by the court’s inherent powers, because the warrant is not granted in “proceedings” and is not an order or judgment.
The form of the warrant is generally in writing,
accompanied by an affidavit, although no affidavit is specifically required by the existing legislation. In practice an affidavit
is supplied in support of the warrant, and is extremely detailed. The Commission understands that it provides information of the
Interception Act
. This Act specifies that the affidavit include:
facts and grounds on which the application is based;
the period the warrant is to be in force and why;
in relation to the service and in relation to each person to whom the application relates, the number of previous applications for
warrants the agency has made and that related to the service or that person;
the number of warrants previously issued on such applications; and
particulars of use made by the agency of the information obtained under such warrants.
5.23 The Commission suggests that it may be prudent for the form of the affidavit to be contained in the legislation to ensure a minimum
uniformity of application and to provide an understanding of what is required.
5.24 There is no provision in the LDA for the review of a warrant where it subsequently found that the affidavit in support of the
warrant is based on false information. In particular, what should happen to the information obtained on such an illegal and careless
basis? Provision exists under the
Evidence Act 1995
(NSW) for the court to exclude improperly or illegally obtained evidence.
Given that the information obtained by listening device may be extremely sensitive, the Commission seeks comment on whether the information
obtained should be destroyed, if it is excluded on that basis, and whether those who have obtained it illegally should be subject
to sanction.
Should the form of the affidavit required in support of the application for a warrant be contained in the legislation, and if so,
what form should it take?
Should information obtained illegally pursuant to a listening device warrant be destroyed if it is excluded from trial on that basis?
Should those who take part in illegally obtaining evidence pursuant to a listening device warrant be subject to sanctions?
What a warrant authorises
Entry to premises
5.25 The New South Wales legislation states that a warrant authorising the installation of a listening device on any premises may
authorise entry onto those premises.
It is imperative that such authorisation is specifically provided for in the warrant. In other jurisdictions where there is no clear
power in the legislation authorising police to trespass onto private property to install electronic surveillance instruments, it
has been held that the court will not imply such a power.
The Commission suggests that to remove any doubt about the scope of the warrant, a warrant authorising entry onto premises should
also state that the entry is not unlawful.
5.26 The current definition of premises in the LDA includes vessels, vehicles and aircraft. It makes no provision for containers,
which are often used in the transporting of stolen goods, drug importation and so forth. The Commission suggests that the definition
should be amended to include containers as a type of premises which may be authorised by warrant for the installation of a listening
device, so that any evidence obtained is not later deemed inadmissible.
Should a warrant authorising entry onto premises state that such entry is not unlawful?
Should the definition of “premises” be amended to include containers?
Who is authorised to use the device
5.27 The LDA requires
that a warrant specify the name of any person who may use a listening device pursuant to the warrant and the persons who may use
the device on behalf of that person. Aside from the inconvenience of having to list in the affidavit any number of names, this requirement
fails to address the following situations:
where substitute or extra personnel can be used (currently a new warrant has to be obtained);
where an interpreter is required to use the device to listen to the conversation and translate, unless the need for an interpreter
was foreseen when the warrant was originally obtained; and
where naming all those who may use the device may jeopardise informers and undercover officers who will use the device. This concern
has now been addressed by the new s 20A of the LDA,
which allows the court to grant a warrant that refers to a person by an assumed name or code-name, if the court is satisfied that
it is necessary to do so to protect the safety of the person.
5.28 It is not always possible at the time the warrant is sought to positively identify the officers who will be available to install
and monitor a listening device at any particular time. Operational requirements may, and frequently do, change at short notice requiring
available officers to undertake other duties. Other factors such as court commitments, sick and recreational leave also affect the
deployment of personnel.
5.29 Other legislation is not as narrow. The
(NSW) authorises a member of the police force and any such assistants as that person considers necessary to execute the warrant.
A warrant issued pursuant to the
Australian Security Intelligence Organization Act 1979
(Cth) (hereafter
) authorises “the Organization” - including its officers, employees or agents - to use a listening device.
Customs Act 1901
(Cth) provides that the authority conferred by a warrant authorising use of a listening device in respect of a narcotics offence
shall be exercised by the chief officer of the agency or by other approved officials of the agency.
Interception Act
permits warrants to be issued to authorised agencies,
and the executive of that agency can authorise members of that agency to use the warrant.
Should the New South Wales legislation remove the requirement that the warrant name each person involved with the execution of the
warrant? Alternatively, should the warrant confer the power on a person who is authorised to delegate that power to other persons?
Emergency warrants
5.30 Application for a listening device warrant can be made by telephone or radio where it is not possible or practicable for a warrant
to be obtained in the normal course.
An application in such circumstances can only be made by a member of the police force,
where that member has a suspicion or belief that a prescribed offence has been or is about to be committed, and for the purpose of
investigation into that offence, the immediate use of a listening device is necessary.
The warrant is only permitted to be in force for 24 hours.
5.31 There is also provision for a listening device to be used immediately (presumably only by police) where there is an imminent
threat of serious violence to persons, substantial damage to property, or a serious narcotics offence.
This would appear to cover hostage and kidnap situations. There will always be some situations that require different rules to apply
for an application for a warrant for a listening device. The Commission makes no suggestions for change to this procedure at this
Period of time the warrant can be in force
5.32 The Commission believes that the intrusive nature of a listening device requires a high degree of accountability for its use,
and one way this can be done is to place a time limit on the period during which a warrant may be in force. However, this safeguard
has to allow a realistic time frame for the installation, monitoring and removal of the listening device. Currently under the LDA
a warrant has a life of 21 days. In many cases this period of time is insufficient to effect covert entry, installation and removal
of the equipment. The 21 day period in New South Wales is mirrored in Victoria and the Northern Territory.
Other States, for example Tasmania,
have longer periods, and Western Australia has no statutory maximum. At a federal level, the
Customs Act 1901
permit a warrant for a listening device to remain in force for 6 months. The
Interception Act
has a 90 day limit.
5.33 In suggesting any increase to the time limit, the Commission is mindful of the type of intrusion that the warrant authorises.
One option may be to increase the initial time authorised by the warrant to say, 30 days, with the option of renewing the warrant
for up to 60 days.
Should the period for which the warrant can be in force be extended beyond 21 days?
Reporting procedures
5.34 The LDA
requires that if a person has been granted a warrant authorising use of a listening device, a report has to be furnished to the court
and the Attorney General. The report has to contain information stating whether or not a listening device was used pursuant to the
warrant, and if so: the name of the person whose conversation was recorded; the period during which the device was used; the premises
where the device was used; the general use made or to be made of any information/evidence obtained by the device; and particulars
of any previous use of a listening device in connection with the prescribed offence in respect of which the warrant was granted.
5.35 The time for the report to be furnished is specified in the warrant. There is also provision for a record of any evidence or
information obtained by the use of the listening device to be given to the court, and the court may order that it be made available
to any person.
5.36 Reports on the use of the warrant are intended to provide an important check on the use of listening devices, by making the applicant
accountable and by establishing a store of knowledge available to the court in future applications. There is a question whether they
provide the intended check, where it is perceived the information they contain is insufficient. In particular this is discussed below
in the context of the annual report.
Annual report requirements
5.37 The LDA requires that the Attorney General shall cause a report to be prepared annually, containing information on the number
of warrants sought, the number of warrants granted, and on such other matters related to the use of listening devices and to the
administration of the legislation as considered appropriate by the Attorney General.
5.38 In practice the report is a compilation of statistics prepared by the Attorney General’s Department Community Relations
Division, which is then forwarded to the Attorney General who tables this information in Parliament.
most recent report tabled by the Attorney to the New South Wales Parliament is the 1994 Annual Report. This report contained the following
information:
the provisions of the LDA pursuant to which applications had been sought and granted;
the overall number of applications and what organisations made them; and
an analysis of reports made in respect of the use of each listening device.
5.39 In comparison with the annual reports of the use of surveillance devices prepared in other jurisdictions, the New South Wales
report is fairly scant in the information that it provides. This is not necessarily because of the requirements in the LDA itself.
The report by the Attorney General can include “appropriate information” relating to the use of listening devices and
the administration of the Act. As an overall comment, the statistics provided in the annual report are given in isolation, there
being no comparison made to previous years; the types of offence for which warrants were obtained were only identified in respect
of those obtained under s 5 (2)(c)(ii)-although there is a statement that more than half the total numbers of warrants were used
in respect of serious drug offences; there is no general comment on the success or otherwise of the legislation, and no legislative
5.40 Tasmania, the Northern Territory and South Australia are the only other State jurisdictions that require annual reports in respect
of their Listening Devices legislation. The information provided in the Tasmanian and Northern Territory reports is fairly minimal.
The South Australian report provides greater detail. At a federal level, the annual reporting provisions of the
Interception Act
require details of how many applications were made and warrants issued; the categories of the serious offences, the duration of the
warrants, and information about the effectiveness of the warrants. Recent amendments to that legislation seek to provide more detailed
information about the usefulness of the information obtained by interception under the warrant.
Apart from the statutory requirements, the report complies with the recommendations of the Senate Standing Committee on Legal and
Constitutional Affairs on appropriate criteria for assessing reports on the operation of Acts.
5.41 The reporting requirements on orders authorising or approving the interception of wire, oral, or electronic communications in
the United States are also fairly comprehensive. Information such as the offence under investigation, the location of the intercept,
the cost of the surveillance, the number of arrests, trials, and convictions as a direct result of the surveillance, is required
to be reported.
Canada also produces a detailed annual report on the use of electronic surveillance.
What should an annual report on listening devices include?
5.42 There may well be a public interest immunity argument when considering what to include in an annual report. There will always
be cases where it is not appropriate for some information to be made public because of fear of jeopardising ongoing police operations
or revealing police methodology.
However, the Commission suggests that more information should be available than is currently included in the New South Wales annual
Suggested changes
5.43 The Commission suggests that the following is information that should be recorded, where relevant, in respect of the specific
section of the LDA
that can authorise a listening device:
The number of applications for warrant that were made, and by whom.
The number of applications for warrants that were refused.
The number of applications for warrants that were granted, and the result of the use of the information obtained pursuant to those
warrants, for example number of arrests, number of prosecutions.
The type of offence involved in each application.
The period of time the warrant was in force (or the average period).
The number of warrants that had to be renewed.
The number and type of place for which the warrant authorises a listening device to be planted, that is, residential premises, commercial
premises, vehicles.
The number of directions made by the court to inform the subject of the surveillance.
Any changes to the legislation during the year in review.
Any general comments on the operation of the legislation.
Comparative statistics from previous years.
Cost of execution of warrants.
The Commission invites comment on its suggested changes to the annual reporting provisions.
Notification and disclosure of surveillance to individuals who have been under surveillance
5.44 Section 20 of the LDA provides the court with the discretion to direct that the person who was the subject of surveillance by
a listening device be notified of that fact, or of “such information regarding the warrant as the court may specify”.
This provision was included in the legislation as an important safeguard against the unjustified invasion of privacy that may be
occasioned by the use of listening devices. It was intended to make persons who may be the victims of improper activity aware of
what has been done to them.
The Commission is unaware of any case where disclosure has occurred.
5.45 Tasmania is the only other State to have disclosure provisions.
The Commission is not aware of any application for disclosure having been made pursuant to those provisions. At a federal level the
Interception Act
does not contain any provision to notify an innocent person whose telephone service has been intercepted of the fact of that interception.
However, this Act provides for a special register with details of warrants which do not lead directly or indirectly to a prosecution,
to be kept.
The United States legislation permits the disclosure of portions of the intercepted communication “in the interests of justice”.
Canada has a similar provision.
5.46 Disclosure of surveillance under a warrant can provide an important check on the proper use of a warrant. The difficulty is exactly
what information should be revealed, and to whom. The Barratt Review
Interception Act
proposed an “innocent persons” register be established which would notify any innocent person whose telephone had been
intercepted, that the interception had taken place. Such a register presupposes that those persons who were not prosecuted were innocent,
and in some cases this may not be so. It may be the case that the particular intercept reveals some evidence of a person’s
illegal activities, which warrants further investigation. In those cases disclosure of the surveillance may jeopardise an ongoing
investigation and therefore be inappropriate. This recommendation was not accepted by the Federal Government.
5.47 Of course there will be cases where those who have been placed under surveillance are not prosecuted, and never will be prosecuted.
Should the surveillance be disclosed to them? Despite the intrusion of the surveillance on their privacy, there may well be a public
interest argument against revealing to people that they have been under surveillance. Further, given that there is no tort of invasion
of privacy in New South Wales, what further action could be taken by a person where it had been revealed they had been placed under
surveillance? Although there have been calls for apologies to be issued in such cases,
the Commission suspects that such acknowledgement would be unlikely to be forthcoming.
Should there be a provision in the New South Wales legislation for disclosure to be made to persons who have been placed under surveillance,
where that person is not found to be connected with any criminal activity, and is not prosecuted as a result of the surveillance?
If so, does the existing section 20 accommodate the need for disclosure? Should such disclosures be recorded in the Annual Report?
Destruction of records created following use of a listening device
5.48 The LDA makes some provision for the destruction of records of evidence or information obtained by a person using a listening
device pursuant to a warrant granted under Part 4 of the Act, or in the circumstances referred to in s 5(2)(c). They are required
“as soon as practicable” after the record has been made, to destroy that record. There is no further definition of “as
soon as practicable”, although a penalty of $2,000 or imprisonment for 12 months can be imposed for non compliance with the
5.49 The Commission raised in Chapter 4 the need for regulation of the destruction of information obtained through overt visual surveillance,
and the same need arises here. The Commission seeks comment on whether the phrase “as soon as practicable” is sufficient,
or whether a finite period of time should be included.
Should a specific period of time be inserted for the destruction of records made from information obtained through a listening device
used in accordance with the LDA ?
LISTENING DEVICES ACT
DOES NOT COVER
Installation/repair/maintenance of device
5.50 The New South Wales legislation only authorises entry onto the premises for installation and retrieval of the device.
There is, however, no specific provision for authorisation for the purpose of testing, repairing or maintaining the device. It is
fairly essential that such ancillary powers are authorised in the warrant. The Commission suggests that such powers should become
automatic on issue of the warrant, as they may be an integral part of the success or otherwise of an operation. Such authorisation
can be granted in other jurisdictions.
Should the New South Wales legislation be amended to specifically provide for entry to premises to allow authorised officers to repair,
test and maintain the listening device once it is installed?
5.51 Under NSW legislation retrieval of the listening device has to take place within the life of the warrant, 21 days.
There is no provision in the legislation for an extension of time for retrieval. Allowing time for retrieval obviously cuts into
surveillance time, and in many cases the device cannot be recovered within that time frame, for instance where persons remain on
the premises, or if the device is in a car, when the vehicle is moved and cannot be located. If this is the case the device is disabled
and left at the location. If the life of a warrant is extended beyond 21 days, the need for extra retrieval time may no longer be
required. However, there may still be occasions where a greater length of time may still not be sufficient to accommodate the retrieval
of the device. It may therefore be preferable to be able to obtain a restricted warrant to retrieve the device.
Should there be provision in legislation for the issue of a restricted warrant to retrieve the device upon completion of the surveillance?
Use of electricity to power the device
5.52 The authorised use of a listening device should also include the use of electricity connected to the premises to power the device.
This would remove any argument at a later date that the device had been used unlawfully, and avoid any suggestion of theft of electricity.
Other forms of power, for example batteries, present the real possibility of not being able to effectively conceal the device or
losing power prior to the expiration of the warrant.
Should the authorised use of a listening device include the use of electricity to power the device?
No definition of visual, signal or tracking surveillance devices
5.53 As discussed earlier in this chapter, the LDA only regulates the use of aural surveillance devices, which are defined as any
instrument, apparatus, equipment or device capable of being used to record or listen to a private conversation simultaneously with
its taking place.
The Commission suggests that this is not satisfactory, given the technology that currently exists, and that may be developed and
used for surveillance in the future. In particular, the Commission suggests that the definition of listening device (or possibly
renamed to be called “surveillance device”) should include the existing definition of aural listening device and incorporate
the following:
visual surveillance device:
equipment that can record images, either with or without sound.
signal devices:
this type of device relates to the use of technology which allows the implanting within a computer of either a recording or transmitting
device to pass raw data to an outside receiving point. This use of technology overcomes any encryption that the target may employ
which could defeat the use of telephone interception techniques, and enables the collection of pass codes and passwords for (potentially)
later access under the username of the target to sources of illegal material. This particular technique would be most often used
in the collection of evidence in paedophile and fraud related crimes perpetrated through computers. Making it permissible pursuant
to warrant would also overcome any possible offences in respect of unlawful access to data in a computer.
tracking devices:
certain investigations may require the position and the movements of a suspect’s motor vehicle/property to be determined. Equipment
is available that allows this to be done with considerable accuracy, but the equipment must be installed into the motor vehicle or
property and to do so there must be an entry into the vehicle or property concerned. Currently the LDA cannot authorise entry for
this purpose.
5.54 It has been suggested
that the definition of listening device that is contained in the
is broad enough to cover devices excluded by the current New South Wales definition, as well as future technological developments.
That definition defines listening device to include:
any instrument, device or equipment capable of being used, whether alone or in conjunction with any other instrument, device or equipment,
to record or listen to words, images, sounds or signals.
5.55 Not only does this definition include visual (including audio-visual) surveillance and tracking devices, it also covers the use
of enhancement equipment used during the recording process. On a strict interpretation of the LDA, enhancement equipment is not technically
capable of being used to record or listen to a private conversation as it takes place. If it is used it may result in an admissibility
problem with the ultimate recording.
The Commission seeks comment on whether the definition of listening device should be widened to incorporate visual/audio-visual surveillance
and signals, and the use of enhancement or tracking equipment.
Protection of legal professional privilege
5.56 There is no specific requirement in the LDA for the court that issues a warrant authorising use of a listening device to consider
a possible breach of legal professional privilege. Any claim of legal professional privilege in New South Wales is regulated by the
Evidence Act 1995
The issue of legal professional privilege may well arise where the warrant seeks to install the listening device on premises belonging
to a solicitor or barrister, or for example, the interview room at a prison. The current practice in New South Wales is that the
Solicitor General requires that a condition be inserted in the warrant that information obtained pursuant to the warrant that may
be covered by legal professional privilege be passed to him. He determines whether privilege attaches to it. The Solicitor General
also requires that there be a condition in the warrant that any information obtained by an agency that is so covered by privilege
will be destroyed. If necessary the Solicitor General will appear before the judge considering the warrant application seeking the
insertion of these conditions.
5.57 The CJC in its review of police powers in Queensland recommended specific legislative recognition of legal professional privilege.
The proposal included no recording of or listening to private conversations at the office or residence of a legal representative,
unless the court was satisfied that there were reasonable grounds to believe that the legal representative was about to become party
to the offence in respect of which the warrant was sought. The CJC went further to recommend that the judge have a discretion to
“live monitor” confidential conversations to prevent privileged conversations from being recorded. No action has been
taken on these recommendations.
Canada would appear to be the only jurisdiction where provision is made for the recognition of legal professional privilege when intercepting
communications. The Canadian telephone interception legislation
requires the judge to be satisfied on reasonable grounds that the lawyer, another lawyer practising with him, or a member of the
lawyer’s household, has been, or is about to become, a party to an offence.
5.58 Is it necessary to formalise the arrangement that occurs in New South Wales in legislation? Would it be preferable to establish
a more formal framework between the Solicitor General and those agencies seeking to execute warrants which may give rise to claims
of legal professional privilege?
Should the LDA specifically address the issue of legal professional privilege?
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of contents
. New South Wales -
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Council, 23 May 1984 at 1440.
. See para 2.3.
. Law enforcement agencies.
. These devices are defined at para 5.53.
. In all other States and Territories an applicant has to be a member of the police force, often above a certain rank. For instance
Listening Devices Act 1972
(SA) s 6(2) provides for a member of the police force to obtain a warrant, but in Queensland, only a police officer ranked Inspector
or above can apply for a warrant:
Drugs Misuse Act 1986
(Qld) s 25.
. New South Wales Attorney General- Listening Devices Act
Annual Report
. This is the most recent annual report on this legislation.
. The onus of establishing these conditions rests with the party seeking to establish them:
Miller v TCN Channel Nine
(1988) 36 A Crim R 92
. See LDA s 5(3).
Listening Devices Act 1971
(SA) s 7(1). See also
Invasion of Privacy Act 1971-1976
(Qld) s 43(2)(a) which permits a party to a conversation to use a listening device;
Listening Devices Act 1969
(Vic) s 4(2).
. LDA s 5(2)(c)(i).
. LDA s 5(2)(c)(ii).
. LDA s 15.
. LDA s 15 and LDA Regulation 5.
. Victoria, South Australia, Western Australia and Queensland
(Invasion of
Telecommunications (Interception) Act 1979
. Criminal Justice Commission,
Report on a Review of Police Powers in Queensland, Volume V: Electronic Surveillance and Other Investigative Procedures
(October 1994) at 760.
. New South Wales Police Service
(13 December 1996). They suggest offences relating to the possession and supply of anabolic steroids pursuant to the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Act 1966
(NSW) should become prescribed offences, together with the offences of the possession of child pornography and publishing indecent
articles under s 578B and
Crimes Act 1900
. Section 15. The LDA also provided for the regulations to allow the District and Local Courts to exercise similar powers.
Grollo v Palmer
[1995] HCA 26
(1995) 184 CLR 348
Kable v Director of Public Prosecutions for New South Wales
[1996] HCA 24
(1996) 70 ALJR 814.
. Section 3A and 3B,
(as amended by
Listening Devices Amendment Act 1996
(NSW) Schedule [2]. For more discussion see New South Wales -
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Council, 27 November 1996 at 6650-1; and New South Wales -
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Assembly, 27 November 1996 at 6754.
Interception Act
Listening Devices Act 1984
Section 16(2).
Haynes v Attorney-General (NSW)
(Supreme Court, NSW, James J, 9 February 1996, 012075/95, unreported).
Coco v The Queen
(1994) 179 CLR 47.
R v McNamara
[1995] 1 VR 263 at 268-69.
Supreme Court Rules
Pt 20 rr1 and 10.
Haynes v Attorney-General (NSW)
(Supreme Court, NSW, James J, 9 February 1996, 012075/95, unreported).
. See LDA Schedule 2, Form of Warrant. The exception is where an emergency warrant is applied for, over the
Interception Act
Evidence Act 1995
s 16(4)(f).
Coco v The Queen
[1994] HCA 15
(1994) 179 CLR 427
s 16(4)(d).
. Amended by
Criminal Legislation Amendment Act 1996
(NSW) Schedule 1 s [1]-[13].
Customs Act 1901
(Cth) s 219B.
Customs Act 1901
(Cth) s 219D.
Interception Act
Interception Act
. LDA s 18.
. LDA s 18(4).
. LDA s 18(2).
. LDA s 18(8).
. LDA s 5(2)(c).
Listening Devices Act 1969
(Vic) s 4A(4)(c);
Listening Devices Act 1990
(NT) s4(7)(c).
Listening Devices Act 1991
allows a maximum of 60 days.
Customs Act 1901
(Cth) s 219B(10).
Interception Act
. There is no specific provision in the LDA relating to extension renewal of warrants.
In practice a person seeking to renew a warrant has to provide fresh evidence by way of affidavit, and a new application for warrant.
. LDA s 19.
. LDA s 19(2) and (3).
. LDA s 23.
Interception Act
Part IX. The latest Annual Report is: Commonwealth of Australia
Telecommunications (Interception) Act 1979
: Report for the year ending 30 June 1995
(AGPS, Canberra, 1996).
Interception Act
s 94(2)(b).
Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act
of 1968 requires the Administrative Office of the US Courts (AO) to report to Congress the umber of Federal and state applications
for orders authorising or approving the interception of wire, oral, or electronic communications. This report is also known as the
Wiretap Report.
. See for example the 1994
Annual Report On The Use Of Electronic Surveillance As Required Under Subsection 195(1) Of The Criminal Code
. The immunity may also arise because the documents may also expose those who co-operate with the police to reprisals and discourage
others in the future.
. LDA s 5(2)(c)(ii), 16(1) and 18(2).
. LDA s 20.
. New South Wales -
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Assembly, 17 May 1984 at 1096.
Listening Devices Act 1991
. Section 81C(1).
18 USC 2518(10)(a).
This section also contains the procedure an aggrieved person should follow to obtain such an order.
Protection of
SC 1973-74, c 50 s 178.23.
. Australia - Department of Finance,
Review of the Long Term Cost Effectiveness of Telecommunications Interception
(1994) (the “Barratt Review”).
. See Australia -
Telecommunications (Interception) Act 1979
Annual Report
for the year ending 30 June 1995, at 11.
. See “Rapid increase in bugging devices sparks inquiry”
The Sydney Morning Herald
(31 October 1996) at 5.
. For example see the
Listening Devices Act 1990
(NT), s 4(6); the
Drugs Misuse Act 1986
(Qld) s 18 and 27; and the
Customs Act 1901
. LDA s 16(3) and (4).
Electricity Act 1945
(1946 No.13)
(NSW) s 30.
Crimes Act 1900
. New South Wales Police Service,
(13 December 1996) at 3.
. Criminal Justice Commission,
Report on a Review of Police Powers in Queensland, Volume V: Electronic Surveillance and Other Investigative Procedures
(October 1994) at 788-791.
Criminal Code
(Canada) s 186.
. For example, agreements as to the procedure for the execution of search warrants on the offices of legal practitioners were reached
between the Law Society of New South Wales and the New South Wales Commissioner of Police in May 1995.
Issues Paper 12 (1997) - Surveillance
6. Visual Surveillance in the Workplace
History of this Reference (Digest)
INTRODUCTION
6.1 Surveillance of workplaces, primarily visual surveillance using video cameras, has recently become a matter for concern in New
South Wales. That concern has led to two recent investigations, culminating in reports by the Privacy Committee and by a Working
Party on Video Surveillance in the Workplace. Workplace surveillance has also been specifically referred to in the Commission’s
terms of reference as follows:
In making this reference the Attorney draws the Commission’s attention ... to the current review of the issue of the regulation
of workplace visual surveillance being conducted by the Department of Industrial Relations.
6.2 With the greater availability, and decreasing cost, of surveillance technology, employers have used video cameras to protect their
property and merchandise from theft or damage by employees and customers and to provide an additional form of supervision of employee
work performance. It is also used to improve customer service, to train staff, to monitor production processes and to protect employers
from liability claims.
Apart from visual surveillance, other types of workplace surveillance include:
monitoring the performance of computer operators through recording such data as number of keystrokes and number of tasks completed;
monitoring the length and destination of telephone calls made by employees;
using individual electronic passes to follow the movement of persons around an office; and
reading employees’ email or other files on their computers.
There is an extensive literature on all aspects of workplace surveillance in the United States,
and recent federal legislation has been introduced, but not yet passed, to address such concerns.
Though these latter types of surveillance are worthy of examination, the Commission’s terms of reference, and the recent investigations
referred to above, are primarily concerned with visual surveillance.
Balancing competing interests in the workplace
6.3 As with all other forms of surveillance, workplace surveillance, both covert and overt, is likely to affect the privacy and other
interests of employees. On the other hand, employers assert that their legitimate concerns must also be taken into account and balanced
against those interests. For example, it is estimated that in the United States, employee theft costs $40 billion per year.
Surveillance is one way of reducing this loss to business. The Commission also recognises the real commercial interests in favour
of limiting regulation in the area of workplace surveillance, and the strong traditional claims of owners and occupiers of property
for autonomy in relation to their property. These interests are not, nonetheless, absolute, and must be balanced against competing
interests, such as an individual’s claim to a degree of privacy. It is possible that workplace privacy and the surveillance
used will become an issue of terms and conditions of employment to be taken into account in enterprise bargaining. Whether there
is real and informed consent in the context of employment negotiations is a vexed issue, however, recognising the distinct inequality
of bargaining power involved. In the previous two chapters, the Commission has outlined the principles and forms of regulation which
it considers should govern surveillance in general and the special category of overt visual surveillance. This chapter discusses
whether, in light of the special issues affecting workplace surveillance, the views outlined should be modified.
REVIEW OF WORKPLACE SURVEILLANCE IN NEW SOUTH WALES
6.4 In the context of complaints and an industrial dispute about workplace privacy, the Privacy Committee of New South Wales investigated
the issue of video surveillance and released a report on its use in the workplace,
Invisible Eyes,
in September 1995. The competing interests involved in the use of workplace surveillance were identified thus:
To employers, video surveillance is a means to expose theft, vandalism, and misconduct; to reduce security risks and legal liability;
and to replace more expensive forms of security and supervision. Employees see its potential to dehumanise their working environment;
to deny them a reasonable level of workplace privacy; to harass individuals; and to put them under constant surveillance.
6.5 Major concerns which arise in workplace surveillance include:
consultation (or lack of) with employees about the purposes and operation of workplace surveillance systems;
the relevance and intrusiveness of the information collected;
security and retention of the recordings made;
access of employees to the recordings made and the opportunity to explain conduct recorded;
disclosure to third parties of the contents of the recordings; and
use of the surveillance devices in areas such as change rooms, toilets and recreation areas.
6.6 The Privacy Committee considered that “measures should be taken to protect employee privacy from the unrestricted use of
video surveillance”.
It did not believe that self-regulation would provide sufficient safeguards, nor that guidelines issued under current privacy legislation
would include adequate enforcement provisions. It therefore recommended that industrial relations legislation be amended to prohibit
the use of video surveillance to monitor employee performance or in certain areas such as toilets and change rooms (except by the
police in certain circumstances), and to require a permit from the Industrial Relations Court for its use in locker rooms, employee
recreation rooms or for any covert operations undertaken by employers.
It also recommended that privacy legislation be introduced to allow an enforceable code of conduct on video surveillance to be developed,
under the supervision of a Privacy Commissioner, and, as an interim measure, that employers adopt the set of guidelines prepared
by the Privacy Committee in this area.
Working Party Report
6.7 Following the Privacy Committee Report, a Working Party on Video Surveillance in the Workplace, co-ordinated by the New South
Wales Department of Industrial Relations, prepared a report which was released on 16 January 1997.
That Report suggested a number of changes in the area of workplace surveillance, both covert and overt, including:
the amendment of the
Listening Devices Act 1984
(NSW) (“LDA”) to also cover visual surveillance, in particular to include a definition of covert visual surveillance,
to prohibit covert visual surveillance to measure work performance, to prohibit all surveillance in toilets, showers and change rooms,
and to require a permit from a Local Court Magistrate before otherwise secretly filming employees; and
the adoption by employers of a voluntary code of practice on the use of overt surveillance in the workplace, including provisions
for notice to and consultation with employees, recognition of the supervisory role of the Privacy Committee, restrictions on locations
or hours of usage, and limitations of the use of and access to the recordings made.
The Report also stated that these recommendations were not intended to affect the existing surveillance powers of the police.
It should be noted that the Employers Federation of New South Wales did not endorse the Report and that there were a number of dissenting
views within the Working Party, including about whether a system of prior judicial authorisation should be selected.
6.8 The Attorney General and Minister for Industrial Relations, the Hon Jeff Shaw QC MLC, has announced that he will be implementing
a reform package in this area after examination of the findings of the Working Party.
THE COMMISSION’S REFERENCE
6.9 There is obviously significant potential for overlap between the Commission’s reference and the recommendations of the Working
Party. It has therefore been suggested that the Commission should avoid considering the issue of workplace surveillance because of
the Working Party review.
The Commission does not agree. In the Commission’s view, excluding the area of workplace surveillance would be an artificial
limitation on its terms of reference, particularly as many surveillance issues in the workplace are, in principle, the same as surveillance
issues in other areas. In any event, such a limitation would involve difficult definition and demarcation issues, for example, what
can be considered to be a “workplace”, and the overlap between employer and law enforcement roles and duties in this
Limitations of the Working Party recommendations
6.10 The Commission has a number of concerns with the reforms proposed by the Working Party. In particular:
Authorisation of covert surveillance.
The Working Party Report recommends amendments to the LDA to allow the prior authorisation of covert visual surveillance through permits
issued by a Magistrate. Though the Commission supports the extension of the LDA to cover visual surveillance, this recommendation
is inconsistent with the current system of warrants issued by Supreme Court judges for listening devices. The Commission considers
that there are very strong arguments not only that the language in the LDA for both aural and visual surveillance should be consistent,
but also that the intrusions involved are so great that nothing less than authorisation by a court of the status of the Supreme Court
of New South Wales should suffice before covert surveillance in the workplace is permitted. (See also Chapter 5.)
Period for surveillance.
The Report recommends a maximum period of 30 days for covert visual surveillance, which is greater than the 21 days allowed under
the LDA for listening devices. As argued above, in the interests of consistency and certainty, the Commission considers that the
relevant conditions for the covert operation of surveillance devices should be the same for both aural and visual devices, unless
it can be argued that markedly different issues arise.
Oversight of surveillance operations.
The Report advocates that covert surveillance operations be overseen by a person who is licensed to install security equipment. The
Commission considers that further protections may be necessary, particularly in light of Justice Peterson’s Report into the
Security (Protection) Industry Act 1985
which suggested that security personnel licensed under that Act might not always be appropriate persons to undertake such tasks.
Voluntary code of practice for overt surveillance.
As discussed in Chapter 4, the Commission provisionally supports the development of codes of practice in the area of overt visual
surveillance, including the types of provisions referred to in the Working Party Report. For the reasons outlined in that chapter,
however, the Commission has concerns about the effectiveness of a
code of practice without enforcement provisions.
Omission of consideration of surveillance of non-employees.
It must be recognised that workplace surveillance involves more than employees - it can also, either deliberately or incidentally,
involve the surveillance of customers and others (including tradespersons and passers-by) without their permission. In the Report,
little consideration has been given to the rights of the general population in relation to workplace surveillance. Recognition of
the rights and interests of third parties who also become the subject of surveillance strengthens the argument for a uniform approach
to surveillance, wherever it takes place.
Extension to non-employers.
The Commission is also concerned by the possibility of workplace surveillance undertaken by, or requested by, non-employers, such
as insurance companies, even if employees have agreed to a certain level of surveillance by their employers in their workplace. The
Commission’s tentative view is that employee consent to surveillance by an employer would not extend to surveillance by such
third parties, but considers that there should be further discussion of this issue.
TENTATIVE CONCLUSIONS
6.11 Although the Commission accepts the need for different rules to be developed for overt visual surveillance, where there are different
issues of principle involved than for other types of surveillance, it considers that it is inappropriate to have different and less
stringent surveillance requirements for certain interest groups or areas. Instead, the Commission’s tentative view is that
all surveillance, regardless of where it occurs, should be regulated in a uniform way and that therefore employees should have certain
minimum standards of privacy which cannot be bargained away. The existing protections which are found in the LDA and the proposed
changes which have been discussed in Chapters 4 and 5 should also, prima facie, apply to both employees and customers in the workplace.
Should the same rules govern all users of surveillance devices, or should there be different rules for the workplace, as proposed
by the Working Party on Video Surveillance in the Workplace?
If different rules are accepted, is regulation of covert visual surveillance in the workplace through permits issued by Magistrates
sufficient? If not, what is the best system of control and supervision?
Should workplace surveillance in certain areas such as toilets and change rooms be prohibited? If so, in which areas?
Should covert workplace surveillance be prohibited for the purposes of monitoring employees’ workplace performance?
Are there additional issues which arise about covert or overt surveillance in the workplace?
Should employee consent to workplace surveillance be considered to extend to third parties such as insurers?
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of contents
. Privacy Committee of New South Wales
Invisible Eyes: Report on Video Surveillance in the Workplace
(Report 67, September 1995) at 2.
. For example, see: T M Dworkin “Protecting Private Employees from Enhanced Monitoring: Legislative Approaches” (Spring
1990) 28 (1)
American Business Law Journal
59-85; D N King “Privacy Issues in the Private-Sector Workplace: Protection from Electronic Surveillance and the Emerging ‘Privacy
Gap’ “ (January 1994) 67 (2)
Southern California Law Review
441-474; D R McCartney “Electronic Surveillance and the Resulting Loss of Privacy in the Workplace” (Summer 1994) 62 (4)
University of Missouri-Kansas City Law Review
859-891; and M Levy “The Electronic Monitoring of Workers: Privacy in the Age of the Electronic Sweatshop” (Winter 1995)
Legal Reference Services Quarterly
. For example, see
(HR 1900 and S 984) (USA).
. R G Boehmer “Artificial Monitoring and Surveillance of Employees: The Fine Line Dividing the Prudently Managed Enterprise
from the Modern Sweatshop” (Spring 1992) 41 (3)
De Paul Law Review
739 at 744.
. Privacy Committee of New South Wales at 11.
. Privacy Committee of New South Wales at 2-3.
. Privacy Committee of New South Wales at 6.
. The Privacy Committee also recommended changes to covert surveillance undertaken by law enforcement agencies in the workplace. Such
surveillance is considered in Chapter 5.
. Privacy Committee of New South Wales at 7-8. See Appendix 1 for “Guidelines on Overt Video Surveillance in the Workplace”.
. Working Party on Video Surveillance in the Workplace
Report to the Hon J W Shaw QC MLC Attorney General and Minister for Industrial Relations
(New South Wales Department of Industrial Relations, Sydney, December 1996).
. Working Party on Video Surveillance in the Workplace at 2.
. Working Party on Video Surveillance in the Workplace, Appendix B.
. The Hon Jeff Shaw QC MLC, Attorney General and Minister for Industrial Relations, Press Release “Stricter controls on spy
cameras” (16 January 1997).
. Australian Business Limited (formerly the Chamber of Manufactures of NSW Ltd)
(4 November 1996) at 2.
. Industrial Relations Commission of New South Wales
Reference by the Minister for Industrial Relations pursuant to s 345(4) of the Industrial Relations Act 1991 regarding the Transport
and Delivery of Cash and Other Valuables Industry
(Matter No IRC1880 of 1995, Report to the Minister, 28 February 1997).
Issues Paper 12 (1997) - Surveillance
History of this Reference (Digest)
ELECTRONIC SURVEILLANCE: CURRENT AUSTRALIAN LEGISLATION AND GUIDELINES
NEW SOUTH WALES
Legislation
Casino Control Act 1992
, Div 1 and s 125(1)(s) - makes it a condition of a casino licence that the New South Wales Casino Control Authority approves plans
relating to the conduct and monitoring of casino operations, including the manner in which a closed circuit television system operates
within the casino.
Crimes Act 1900
-310 - offences relating to computers, including “anti-hacking” provisions.
Industrial Relations Act 1996
- includes “the surveillance of employees in the workplace” in the definition of an “industrial matter”.
Listening Devices Act 1984
- regulates the obtaining of a listening device by any person through a warrant system.
sets up the Privacy Committee with the power to advise public and private sector agencies about privacy issues. Also grants certain
coercive powers to the Committee to enable it to obtain information.
Security (Protection) Industry Act 1985
- governs licences for installing, maintaining or repairing security equipment and the sale of security equipment.
New South Wales Police Service
Guidelines for Investigation of Potential for, and Implementation of, CCTV by Local Councils
(May 1996).
Guidelines on Overt Video Surveillance in the Workplace
(September 1995).
COMMONWEALTH
Legislation
Australian Federal Police Act 1979
, Division 2 - regulates the use of listening devices for general (non narcotic) Commonwealth offences.
Australian Security Intelligence Organization Act 1977,
s 26 - grants special powers to ASIO, including the use of listening devices.
Crimes Act 1914
- offences relating to computers, including “anti-hacking” provisions.
Customs Act 1901
Division 1A - governs the use of listening devices for narcotics offences.
Data-Matching Program (Assistance and Tax) Act 1991
- regulates government data matching programs.
Human Rights (Sexual Conduct) Act 1994
- implements Australia’s international obligations under Article 17 (which relates to privacy) of the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights.
- regulates the use of personal information collected by Commonwealth government agencies, the use of tax file numbers and of information
collected by private credit reporting agencies.
Telecommunications (Interception) Act 1979
- prohibits the interception of “a communication passing over a telecommunications system” except under the provisions
of this Act.
Relevant guidelines
Commonwealth Privacy Commissioner
Guidelines on Covert Optical Surveillance in Commonwealth Administration
OTHER STATE AND TERRITORY LEGISLATION REGULATING LISTENING DEVICES
Invasion of Privacy Act 1971
Drugs Misuse Act 1986
Criminal Justice Act 1989
Listening Devices Act 1991
Listening Device Act 1990
Listening Devices Act 1969
Listening Devices Act 1972
Listening Devices Act 1978
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of contents
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter