URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/lawreform/ALRCDRP/1997/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:32:47
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Review of the Archives Act [1997] ALRCDRP 4
Draft Recommendations Paper 4
Review of the
Archives Act 1983
Your comments and submissions on the draft
recommendations in this Draft Recommendations Paper are welcome.
Information on how to
comment is given below.
Terms of reference
Abbreviations
1. Introduction
Principles and objectives of a Commonwealth archival system
Archives Act 1983
3. The principal elements of an effective Commonwealth archival system
4. Strategies for electronic recordkeeping and information systems
The archival organisation
5. Structure and governance of the National Archives of Australia
6. Functions and powers of the National Archives of Australia
7. Financing the National Archives of Australia
Creating, identifying and managing records of enduring value
8. What is a Commonwealth record?
9. Creating and managing Commonwealth records
10. Disposing of Commonwealth records — appraisal and sentencing
11. Recovery
12. Custody
13. Preservation
14. Records of the Parliament, the Commonwealth Courts and royal commissions
Accessing records of enduring value
15. An access regime
16. Responsibility for access decisions
17. Access procedures
18. Privileged access
Sensitive records — access and review
19. Exemption issues
20. Personal information in Commonwealth records
21. Review of decisions
Other significant issues
22. Services to the public
23. Records relating to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people
24. Records relating to functions and services provided by contractors
Appendix A: Participants
Appendix B: Written submissions
Table of legislation
How to make comments and submissions
You are invited to make comments and submissions on
thedraft recommendations in this Paper.Written comments and submissions
The Secretary
Australian Law Reform Commission
Level 10, 131 York Street
SYDNEY NSW 2000
(GPO Box 3708 SYDNEY NSW 2001)
Phone: 02–9284–6333
TTY: 02–9284–6379
Fax: 02–9284–6363
ALRC homepage: http://www.alrc.gov.au/
Closing date: 27 February 1998
It would be helpful if comments addressed specific draft recommendations or paragraphs in the Paper.
Confidentiality
Unless a submission is marked confidential, it will be made available to any person or organisation on request.
If you want your submission, or any part of it, to be
treated as confidential, please indicate this clearly. A request for a
marked 'confidential' will be determined in accordance with
Freedom of Information Act 1982
The Commission will include in its final report on this
project a list of submissions received in response to this Paper. It
also refer to those submissions in the text of the report and other
Commission publications. It may decide to publish them. If you
want your submission or any part of it to be used in any one of these
ways please indicate this clearly.
© Commonwealth of Australia 1997
This work is copyright. It may be reproduced in whole or in part for
ALRC public consultations, study or training purposes subject
inclusion of an acknowledgment of the source and no commercial usage or
sale. Reproduction for purposes other than those
indicated above,
require the written permission of the Australian Government Publishing
Service. Requests and inquiries concerning
reproduction and rights
should be addressed to the Manager, Commonwealth Information Services,
Australian Government Publishing
Service, GPO Box 84, Canberra ACT 2601.
ALRC reference:
0 642 28344 3
What is a draft recommendations paper?
This paper sets out the Commission's draft recommendations. It also
identifies areas where the Commission is seeking further information.
Unlike a discussion paper or a final report, this paper does not
contain detailed summaries of the research and submissions. It is
working paper designed to indicate the preliminary views of the
Commission and to form the basis for further consultati
The draft recommendations have been developed in light of the
submissions the Commission has received on Issues Paper 19, the
made at public hearings and consultations and the Commission's
own research. The Commission's review process is descr
ibed in more
detail in chapter 1.
The Commission has not formed any final views on the matters raised
in this paper. The Commission will be settling its final
recommendations
in light of the responses to this paper and of the
submissions, evidence and other material it has obtained in the course
review. The Commission's final report is due by 31 March 1998.
It seeks the views of all interested persons and organisations on the
draft recommendations contained in this paper and on any matters
that may not have been addressed.
Terms of reference
1. I, Daryl Williams, Attorney-General of Australia, HAVING REGARD TO:
(a) the purposes of, and benefits intended to be conferred by the
Archives Act
and the functions of the Australian Archives:
— to ensure the conservation and preservation of the existing and future archival resources of the Commonwealth
— to promote, by providing advice and other assistance to Commonwealth institutions, the keeping of current Commonwealth records
in an efficient and economical manner and in a manner that will facilitate their use as part of the archival resources of the Commonwealth
— to ascertain the material that constitutes the archival resources of the Commonwealth
— to have the custody and management of Commonwealth records, other than current Commonwealth records, that —
(i) are part of the archival resources of the Commonwealth;
(ii) ought to be examined to ascertain whether they are part of those Archival resources;
(iii) although they are not part of those archival resources, are required to be permanently or temporarily preserved
— to encourage, facilitate, publicise and sponsor the use of archival material
— to make Commonwealth records available for public access in accordance with the Act and to take part in arrangements for
other access to Commonwealth records
— to develop and foster the coordination of activities relating to the preservation and use of the archival resources of the
Commonwealth and other archival resources relating to Australia
(b) the Australian Law Reform Commission Report 77/Administrative Review Council Report 40
Open Government: a review of the federal
Freedom of Information Act 1982
(1995), and in particular its recommendations concerning the
Archives Act
(c) the principles and provisions of relevant State and overseas archival legislation
REFER to the Law Reform Commission, for inquiry and report under the
Law Reform Commission Act
, the following matters:
(a) to identify what the basic purposes and principles of national archival legislation should now be
(b) whether the
Archives Act
has achieved those purposes and principles or whether it requires amendment, having regard in particular to
(i) the role of the Australian Archives in setting and auditing standards for the management of all Commonwealth records
(ii) the need to ensure that records in electronic and other non paper formats are managed effectively
(iii) the need to ensure the maximum possible consistency between the
Archives Act
Freedom of Information Act
Public Service Act
(iv) the most appropriate public access regime for Commonwealth records of enduring value
(v) the relationship between the Australian Archives and other Commonwealth agencies
(vi) whether the structure and wording of the Act can be simplified to make it more easily understood by the public
(vii) any related matter.
2. The Commission is to prepare and release an issues paper for public consultation by 30November 1996 and is to report by 31 December
Dated 15 August 1996
Daryl Williams
Attorney-General
Abbreviations
Administrative Appeals Tribunal
Australian Bureau of Statistics
Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977
Australian Government Publishing Service
Australian Law Reform Commission
Australian National Audit Office
Administrative Review Council
Archives Act
Archives Act 1983
Australian Security Intelligence Organization
Freedom of Information Act 1982
General Disposal Authority
Issues Paper 19
ALRC Issues Paper 19 —
Review of the
Archives Act 1983
National Archives of Australia
Records Disposal Authority
1. Introduction
Terms of reference
Issues paper
Submissions
Consultations
Terms of reference
On 15 August 1996 the Attorney-General, the Hon. Daryl Williams AM, QC, MP, asked the Australian Law Reform Commission (the Commission)
to review the Commonwealth
Archives Act 1983
(the Act). The review is to identify what the basic purposes and principles of national archival legislation should now be and to
determine whether they have been achieved by the present Act. The full terms of reference are set out on page 3. In reviewing the
Act the Commission is to have regard in particular to
the role of the Australian Archives in setting and auditing standards for the management of all Commonwealth records
the need to ensure that records in electronic and other non paper formats are managed effectively
the need to ensure the maximum possible consistency between the
Archives Act
Freedom of Information Act
Public Service Act 1922
the most appropriate public access regime for Commonwealth records of enduring value
the relationship between the Australian Archives and other Commonwealth agencies
whether the structure and wording of the Act can be simplified to make it more easily understood by the public.
The Commission was required to complete its report on the
Archives Act
by 31 December 1997. However the Attorney-General agreed on 12 September 1997 that the reporting date should be extended to 31 March
Issues paper
The Commission published Issues Paper 19 on the Act in January 1997. Some 2 000 copies of the paper were distributed in Australia
and overseas and the paper was also made available on the Commission's Internet site. Issues Paper 19 summarised the present provisions
of the Act and set them in their historical and administrative context. It raised issues as to how the Act had operated and how it
might be improved. It also suggested a series of principles on which new archival legislation might be based.
Submissions
The Commission received 101 written submissions in response to Issues Paper 19. Stakeholder groups were represented as follows
Commonwealth Government agencies
State Governments and their agencies
Non Commonwealth libraries and library organisations
Other organisations
Legal organisations and specialists
Professional groups representing archivists and records managers
Individual archivists and records managers
Professional groups representing historians and other users of archival records
Individual users of archival records
Other individuals
The Commission was impressed by the quality of many of the submissions. They presented an incisive review not just of the legislation
itself but also of the present situation and future directions of Commonwealth recordkeeping generally. While submissions came from
a wide range of stakeholders, there was broad agreement in many concerning the nature of significant problems and the most practical
solutions to resolve them.
Consultations
Between May and July 1997 the Commission held one general public meeting on the reference in each State and Territory capital city.
The Commission also held a range of meetings with specific stakeholder groups in Canberra, Sydney, Darwin and Adelaide. The various
meetings gave the Commission direct contact with several hundred people and provided a good opportunity for amplification of issues
raised in written submissions. The meetings confirmed the strength of stakeholder interest in Commonwealth recordkeeping and of concern
outlines the origins of the present Act and briefly assesses how effectively it has operated. It then suggests a series of major
objectives which should be included in an objects clause in the revised legislation and the 10 principal elements of an effective
Commonwealth records management and archival scheme which underlie and elaborate those objectives. Finally it outlines the effect
of electronic technologies on recordkeeping systems and on the development of a coordinated electronic access system for Commonwealth
government information and records.
examines the functions and powers of Australian Archives and suggests a revised set of functions for a new archival authority. It
makes recommendations on the structure and governance of the new authority which will have policy and standard setting responsibility
for the new records management and archival regime set out in the remainder of the paper. It also considers the financial basis of
the present Australian Archives and how this might be adapted to meet the needs of the new authority.
begins by considering technical and legal definitions for Commonwealth government records in order to establish a clear jurisdiction
for the legislation. It then traverses the continuum of the records management process from creation to appraisal, disposal, storage
and preservation. In all these activities it stresses the importance of consistent and accountable standards being issued by the
archival authority and of ensuring that the new legislation and the standards issued under it will deal effectively with records
of all formats both now and in the future. It also considers provisions for the recovery of records removed from Commonwealth custody
without authority and the extent to which the legislation should apply to the records of the Parliament, the Commonwealth Courts
and royal commissions.
reviews the present public access regime for Commonwealth records based on the 30 year rule and recommends ways in which it might
operate more effectively. It considers the relationship between the
Archives Act
and other legislation, in particular the FOI and Privacy Acts. It suggests ways in which a more proactive approach might be taken
to the release of Commonwealth records beyond the minimum statutory requirements. It considers procedures and the allocation of responsibility
for the handling of public access applications and a new approach to the granting of privileged access to records not suitable for
general public release.
considers what provision the legislation should make for records which justify exemption from public release beyond the age of 30
years. It reconsiders the approach to exemption provisions in the archives legislation. The Part then focuses on particular issues
relating to personal information in records. Finally it considers mechanisms for the review of decisions to exempt records from public
access and for other decisions made by the archival authority.
deals with three areas in which submissions have raised issues about Commonwealth recordkeeping and archival services which relate
to more than one of the proceeding parts. It examines the services provided to the public by Australian Archives. It considers a
range of issues raised by Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people about the management and accessibility of records which relate
to them. It also considers the implications for Commonwealth recordkeeping of the rapid growth in the contracting out of Commonwealth
government functions and services.
The Commission welcomes comments on its draft recommendations. These should be dispatched by 27 February 1998 to
The Secretary
Australian Law Reform Commission
GPO Box 3708
Sydney NSW 2001
Fax: (02) 9284 6363
or to the Internet e-mail address
archives@alrc.gov.au
Principles and objectives of a Commonwealth archival system
Archives Act 1983
Introduction
The role of Australian Archives
Managing Commonwealth records
Accessing Commonwealth records
Introduction
The Commonwealth archival function came
into being in 1944 when an Archives Officer was appointed to what
became the Archives Division
of the Commonwealth National Library. The
Archives Division concentrated initially on the evaluation and in many
cases destruction
of the large backlog of records which had built up in
Commonwealth agencies. It also began to establish a network of records
facilities. In 1961 the Archives Division was separated from
the National Library to become the Commonwealth Archives Office within
the Prime Minister's Department. The Commonwealth Archives Office was
renamed Australian Archives in 1974. During the past two
decades the
organisation has formed part of many Commonwealth departments, although
it has generally been associated with the department
responsible for
either cultural or administrative affairs. It is currently part of the
Department of Communications and the Arts
and has offices and records
repositories in each State and mainland Territory capital city.
During its first 40 years of operation the
Commonwealth archival function was managed entirely by administrative
decision. Most
decisions about the management of older Commonwealth
records were made by the archival authority itself or by its parent
department.
Occasionally major decisions on policy issues such as
public access to records were made by Cabinet. The first draft of the
Bill appeared in 1974 and after a series of revisions the Bill
was eventually tabled in the Senate on 9 June 1978. It was then
considered by two Senate committees in 1978–79
and further revised. The legislation was finally passed in October 1983 and proclaimed on 6 June 1984.
Archives Act 1983
combines two
distinct but related legislative objectives. The first objective is to
establish the administrative entities known
as the Australian Archives
and the Advisory Council on Australian Archives and to confer on them a
range of powers and responsibilities.
In doing this the Act elaborates
a general management regime for Commonwealth records, administrative
responsibility for which
resides only in part with Australian Archives.
The second objective is to establish a public access regime for
Commonwealth records
more than 30 years old modelled closely on the
Freedom of Information Act 1982
The role of Australian Archives
The present Act establishes Australian
Archives within a Commonwealth department and subject to direct
ministerial control. The
Act also provides for the appointment of a
Director-General and an Advisory Council. The powers and functions set
out for Australian
Archives reflect the role and objectives of
Australian Archives as it existed in the 1970s. They focus on the
disposal, preservation
and storage functions and the archival
authority's role in gathering information about records and
facilitating access to them.
Although Australian Archives has
significantly modified its priorities and strategies in some areas
since the legislation was drafted,
the most significant functions set
out in the legislation are described in sufficiently general terms to
remain relevant today.
The most notable exceptions are the custodial
provisions, which are now too prescriptive, and the records management
advisory function,
which is expressed too narrowly. Some of the more
specialised powers and functions are now of only marginal relevance.
A reading of the functions and powers set
out in the legislation against submissions made to the Commission
suggests that, with
the exception of records management standards,
Australian Archives has not been significantly constrained by the
legislation in
delivering effective archival services in a changing
administrative and technological environment. The relative
effectiveness of
these services has been determined more by the
resources, priorities and skills directed to their achievement than by
which they are endorsed in the Act. However it is not enough
that the present elaboration of functions and powers has operated in
neutral rather than a negative way. The Commission believes that it is
essential that the legislation should have an objects
clause setting
out its overall objectives. The legislation should also make it clear
where primary responsibility for achieving
these objectives lies. The
archival authority's functions and powers should be set out in a way
that focuses on outcomes rather
than processes to avoid linking it too
closely to specific technologies and administrative strategies.
Australian Archives has operated within
the framework of a departmental structure and direct responsibility to
a minister throughout
its existence. For the last 13 years this
situation has been ordained by the legislation. Evidence provided to
the Commission suggested
that Australian Archives has nevertheless
maintained a relatively independent existence within the broad policy
and resource parameters
set by ministers. This independence is probably
due in part to the specialised and generally uncontentious nature of
functions. However submissions strongly supported the
establishment of the archival authority as an independent statutory
The need for such a change was seen not so much in terms of
improving the efficiency with which the archival authority manages its
own affairs, but rather in giving it a more authoritative and
independent role in the management of Commonwealth records generally.
It was also seen as appropriate that an organisation which administered
legislation extending to the records of the Parliament
and the Courts
should be more directly responsible to the Parliament.
Managing Commonwealth records
The present Act is focused mainly on the
management of older records. It assumes that records will be created by
Commonwealth agencies
as part of their ongoing administrative
functions. It also assumes that those records will be cared for
adequately by the creating
agency until they cease to be regularly
required for its business. The fundamental concern of the Act is to
ensure that records
of enduring value (that is records which justify
retention for evidential or historical purposes beyond the time for
are required for current administration) are created and
managed appropriately. However, in practice, it has proved impossible
to separate this objective from the general objective of ensuring that
adequate management and accountability standards are applied
Commonwealth records, including the great majority of records which are
not of enduring value. This is particularly true
of electronic records,
which will increasingly dominate Commonwealth recordkeeping in the next
century. Unless electronic recordkeeping
systems are planned and
managed adequately there can be no guarantee that any records, whether
of enduring value or not, will be
created and maintained to an
acceptable standard.
Evidence to the Commission stressed that
the legislation can no longer rely on an initial phase of quite
unregulated recordkeeping,
with a statutory management regime
commencing when records reach middle age. For nearly a century
Commonwealth agencies have created
records as they saw fit without any
reference to general standards and often without any consistent
approach to recordkeeping even
within the agency itself. The current
state of Commonwealth recordkeeping suggests that this
laissez faire
approach is inadequate. There is no Commonwealth legislation providing
a comprehensive framework for the management of Commonwealth
although the
Archives Act
provides some elements of such a framework.
The reasons for the Act's failure to address the 'front end' of
Commonwealth recordkeeping
go back to territorial disputes which are
now a matter of history. The gap they have left in the Commonwealth
records management
regime, however, represents one of the most
fundamental weaknesses of the present legislation.
Under the present legislation Australian
Archives' statutory policy role in the management of Commonwealth
records begins at the
disposal stage. The archival authority has always
regarded regulation of the disposal of Commonwealth records as one of
crucial functions, not only to ensure that valuable records
survive but also to provide a general 'housekeeping' service to
Commonwealth
agencies. In terms of the scope of its disposal authority
coverage Australian Archives can be satisfied with what it has
In terms of the quality of the coverage and the way in which
it is implemented, submissions to the Commission suggested that there
are some areas in which further work is needed. The archival authority
also faces a challenge in restructuring the records appraisal
so that records can be appraised earlier in their lives and within the
framework of a comprehensive overall assessment
of the nature and
relative value of Commonwealth government functions. These are
essentially administrative challenges within the
framework of the
authority over the disposal process already given to Australian
Archives in the existing legislation.
The Act gives Australian Archives a
central role in the custody of Commonwealth records by requiring that
nearly all records be
transferred to its custody by the age of 25
years. As with the disposal provisions this reflects an administrative
regime that
was already well established when the legislation was
enacted. In recent years Australian Archives has substantially modified
custodial polices and most records which are not of enduring value
are now stored by the agency which created them or by private
contractors. These changes have been driven by resource constraints and
the trend towards outsourcing functions, which have encouraged
Australian Archives to concentrate on its core function of managing
records of enduring value. Current custodial arrangements have
moved away from the scheme envisaged by the legislation. Submissions
generally accepted the logic of this move, but it clearly
revision of the custodial provisions of the legislation. Such revision
must also take into account a very significant
issue not even envisaged
by the present Act, namely the likely need to require some agencies to
maintain electronic recordkeeping
systems indefinitely in order to
preserve records of enduring value.
Accessing Commonwealth records
The application of a freedom of
information type statutory access regime to Commonwealth archival
records in 1984 was, by comparison
with most other jurisdictions in
Australia and overseas, a quite radical innovation. Many archival
an essentially permissive access regime,
which combined a general undertaking that records would become
available to the public
at a certain age with a range of exceptions
intended to protect specific sensitivities. In most cases these
exceptions were unappealable.
The Commonwealth jurisdiction was
relatively well prepared for the new regime because it had been subject
to a 30 year public access
rule since 1970 and detailed guidelines had
been developed by Australian Archives to identify records considered
unsuitable for
release. Although the categories of exemption in the Act
were expressed quite differently from those previously used the old
was grafted onto the new and the management of access to
Commonwealth records continued along broadly similar lines.
The most significant change brought to
the access process by the Act was the establishment of a statutory
appeal system. This had
two main consequences. Firstly it brought into
the process important groups of records, particularly those relating to
and intelligence issues, which had not previously even been
considered for public release. Many of these records were, at least
initially, claimed to be exempt from release. The operation of the
appeal process gradually enforced a more open release policy
records to the extent that they are now an important research resource.
In doing this the appeal provisions also achieved
consequence of drawing attention generally to the need to comply with
the Act. Appeals under the Act have related predominantly
to security
and intelligence records, but the very existence of the appeal
provisions, and the requirement to provide written statements
reasons in support of exemptions claimed, have had a beneficial effect
on the operation of the entire access system.
In some areas, however, the access
system has displayed weaknesses. The underlying intention of the Act
was that the Commonwealth
should proactively release records once they
reach the age of 30 years, with the formal access application and
appeal system acting
as a fallback to resolve disputes and discourage
tardy decision making by the Commonwealth. In fact, for resource
reasons, most
records are still only considered for release once a
specific application is lodged for access to them. Many are then
quickly, but ever since the Act has been in force a minority
of access applications have taken much longer than the statutory 90
days to determine. Delays in the system have been a more significant
irritant to users of archival records than the actual imposition
exemptions, the appropriateness of which, with some exceptions, appears
to have been accepted fairly generally. Despite some
useful innovations
by Australian Archives the difficulties many people still experience in
navigating the maze of Commonwealth
recordkeeping systems also remains
an inhibiting factor in achieving the objectives of the legislation.
A second weakness of the access system
is that its various provisions to permit, but not require, the release
of records less than
30 years old have achieved little. The intention
that the 30 year rule should merely establish a minimum standard of
public accessibility
has been replaced by a view in some quarters that
even the 30 year rule places an unreasonable burden on Commonwealth
The Commission sees a need to reaffirm the basic objectives
and benefits of an effective public access scheme.
See Senate Standing Committee on Education and the Arts,
Inquiry into the Archives Bill 1978
, Canberra, 1979; Senate Standing Committee on Constitutional and Legal Affairs,
of Information: Report by the Senate Standing Committee on
Constitutional and Legal Affairs on the Freedom of Information
1978 and aspects of the Archives Bill 1978
, Canberra, 1979.
3. The principal elements of an effective Commonwealth archival system
The need for an objects clause
The principal elements of an effective Commonwealth archival system
The need for an objects clause
The present Act does not include an objects clause. It does set out the powers and functions of the administrative entity known as
Australian Archives. It also sets out a range of procedures and responsibilities for the management and accessibility of Commonwealth
records. Read together the various provisions constitute a quite comprehensive scheme. However the legislation would be more transparent
and forceful if it was prefaced by a clear statement of its major objectives. This is particularly important because the archival
authority is only one of the organisations with administrative responsibility for achieving the various objectives of the Act. The
present scheme under which the legislation is in effect introduced by a statement of the powers and functions of Australian Archives
does not make it clear that adequate recordkeeping should be fundamental to the operation of all Commonwealth agencies.
The Commission recommends that the legislation commence with a statement of its major objectives, which are
to ensure that the Commonwealth administration creates records sufficient to
manage current Commonwealth functions efficiently and accountably
record and safeguard the rights, entitlements and obligations of individual citizens
document the history of the Commonwealth and the nation by maintaining a record of significant events, policies, movements and people
to establish an accountable framework for the identification of records of enduring value
to ensure the enduring record of the Commonwealth is preserved and made accessible
to provide a statutory right of access to records in the open access period
to encourage the provision of access to records beyond minimum statutory obligations
to encourage the greatest possible public use of Commonwealth records as a vital element in the history of the nation
to establish an authority to ensure that the objectives of the Act are achieved.
Draft Recommendation 3.1.
The legislation should include an objects clause specifying its major objectives.
The principal elements of an effective Commonwealth archival system
In Issues Paper 19 the Commission suggested a number of principles on which an effective Commonwealth archival system should be based.
Submissions generally supported these principles and offered a range of suggestions for their improvement. These suggestions have
been taken into account in drawing up the following ten principal elements. The principal elements seek to develop the objectives
set out in the objects clause into a framework for a Commonwealth archival system. Each recommendation in this paper is referable
to one or more of the proposed principal elements.
Despite some support for the idea, the Commission does not recommend that the principal elements
be placed into legislation. That said, the legislation in general should reflect these principal elements and a number of the principal
elements would require legislative recognition, either through inclusion in an objects clause or by the creation of specific powers
and obligations. Other principal elements would be implemented primarily through administrative action.
(1) Full and accurate records must be created, maintained and made accessible through a reliable and enduring system.
No organisation can operate effectively if its transactions are not recorded or if their recording is left to the whim of individuals.
This is true especially of a large and complex organisation like the Commonwealth administration, which conducts a wide range of
dealings with other governments, the private sector and individual citizens. In these dealings the Commonwealth has a recordkeeping
obligation not only to itself, but also to all those with whom it has a relationship.
Recordkeeping systems must be designed to protect the integrity and functionality of the records they contain for as long as they
may be required. As new technologies evolve it is vital that recordkeeping needs are taken into account in systems design and that
this is done in a way compatible with the broad strategies of Commonwealth information management.
Commonwealth records are not created merely to serve administrative objectives. They are also an essential element in ensuring the
accountability of the executive government. This includes accountability to the people through the Parliament and to supervisory
authorities such as the Auditor-General. It also includes the longer term accountability that comes from records being made available
for public scrutiny and discussion.
Commonwealth records of enduring value are a resource for the whole nation. They are not retained merely because they might be of
some further use in Commonwealth administration. They are retained because they document the history of the nation and its people
and the rights and obligations of individual citizens. The Commonwealth has an obligation to care for them and to make them accessible.
(2) The management of Commonwealth records should be an integrated continuum supported by
a legislative regime clearly defining objectives and responsibilities
a coordinated 'single mind' approach at a policy level by the various organisations with records management responsibilities.
Policy responsibility for the management of Commonwealth records is fragmented. There is no organisation with overall responsibility
for current records and even within individual agencies there is often no single records authority. Older records are mainly the
responsibility of Australian Archives, which also provides some advice about current records. There is no single piece of legislation
dealing comprehensively with Commonwealth records management.
The effective management of Commonwealth records requires a clear legislative framework setting out objectives and responsibilities
for the continuum of records management from creation to archiving or disposal. It is not essential that all aspects of the management
and accessibility of Commonwealth records be dealt with in a single act, but it is important that there should be a general scheme
of management for Commonwealth records set out clearly in legislation.
Within the legislative framework there should be a coordinated approach to the development of policy and standards which the Commission
has designated the 'single mind'. The concept of the 'single mind' does not mean that one organisation should be responsible for
all aspects of records management and accessibility. It means rather that the various organisations involved should be able to speak
with one consistent voice about what needs to be done for records and how this is to be achieved.
(3) The archival system should have sufficient flexibility to accommodate changing technology and management practices relating to
the creation, custody and accessibility of records.
The present
Archives Act
was drafted essentially to reflect the procedures used to manage paper records in the 1970s. It requires revision to accommodate
the electronic recordkeeping systems of the 1990s. However it is important that the new legislation should not be bound by specific
technologies. It should address the objectives of recordkeeping in a way that can accommodate not only technologies which now exist
but others which have yet to be devised.
The legislation should also have sufficient flexibility to accommodate changing management practices, particularly in the increasingly
complex interface between the public and private sectors.
(4) Clearly articulated standards are needed to ensure the creation, management and preservation of accurate and reliable records
for as long as they are required for administrative, community or cultural purposes.
In such a large and diverse function as Commonwealth recordkeeping comprehensive standards are necessary to provide guidance to staff
and to reassure those who have dealings with the Commonwealth that their interests are being protected. The standards should be focused
on outcomes rather than on processes.
(5) An effective appraisal and disposal regime is essential to the management of Commonwealth records in order to identify records
of enduring value and to facilitate the timely disposal of records which are no longer of value.
An effective appraisal regime based on clearly articulated principles is essential to ensure that
Records of enduring value (that is, records of long term value to the government and the people) are identified so that they can
be cared for and made accessible appropriately.
Records which are not of enduring value are disposed of in a timely manner once they cease to be required for administrative purposes.
The development of electronic recordkeeping has further emphasised the importance of appraisal as a basic component of systems design.
It is also desirable that records which are no longer of value should be identified and disposed of effectively, ensuring that resources
are not devoted to the storage and accessing of such records unnecessarily.
(6) There should be an enforceable right of public access (subject only to clearly defined and appealable exemptions) to all Commonwealth
records which have reached the age of 30 years.
Governments tend to be reluctant to make their records available to the world at large, partly because of real or imagined sensitivities
and partly because of resource costs. It is important that at some clearly defined point in their lives records of enduring value
should move into the public domain unless there are specific and reviewable reasons for withholding them. The most effective way
of achieving this is by maintaining the present 30 year rule and administrative review system. In the Commission's view the 30 year
rule represents the most reasonable compromise between openness, the need to protect any information which is still sensitive and
resource costs.
The Commission recommends that the access regimes of the Freedom of Information and archives legislation should remain complementary
but separate, provided that the coverage of the
Freedom of Information Act
is extended retrospectively to meet the 30 year rule. This would ensure that the proactive release principle on which the 30 year
rule is based would not be eroded by the more reactive and restrictive access regime of the FOI Act.
The 30 year rule should be seen by Commonwealth agencies as a minimum obligation rather than a maximum obligation. Their records management
strategies should include a systematic assessment of groups of records to identify those which can be made available to the public
at an age of less than 30 years. This is a matter for cultural change within agencies rather than for the application of significant
additional resources. Indeed systematic assessment can save resources by reducing the need to deal with individual FOI applications.
(7) Statutory rights of public access should be supported by effective information and service delivery procedures.
Statutory access rights can not operate effectively if members of the public do not have the information necessary to find the records
in which they are interested. Because of their size and complexity Commonwealth recordkeeping systems can be intimidating and difficult
to use. The Commonwealth must recognise its obligation to provide an appropriate level of information support for researchers both
through the archival authority and through other information delivery initiatives.
Australian Archives currently provides research facilities in each State and Territory capital city. In a country as large as Australia
this is an important factor in making records genuinely accessible. Despite diminishing resources records should be kept as far as
possible in the State or Territory in which they were created so that members of the public do not have to travel thousands of kilometres
to access them.
(8) Commonwealth recordkeeping systems should be seen as an integral part of a unified Commonwealth information network.
The rapid development of electronic access to information about Commonwealth government functions through the Internet has profound
implications for Commonwealth recordkeeping. At present attention is focused mainly on coordinating and improving access to information
System offers a wide range of possibilities for direct linkages to Commonwealth recordkeeping systems. Such linkages raise substantial
administrative, security and privacy issues, but they also have the potential to improve the management of Commonwealth recordkeeping
and its interface with the community. It is important that developments in the administration and technology of Commonwealth recordkeeping
should have adequate regard to this wider world of information access.
(9) The legislative scheme should provide for the establishment of national consultative mechanisms in which the principle stakeholders
may put forward their views and be consulted on major policy issues.
The archival authority has responsibilities to a wide range of stakeholders in both the Commonwealth administration and the community
as a whole. It is important that all stakeholders should have an effective opportunity to express their views on how Commonwealth
records are managed. Consultative mechanisms may include a range of specialised groups as well as a peak managerial body.
(10) The archival authority should exercise a leadership role within the system.
The Commission endorses the principle that the Commonwealth archival authority should continue to be concerned essentially with the
management of Commonwealth government records, leaving the management of the archival records of the other tiers of government and
of the private sector to other institutions. This would not preclude the authority from accepting custody of non Commonwealth records
where it was appropriate to do so.
However the Commonwealth archival authority, as the largest single archival institution in the country, should maintain a general
professional leadership role to assist the further development of archival institutions both large and small.
Draft recommendation 3.2.
The Explanatory Memorandum and other legislative material for the new archives legislation should elaborate the interpretation of
the objects clause by referring in detail to the principal elements on which the legislation is based.
4. Strategies for electronic recordkeeping and information systems
Introduction
Electronic recordkeeping systems
Developing an electronic information locater system
Introduction
The Commission has reviewed the
Archives Act
against a background of rapid developments in electronic technologies for the management of information and recordkeeping systems.
These developments have profound implications not just for recordkeeping itself but also for the relationship between recordkeeping
and the overarching superstructure of a unified electronic access system for all government information.
Records are the primary means by which information is accumulated and stored within Commonwealth agencies. Without proper management
of information any organisation will falter. Both the government and private sectors have eagerly embraced information technology,
but still face significant problems in managing the information which technology has enabled them to capture. Technology provides
tools for management, but without a proper understanding of information management, the tools will only complicate information systems.
If useful information is to be created, preserved and made accessible to present and future generations it must be managed effectively.
This requires effective recordkeeping systems which do not merely 'keep' records but manage them.
Electronic recordkeeping systems
The basic purposes and properties of a record remain the same no matter what medium the record is housed in. For this reason the
Commission has in general dealt with issues relating to the management of electronic records in the course of its consideration of
the same issues as they relate to records in other formats. However the Commission has been very much aware of the profound changes
that electronic technologies are making to Commonwealth recordkeeping and of the need to ensure that its recommendations are relevant
to these technologies.
The position is complicated by the fact that there are wide variations in the extent to which Commonwealth agencies have adopted
electronic recordkeeping technologies. Most Commonwealth records are now created electronically, but in many cases this merely means
that they are created on a personal computer networked within a work group or agency. The record may be transmitted electronically
and become part of an accumulation of electronic records. Yet in many cases the 'recordkeeping system' to which it belongs is no
more than a server filled with an unstructured mass of records which are difficult to locate and subject to intermittent purges.
In such cases reliable and enduring recordkeeping still depends on record creators printing all records of more than transient value
and ensuring that they are incorporated into a structured paper based recordkeeping system.
Some agencies are now developing true electronic recordkeeping systems which not only create records but also manage and preserve
them reliably. However it is likely that a mixture of paper based and electronically based systems will continue to exist side by
side in many Commonwealth agencies for the foreseeable future. This means that the legislation and the authority responsible for
its implementation must not only be adequate to cope with a range of technologies but must also do all it can to encourage the adoption
of the most effective technologies.
The Commonwealth Government has already taken some general initiatives in the area of electronic records management. In June 1997
the Office of Government Information Technology (OGIT) announced that five companies with eight core products for records management
systems have been accredited by the Commonwealth and placed on a Shared Systems Suite.
This means that any Commonwealth agency wishing to implement a new records management system must use one of these products through
the approved companies. Standard contracts have been developed for use by all agencies.
While the standardisation of records management systems is a useful innovation it is only a step on the road to ensuring that the
Commonwealth establishes effective electronic recordkeeping systems. It is essential that the Commonwealth agencies responsible for
major initiatives such as the outsourcing of information technology services are fully aware of the need to safeguard and enhance
the capacity to create and maintain records to a satisfactory standard. One of the crucial weaknesses of the present Act is its failure
to require that consistent recordkeeping standards are issued and implemented. This failure has cost the Commonwealth dearly in the
era of paper records and unless adequate measures are taken to address it the same failure will be repeated in the electronic era.
One of the key objectives of new information technologies should be to establish systems that can be readily accessed by anyone,
subject to appropriate protections for sensitive information. Institutional memory should no longer be the sole preserve of individual
institutions or of members of the institution's staff. This will facilitate major initiatives in areas such as the benchmarking and
contestability of Commonwealth government services.
In recommending that the archival authority issue recordkeeping standards the Commission is aware that it is presenting the authority
with both an opportunity and a challenge. Australian Archives' staff have already been involved in a number of initiatives in electronic
records management. If the archival authority is to take on formally the role of advising and setting standards in this area, it
must also continue to develop its technical expertise. In some cases it may need to guide the development of technology as well as
to provide advice to Commonwealth agencies on available options. There is a clear need for the organisation to bring together expertise
in information technology and records management for the benefit of the Commonwealth as a whole.
Draft recommendation 4.1.
The Commonwealth government should ensure that recordkeeping issues are addressed as an integral part of the development of new information
technology strategies at both a policy and a technical level. The work already undertaken in some agencies to develop effective electronic
recordkeeping systems should be accelerated and extended to all agencies to facilitate the full implementation of contestability
in the provision of Commonwealth government services.
Developing an electronic information locater system
The development of the Internet has provided a powerful new medium for making government information available to the public. The
initial stage of the Commonwealth's involvement with the Internet has been characterised by the independent development of many individual
agency sites displaying information specifically created for public use. In some cases this information includes copies of records.
However there is clearly a need for a more integrated approach to realise the full potential of the technology and to make information
in the system more readily retrievable. Under the auspices of OGIT, the Information Management Steering Committee (IMSC) has developed
a strategy for a whole-of-government approach to the management of access to government information. The IMSC has released two reports,
recommendations in which include the establishment of a single entry point to government information and the development of an Australian
Government Information Locater System (AusGILS). The single entry point service provided by the National Library of Australia is
a prototype for this development.
AusGILS is an essential step towards a unified access service to all government information. In the future accessing government information
will entail not merely locating the home pages of relevant Commonwealth agencies, but also searching a wide range of individual records.
This will require a locater system which contains information (generally described as metadata) about the structure of individual
information and recordkeeping systems. Well structured metadata should permit a search of the entire body of publicly available government
information, regardless of its location. To do this the metadata must be in a standardised format. The IMSC has recommended that
the primary role in developing and implementing standardised metadata formats should be undertaken by Australian Archives.
One of the tools for developing standardised metadata will be a thesaurus containing keywords for describing and identifying records.
The Records Management Office of NSW has developed the AAA Keyword Thesaurus for use by NSW Government agencies. Australian Archives
has bought the rights to use the AAA Keyword Thesaurus and has begun to develop a Commonwealth Thesaurus catering specifically to
the needs of Commonwealth agencies.
The archival authority has a vital interest in the development of AusGILS. Australian Archives has already compiled and stored electronically
large amounts of information about Commonwealth agencies and the records which they have created. This information has been gathered
primarily to identify and control older records which are in archival custody or likely to be so soon. However one of the objectives
underlying the Commission's review of the Act has been to reduce the barriers between 'current' and 'archival' records in order to
encourage a more proactive approach to the public release of Commonwealth records. Even though many of the older records will probably
always remain in paper or non standard electronic formats it is important that information about their existence, content and location
should be accessible through a single electronic network.
An additional reason for the archival authority taking an active part in the development of AusGILS is that the creation of standardised
metadata formats will facilitate the networking of electronic recordkeeping systems which include records of enduring value. As already
noted in this chapter the need to ensure that such records are maintained and kept accessible is one of the most urgent challenges
facing the archival authority.
The Commission supports the concept of AusGILS but it is necessary to ensure that AusGILS adopts a 'whole of government' approach
to information, including information contained in archival records. The participation of the archival authority in the development
AusGILS is essential.
Draft recommendation 4.2.
Commonwealth agencies should support the further development of an electronic information locater system for Commonwealth government
information and records. The archival authority should participate actively in this process.
BHP Information Technology Pty Ltd with
; Computervision Pty Ltd (now CVSI) with
; Educom Pty Ltd with
Records Manager
; GE Capital IT Solutions with
; IBM Australia with
IMSC Technical Group
Architecture for Access to Government Information
Management of Government Information as a National Resource
Preliminary Report 1996.
http://www.nla.gov.au/oz/gov/
The archival organisation
5. Structure and governance of the National Archives of Australia
Introduction
Nature of organisation
Name of the authority
Need for a statutory corporation
Relationship with the Parliament, the Courts and the Executive
Parliament and the Courts
The Executive
The National Archives of Australia Council
A chief executive officer
Staff of the National Archives of Australia
Powers of Council in relation to the National Archivist
Delegating powers of the Council
Composition of the Council
Consultation with stakeholders
Introduction
The principal elements of an effective
archival system articulated in Chapter 3 lay considerable emphasis on
the recordkeeping
continuum and the promulgation of standards and
guidelines to ensure that full and accountable records are created,
and made accessible through a reliable and enduring system.
Consistent with these and other related
principles, the Commission is recommending the conferment of a number
of substantial functions
and powers on the new archival authority,
while at the same time recognising the key roles of chief executives of
departments and
agencies in ensuring compliance with standards and
guidelines issued by the authority.
The discharge of its recommended
responsibilities, particularly in relation to the making of standards
and guidelines, would involve
a very significant policy making role. In
conjunction with this role, the authority would, as now with the
Australian Archives,
have major service provision responsibilities,
particularly in relation to providing modern, accurate and streamlined
stakeholders to the enduring records of the Commonwealth.
This chapter will examine the structure which the authority requires in
order to effectively fulfil such a role.
Nature of organisation
During the past decade public sector
reformers have favoured the adoption of the 'functional' model for
organisations. This model
involves separation of policy making from
operational functions. The functional model is seen as a means of
improving independent
policy advice to government as well as
facilitating greater contestability in the arena of public service.
The contrasting 'sectoral' model involves vertical integration of
advisory, regulatory and service delivery functions within the
organisation. The advantages of the sectoral model are seen to include
better policy coordination, promotion of informal sharing
information, and reduction of transaction costs.
While noting that the functional model has been recommended for the New Zealand National Archives,
the Commission does not favour the creation of separate policy and
service providing organisations for Commonwealth archival functions.
this connection the Commission notes that the functional model has been
found to be unsuitable when policy advisers need detailed
and specific
knowledge about operational matters in order to tender sound advice,
and when successful policy outcomes depend on
a high degree of
coordination and consultation between those responsible for policy
formulation and those responsible for its implementation.
In the case of the recommended archival
authority, the Commission believes that the intimate interrelationship
between records
management and archival policy on the one hand, and
service delivery on the other, would be such as to render the
functional model
inefficient and inappropriate. In particular,
duplication of much high level technical expertise essential to both
areas of responsibility
would be unavoidable and wasteful. The
Commission's conclusion in this regard should not be taken as implying
that the service
provision function of the archival authority should
not be open to competition and thus contestable.
Draft recommendation 5.1.
The policy making and service delivery functions of the archival authority should be vested in a single organisation.
Name of the authority
The Commission believes that the name
given to the proposed authority should reflect both its professional
expertise and its national
character. Accordingly, it prefers the name
'National Archives of Australia'. Throughout the remainder of this
paper the Commission
refers to the proposed archival authority as the
National Archives of Australia or the NAA.
Draft recommendation 5.2.
The name of the archival authority
should reflect both its professional expertise and its national
character. The name 'National
Archives of Australia' is accordingly
recommended.
Need for a statutory corporation
The Australian Archives is established by statute as an unincorporated body within a Department of State.
As such it does not have any independence from the Department and the
Director-General is subject under s 7(3) to directions from
Minister. There was strong support in the submissions for establishing
the NAA as an independent statutory authority. The support
however, unanimous. A number of submissions preferred the NAA to remain
in a closer relationship with the Executive due
to the fact that many
records of the executive branch of government are regulated by, or are
in the custody of, Australian Archives.
The Commission supports a substantially
independent NAA separate from the executive government. While
Australian Archives has been
able to build its own identity, the
strengthened and enlarged role envisaged by the Commission's
recommendations require for their
accomplishment that the NAA have an
independent status consistent with the leadership and authority that it
will be expected to
provide. Such separate standing and authority are
also seen as essential to enable the NAA to command the respect and
the significant stakeholder communities outside government
who would thereby gain a greater sense of 'ownership' of the national
archival function.
In addition, the NAA requires to have
independence and standing to react quickly and decisively, ensuring a
high degree of flexibility
and innovation to move proactively in the
face of fast changing records management developments.
Given the need for standards and
guidelines to be accorded high standing and quick and effective
implementation, the establishment
of the NAA as an independent
statutory authority would be likely to enable it to command
significantly higher levels of compliance
than if it were to remain
within an executive department.
An independent statutory authority is
also seen as attracting staff members and expert consultants at the
leading edge of disciplines
associated with its functions.
Another advantage would be its ability
to deal on a more appropriate basis with the Parliament and the Courts
than would an unincorporated
body within a Department of State. This is
especially important in the light of the discussion and recommendations
in Chapter 14
relating to the records of the Parliament and the Courts.
The conferment of separate corporate
personality would also enable the NAA to own and manage its own assets
and have responsibility
for managing its own finances in conformity
with the code established for such bodies under the
Commonwealth Authorities and Companies Act 1997
This would enable the NAA to have greater financial flexibility
consistent with its independence while subjecting it to a common
of financial accountability.
Draft recommendation 5.3.
The NAA should be established as an
independent statutory authority having its own legal personality and
capacity to own its own
assets and manage its own finances.
Relationship with the Parliament, the Courts and the Executive
Parliament and the Courts
Archives Act
is carefully structured
to ensure that the constitutional independence of the Parliament and
the Courts from the Executive is respected.
This was especially
necessary having regard to the fact that Australian Archives is, under
the current legislation, a part of an
executive Department of State.
For the reasons discussed in Chapter 14,
the Commission has concluded that significant advantages in terms of
national uniformity
and regulatory simplicity would be achieved if the
standard setting powers of the NAA were to extend appropriately to the
of all three arms of government, and if the accessibility
regime were extended appropriately to the records of the Parliament and
the Courts.
At the same time, the Commission has
recognised the need, in terms of the constitutional doctrine of the
separation of powers,
to ensure that the Parliament and the Courts
should have ultimate control over the records of proceedings of the
Parliament and
the Courts, as distinct from records of an ancillary
administrative character.
In the Commission's view, the
application to records of the Parliament and the Courts of standards
promulgated by the NAA, and
the inclusion of Parliamentary and Court
records within the access regimes, can best be achieved in a manner
that is consistent
with the separation of powers by the establishment
of the NAA as an independent body that has legal personality entirely
from the executive and subject to direction by the executive
only in relation to particular matters of policy that it should take
into account in promulgating standards and guidelines.
The Executive
The relationship between an incorporated
statutory authority and the executive government is, to a large extent,
governed by the
degree to which the relevant Minister is empowered to
give directions to the authority.
The Commission notes that the NAA would come within the purview of the
Commonwealth Authorities and Companies Act
1997 and would therefore be subject under
of that Act to
ministerial directions on matters of general policy applying generally
across the Commonwealth government sector.
Having regard in particular to the
regulatory role proposed to be given to the NAA to promulgate a wide
range of standards and
guidelines that would impact significantly on
the day to day recordkeeping activities of all departments and
agencies, the Commission
favours the inclusion in the constituting
statute of the NAA of a limited power of ministerial direction in
relation to policy
matters concerning particular standards and
guidelines.
In the Commission's view, the Minister
should have power to direct the NAA, when formulating a standard or
guideline relating to
a particular matter, to take into account any
government policies in relation to that matter that the Minister may
identify and
direct to be taken into account.
The Commission considers that, in other
respects, the NAA should, consistent with the independence envisaged
for it, be free from
the constraints of ministerial direction.
Draft recommendation 5.4.
The responsible Minister should be
empowered, in relation to any matter in respect of which the NAA may
issue a standard or guidelines,
to give directions regarding matters of
government policy to which the NAA shall have regard in formulating
that standard or those
guidelines.
The National Archives of Australia Council
If, as recommended, the NAA were to be
established as a statutory authority with separate legal personality,
the choice would need
to be made between vesting the powers of the NAA
in a council, board or other group, or in a single high level official
as a corporation
While the Australian Archives is
presently unincorporated, power is concentrated in the office of the
Director-General who, under
Archives Act
, is vested with
all the powers of Australian Archives.
By contrast, the Advisory Council,
established as a separate unincorporated body under
function of providing advice to the Minister and the Director-General.
Its advice and recommendations are not binding
on either the Minister
or the Director-General.
In the light of the greatly enhanced
powers proposed by the Commission for the NAA, including the power to
issue binding standards
and guidelines, and the need for external
stakeholders to have 'ownership' of the NAA as a national cultural
institution, the Commission
favours the vesting of the powers of the
NAA in a governing council. Relevant precedents are to be found in the
Council of the
National Library of Australia and the Council of the
National Gallery. The Commission envisages that the membership of the
would be part-time with the Council meeting approximately
The proposed governing Council should
not, however, be confused with the existing Advisory Council. The
existing Advisory Council
has no management or deliberative role
comparable with that of a governing council. The Commission envisages
that the various functions
of the Advisory Council would be subsumed
into those proposed for the new governing NAA Council or those of the
proposed advisory
groups established by the NAA Council.
Draft recommendation 5.5.
The powers of the NAA should be
vested in a governing council appointed by the Governor-General. The
membership of the Council should
be part-time and the Council should
meet approximately monthly.
A chief executive officer
Every major governmental organisation
requires a full-time chief executive officer to take on the
responsibility of day to day
management. This would be no less the case
with the NAA. A chief executive officer would be needed both to ensure
that the day
to day business of the NAA is transacted and to provide
expert technical and policy advice to the Council in the discharge of
key functions relating to standards setting and management of the
Principally because of the chief
executive officer's key role in the development of organisational
policy and direction, the Commission
believes that the CEO (who could
be styled appropriately as the National Archivist) should also be a
member of the Council. The
Commission notes that a number of similar
statutory authorities have the chief executive officer as a member of
the Board or Council.
The Commission has not
received any submissions on whether the National Archivist should be
appointed by the Council or by the
government (via the Governor-General
in Council). Bearing in mind the need for the Council to act very
substantially through its
CEO, the Commission's current thinking
favours appointment of the National Archivist by the Council. Further
views are invited.
Draft recommendation 5.6.
The legislation should provide for
the appointment of a chief executive officer of the NAA whose office
should be styled as 'National
Archivist'. The National Archivist should
member of the Council with full participation and voting rights.
Issue for further consideration.
The Commission invites
further views on whether the National Archivist should be appointed by
the Council (the Commission's current
preference) or by the
Governor-General in Council on the recommendation of the government.
Staff of the National Archives of Australia
Currently the staff of Australian
Archives are employed under the Public Service Act 1922. While the
Commission has not received
any submissions suggesting that this should
not continue to be the case in the proposed NAA, it recognises that
this would be an
important issue for government. In particular, the
Commission recognises the force of the view that significant
efficiencies and
economic gains can be achieved in the area of public
sector staffing by placing responsibility squarely in the hands of the
authorities.
Issue for further consideration.
The Commission invites
further views on whether staff of the NAA should be employed directly
by the NAA or under the public service
legislation.
Powers of Council in relation to the National Archivist
The relationship between the Council and
the National Archivist needs to be made clear by the legislature. As
the governing body
of the NAA, the Council would need to have the power
to give binding directions to the National Archivist on any matter
within its functions and powers. As a member of the Council, the
National Archivist would have the ability to influence the decisions
Council and, in practice, directions from Council would often have been
suggested by the National Archivist. However, it would
need to be made
clear that, where the National Archivist and the Council disagreed, the
National Archivist would be bound to follow
the lawful directions of
Council. The only exception to this should, in accordance with long
standing precedents, be the powers
of the National Archivist in
relation to day to day employment matters.
Draft recommendation 5.7.
The Council should have power to
give directions to the National Archivist in relation to any matter
within its functions and powers
except day to day staffing matters.
Delegating powers of the Council
As in the case of other statutory
authorities having an extensive range of functions and powers, it is
essential that the Council,
acting on behalf of the NAA, have full
capacity to delegate all or any of its functions and powers to its
chief executive officer
or any staff member.
Draft recommendation 5.8.
The Council should have the power
to delegate all or any of its functions and powers (except the power of
delegation) to the National
Archivist or any other member of staff.
Composition of the Council
As discussed above the NAA envisaged by
the Commission would be a diverse organisation with a wide range of
stakeholders. Stakeholders
would include both organisations and
individuals with particular interests in the policies, practices and
services of the organisation.
It is important that the views and
concerns of stakeholders are appropriately factored into the policy and
other deliberations
of the NAA.
The Commission has identified
stakeholders of the NAA as including public user groups (among them
historians, genealogists, educators,
academics and students), record
subject groups (often from particular cultural communities), government
agencies, professional
archivists and records managers, information
technology professionals, and private service providers. With such a
diverse range
of stakeholders there is a need for the deliberative and
consultative processes of the NAA to be appropriately structured to
account of their advice and aspirations.
At the highest level is the membership
of the proposed Council. In the Commission's view it is essential that
stakeholders' technical
and policy expertise in particular be brought
to bear on the deliberative processes of the Council. This can most
effectively be
achieved by structuring the qualifications and
membership of the Council in such a way as to ensure appropriate
stakeholder inputs
of that kind.
Some archival authorities at the State
level have included prescriptive provisions identifying particular
kinds of stakeholders
to be represented on their Councils. For its part
the Commission is reluctant to recommend the prescription of very
specific qualifications
for each member. The Commission is also
concerned that prescriptive provisions can lead to undesirable
exclusions and some inflexibility.
This is of particular importance
having regard to the wide variety of stakeholders in the area of
records management and archiving.
The Commission considers that a
governing Council for the NAA should consist of not less than 8
members, nor more than 12. This
number would provide a workable base
for discussion and decision making, while permitting a number of views
to be represented.
A quorum of 5 would seem appropriate for this
purpose. It has already been recommended that the National Archivist be
an ex officio
member of the Council.
This would leave at least 7 other positions on the Council to be filled.
While considering that, as a general
rule, very specific qualifications of individual Council members should
not be prescribed,
the Commission believes that there are two
particular stakeholders which should have guaranteed representation on
the Council.
These are the two Houses of the Federal Parliament. The
Commission believes that the inclusion of two members of the Parliament
would provide both an accountability counter balance for the extensive
independence proposed for the NAA and an opportunity for
benefit in its deliberations from the important perspectives of
national legislators.
As the Council would have ultimate
responsibility for all actions of the NAA and have the power to
determine the strategic direction
and policies of the NAA, it would
need a substantial majority of members with knowledge and experience in
relation to records management
and archival functions. The remaining
members of the Council should, therefore, be required to have proven
knowledge or experience
in relation to functions of the NAA. It should
be a matter for the government to ensure at any time that the
membership adequately
represents an appropriately wide range of
stakeholder expertise and opinion.
Draft recommendation 5.9.
The Council of the NAA should consist of not less than 8 members nor more than 12 members including
the Director of the NAA (ex officio)
a member of the Senate and a member of the House of
Representatives nominated by the Senate and House of Representatives
respectively
other persons, with proven knowledge and experience in relation to
records management or archival functions, appointed by the
Governor-General.
Draft recommendation 5.10.
The legislation should include a
general direction that membership of the Council should be chosen so as
to ensure that the Council
has the benefit of wide ranging stakeholder
opinion and expertise.
Consultation with stakeholders
A number of submissions commented on the
value of the present advisory and consultative role performed by the
Advisory Council
constituted under the
Archives Act
Given the expanded role envisaged for
the proposed NAA, and in particular its wide powers in relation to an
extensive range of
matters, the Commission considers that the
legislation should ensure that stakeholder consultation is not only
continued, but is
broadened and enhanced.
Such consultation is seen to be of
special importance in the light of the current climate of rapid
technological change and the
need to make timely and well informed
decisions that lead, rather than react to, change.
The Commission proposes, therefore, that
the legislation provide specifically for the appointment by the
Council, and the effective
servicing by the NAA, of advisory committees
covering key areas of technology, major policy issues, and service
needs and provision.
Additionally, the Commission would
envisage that the Council be charged by the legislation with convening
when and where appropriate
consultative forums to learn of the needs of
client groups whose special requirements or concerns warrant discrete
consideration
in an appropriate setting. The Commission has in mind in
this regard the convening of forums to deal, as necessary, with the
of indigenous communities in relation to preservation and
access to records of special cultural interest and sensitivity to those
communities.
Draft recommendation 5.11.
The Council should be required to
establish and service such advisory groups as are necessary to ensure
that it receives timely
and well informed advice on key technological,
policy and service needs from major stakeholders.
Draft recommendation 5.12.
The Council should be required to
conduct consultative forums of client groups whose special requirements
or concerns warrant discrete
consideration.
Jonathan Boston 'Institutional Design' in Jonathan Boston, John
Martin, June Ballot and Pat Walsh Public Management: The New Zealand
Model Oxford University Press Auckland 1996, 76. A recent example of
the application of a functional model at the Commonwealth
level would
be the creation of Centrelink as a separate service providing body with
the Department of Social Security becoming
a small policy making
organisation.
This was originally recommended in McDermott Miller Ltd National
Archives: an independent review Report to the Department of Internal
Affairs and the Treasury, New Zealand 1994. The result of the
recommendations of this report would have been the placement of policy
functions within a branch of the Department and the creation of an
independent service providing entity to be known as the National
Archives. For various reasons this report has not been fully
implemented. An overview of the changes being made to the National
Archives of New Zealand can be found in Rachel Lilburn 'The
Restructuring of the National Archives of New Zealand: An Ideological
Experiment?' (1996) 13 Government Information Quarterly 285.
Baden Ewart and Jonathan Boston 'The Separation of Policy Advice
from Operations' (1993) 52 Australian Journal of Public Administration
Archives Act
Australian Archives is currently a part of the
Department of Communication and the Arts but has been a part of a
number of different
departments.
Commonwealth Authorities and Companies Act 1997
is expected to
commence operation on 1 July 1998. These recommendations have been
written with the expectation that this Act will
be in operation at the
time of establishing the NAA.
See para 5.41–45 below on the establishment of advisory groups.
For example see the
National Library Act 1960
; National Gallery Act
Australian Broadcasting Corporation Act 1983
; Federal Airports
Corporation Act 1986; and the Civil Aviation Safety Authority
established by the
Civil Aviation Act 1988
See draft recommendation 5.6 above.
6. Functions and powers of the National Archives of Australia
Introduction
Functions of the National Archives of Australia
Powers of the National Archives of Australia
Powers of a body corporate
Operational powers of the National Archives of Australia
Introduction
The establishment of the proposed NAA as an incorporated statutory authority would necessitate the enumeration in the legislation
of the functions of the NAA and the powers with which it would need to be invested to enable it to discharge those functions.
Functions of the National Archives of Australia
The functions of the NAA would need to be specified with sufficient width to ensure that the earlier stated objectives of the legislation
could be met but, at the same time, with sufficient specificity to ensure that the NAA and those with whom it deals have a clear
sense of its intended role.
Taking as its starting point the objectives suggested in Chapter 3, and guided by the functions of Australian Archives as specified
Archives Act
, the Commission considers that the legislation should confer on the NAA the following ten functional responsibilities.
1. To ensure that Commonwealth departments and agencies create and maintain such records in relation to the discharge of their functions
as are necessary
for the efficient and accountable management of those functions
to record relevant rights, entitlements and obligations of persons under Commonwealth law
to document the history of the Commonwealth
This function would give expression to the Commission's recommendation that, in order to establish and maintain a vital and efficient
records continuum, the NAA should have overall responsibility for implementing a single whole-of-government approach to records creation
and maintenance. This role would apply to all Commonwealth records, unlike the archival functions which would, with one exception,
be confined to Commonwealth records identified as being of enduring value.
2. To ensure the identification those Commonwealth records that are of enduring value
At the heart of any archival organisation's function is the need to identify those records that are to be preserved for posterity.
In the case of the NAA, those records will be Commonwealth records that are identified as having enduring value.
3. To control the custody of the enduring records of the Commonwealth
While there are circumstances in which enduring records need not be held directly in the custody of the NAA, it is essential that
control of all such records, wherever and however held, should be subject to a single authority.
4. To ensure the preservation of the enduring records of the Commonwealth
Preservation of records of enduring value is an essential core function of an archival authority.
5. To ensure the recovery of Commonwealth records of enduring value that should be brought within Commonwealth control
The integrity of any archival organisation is dependent in part upon the organisation having the capacity to draw back under its control
records which, while properly a part of its holdings, have for one reason or another been taken outside of its control.
6. To ensure that records are made accessible to the public in accordance with the rights of access provided for in the legislation
The identification and preservation of enduring value records is of little point unless the NAA is required, as one of its key functions,
to ensure that access rights are properly afforded in accordance with legislative entitlements.
7. To encourage and facilitate the earliest possible access to records of the Commonwealth
The Commission's findings place considerable emphasis on the need for the NAA to act proactively at all times in seeking to promote
the earliest possible access to records of enduring value, irrespective of whether they have yet reached the open period. Hence the
need for this to be included in the functions of the NAA.
8. To encourage further public awareness and understanding of the benefit to the nation of enduring value records of the Commonwealth
and to facilitate the public use of such records
A knowledge and understanding of its history and culture is essential to the successful development and well-being of any society.
It is of major importance that the NAA have as one of its functions the fostering of public awareness and understanding of the benefits
of enduring value records and the facilitation of public use of those records.
9. To encourage and support activities that enhance standards of recordkeeping and archiving in Australia
As the national archival authority, the NAA should provide an appropriate level of leadership and guidance to the professional archival
and records management community in areas of expertise relevant to the discharge of its functions.
10. To accept custody of records which, while not being Commonwealth records, are, in the opinion of the Minister, of such interest
and value to the nation that their custody and preservation should be undertaken by the NAA
While the Commission believes that the custodial and archival activities of the NAA ought to be confined to Commonwealth records of
enduring value, it also recognises the need for the NAA to be able to accept custody of records of such national interest and value
that they ought to be preserved appropriately for the sake of posterity. The Commission would expect this to be a rarely used function,
but one that is appropriate for dealing with exceptional circumstances. The existing Personal Records Service of Australian Archives,
which takes into archival custody non-Commonwealth records and Commonwealth records held by former senior officials of the Commonwealth,
is an example of how this function could be exercised appropriately.
Draft recommendation 6.1.
The legislation should confer on the NAA the following functions.
To ensure that Commonwealth departments and agencies create and maintain records in relation to the discharge of their functions as
are necessary
— for the efficient and accountable management of those functions
— to record relevant rights, entitlements and obligations of persons under Commonwealth law
— to document the history of the Commonwealth.
To ensure identification of those Commonwealth records that are of enduring value.
To control the custody of the enduring records of the Commonwealth.
To ensure the preservation of the enduring records of the Commonwealth.
To ensure the recovery of Commonwealth records of enduring value that should be brought within Commonwealth control.
To ensure that records are made accessible to the public in accordance with the rights of access provided for in the legislation.
To encourage and facilitate the earliest possible access to records of the Commonwealth.
To encourage further public awareness and understanding of the benefit to the nation of enduring value records of the Commonwealth
and facilitate the public use of such records.
To encourage and support activities whose purpose is to enhance standards of recordkeeping and archiving of a kind for which the
NAA has responsibility.
To accept custody of records which, while not being Commonwealth records, are, in the opinion of the Minister, of such interest and
value to the nation that their custody and presentation should be undertaken by the NAA.
Powers of the National Archives of Australia
Powers of a body corporate
As an incorporated body the proposed NAA would need to have conferred upon it those powers that would be essential to enable a body
corporate to function fully as a separate and independent person. These include the power to
have and use a seal for the execution of documents in its corporate name
enter into contracts
sue and be sued in its corporate name
acquire, hold and dispose of real and personal property
erect buildings and structures and carry out work
take on leases of land or buildings and to grant leases and sub-leases of land or building
purchase or take on hire, deposit or loan, and dispose of or otherwise deal with, furnishings, equipment or other goods
appoint agents and attorneys and act as a general agent for other persons
exercise its powers alone or jointly with another person or persons.
Draft recommendation 6.2.
The legislation should confer on the NAA the powers enumerated above to ensure that it is able to function fully as a separate and
independent person.
Operational powers of the National Archives of Australia
In addition, the NAA would, in relation to the discharge of its functions, need to be empowered, in common with like statutory authorities,
to do all things that are necessary or convenient to be done for or in connection with the performance of its functions.
Importantly, the legislation should, as in the current
Archives Act
, expressly include within such an encompassing provision specific reference to particular powers that are essential to the discharge
of the NAA's functions. In the Commission's view it would be appropriate to include powers that correspond to the powers set out
in paragraphs (a) to (m) of
Archives Act
appropriately recast for alignment with the functions of the NAA. These are powers with regard to
establishing and controlling repositories
surveying, appraising, accessioning, arranging and describing, and indexing records
making arrangements for Commonwealth acquisition of copyright in records
recording matters relating to the structure of Commonwealth institutions
copying records but not so as to infringe copyright
arranging for publication of records but not so as to infringe copyright
publishing indexes of, and other guides to, records
authorising the disposal and destruction of records
assisting in the training of persons responsible for keeping Commonwealth records or for work in connection with Commonwealth records
obtaining and maintaining equipment for retrieving information from records
providing information and facilities for persons accessing records.
Specific reference would also need to be made to important additional powers central to the implementation of key recommendations
of the Commission. These would include powers with regard to
promulgating standards and issuing guidelines in relation to the creation, management, appraisal, sentencing, destruction, custody,
preservation and accessibility of records
entering into premises to monitor compliance with standards and guidelines relating to appraisal, sentencing, destruction, custody
and preservation of records
recovery of records
payment of compensation for the acquisition of property rights, including copyright, in records
entering into agreements and arrangements in relation to the custody of records
obtaining information concerning records
exhibiting and otherwise encouraging and fostering public interest in records
granting of awards and scholarships for the technical and professional advancement of learning related to the functions of the NAA
accepting custody of, preserving and providing access to records (not being Commonwealth records of enduring value) that are, in
the opinion of the Minister, of special interest and value to the nation
imposing and collecting charges in relation to the provision of services.
Draft recommendation 6.3.
The legislation should confer on the NAA
a general power to do all things that are necessary or convenient to be done for or in connection with the performance of its functions
specific powers corresponding to those in
Archives Act
additional specific powers required to undertake its functions including
— promulgating standards and issuing guidelines in relation to the creation, management, appraisal, sentencing, destruction,
custody, preservation and accessibility of records
— entering into premises to monitor compliance with standards and guidelines relating to appraisal, sentencing, destruction,
custody and preservation of records
— recovery of records
— payment of compensation for the acquisition of property rights, including copyright, in records
— entering into agreements and arrangements in relation to the custody of records
— obtaining information concerning records
— exhibiting and otherwise encouraging and fostering public interest in records
— granting of awards and scholarships for the technical and professional advancement of learning related to the functions
— accepting custody of, preserving and providing access to records (not being Commonwealth records of enduring value) that
are, in the opinion of the Minister, of special interest and value to the nation
— imposing and collecting charges in relation to the provision of services.
See below at function number 10.
See para 11.13 for further discussion on Australian Archives' Personal Records Service.
The Commission has recommended that the NAA should be responsible for promulgating government wide standards and issuing guidelines
in relation to a number of records management and archival functions. See Chapter 9 for a general discussion of standards.
See draft recommendation 9.5.
Chapter 11 discusses the requirement of powers to recover Commonwealth records which are not in Commonwealth custody.
It may be necessary to exercise this power in relation to the recovery of records: see Chapter 11.
The Commission has recognised the need for flexible custodial arrangements in the legislation, and has accordingly recommended that
the NAA have the power to approve or require alternatives to custody by the NAA: see Chapter 12.
This is an essential power which supports the function of making records accessible to the public: see para 16.13–16 for further
discussion.
See draft recommendation 22.4.
The Commission has recommended that a scholarship be awarded to assist Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander persons to train as archivists:
see draft recommendation 23.10.
This power supports the function of accepting custody of records which are not Commonwealth records: see para 6.3 above.
See Chapter 7 on financing the NAA.
7. Financing the National Archives of Australia
Introduction
The need for a study of Commonwealth recordkeeping
The present funding structure of Australian Archives
Australian Archives' power to charge
Making the present charging regime more flexible
What services should attract a charge?
Charging the public to use Commonwealth records
Charging for public access applications
Charging Commonwealth agencies
Introduction
The Commission has recommended that the NAA should be an independent statutory corporation. The Commission is of the firm view that
in undertaking its core functions of policy making and standard setting the NAA would continue to be budget funded. No exact figures
are available, but the Commission, after consulting with Australian Archives, is proceeding on the assumption that around 20% of
Australian Archives' present expenditure is devoted to core policy and standards functions. This proportion might rise somewhat if
the NAA assumed responsibility for issuing mandatory recordkeeping standards. The Commission sees the maintenance of these core functions
as essential to the achievement of an effective Commonwealth recordkeeping and archival system in the electronic era.
In relation to service delivery the position is more complex. At present Australian Archives provides a range of services associated
with its functions to members of the public and to Commonwealth agencies. These services are presently categorised as 'non-discretionary'
or 'discretionary'. The Archives has the power to charge for discretionary services.
For example the Archives does not charge other Commonwealth agencies for the storage of those of their records which are of enduring
value, but it does charge for the storage of records which can be disposed of at an age of less than 30 years. Similarly members
of the public may inspect records in the open access period without charge, but they must pay for any photocopies of the records
which they require.
Australian Archives is at present reviewing its charging regime in the context of the general application of the contestability principle
to Commonwealth government services. The findings of this review are likely to be available to the Commission prior to settling its
final report on the Act. The Commission's terms of reference do not extend to a detailed financial analysis of the Archives, but
the Commission must nevertheless have regard to the financial implications of its recommendations and to how, at a time of stringency
in budget allocations, the NAA might enhance its capacity to make a progressively greater contribution to the funding of its service
delivery and any new initiatives. This chapter gives a brief summary of the present financial outlays and revenues of the Archives
and considers areas in which revenue might be increased.
The need for a study of Commonwealth recordkeeping
The Commission has not found any estimate of the total annual cost of records management to Commonwealth agencies, although quite
obviously it is far greater than the cost of operating Australian Archives. It is characteristic of the
laissez faire
approach to Commonwealth recordkeeping noted elsewhere in this paper
that this task has never been attempted and that in consequence there is nothing apart from anecdotal evidence to indicate whether
the Commonwealth is receiving good value for the very substantial resources this function clearly absorbs. The present sample study
of recordkeeping being undertaken by the Auditor-General should be followed by a major investigation of how the Commonwealth can
achieve a high quality integrated recordkeeping system which will satisfactorily meet the needs of the coming century.
Draft recommendation 7.1
. As a matter of priority the Commonwealth should undertake a high level study to identify how its recordkeeping requirements can
be met in a more efficient, effective and integrated manner.
The present funding structure of Australian Archives
In the 1996–97 financial year Australian Archives expended $35 507 073. $34 605 140 of this sum was funded from the Commonwealth
budget appropriation and the remaining $901 933 represented that portion of the Archives' total revenue of $2 143 737 which the Archives
was permitted to retain under s 35 of the
Audit Act 1901
. $1 469 163 of the total revenue earned in 1996–97 came from storage charges, which applied predominantly to records due for
disposal at an age of less than 30 years. The Archives also received $116 271 from general photocopying charges and $131 475 from
charges for supplying copies of World War One Army service dossiers. Other sources of revenue included the sale of publications,
the provision of training courses, exhibition fees, royalties, employee subsidies and asset sales.
Australian Archives' expenditure on salaries and administrative costs was as follows
Government services program
Records accessibility program
Facilities and corporate program
Property operating expenses
$10 574 322
Corporate and executive
Australian Archives' power to charge
As enacted in 1983 the Act made only limited provision for the imposition of charges by the Archives. Section 71 provided that regulations
might be made for charges in respect of
the provision of copies or transcripts of records
the keeping of records that do not form part of the archival resources of the Commonwealth.
Regulations were subsequently made for photocopying charges but not for searches. In 1990 s 69A was added to the Act to permit the
Director-General of Australian Archives to determine charges for the provision of discretionary services to Commonwealth institutions,
while s 71 was amended to permit regulations to be made for charges for discretionary services provided to persons other than Commonwealth
institutions. Regulations currently specify charges for a range of discretionary services, including
provision of copies
sentencing and destruction of records
transport, storage and retrieval of records
training courses.
Making the present charging regime more flexible
The distinction between 'discretionary' and 'non-discretionary' services on which the 1990 amendments are based attempts to identify
the core elements of a national archival service, in particular the identification, protection and accessing of records of enduring
value, in order to assert the principle that they should be provided free of charge in the national interest. However changing administrative
and technological circumstances may make it appropriate to review the boundary between 'discretionary' and 'non-discretionary' services
over time. In the Commission's view it would be more flexible for the NAA to have a general power to levy charges for services which
it provides, or which are provided on its behalf by contractors, subject to appropriate review by way of Parliamentary oversight.
In the Commission's view it is not necessary to identify in the legislation specific services for which charges may or may not be
The charging regime for archival services would, however, affect the entire Commonwealth archival system. The NAA would have a key
role to play in coordinating this system, but there would also be other important stakeholders. The determination of the scope and
level of charges should be subject to an accountable process which could consider the various interests involved and whether the
charges proposed would unreasonably inhibit the achievement of the principles on which the legislation was based. The
Legislative Instruments Bill 1996
, which is expected to be enacted early in 1998, would provide an appropriate regime for promulgating and reviewing charges under
the archives legislation. First there would be a requirement to consult with interested bodies prior to the making of the legislative
instrument and its incorporation into a Federal Register of Legislative Instruments available to the public. The legislative instrument
would then be laid before Parliament. This would provide an accountable process which would enable the NAA to have primary responsibility
for establishing charges, but only after consultation with relevant groups and subject to Parliamentary scrutiny.
In addition to the power to determine charges there should be a specific recognition of the NAA's power to waive any of the set charges.
This would be particularly relevant to charges for services to the public. A number of circumstances might arise in which it would
be inappropriate to apply charges. These circumstances should be incorporated into the legislative instrument establishing the charges.
Some circumstances might attract an automatic waiver whilst in other circumstances the discretion to waive should remain with the
In recommending that the NAA have a general power to levy charges the Commission is aware of the possibility, particularly in times
of economic stringency, that tensions might arise between the need to raise revenue and the achievement of the legislation's objectives.
One example would be the attempted imposition of charges so substantial that they effectively denied reasonable public access to
records. But this possibility would not, in the Commissions' view, be justification for denying the NAA such a general power. The
power of disallowance would, the Commission believes, be a sufficient safeguard. Added to that the legislation could contain an injunction
that, in fixing charges, the NAA must ensure that the charges will not operate in a manner inconsistent with the achievement of the
NAA's objectives.
Draft recommendation 7.2.
The NAA should have the power to determine which services should attract charges and the amount or rate of those charges. Charges
for services should be required to be imposed by legislative instrument and accordingly be subject to Parliamentary scrutiny. The
present distinction between 'discretionary' and 'non-discretionary' services should be removed.
Draft recommendation 7.3.
The NAA should have power to waive charges in appropriate circumstances. These circumstances should be incorporated into the legislative
instrument establishing the charges.
Draft recommendation 7.4.
The legislation should contain an injunction that the NAA must ensure that charges do not operate in a manner inconsistent with the
attainment of the principal objectives of the legislation which are set out in Chapter 3.
What services should attract a charge?
Charging policies in other government archival jurisdictions in Australia and overseas vary considerably in detail, but certain broad
strands of common practice are evident. There appears to be a general assumption that it is appropriate for governments to fund the
basic processes of preserving records of enduring value and the making of them available for public inspection once they reach a
certain age. The process of making records available is seen to include providing public facilities in which the records may be studied
and at least basic information and guidance services to assist people to find records relevant to their interests. Archives generally
charge the public for copies of records, publications and the provision of research and reference services beyond the basic standard.
Administrative relationships between archival authorities and other government agencies in various jurisdictions take many forms,
but it is common for the NAA to charge agencies for the storage of records which are not of enduring value, for the provision of
appraisal and disposal services and for training and professional advice. Alternatively agencies are required to undertake these
functions themselves or to contract them out.
As noted above, Australian Archives is currently reviewing the scope and scale of its charges. At this stage the Commission makes
only general recommendations on possible areas in which charges might be applied. It will make more specific recommendations in its
final report.
Charging the public to use Commonwealth records
The records accessibility program of Australian Archives cost some $5 000 000 in salary and administrative expenditure in 1996–97.
Against this the program earned some $248 000 in revenue from supplying copies of records and smaller amounts of money from the sale
of publications and from other sources. To achieve full cost recovery in the service element of the records accessibility program
would require the present revenue to be increased at least tenfold. Such an increase would make the use of Commonwealth records prohibitively
expensive for most of the present clients of Australian Archives and it would thus be contrary to the basic objectives of the legislation.
In both submissions and consultations private clients of the Archives argued strongly against the imposition of charges on the grounds
that it would seriously restrict access to records, especially as many clients are students or retired people with low incomes.
The Commission accepts that the imposition of substantial charges for public use of the Archives would not only be contrary to the
objectives of the legislation but would probably also be futile, since the decrease in client numbers would tend to cancel out the
effect of the charges. However there may be areas in which clients might reasonably make a contribution towards the cost of the services
which they utilise. The basic public service provision statistics for Australian Archives in 1996–97 were as follows
Reference inquiries
Visits to reading rooms
New visitors to reading rooms
Record items consulted
Reference inquiries are dealt with by Australian Archives staff free of charge up to a normal maximum of one hour per request. Inquirers
requiring more extensive assistance involving research are referred to private agents who work on a fee for service basis. Many of
the reference inquiries simply concerned the services the Archives provides and the records which it holds. Given the complexities
of Commonwealth records and the limitations of indexes and finding aids in many areas the provision of a basic reference service
is an essential element in making records accessible. The Commission does not recommend that charges be applied to it.
There is currently no charge for members of the public to visit the reading rooms of Australian Archives or to access records there.
It would be possible to apply two separate charges to this process. Firstly there might be a charge for entry to the reading room
of, for example, $5 per day or $100 per year. If all the 15 335 people who visited the reading rooms in 1996–97 paid $5 per
visit revenue of some $75 000 would be generated. However in reality the revenue would almost certainly be significantly lower because
of annual and student/pensioner concession rates and the loss of clients who were not prepared to pay the fee.
In addition to, or as an alternative to, an entry fee, a charge might be levied for the use of each record item. A charge of $2 per
item would earn revenue of some $100 000 on 1996–97 figures, although this would almost certainly be reduced by a decline in
client use. Such a charge would bear particularly heavily on research students who require to access large numbers of records.
The Commission considers that if charges were to be introduced for members of the public they could be applied most equitably by
a right of entry charge offered at either a daily or an annual rate. The Commission does not endorse the introduction of a general
charge for the issue of individual record items because it would be likely to discourage the use of Commonwealth records. However
consideration might be given to charges for very large research projects.
Another option would be to restrict charges to, or apply a more substantial charging regime to, clients who were undertaking projects
for which they would gain financial reward. Most clients are students or amateur researchers who would make little or no profit from
any work which they might publish. However clients undertaking research in connection with major legal actions or with fully commercial
publications or film productions might reasonably make a larger contribution to the cost of servicing them.
The Commission does not endorse the option of charging overseas users of Australian Archives at higher rates, or for a wider range
of services, than Australian citizens. This would not only invite retaliation against Australian researchers who make use of archives
overseas, but would probably be open to various methods of evasion.
Draft recommendation 7.5.
Charges should not be applied to the provision of basic reference services to members of the public. These include the provision
information about the NAA's services
advice to clients about how they might most effectively seek information on the subject in which they are interested (subject to
a specified time limit)
access to databases, guides and finding aids.
Draft recommendation 7.6.
Consideration should be given to introducing a charge for entry to the reading rooms of the NAA. The charge should not be so high
that it effectively inhibits members of the public from using archival records.
Draft recommendation 7.7.
There should not be a general charge for accessing records at the NAA. However charges might be applied to very large research projects.
Draft recommendation 7.8.
Clients undertaking research essentially for financial gain should pay charges at full cost recovery rates.
Draft recommendation 7.9.
Any charging regime for the NAA should not distinguish between Australian and overseas residents.
Charging for public access applications
Many of the records of interest to clients of Australian Archives are already available because their access status has been assessed
either as part of a general assessment program or in response to a specific application by a previous client. However if the access
status of a record has not been assessed the client is required to make specific application for it. In 1996–97 17 389 individual
record items were subject to access applications. Australian Archives estimates that access applications average about five record
items each, so that this figure represents around 3 000 individual applications. No charges have ever been levied under the
Archives Act
for the processing of access applications, although the Administrative Appeals Tribunal levies a filing fee of $500 to review applications.
In contrast, applications for access to records under the FOI Act are subject to a $30 application fee, plus a search and retrieval
fee of $15 per hour and a decision making fee of $20 per hour. FOI fees may be waived or restricted in some circumstances, but they
can nevertheless constitute a barrier to the use of the legislation, particularly for research requiring access to a significant
number of records.
Australian Archives has opposed the application of fees to access applications under the
Archives Act
, partly because the Act is seen as giving the Commonwealth a responsibility to release records proactively once they reach the age
of 30 years and partly because charges would be likely to impose a large burden on researchers who need to access hundred or even
thousands of individual record items. On the basis of the 1996–97 figures a $30 application fee might generate revenue of $90
000. In reality this would almost certainly be reduced substantially because clients would be discouraged from seeking access to
records not already available.
The administrative cost of assessing the suitability of records for public release varies widely. Records which are not security
classified and do not relate to the personal affairs of individual people can generally be assessed quickly. At the other end of
the scale some security records and personal case files may require intensive scrutiny and consultation to identify sensitive material.
The application of decision making charges to such records would probably reduce their usage rather than generate significant revenue.
It would also be inequitable for the first person to seek access to a record to be subject to an access charge, whereas subsequent
users of the record could do so without charge.
Draft recommendation 7.10.
The NAA should investigate the effect of introducing a charge for access applications as part of a general study of how members of
the public might make some contribution towards the cost of providing the services which they use. Any such charge should be applied
equitably to all users.
Charging Commonwealth agencies
The government services program of Australian Archives cost some $8 000 000 in salary and administrative expenditure in 1996–97.
In addition the Archives spent more than $10 000 000 in property operating costs, a large proportion of which would have been devoted
to services to government and the storage of records. Against this the program earned some $1 500 000, predominantly from records
storage charges.
Services provided by Australian Archives to other Commonwealth agencies fall broadly into two categories. The first category covers
services which assist the agencies' current administrative functions. In the past this included the storage and retrieval of records
not of enduring value, detailed involvement in the preparation of records disposal authorities, the sentencing of individual records
and a range of training and advisory activities. Responsibility for many of these services has now passed to the agencies concerned
or to contractors working on their behalf. The second category consists of services which are considered essential to the preservation
of records of enduring value. The core of these services is the management of an appraisal and disposal regime sufficient to identify
records of enduring value and to provide storage and preservation facilities to care for those records. The provision of reference
and access services to members of the public is in a sense also a service to agencies, since if there was no archival authority the
agencies would have to provide these services themselves, as they do for FOI applicants. Some of the services in the second category
may be undertaken by contractors in the future, but the delivery of these services will remain the direct responsibility of the NAA
and contractors will be responsible to the authority rather than to the agency which created the records.
As noted in paragraph 7.5 the great bulk of Australian Archives' current revenue comes from the storage of records which are not
of enduring value. At present charges are levied only on records due for disposal at an age of less than 30 years and revenue from
them will gradually diminish as they are disposed of and not replaced by new transfers from agencies. If storage charges were extended
to records which are not of enduring value, but which must be retained for more than 30 years, the NAA would gain a significant new
source of revenue. However this revenue would need to be committed to the purpose for which it was raised, rather than being available
to support other aspects of the NAA's operations.
The Commission considers that all services for records which are not of enduring value should be based on cost recovery and contestability
principles. This does not mean that the NAA should necessarily withdraw from the provision of such services, but rather that they
should be approached on a fully commercial basis.
The Commission also believes that services directly related to ensuring the identification and preservation of records of enduring
value should continue, as currently with the Australian Archives, to be budget funded directly to the NAA. These would include
the issue of mandatory standards for records
the issue of guidelines supporting the standards
authorising and monitoring the disposal of records to an extent sufficient to ensure the preservation of records of enduring value
the provision of storage and preservation facilities for records of enduring value.
To require the agencies which created records of enduring value to continue to support them in their archival phase would merely
add administrative complexity to the present system. It might also lead to a fragmentation of holdings of such records.
Draft recommendation 7.11.
All services for records which are not of enduring value should be managed on cost recovery and contestability principles.
Draft recommendation 7.12.
Services directly related to ensuring the identification and preservation of records of enduring value should continue to be budget
funded. However agencies accessing records of enduring value in the custody of the NAA should be responsible for the costs involved.
Draft recommendation 7.13.
In the first five years after its creation the NAA should move to a position in which it is recovering a substantial proportion of
the cost of its property operating expenses and of its Government Services Program from charges to the Commonwealth agencies which
make use of those services.
Non discretionary services are those which the Act requires the Archives to perform or which are essential to the delivery of services
(for example, the provision of information and research facilities) which the Archives is required to perform.
See Chapters 2 and 9.
Government services include the preparation of standards, training, and the provision of services such as appraisal, storage, preservation
and the recording of information about records.
Records accessibility includes the provision of access and information services to both government and the public and the preparation
of exhibitions and publications.
Archives Regulation 11(6) provides for charges under the present Act to be waived in certain circumstances.
Creating, identifying and managing records of enduring value
8. What is a Commonwealth record?
Defining a record
Defining a Commonwealth record
The records of Commonwealth agencies which are corporatised or privatised
Records of 'enduring' value
Defining a record
Archives Act
defines a record as
a document (including any written or printed
material) or object (including a sound recording, coded storage device,
magnetic tape
or disc, microform, photograph, film, map, plan or model
or a painting or other pictorial or graphic work) that is, or has been,
kept by reason of any information or matter that it contains or can be
obtained from it or by reason of its connection with any
event, person,
circumstance or thing;
This definition was drafted in the 1970s
when the great majority of Commonwealth records were still in paper
format. The basic
unit of records management was then the file, a
folder within which were placed in chronological order all documents
relevant to
a particular subject, transaction or client. The definition
acknowledges that records can exist in electronic formats such as disks
or tapes but it describes them as physical objects rather than as the
gateway to a complex world of 'virtual' records.
During the past two decades technologies
for the capture, storage and transfer of records electronically have
developed rapidly.
This has compelled records managers and archivists
to define clearly what is meant by a record and to recognise the
distinctions
between the terms record, information (which is not
necessarily a record, but may be incorporated in a record) and document
is a device by which either a record or information may be
physically presented).
Current definitions of 'record' focus on
the purpose for which records are created and the framework within
which they reside.
Australian Archives defines a record as
... something created and kept as evidence of an
organisation or person's functions, activities and transactions. A
record must
possess content, structure and context to be considered to
be evidence. It must also be part of a recordkeeping system.
Standards Australia defines 'records' as
recorded information, in any form, including data in
computer systems, created or received and maintained by an organization
person in the transaction of business or the conduct of affairs and
kept as evidence of such activity.
The Archives Authority of New South Wales has suggested for possible inclusion in new legislation the definition
'record means any document or other source of
information compiled, recorded or stored in written form or on film, or
by electronic
process, or in any other manner or by any means.
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth) defines 'document' as
'any record of information, and includes:
(a) anything on which there is writing; or
(b) anything on which there are marks, figures, symbols or perforations
having a meaning for persons qualified to interpret them;
(c) anything from which sounds, images or writings can be reproduced with or without the aid of anything else; or
(d) a map, plan, drawing or photograph.'
Particularly in the light of rapidly
changing technology relating to records creation, the Commission
favours a definition that
has the following characteristics
(a) its scope must be flexible enough to take clear and effective account of current and emerging technology
(b) it should be expressed in the simplest possible way conducive to ready comprehension and practical application by all users
(c) it should be framed in a way which recognises the evidential nature of records
(d) it should make clear that the technology essential to maintaining
the record in an accessible format is part of the record
example, the software essential to the functionality of an electronic
record should come within the definition)
(e) intended exceptions to the general definition should be expressly
and unambiguously excluded from the definition (thus those
books, maps,
films, works of art, museum exhibits and models that the Commission
proposes should be excluded would be so excluded
by a clear, explicit
exception incorporated in a schedule to the legislation)
(f) in an environment of rapidly developing technology and changing
needs, a mechanism should be included both to permit expansion
definition to take account of new forms of record and to exclude
records that may, for policy reasons, need to be excepted
(this could
readily be achieved by including a power to achieve these ends by
regulation).
The Commission believes that the Standards
Australia definition, amongst those considered, seems best designed to
achieve the key
fundamental characteristics, namely those in (a) to (c)
above. A definition along these lines could be readily supplemented by
the express addition of language to incorporate characteristics (d),
(e) and (f).
Draft recommendation 8.1.
The term 'record' might be defined as follows
'record' means recorded information, in any form, including data in
computer systems, created or received or maintained by an organisation
or person in the transaction of business or the conduct of affairs and
kept as evidence of such activity and includes
(i) in the case of a record that can only be accessed by the application of technology, that technology;
(ii) any other matter or thing declared by regulations to be a record
but does not include
(i) any books, maps, works of art, museum exhibits or models of a kind specified in a schedule to the legislation
(ii) any other matter or thing declared by the regulations not to be a record.
Defining a Commonwealth record
Section 3(1)
of the present Act defines a 'Commonwealth record' as
(a) a record that is the property of the Commonwealth or of a Commonwealth institution; or
(b) a record that is deemed to be a Commonwealth
record by virtue of a regulation under sub-section (6) or by virtue of
but does not include a record that is exempt material
or is a register or guide maintained in accordance with Part VIII;
The use of a property based definition
such as that in s 3(1) is not universal in archival legislation. The
most common alternative
is an administrative provenance definition,
such as was proposed in the original drafting instructions for the
Archives Bill in
1974. The suggested formula was 'all records of any
kind made or received by any Australian [ie Commonwealth] Government
in the conduct of its affairs'. However successive drafts of the
Bill in 1974–75 moved from a provenance definition through
custodial definition ('a record that is held in official custody on
behalf of the government') to the present property definition.
One problem that can arise with a
provenance definition is that unless an appropriate exclusion is
incorporated in the legislation
it applies to records which were
created by a government agency specifically for transmission to some
other organisation or individual
outside the agency concerned. The
South Australian
State Records Act 1997
has avoided this
difficulty by defining an official record as 'a record made or received
by an agency in the conduct of its business',
but excluding from the
definition 'a record made or received by an agency for delivery or
transmission to another person or body
(other than an agency) and so
delivered or transmitted'
The current property based definition
has the advantage that, recovery aside, it has been in place for 13
years and has, by and
large, not given rise to significant difficulties
in the administration of the Act.
A major shortcoming is that it leaves a
legislative vacuum in respect of documents which are in Commonwealth
custody but where
there is some doubt as to whether the personal
property in them belongs to the Commonwealth. These particular
shortcomings can
be expected to come into focus if, as recommended, the
NAA is given power to recover Commonwealth records and the NAA's claims
to ownership of some records cannot be readily substantiated.
The advantage of a provenance definition
approach is that legislative coverage of documents in actual
Commonwealth custody is (technical
exceptions aside) complete and proof
of entitlement to recover becomes a matter of fact not a matter of both
fact and law as in
respect of the property definition.
One possible disadvantage of a
provenance definition is that recovery of a record in which the
Commonwealth does not own personal
property rights would likely involve
an acquisition of property within the meaning of s 51(xxxi) of the
Constitution
. This difficulty could be overcome, however, by including
in the legislation a provision for the payment of just terms
compensation
in such cases.
Weighing up all of the above
considerations, the Commission is currently disposed to favour a
provenance definition. The Commission
would, however, welcome further
submissions on this point before coming to a final conclusion in its
Issue for further consideration.
The Commission is currently
disposed to favour a provenance, as opposed to property, based
definition of Commonwealth record but
seeks further views before coming
to a final conclusion.
The records of Commonwealth agencies which are corporatised or privatised
The present Act defines a Commonwealth record as one that is the property of the Commonwealth or of a Commonwealth institution.
This recognises that while most Commonwealth property is owned by the
Commonwealth as a whole there are some Commonwealth institutions
own property in their own right. The definition of 'Commonwealth
institution' includes the official establishment of the
Governor-General, the Executive Council, the Parliament, a Department,
the Commonwealth Courts, an authority of the Commonwealth
Administration of an external territory other than Norfolk Island.
The Act originally defined 'authority of the Commonwealth' as
(a) an authority, body, tribunal or organization, whether incorporated or unincorporated, established for a public purpose ...
(b) the holder of a prescribed office under the Commonwealth; or
(c) a prescribed company or association over which the Commonwealth is in a position to exercise control ...
In 1995 paragraph (c) was amended to read 'a Commonwealth controlled
company or a Commonwealth controlled association'. The reasons
amendment to (c) are discussed in the following paragraphs.
At the time the Act came into force the
corporatisation of government business enterprises, while seen as an
emerging issue of
considerable significance, was not such as to require
specific provision to be included in the Act. By 1989, however,
Archives had become aware of the archival implications of
legislation enacted in 1988–89 for the corporatisation of
Airlines, the Australian National Line, the Overseas
Telecommunications Commission and the Snowy Mountains Engineering
Corporation.
The legislation included provisions to the effect that the
companies which it created were to be taken as not having been
incorporated
or established for a public purpose. Similar provisions
were included in legislation enacted in 1990 for the corporatisation of
the Commonwealth Bank, Commonwealth Funds Management and the
Commonwealth Serum Laboratories. The effect of these provisions was
remove all records of these enterprises from the Act's jurisdiction,
including records created prior to corporatisation, because
enterprises no longer fell within the definition of 'authority of the
Commonwealth' in s 3(1) unless they were prescribed to
regulation.
Australian Archives initially sought to
restore these companies to the Act's jurisdiction by regulation.
However in 1991 the then
Treasurer refused to agree to the making of a
regulation in relation to the records of the Commonwealth Bank and the
Archives adopted
a policy of only making regulations for those
companies which agreed to be restored to the Act's jurisdiction. In
fact the only
regulations made were those for the records of
Commonwealth Funds Management Limited and the Australian and Overseas
Telecommunications
Corporation Limited (now Telstra) in 1992.
In order to ensure the maintenance of
the policy that the records of Commonwealth controlled companies should
continue to be subject
to the Act a series of amendments was enacted in
1995. The amendments did not, however, seek to restore to the Act's
those companies which had already been removed from it and
which had not been restored by regulation. The amendments were as
Part (c) of the definition of 'authority of the Commonwealth' in s
3(1) was amended to read 'a Commonwealth controlled company or
Commonwealth controlled association'.
Section 3A was added to provide that if an authority, body,
tribunal or organisation, whether incorporated or unincorporated, had
been established for a public purpose then, for the purposes of the
Act, it could be taken as never having been established for
purpose only by a specific legislative provision or regulation.
Section 3B was added to provide that if, immediately prior to the
commencement of the amendments, a Commonwealth controlled company
association had never been established for a public purpose and had not
been prescribed as an 'authority of the Commonwealth'
under s 3(1),
then the company or association was not to be taken as an authority of
the Commonwealth.
Section 28A was added to provide that if a company or association
ceased to be an authority of the Commonwealth then its records
up to that time would continue to be Commonwealth records. It also
permits the Archives to continue to make arrangements
with the company
or association for dealing with the records.
In the Commissions' view the 1995
amendments are unduly complicated and are likely to cause confusion.
Moreover they have had the
unintended consequence of again removing
Telstra and Commonwealth Funds Management Limited from the jurisdiction
of the Act by
nullifying the effect of the earlier regulations bringing
their records back under the Act. The Commission fully endorses the
of ensuring that in the future the records of Commonwealth
controlled companies are Commonwealth records. This should be achieved
in the new legislation by adding 'Commonwealth controlled company' and
'Commonwealth controlled association' to the definition
of 'authority
of the Commonwealth'.
Draft recommendation 8.2.
Commonwealth controlled
associations and companies should be subject to the legislation and
included in the definition of 'authority
of the Commonwealth' unless
they are specifically excluded from it by regulation or by a provision
of some other legislation.
Draft recommendation 8.3.
If a company or association ceases
to be a Commonwealth controlled company or association the records
which it had created prior
to that time should continue to be
Commonwealth records and subject to the legislation.
Draft recommendation 8.4.
The NAA should be required to
approve any transfer of the custody or ownership of Commonwealth
records to the new owners of former
Commonwealth organisations.
Draft recommendation 8.5.
The Commonwealth should always
retain ownership of records of enduring value created by a company or
association prior to the time
when it ceased to be a Commonwealth
controlled company or association.
Draft recommendation 8.6.
The custody of records of enduring
value should only be transferred to an organisation which is not an
authority of the Commonwealth
if there is a demonstrated need for that
organisation to access them and if they can not reasonably be made
available to the organisation
on Commonwealth premises or by the
provision of certified copies. Any such loan should be subject to
inspection by the NAA and adherence to any conditions imposed by it
an absolute prohibition on the transfer of custody of records of more than a specified age.
Draft recommendation 8.7.
'Controlling agency' responsibility
for the existing records of authorities of the Commonwealth which are
privatised should pass
to the NAA if there is no other authority of the
Commonwealth whose current responsibilities reasonably relate to the
Records of 'enduring' value
The great majority of records created by
the Commonwealth will sooner or later be destroyed because they are no
longer required
for current administrative purposes and they do not
justify retention for evidential, research or other purposes. It is not
possible to determine an appropriate lifespan for all records at
the time they are created, although such identification will become
easier with the further development of electronic recordkeeping systems
and appraisal techniques. For this reason the legislation
continue to apply to all Commonwealth records, with provisions to
ensure that valuable records are identified and cared
for appropriately
and that valueless records are disposed of.
The present Act adopts the concept of
the 'archival resources of the Commonwealth' to define in very broad
terms that portion of
Commonwealth records which justifies indefinite
retention. Section 3(2) of the Act defines 'the archival resources of
the Commonwealth'
such Commonwealth records and other material as are of national significance or public interest and relate to —
(a) the history or government of Australia;
(b) the legal basis, origin, development, organization or activities of the Commonwealth or of a Commonwealth institution;
(c) a person who is, or has at any time been, associated with a Commonwealth institution;
(d) the history or government of a Territory; or
(e) an international or other organization the
membership of which includes, or has included, the Commonwealth or a
Commonwealth
institution.
The concept of 'the archival resources
of the Commonwealth' has not been applied very widely in normal
archival administration,
where it has been found more convenient to
designate records as being of either 'permanent' or 'temporary' value.
More recently
there has been a tendency to challenge the validity of
the term 'permanent' on the basis that the continuing usefulness of
may be reassessed over the years. Australian Archives has
recommended that the concept of 'the archival resources of the
Commonwealth'
should be replaced by the term 'records of continuing
This would recognise that records of
'continuing' value may not always be records of 'permanent' value,
since records are always
liable to reevaluation in the light of
changing administrative and research needs.
The Commission believes it to be
essential that the legislation include a specific definition for those
Commonwealth records which
justify retention beyond the point at which
they cease to be required for current administrative purposes. A number
recommendations of the Commission relate specifically to
such records, particularly in the areas of disposal, mandatory transfer
to NAA custody and the recovery of records which have passed out of
Commonwealth custody. The Commission prefers the term 'enduring'
than 'continuing'. 'Enduring' connotes the maintenance by these long
term records of historical value even when subjected
to reevaluation
against differing considerations period by period. The definition of
'enduring value' should be developed from
the present definition of
'the archival resources of the Commonwealth'.
Draft Recommendation 8.8.
The legislation should include the
term 'records of enduring value' to identify those records which
justify retention beyond current
administrative needs and which require
to be managed as archival records.
Draft recommendation 8.9.
Records of enduring value should be defined as
'Commonwealth records which may no longer be required for current
administrative purposes but which have continuing value as records
the history of Australia
the operation of the Commonwealth government and of Commonwealth institutions
the rights, entitlements and obligations of the people of Australia.'
Australian Archives Handbook
Canberra 1996, 116.
Standards Australia
AS 4390 Records Management
Part 1, Sydney 1996, 4.21.
Information provided to the Commission by the Archives Authority of NSW.
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth), Dictionary. The Dictionary defines
a 'Commonwealth record' as a record made by a department, the
Parliament or a range of
other Commonwealth organisations.
See para 12.32–35 for discussion of the present 'exempt material' provision and material such as books and maps.
See para 14.22–23.
See para 12.32–38.
The term 'register or guide' refers to registers or guides required
Archives Act
to be maintained by Australian
Archives. For further discussion of registers and guides see para
State Records Act 1997
Australian Archives
Submission 56
9. Creating and managing Commonwealth records
Introduction
Standards for the creation and maintenance of records
Which authority should issue recordkeeping standards?
Which authority should audit the implementation of recordkeeping standards?
Reporting on the state of Commonwealth recordkeeping
Archives Act
or a Records Act?
Introduction
Most Australians become aware of failings in Commonwealth recordkeeping only when specific issues are the subject of Parliamentary
or media interest, or when some problem arises with records relating to their own affairs. However submissions made to the Commission
during the consultation process suggest that the problems of mediocre and fragmented recordkeeping are so widespread within the Commonwealth
administration that they have come to be accepted with a degree of fatalism. Australian Archives' submission suggests that
At the time when the Archives legislation was being enacted, the last vestiges of systematic recordkeeping and high level managerial
support for that process were disappearing from most Commonwealth agencies... Factors such as the poor profile of the activity, the
consequent loss of any ongoing expertise, the impact of the continued emphasis on streamlining and cost efficiencies, and the disappearance
of any formal central agency responsibility for recordkeeping all contributed to the demise of recordkeeping as a core responsibility
of agencies and as one they would continue to hold in high importance.
The early 1980s was also the period when devolution became popular as a method of departmental management. In practice what occurred
in regard to recordkeeping in agencies was often not devolution but effectively an abandonment of responsibility in the name of managerial
efficiency. The result is that across Commonwealth agencies there has been a systemic failure in records management.
Eighteen of the reports issued by the Australian National Audit Office (ANAO) in 1995–1996 made reference to problems related
to inadequate recordkeeping. In January 1997 the ANAO commenced a preliminary study to review the policies, strategies and administrative
practices of five Commonwealth agencies to assess the effectiveness and relative efficiency of their electronic and hard copy records
management. In the light of the findings of this study the ANAO is now undertaking a detailed records management audit of six agencies
covering a wide range of Commonwealth functions. The Commonwealth Ombudsman has also drawn attention to a range of records related
problems in her recent annual reports.
The problems caused by a lack of consistent guidance and training for recordkeepers have been compounded by the fact that most Commonwealth
agencies are currently operating a mixture of paper based and electronic recordkeeping systems. Links between these systems are often
inadequate or non-existent, while many records which are produced on personal computers and transmitted by electronic mail may not
become part of a formal recordkeeping system at all.
Standards for the creation and maintenance of records
The present Act starts from an assumption that records have been created. This is no longer adequate. The Commission has recommended
in Chapter 3 that one of the principal elements of an effective Commonwealth archival system is an integrated continuum of records
management supported by a coordinated 'single mind' approach at a policy level. The foundation of this continuum must be adequate
provision for the creation and maintenance of records.
The Commission was impressed by the degree of concern displayed about current failings in Commonwealth recordkeeping, not least by
Commonwealth agencies themselves. While there is no reliable evidence of the cost of these failings there can be little doubt that
it is very substantial in terms of both resources and of inadequately informed decision making. The legislation should include a
specific requirement that Commonwealth agencies should create and maintain adequate records and it should state briefly the main
objectives of recordkeeping. These are
to ensure that the Commonwealth administration is conducted efficiently and accountably
to document the rights and obligations of individual citizens
to maintain an enduring record of significant Commonwealth policies and activities.
The need for a specific Commonwealth recordkeeping obligation was endorsed by the report of the Public Service Act Review Group in
1994. The Group recommended that a new Commonwealth Public Service Act should specify among the responsibilities of Secretaries of
Commonwealth departments an obligation to 'ensure that proper standards are maintained at all times in the creation, management,
maintenance and retention of Commonwealth records'.
However the Public Service Bill introduced into the Parliament in June 1997 contained no provisions relating to recordkeeping. In
their 1995 review of the FOI Act the Commission and the Administrative Review Council recommended that
Archives Act
should impose an obligation on the chief executive officer of an agency to ensure the creation of such records as are necessary to
document adequately government functions, policies, decisions, procedures, and transactions and to ensure that records in the agency's
custody are maintained in good order and condition.
The Commission believes that the recordkeeping obligations of chief executive officers are so important that they should be legislatively
based. The inclusion of these obligations in the archival legislation would be appropriate.
In Issues Paper 19 the Commission sought views as to whether it would be either feasible or desirable to establish uniform standards
for the creation and management of Commonwealth records. Such standards would operate within the framework of the statutory obligation
to create and maintain adequate records. Approximately half of the written submissions dealt with this issue and it was also covered
extensively in oral consultations. The predominant view was that the issue of general standards for the creation and management of
records would be a significant step towards improving Commonwealth recordkeeping.
Submissions expressed a range of views as to whether records management standards for Commonwealth agencies should be advisory or
mandatory. Supporters of mandatory standards were in a substantial majority, particularly among archivists and historians. Mandatory
standards were also endorsed by the majority of Commonwealth agencies which made written submissions, provided that the standards
were not so detailed as to be inflexible.
The Commission agrees that the basic recordkeeping obligations to be included in the legislation should be supported by more detailed
recordkeeping standards issued by a single coordinating agency and binding on all Commonwealth agencies. The standards should be
focused on outcomes rather than processes, so that they give agencies a clear vision of what needs to be achieved without locking
them into detailed procedures which may or may not be appropriate to their particular circumstances.
Draft recommendation 9.1.
The new archives legislation should impose a specific obligation on the chief executive officer of each Commonwealth agency to create
and maintain adequate records and set out the main objectives of Commonwealth recordkeeping.
Which authority should issue recordkeeping standards?
At the time the present Act was drafted the Public Service Board rather than Australian Archives was regarded as the authority responsible
for policy on the management of current Commonwealth records. The Public Service Board was not very active in the records management
area even prior to its abolition in 1987 and it has left behind no enduring recordkeeping requirements. Australian Archives has to
some extent taken on
the role of providing records management advice to other Commonwealth agencies. Such advice has generally been provided on a limited
basis, focusing in particular on agencies in which records management problems have caused difficulties in the disposal of records
or in their transfer to archival custody.
In order to place the provision of records management advice on a more consistent basis Australian Archives established a documentation
standards project in 1994. This project has produced a report on the development of a documentation standard for Commonwealth agencies
and a draft policy on the keeping of electronic records. Submissions indicate that this initiative has been received well, but that
many agencies still feel an urgent need for more detailed guidance on the creation and management of their records.
With the exception of the Australian Taxation Office and the Australian Federal Police there was general support for Australian Archives
undertaking responsibility for issuing records management standards. This support was based largely on the premise that if recordkeeping
is accepted as a continuum then a single agency should set at least broad standards for the management of each stage of the continuum.
As already noted the 1995 review of the FOI Act by the Commission and the Administrative Review Council recommended that Australian
Archives should assume formal responsibility for issuing recordkeeping standards for all Commonwealth agencies. The NAA is the logical
agency to undertake the 'single mind' function of issuing standards because Australian Archives is already responsible for a wide
range of activities relating to the management of Commonwealth records, in particular the appraisal of existing and planned recordkeeping
systems. No other Commonwealth agency is likely to be so widely involved with Commonwealth records at both a policy and an operational
The Commission has recommended in Chapter 6 that the NAA should have the power to issue standards relevant to each aspect of the
recordkeeping continuum from the creation of a record through to its disposal or preservation and use as an archival record. Australian
Archives has already issued a range of policies, standards and guidelines which deal with various aspects of recordkeeping. In most
cases they are advisory material for use by the staff of the Archives and other Commonwealth agencies. Certain procedures for dealing
with the appraisal and disposal of records and the handling of special access applications under s 56(2) have been issued as regulations
under the Act. In addition the records disposal authorities issued by the Archives, while not being legislative instruments, are
based on the Archives' authority to regulate the disposal of records under s 24. The recognition of the standard setting power in
the legislation would enable material produced by the NAA to be promulgated in a more consistent and authoritative way. This chapter
deals with the issue of standards for the creation and maintenance of current records. The application of standards to the later
phases of the recordkeeping continuum is addressed in the chapters dealing with those phases.
The Commission does not propose that the NAA should be compelled to issue standards for any specific phase of the recordkeeping continuum.
In areas such as the creation of records standards will clearly be required. In areas such as the appraisal and disposal of records,
in which Australian Archives is already closely involved, more detailed management strategies may be appropriate. It would be more
flexible for the NAA to be free to determine how policy guidance can be promulgated most effectively.
Draft recommendation 9.2.
The NAA should be empowered under the legislation to promulgate as legislative instruments mandatory standards for all aspects of
the management of Commonwealth records from creation to archiving or disposal. The standards should be focused on outcomes rather
than processes.
Draft recommendation 9.3.
The legislation should not compel the NAA to issue standards on any specific aspect of recordkeeping.
Which authority should audit the implementation of recordkeeping standards?
Submissions were divided on the question of who should audit and enforce records management standards. Some argued that Australian
Archives should undertake this role because it had the greatest expertise and because experience gained from auditing would assist
the further development of standards. Others argued that there is an inherent conflict of interest between the roles of standard
setter and auditor and that they must be undertaken by different authorities. Australian Archives itself is in favour of taking on
the standard setting role, but opposed to taking on the auditing role. The Archives Authority of New South Wales sees no difficulty
in principle with the NAA undertaking the monitoring role, but suggests that in practice an existing body with a compliance monitoring
role such as the Australian National Audit Office would be better placed in terms of resources, skills and acceptance by Commonwealth
agencies to undertake the function.
In the 1995 FOI Review the Commission and the Administrative Review Council recommended that Australian Archives be given a statutory
auditing role in relation to the records management standards which it set.
Since then, however, the Auditor-General has begun to address Commonwealth recordkeeping as an issue in itself as well as a factor
in the investigation of other matters. The Auditor-General has wide investigatory powers and will clearly continue to be involved
in records related issues. It therefore seems more effective for the Auditor-General to maintain and enhance the auditing role of
his office in relation to records management rather than to share it with Australian Archives. The findings of the Auditor-General's
audits would of course be a significant input into the further development of recordkeeping standards by the NAA.
The importance of the Auditor-General's role in auditing recordkeeping practices would be emphasised if the Act provided specifically
that a performance audit as defined in
Auditor-General Act 1997
may include an audit of recordkeeping practices.
of the present
Archives Act
provides that:
the Archives is entitled, for the purposes of this Act, to full and free access, at all reasonable times, to all Commonwealth records
in the custody of a Commonwealth institution other than the Archives.
Even though the Auditor-General would be responsible for auditing the implementation of recordkeeping standards the NAA should retain
a right of entry to other Commonwealth agencies to the extent that this is necessary to ensure the preservation and accessibility
of the enduring records of the Commonwealth. This right should extend where appropriate to the premises of contractors storing records
on behalf of Commonwealth agencies.
Draft recommendation 9.4.
Primary responsibility for auditing compliance with the standards promulgated under the new archives legislation should lie with
the Auditor-General. The legislation should provide that a performance audit as defined in the
Auditor-General Act 1997
may include an audit of recordkeeping practices.
Draft recommendation 9.5.
The NAA should retain a right of entry to the premises of other Commonwealth agencies and those of contractors storing records on
their behalf to the extent that this is necessary to ensure the preservation and accessibility of the enduring records of the Commonwealth.
Reporting on the state of Commonwealth recordkeeping
The Commission recommends that the NAA should have a specific statutory requirement to report on the state of Commonwealth recordkeeping
in its annual report to the Minister, which would be tabled in Parliament. Even without a formal auditing role the NAA is likely
to gather a substantial amount of information on this subject through its standard setting and advisory roles and its own archival
operations. Such a general reporting requirement would complement investigations in specific areas by the Auditor-General and encourage
external scrutiny of a process in which all Australians have a significant interest.
Draft recommendation 9.6.
The NAA should be required to report on the state of Commonwealth recordkeeping in its annual report under the legislation.
An Archives Act or a Records Act?
The present Act is focused on the functions of Australian Archives as they existed in the 1970s. It deals with general records management
issues such as disposal, custody and preservation, but it approaches them mainly from the viewpoint of the archivist. No legislation
deals comprehensively with all aspects of Commonwealth recordkeeping. The continuum approach to records management endorsed by the
Commission in this review requires that Commonwealth recordkeeping obligations should be set out more consistently and transparently.
In line with this approach the Commission has recommended above in this chapter that the legislation include specific obligations
to create and maintain records to an adequate standard. It also recommends in Chapter 10 that the NAA take a more proactive approach
to the appraisal of records.
These recommendations further strengthen the case for broadening the focus of the legislation. Instead of an
Archives Act
which makes various excursions forward into current recordkeeping issues the Commonwealth requires a Records and
Archives Act
which deals with the continuum of recordkeeping from creation to archiving or disposal.
Draft recommendation 9.7.
The new archives legislation should include both 'records' and 'archives' in its title to reflect its objective of achieving satisfactory
recordkeeping practices from creation to archiving or disposal.
Australian Archives, Submission 56.
Report of the Public Service Act Review Group, Canberra 1994, 161.
Australian Law Reform Commission Report 77 and Administrative Review Council Report 40 Open government: a review of the federal
Freedom of Information Act 1982
Sydney 1995 (ALRC 77/ARC 40), 5.11–5.12.
Archives Authority of NSW Submission 97.
ALRC 77/ARC 40, 5.11–5.13.
10. Disposing of Commonwealth records — appraisal and sentencing
Introduction
The present disposal regime
Who should authorise the disposal of Commonwealth records?
Appraisal policy
Appraising and sentencing electronic records
Disposal as a matter of normal administrative practice
Penalties for the unauthorised disposal of records
Altering or amending records more than 25 years old
The rights of the record subject
Quality control problems in sentencing
Name identified Census records
Consulting stakeholders on appraisal and disposal policy
Publicising significant sentencing projects
Introduction
In almost any organisation, government or private, large or small, most records created will sooner or later have so little value
for either current or historical purposes that the cost of retaining them can no longer be justified. The process of determining
how long specific records need to be retained is generally described as 'appraisal'. It is of crucial importance to the efficient
achievement of all other archival processes. The object of appraisal is to establish consistent standards to determine an appropriate
lifespan for individual records. The assessment of records against these standards is known as 'sentencing', although the term 'disposal'
is often used to encompass both the appraisal and sentencing processes.
The present disposal regime
of the present Act gives Australian Archives a crucial role in the disposal of Commonwealth records. It is unlawful to destroy or
otherwise dispose of, to transfer the custody or ownership of, or damage or alter a Commonwealth record unless such an action is
required by law
approved by Australian Archives
carried out in accordance with a practice approved by Australian Archives
carried out in accordance with a normal administrative practice (for example an agency's procedures for the disposal of duplicate
or ephemeral material), other than a practice of which Australian Archives has noted its disapproval
done to return Commonwealth records held by some other individual or organisation to Commonwealth custody.
The principal objective of the present Act in giving Australian Archives control over the disposal of Commonwealth records was to
ensure that records which formed part of 'the archival resources of the Commonwealth' as defined in s 3(2)
were identified and preserved. However the Act did not address directly two administrative assumptions which were already well established
when it came into force. The first of these assumptions was that the reliable identification of records falling within the definition
of 'the archival resources of the Commonwealth' inevitably involved the appraisal of a much larger proportion of Commonwealth records
in order to ensure that valuable records were not overlooked. The second assumption was that Australian Archives' expertise in and
organisational responsibility for records of enduring value made it the appropriate authority to plan and manage a consistent records
disposal regime for all Commonwealth records. Such a regime was seen as a matter of good housekeeping, regardless of whether the
records concerned were of enduring value or not. Because of this general housekeeping role Australian Archives developed expertise
in assessing the administrative value of records as well as their research and historical value.
The present disposal authorisation process is based on Records Disposal Authorities (RDAs) which are approved by the Director-General
of Australian Archives or his delegate. There are currently some 700 RDAs in operation, ranging in scope from small groups of specialised
records to the entire central recordkeeping systems of major agencies. In general, RDAs are drafted by the agency to whose records
they relate, although Australian Archives may provide advice and training. When an RDA has been drafted it is submitted to the Archives
for checking and formal approval. The Archives' assessment of the draft RDA includes consideration of its completeness and consistency,
comparison with any other relevant RDAs and a check that all appraisal criteria, in particular research and display values, have
been assessed adequately.
Some large groups of records are common to many Commonwealth agencies. In order to avoid each agency having to prepare essentially
similar disposal authorities Australian Archives issues General Disposal Authorities which may be used by any agency to dispose of
records relating to certain functions or subjects. The General Disposal Authorities are prepared mainly by Australian Archives staff,
although agency staff are involved in providing advice and testing drafts. A high proportion of records covered by General Disposal
Authorities are of administrative value only.
Australian Archives believes that the great majority of Commonwealth records are now covered by current disposal authorities, although
no exact figures are available. There is no exact figure for the percentage of Commonwealth records which are appraised as having
what has traditionally been described as 'permanent' value and is now more often described as 'enduring' or 'continuing' value. Australian
Archives' staff suggest that some 5%–7% of all records created fall into the 'enduring' category, although there are no reliable
estimates either of the volume of Commonwealth records which exist or of the volume which is destroyed each year.
Who should authorise the disposal of Commonwealth records?
The great majority of Commonwealth agencies which commented on the issue supported a continuation of the existing 'single mind' regime
under which the NAA has overall responsibility for appraisal policy and sole responsibility for authorising records disposal authorities.
Australian Archives also recommended that it should retain sole responsibility for authorising the disposal of Commonwealth records
and for setting down policy, standards and procedures.
Agencies opposed to a central role for the NAA included the Australian Bureau of Statistics,
which suggested that the NAA's role be confined to records of enduring value, and Australia Post
and the Australian Federal Police,
both of which preferred to determine their own appraisal policies within general standards set by the NAA.
The most common criticism of the present system by agencies was that some draft disposal authorities took a long time to be approved
by Australian Archives. This appears to be due to a combination of resource constraints, complex procedures and perhaps an over attention
to fine detail. The lack of experienced appraisal staff in some agencies is probably a further complicating factor, since it is likely
to result in draft authorities having to be extensively modified by Australian Archives. The need to update some of the existing
General Disposal Authorities was also emphasised.
The Commission has considered three options for a statutory framework for the disposal of records. The first is to maintain the present
system whereby the NAA is responsible for authorising the disposal of all Commonwealth records. This would not necessarily require
the NAA to issue detailed disposal authorities for all records, nor need it specify which agency was responsible for drafting those
authorities. However it would require the NAA to be satisfied that records had been evaluated adequately and to issue clear directions
as to their retention or disposal.
The second option is that agencies be required to notify the NAA of any records for which they wished to undertake disposal action.
The NAA would then identify those groups of records which it believed were likely to include material of enduring value. The agency
responsible for those records would be required to ensure that they were appraised and that the NAA approved a disposal authority
for them. Records not identified by the NAA as likely to include records of enduring value could be disposed of as the agency saw
fit, subject to whatever general guidelines had been issued by the NAA.
The third option is for the NAA to give up any detailed involvement in the appraisal process. The NAA would issue general standards
and guidelines for the identification of records of enduring value, which agencies would be required to adhere to when sentencing
records. The resources currently devoted by the NAA to checking appraisal reports and draft records disposal authorities could be
diverted to more intensive monitoring of agency sentencing projects to ensure that records of enduring value were identified.
Each of these options has strengths and weaknesses. The first option is the safest, since it establishes the most detailed central
control over the appraisal process. Its weaknesses are that it can be labour intensive and that it puts pressure on the NAA to concentrate
on the most urgent, rather than the most valuable, cases. The second option targets archival resources on the most valuable records
provided that they can be identified effectively. Its weaknesses are that valuable records might be overlooked and also that if the
NAA gave up issuing disposal authorities for records which were not of enduring value, agencies might devote substantial resources
to 'reinventing the wheel' by devising their own disposal authorities for such records. The third option is, at least at first sight,
the most streamlined. However it would require extensive testing to establish whether general guidelines could effectively replace
specific disposal authorities and also whether more intensive monitoring of sentencing could compensate adequately for less comprehensive
written guidance.
In the light of these considerations, the Commission recommends that the NAA should retain the sole power to authorise the disposal
of all Commonwealth records. Given the sheer volume of records, the large number of agencies involved and the fact that identifying
records of enduring value is a complex process, any fragmentation of the disposal power might well cause as many problems as it solved.
Strategies for making the appraisal regime operate more effectively within the existing authority framework are considered below.
Draft recommendation 10.1.
The NAA should retain sole authority for authorising the disposal of Commonwealth records and the present s 24 provisions should
be retained.
Appraisal policy
Appraisal is fundamental to the disposal process since it establishes a consistent and accountable framework within which individual
records may be assessed. However the present Act makes no mention of appraisal. The s 24 requirement that Australian Archives must
authorise the disposal of Commonwealth records assumes that the Archives will devise and implement appraisal policies, but this task
is too important to be left to assumption. The Commission has recommended in Chapter 6 that the powers of the NAA should include
the promulgation of standards and issue of guidelines in relation to appraisal. The disposal provisions of the new legislation should
make it clear that the NAA has an obligation to ensure that there is an adequate appraisal policy framework within which agencies
can prepare individual records disposal authorities for authorisation by the NAA. This obligation might be met by the issue of standards
and guidelines, by the provision of training or by the undertaking of specific appraisal projects which would assist the development
The present Act gives little guidance as to the nature of the enduring record of the Commonwealth. A number of submissions contrasted
the very general wording of 'the archival resources of the Commonwealth' in s 3(2)
with the more specific public access exemption criteria set out in s 33, expressing concern that the Act gave so little guidance
on a process which determines whether records survive or are destroyed.
Australian Archives has identified five general criteria against which the value of records may be appraised
administrative value
financial or accounting value
legal requirements
legal value
research and display values.
Records of enduring value are likely to fall predominantly within the research and display value category, although such records
may also have other values. The Archives cites five broad categories of records which are most likely to include material of research
and display values
information about how the Government created agencies and developed their structures and functions
significant policy material
significant precedent material, exceptional cases or incidents that change agency policy
information about significant cultural or historical events or things, and
standardised information about the social, economic or physical condition of individuals.
In addition to the general criteria set out above the Archives applies a number of secondary or threshold tests to determine whether
records are of enduring value. These include
duplication
reliability and completeness
accessibility
costs associated with storing, preserving and accessing the records.
Issues Paper 19 asked whether the principles which determine whether records are retained or disposed of should be stated in the
legislation, for example by listing key objectives and broad document classifications. Most submissions felt that it would be impracticable
to reduce appraisal policy to a set of clearly defined categories brief enough to be included in legislation, especially as they
would probably need to change over time. Some submissions suggested including appraisal criteria in the regulations rather than in
the Act itself. The Commission believes that a statement of the basic criteria on which decisions about the retention or destruction
of Commonwealth records are to be based is a matter of interest to the Parliament and the community. The NAA should issue a standard
relating to appraisal criteria as a legislative instrument. The standard should be supported by more detailed guidelines.
Draft recommendation 10.2.
The disposal provisions of the new legislation should make it clear that the NAA has an obligation to ensure that there is an adequate
appraisal policy framework within which agencies can prepare individual records disposal authorities for authorisation by the NAA.
Draft recommendation 10.3.
The NAA should issue a standard relating to appraisal criteria.
Appraising and sentencing electronic records
The appraisal process has so far been concerned largely with paper records which have been in existence for at least a number of
years and in some cases for several decades. Some records disposal authorities have been issued for electronic recordkeeping systems,
but many electronic systems appear to be operated on the basis that it is less trouble to retain all the records indefinitely than
to devise an appraisal and sentencing regime for them. This view must change as the use of electronic systems increases, as is likely
to occur rapidly over the next decade. Whereas many of the present electronic systems are concerned with administrative and case
management processes which do not generate records of enduring value the development of whole-of-agency electronic systems will mean
that policy and general correspondence records will also be managed electronically. Unless there is an effective appraisal and sentencing
regime for such systems valuable records may be lost.
Submissions and consultations emphasised the need to make appraisal strategies more proactive, to articulate general principles more
clearly through a 'top down' approach and to try to reduce the amount of appraisal resources being devoted to records which are of
little or no archival value. This was seen to be essential in relation to electronic records and highly desirable in relation to
paper records. Many archivists now support the concept of functional appraisal as a way of establishing records appraisal on a more
proactive and less labour intensive basis
Under functional appraisal, agencies no longer offer records for evaluation prior to destruction. The decision to create a record
reflects a decision about the need for it (the need to document a process) and this decision embodies all the elements needed for
appraisal. In traditional terms, the decision was seen as comprising three sequential stages: should I make a record, for how long
should I keep it, can I destroy it now? Paper transactions left a documentary trace, the only decision needing to be made was whether
or not to file it. This administrative decision did not include all of the elements of disposal. Electronic transactions will leave
no trace unless there is intervention to capture records of specified processes and maintain them for a specified period. These decisions
include all the elements of disposal. The need to create and maintain records must be articulated at the system design stage and
cannot be left to a subsequent stage in a life cycle. "Appraisal becomes a matter of records creation and retention", rather
than destruction.
Australian Archives currently has a working group considering how functional appraisal might be further developed in the Commonwealth
The most cost effective outcome of functional appraisal would be to link specific functions to broad and simple records disposal
outcomes. For example records of a function which attracted a high score might be retained without more detailed appraisal unless
they fell within the coverage of the General Disposal Authorities. Conversely the records of a function which had a low score might
be retained only if they fell within a small number of clearly defined classes intended to preserve a basic record of the history
of the function. Whether such broad outcomes are achievable without unacceptable levels of loss of valuable records and over retention
of valueless records will need to be demonstrated by the testing of a substantial model. It is important, particularly for electronic
records, that this process be completed as soon as possible. Many professional archivists have embraced functional appraisal enthusiastically
at a theoretical level, but their enthusiasm is not necessarily shared by all their colleagues. The research community also displays
a measure of unease about a system which might reduce the appraisal of records to a much broader and more summary level.
Appraisal strategies are not a matter for legislation. However appraisal is so fundamental to the efficient operation of Commonwealth
recordkeeping that it is appropriate for the Commission to emphasise the need for the NAA to give high priority to developing new
appraisal strategies, particularly in relation to electronic records, and ensuring that they are tested and implemented by Commonwealth
Draft recommendation 10.4.
The NAA should give high priority to the development and testing of new appraisal strategies, particularly in relation to electronic
Disposal as a matter of normal administrative practice
Section 24(2)(c) permits records to be disposed of 'in accordance with a normal administrative practice, other than a practice of
a Department or authority of the Commonwealth of which the Archives has notified the Department or authority that it disapproves'.
The section is intended to permit the disposal (without a specific authority) of trivial, ephemeral or duplicate material which does
not normally become part of a structured recordkeeping system. Interpretative guidelines issued by Australian Archives see the provision
as encompassing material like superseded drafts of reports or correspondence, ephemeral phone or electronic mail messages and duplicates
of material such as manuals, forms, directories and published reports.
Submissions did not provide any specific evidence that the 'normal administrative practice' provision had been misused, although
some concern was expressed that, notwithstanding the existence of guidelines, the wording of the provision is so open ended as to
be liable to abuse. However there does not appear to be any specific evidence of significant abuse. If an efficient regime for the
disposal of ephemeral material does not exist, or if such disposal is subject to needlessly complicated procedures, the whole appraisal
regime will be brought into disrepute and genuinely valuable records put at risk. The Commission recommends that the provision be
maintained, subject to the NAA continuing to issue guidelines for its implementation.
Draft recommendation 10.5.
The 'normal administrative practice' disposal provision should be retained, subject to the NAA continuing to issue guidelines for
its implementation.
Penalties for the unauthorised disposal of records
Archives Act
provides a $2,000 penalty for the unauthorised destruction or other disposal of Commonwealth records. No prosecution for a breach
has ever been commenced. Several submissions commented on the failure to initiate action under
in cases where records had almost certainly been destroyed incorrectly in the course of sentencing operations. These failures appear
to have flowed partly from the belief that 'the Commonwealth should not prosecute itself' and partly from the difficulty of establishing
who was responsible for the improper disposal of a particular record and whether they had acted deliberately or because of a lack
of training and guidance. The issue is complicated by the fact that the principal item of evidence, the record itself, is no longer
available because it has been destroyed. The only relevant evidence is likely to be the title of the record item, which is often
an unreliable guide to the value of the contents, and any recollections of those who had had dealings with the record when it was
in administrative use.
penalty is an important one and should be retained. If possible it should be strengthened by specifying that unauthorised destruction
encompasses cases in which a record has been inappropriately destroyed through carelessness or inadequate attention to available
guidelines. Nevertheless, the most effective deterrent to bad sentencing is likely to be increased attention to monitoring and training
by the NAA.
Criticism of the failure of Australian Archives to take action under
could be addressed by requiring the NAA to include in its annual report details of any significant inappropriate destruction identified
and the measures taken to deal with it. This would reassure stakeholders that the problem was being taken seriously.
Draft recommendation 10.6.
penalty for the unauthorised disposal of records should be retained and defined more stringently.
Draft recommendation 10.7.
The NAA should be required to report annually on any significant case of inappropriate destruction of records identified and the measures
taken to deal with it.
Altering or amending records more than 25 years old
prohibits the alteration of a Commonwealth record after it has been in existence for 25 years unless the alteration is required by
law or is done either with the permission of the Archives or in accordance with a practice or procedure approved by the Archives.
The object of this provision is to prevent records, and in particular records of enduring value, remaining liable indefinitely to
alteration (for example by the addition, amendment or removal of individual folios) by the agency which created it. The proviso that
alterations may be made to records more than 25 years old if this is required by law recognises that under the FOI Act record subjects
have an indefinitely retrospective right to seek amendment or annotation of personal information. This issue is dealt with in Chapter
The proviso that the Archives may authorise alteration beyond the age of 25 years recognises that in exceptional circumstances such
alteration might be appropriate, subject to the approval of an appropriate authority. Australian Archives has rarely been asked to
approve such alterations. Very occasionally permission has been sought by the subject or surviving relative of the subject of an
ASIO file to have a statement added to the file contesting information contained in it. Since the security and intelligence agencies
are not subject to the FOI Act it is necessary for such an action to be sanctioned under the
Archives Act
The Commission endorses the principle that records of enduring value should not be liable to amendment indefinitely, provided that
there is a discretion for the NAA to authorise the addition of material to a record in exceptional circumstances. However the Commission
does recommend that the provision should include the additional safeguard of requiring that alterations or additions to records more
than 25 years old should not be undertaken in a way that results in any existing information in the record being modified or deleted.
For example, if the NAA agreed that information in a record was so harmfully misleading as to justify correction even after 25 years
this should be done by adding an amending statement rather than by deleting existing information.
Draft recommendation 10.8.
The legislation should continue to provide that alterations to records more than 25 years old should only be undertaken if required
by law or approved by the NAA. No such alteration should be able to be undertaken in a way that involves the alteration or deletion
of information already included in the record.
The rights of the record subject
Submissions from Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander organisations raised the issue of the right of the subject of a record to
be consulted over its disposal when it ceased to be required for administrative purposes. Such a right might involve seeking the
subject's approval for the record to be destroyed or transferring ownership of the record to the subject. The issue was raised in
connection with the destruction over the years of records relating to the removal of Indigenous people from their families. However
similar issues of principle arise in relation to any record created by the Commonwealth which documents the affairs of individual
In a democratic society it is difficult to contest in principle the proposition that record subjects should have the right to acquire
or request the destruction of records relating to them once they are no longer of administrative use. Exceptions would include records
which were of enduring value (for example the service dossiers of members of the First Australian Imperial Force) and records which
might prejudice the interests of some other person or organisation if they were given to the principal subject. In practice the issue
is complicated by the sheer size of the task. The Commonwealth has compiled many millions of individual case files over the years,
the vast majority of which will sooner or later be destroyed. Some include current information about the location of the subject,
others do not. But even when the subject can be traced readily there would be a formidable administrative effort in contacting all
the subjects and implementing their wishes.
The Freedom of Information and Privacy Acts have between them addressed the rights of record subjects to access records relating
to themselves, to seek their amendment and to be reassured that the information they contain is not misused. No legislation specifically
addresses the disposal of such records. The Commission does not recommend that archives legislation make specific provision for the
disposal of records relating to individuals. However the Commission does consider that the Privacy Commissioner should in due course
consider possible options in this area, at least in relation to records created after a policy had been determined. In the short
term these might include a notification to all record subjects of the records disposal regime applying to the records of the agency
with which they are dealing. It might also include a 'tick this box' option for those who wish to assume ownership of the record
if this becomes appropriate. In the longer term the design of new systems should take into account the rights of the record subject
as far as this is practicable.
Draft recommendation 10.9.
In consultation with the NAA the Privacy Commissioner should consider issues relating to the disposal of records containing personal
information with a view to jointly developing appropriate records disposal authorities.
Quality control problems in sentencing
Until the 1980s responsibility for sentencing records was shared between Australian Archives and the agency which created the records.
The Archives has now withdrawn almost entirely from direct involvement in sentencing work, which is undertaken either by the staff
of the relevant agency or by contractors employed by the agency. The use of private contractors in sentencing began in the latter
1980s and it is estimated that they are now responsible for as much as one third of Commonwealth sentencing work.
Public debate on the accuracy of sentencing work and on appraisal policy generally has been restricted by the fact that most sentencing
is undertaken before records reach the open access period at the age of 30 years. Researchers often learn of a record's existence
only years after it has been destroyed through finding references to it in indexes or in other papers. There is no single list of
records which have been destroyed.
In recent years Australian Archives' campaign to sentence all unevaluated records in its custody has focused attention on sentencing
practices because it has resulted in some records which were already accessible to the public being withdrawn from archival custody
for sentencing. Many of these records were confirmed as being of enduring value and returned to the Archives, but some were destroyed.
This prompted a range of public representations to the Archives and the Advisory Council and a debate between archivists and historians
in the professional literature as to the adequacy of sentencing practices and the desirability of involving historians in disposal
decisions. A number of submissions raised concerns about the apparently inappropriate destruction of records. They also suggested
that sentencing had been reduced to an industrial process undertaken by staff who were ill equipped to make informed decisions about
the real value of records.
Sentencing is a difficult function over which to establish complete accountability. It is undertaken on a very large scale in a wide
variety of locations and by a wide variety of staff. It is also subject to significant time constraints and cost pressures. The staffing
of records management areas of Commonwealth agencies has traditionally been given a low priority, while the development of contract
sentencing has brought new pressures to recruit staff as quickly and cheaply as possible and to dispense with them between projects.
It is likely that there is still a considerable range of experience and commitment among those engaged in sentencing Commonwealth
Commonwealth agencies are responsible for monitoring sentencing work undertaken by their own staff and contractors. Archives Regulation
7 requires Commonwealth agencies to notify the Archives within 30 days of destroying or otherwise disposing of records. This information
is provided on standard forms which do not normally include details of individual records. The forms are submitted to the Archives
after the records have been destroyed so that they can be used only as a general guide to sentencing work in progress and as an indicator
of possible problems such as the misinterpretation of records disposal authorities. It is the Archives' view that many more records
are destroyed than are actually reported even at this summary level, although this does not necessarily imply that the records concerned
have been destroyed inappropriately.
The present requirement to report the destruction of records after the event seems to be of limited use. If implemented conscientiously
by the agency and the NAA it can be a useful quality control measure, although since the records have already been destroyed it can
do no more than prevent errors being repeated. Its weakness is that it applies to all records regardless of their value. This means
that time can be wasted checking records which are unlikely to include material of enduring value.
A more realistic approach would be to replace the present regulation with a provision in the legislation requiring agencies to give
the NAA reasonable warning of any planned sentencing work involving records likely to include material of enduring value. This would
enable monitoring resources to be concentrated on potentially valuable records as the sentencing proceeded so that any errors could
be detected before it was too late. The agency would not be required to obtain the NAA's approval before commencing sentencing, but
it would be required to give the NAA a reasonable opportunity to monitor the work. These requirements would also extend to contractors
working on behalf of agencies. Whatever statutory provisions may exist for the control of sentencing their success or failure will
ultimately depend on the skill and resolve the NAA displays in their implementation.
Draft recommendation 10.10.
The present requirement in Archives Regulation 7 to report the destruction of records should be replaced by the legislative provisions
proposed in the next two recommendations.
Draft recommendation 10.11.
Agencies planning sentencing work likely to involve records of enduring value should be required by the legislation to give the NAA
reasonable notice of their intention before the project commences.
Draft recommendation 10.12.
Agencies undertaking sentencing likely to involve records of enduring value should be required by the legislation to give the NAA
a reasonable opportunity to monitor the sentencing work.
Draft recommendation 10.13.
The NAA should give priority to designing and implementing an effective sentencing monitoring regime that focuses on records of enduring
Name identified Census records
A number of submissions argued strongly for the retention of name identified Census records (that is the Census forms completed by
individual citizens), which are currently destroyed after the Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) has extracted statistical data
from them. However ABS strongly supported the continued destruction of name identified Census records and in addition recommended
that they be removed from the coverage of the
Archives Act
altogether.
The ABS recommendation was made on the basis that the release of such records even after a period of 100 years would discourage people
from completing Census forms fully and accurately.
The question of whether name identified Census records should be retained or destroyed is currently being considered by the House
of Representatives Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs and the Commission does not at this stage express a view
be removed from the coverage of the
Archives Act
altogether. The Act is a general measure intended to ensure that Commonwealth records are managed consistently and as far as possible
in the interests of all stakeholders. To remove certain groups of records from the Act to serve specific administrative ends is undesirable
in principle.
Draft recommendation 10.14.
Name identified Census records should continue to be subject to the normal disposal provisions of the Act.
Consulting stakeholders on appraisal and disposal policy
Section 25(1) of the Act requires Australian Archives to provide the Advisory Council on Australian Archives with particulars of
the practices followed by, or approved by, the Archives in respect of the destruction or other disposal of Commonwealth records.
The Act does not give the Council the right to formally approve, disapprove or modify Australian Archives' disposal practices, although
it is open to the Council to discuss any relevant issue and provide advice to the Minister on it. Australian Archives has responded
to its s 25(1) obligations by producing a booklet setting out the legislative and administrative basis of the disposal system. Since
the Council was established it has considered appraisal and sentencing policy and procedures on a number of occasions in relation
both to the policy statement and to representations about the destruction of individual records.
The Commission has recommended in Chapter 5 that the Advisory Council's functions should be subsumed within the functions of the
proposed governing Council and advisory groups. The new Council would have the right to involve itself in the disposal process to
whatever extent it considered appropriate. Specific recommendations about the role of the new body in relation to disposal are therefore
unnecessary.
In Chapter 5 the Commission recommends that the new governing Council should establish advisory groups to facilitate input from a
wider range of specialists and stakeholders than can be accommodated on the council itself. One of these groups should be established
for appraisal and disposal issues. Some submissions recommended that such a body be established in each State and Territory. However
it would probably be more effective to centralise discussion of what is a fairly specialised subject in a single group. Some submissions
also suggested the establishment of more specialised panels of advisers to focus on the records of particular agencies. Here again
the best starting point is likely to be a single group which can invite specialists to join it for specific projects.
Draft recommendation 10.15.
An advisory group on appraisal and disposal issues should be established by the Council to provide a focus for stakeholder input.
Publicising significant sentencing projects
Submissions also suggested a range of notification processes for specific sentencing projects so that researchers could put forward
their views on the value of the records. The Commission does not accept that strategies such as advertising lists of individual records
proposed to be destroyed would justify the very substantial costs involved. However the combination of the recommended requirement
for agencies to report sentencing projects involving records of enduring value and the recommended establishment of a disposal advisory
group should encourage more effective public input. This should be supported by the NAA making public information it receives from
agencies about planned sentencing projects. This information could be made available in the public research areas of the NAA and
also on the Archives of Australia Internet site,
with appropriate facilities for public comment.
Draft recommendation 10.16.
The NAA should publicise and seek comment on sentencing projects likely to involve records of enduring value.
See para 8.25 for a discussion of archival resources of the Commonwealth.
Australian Archives
Submission 56
Submission 86
Australia Post
Submission 25
Australian Federal Police
Submission 35
See para 8.25.
Chris Hurley
Submission 27
Submission 86
http://www.aa.gov.au
11. Recovery
Introduction
Official records in private custody
1. Records of significant value
2. Records retained by ministers and senior officials
3. Records retained by individuals with a particular interest in them
Penalties for the unauthorised transfer of the custody or ownership of Commonwealth records
Recovering Commonwealth records from individuals
Compensation and arbitration for records recovered from individuals
Making records available for copying
The status of official records retained by former ministers
Introduction
In most government archival jurisdictions there have been examples of official records passing into the custody of private individuals
or organisations without appropriate authority. Some records may have passed through a series of custodians. Many of these records
have not been of significant archival value and there has been little incentive to recover them. However, even when the government
concerned has sought actively to recover the record, the process has not always been an easy one, particularly if (as is the case
with the present
Archives Act
) there is no specific recovery power in the relevant archival legislation.
This chapter has been written on the basis that the definition of 'Commonwealth record' would continue to be property based. The
Commission has suggested in Chapter 8 that it favours a definition of 'Commonwealth record' based on provenance rather than property,
but has called for further submissions on the issue. A change from the property based definition would have significant ramifications
for provisions relating to recovery which will be dealt with in the Commission's final report if a provenance based definition of
'Commonwealth record' is recommended.
Official records in private custody
Official records which have passed into private custody fall very broadly into three categories.
1. Records of significant value
This category includes individual records which are of particular historic significance because of the events which they document.
It also includes items such as plans, designs, pictures, stamps and original signatures of well known people, all of which are likely
to be of financial value and/or to appeal to individual collectors. Records in this category are likely to have been removed from
official custody by people who had a clear idea of their value and who were also aware that their removal was unlawful.
2. Records retained by ministers and senior officials
Most government agencies have, or formerly had, structured recordkeeping systems intended to ensure that records are traceable and
accessible and that they do not remain in the possession of individual officers for long periods. However, centrally managed recordkeeping
systems have never entirely discouraged individuals from maintaining their own independent systems. Independent systems have tended
to be most prominent in ministers' offices and specific issues relating to such records are discussed below.
It has also been quite common for senior departmental officials to maintain a personal collection of records about issues with which
they were currently involved. In many cases such records are eventually destroyed as duplicates or incorporated into the agency's
main recordkeeping system, but some officials have retained records when they left office.
3. Records retained by individuals with a particular interest in them
There have also been cases where individual officers with a strong interest in particular records in effect took custody of them to
ensure that they were not destroyed. Such cases have related particularly to technical records such as plans of buildings or equipment.
They were probably more common in the past when disposal authority coverage was less comprehensive.
The Act does not include specific provisions relating to the recovery of Commonwealth records from individuals or non Commonwealth
organisations. The 1976 draft of the Archives Bill included provisions for Australian Archives to direct that records should be returned
to Commonwealth custody and to take any court action necessary to achieve this. It also provided that courts could award compensation
to the person required to surrender the records. These provisions did not appear in the 1977 and subsequent drafts of the Bill.
Penalties for the unauthorised transfer of the custody or ownership of Commonwealth records
Section 24 prohibits the transfer of the ownership or custody of Commonwealth records without the authority of Australian Archives.
Any person who undertakes such a transfer is liable to a $2 000 penalty. However, it would be necessary for the Commonwealth to bring
an action for trespass or detinue to obtain a court order to recover custody of the records. No action has been taken under s 24,
presumably because no unauthorised transfer of custody or ownership has been identified which clearly took place after the Act came
into force in 1984. Australian Archives has on two occasions sought legal advice on the possibility of recovering records which had
passed out of Commonwealth custody prior to 1984. However, in view of the fact that the records had been removed prior to the legislation
being enacted and of uncertainties about the circumstances in which the removal had taken place the advice was that legal action
would be unlikely to succeed.
The unauthorised removal of records from Commonwealth custody does not appear to have been a major problem over the years, although
there may be instances of removal of which the Commonwealth is still unaware. Any such removal is undesirable both in itself and
as a precedent which others might be encouraged to follow. The Commission has already recommended in Chapter 10 that the NAA should
continue to regulate the disposal of Commonwealth records. The Commission supports the retention of the present s 24(1) prohibition
of the unauthorised transfer of the custody or ownership of Commonwealth records, together with provision for appropriate penalties.
It is important that the legislation should state unequivocally that such unauthorised dealings with Commonwealth records are illegal.
Draft recommendation 11.1.
The s 24(1) prohibition of the unauthorised transfer of the custody or ownership of Commonwealth records should be retained.
Recovering Commonwealth records from individuals
Recovery may serve two related but distinct objectives. The first is the administrative and disciplinary objective of reinforcing
the general prohibition on the unauthorised transfer of Commonwealth records by requiring that any record so transferred be returned
to the Commonwealth. The second is the archival objective of securing the return to Commonwealth custody of records which are of
archival significance. The second group is probably only a small subset of the first, since many of the records which have passed
out of Commonwealth custody over the years are unlikely to be of enduring archival value, either because of their ephemeral content
or because they are duplicated by records remaining in Commonwealth custody. In the Commission's view only the second objective merits
a specific recovery provision. The first objective can be dealt with through s 24(1) and other legislative and administrative regimes
designed to ensure the good management of the Commonwealth administration. There seems little point in giving the NAA a power to
recover records which it does not want.
Submissions predominantly favoured a recovery provision, although opinions varied on issues such as retrospectivity, compensation,
arbitration and limiting the provision to records of archival significance. In the Commission's view a specific recovery power is
justified. Even if the discovery in private hands of a Commonwealth record of archival significance is a comparatively rare event
it is likely that such events will continue to occur from time to time. The Commonwealth should have an effective recovery regime
available to it. The power should be exercised by the NAA and if necessary enforced by order of a court.
The Commission recommends that in relation to records of enduring value the recovery power should be retrospective. Since the proclamation
of the present Act on 6 June 1984 the unauthorised transfer of the custody or ownership of a Commonwealth record has been explicitly
unlawful. Even before 6 June 1984 s 71 of the
Crimes Act 1914
Regulations 34
Public Service Act 1922
(Cth) provided a basis for action against a person who carried out such a transfer. The proposed recovery power would therefore not
be an innovation but a reinforcement of a principle that has always been understood.
Draft recommendation 11.2.
The legislation should make specific provision for the NAA to recover records which have passed out of Commonwealth custody without
appropriate authority. The power should extend to records of enduring value which passed out of Commonwealth custody prior to the
proclamation of this provision.
Draft recommendation 11.3.
The recovery procedure should be initiated by the NAA issuing a determination that a record owned by the Commonwealth but not presently
in Commonwealth custody is a Commonwealth record of enduring value and one which is not duplicated by any other record known to be
in Commonwealth custody.
Compensation and arbitration for records recovered from individuals
The more recent State archival legislation provides at least a discretion for the payment of compensation for the compulsory recovery
of public records. However the State jurisdictions, as successors to the colonial governments, have a much longer administrative
history than the Commonwealth. In consequence there may be a stronger case for the payment of compensation for the compulsory recovery
of records which may have been in private hands for generations. In the Commonwealth jurisdiction there seems to be no case for even
discretionary compensation for the recovery of records which were removed from Commonwealth control without authority after the proclamation
Archives Act
on 6 June 1984. A discretionary power to pay compensation would be appropriate for records removed prior to 6 June 1984 or for which
the circumstances of removal cannot now be established.
An order by the NAA for the recovery of a Commonwealth record of enduring value should be appealable to the Administrative Appeals
Tribunal. The AAT should also deal with any dispute as to whether the present holder of the record was eligible for compensation
or about the level of compensation to be paid.
Draft recommendation 11.4.
No compensation should be payable in relation to the recovery of records which passed out of Commonwealth custody on or after 6 June
Draft recommendation 11.5.
There should be a discretion for the payment of compensation in relation to the recovery of records which passed out of Commonwealth
custody prior to 6 June 1984, or for which the circumstances of removal can not now be established.
Draft recommendation 11.6.
Disputes relating to decisions made by the NAA under the recovery provisions should be appealable to the AAT.
Making records available for copying
The legislation should give the NAA the power (subject to appeal) to require the holder of a Commonwealth record of enduring value
to deliver the record to it for copying. The object of copying would normally be to facilitate action to recover the original. On
occasions the needs of the NAA might reasonably be met by making a copy of the record and returning the original to the private custodian.
In either case reasonable costs associated with the delivery of the record would be payable by the NAA. As this right would only
be exercised in relation to records to which the NAA is entitled to custody, the Commission believes it would be appropriate to exempt
such copying from copyright infringement. Such an amendment, which might be included in an amendment to
(Cth) would, in the Commission's opinion, be consistent with the terms of the existing exemptions in that section.
Draft recommendation 11.7.
The NAA should have the power to require that a Commonwealth record of enduring value be made available for copying.
Draft recommendation 11.8.
should be amended to expressly exempt such copying from copyright infringement.
The status of official records retained by former ministers
The present Act does not make specific provision for the records of former ministers. In principle, therefore, those records in ministers'
offices which are Commonwealth records are subject to the disposal, custody and public access provisions of the Act. This means that
former ministers would be in breach of the legislation if they retained custody of such records after leaving office. Former ministers
are free to retain or dispose of their non Commonwealth records as they see fit.
This position has been modified by certain political and administrative conventions. Firstly, the Commonwealth has never been prepared
to invoke s 24(1) to compel departing ministers to return official records to Commonwealth custody. Australian Archives operates
a Personal Records Service which encourages former ministers and senior officials to deposit their records (both Commonwealth and
personal) with Australian Archives. Many former ministers have now done this, but no action has been taken against those who have
not. Indeed if former ministers do not respond to approaches from Australian Archives about their records it may be difficult to
determine whether or not they actually include Commonwealth records.
Secondly, some ministers retain their sets of Cabinet documents in spite of the request that they be returned to Cabinet Office.
It would be open to Cabinet Office to initiate action against such defaulters under s 24(1), but this has never been done. In consequence
Australian Archives accepts Cabinet material in deposits of records from former ministers on the rationale that if they were not
accepted depositors might well take all their records elsewhere. Cabinet Office has accepted this situation in practice because it
results in at least some Cabinet material being returned to Commonwealth custody.
Thirdly, the normal public access regime has been modified for those who deposit Commonwealth records with the Personal Records Service.
As proclaimed in 1984 the Act gave no specific access rights to such depositors so that at least in theory they could be denied access
to records which they had deposited until the records were 30 years old. In recognition that this would be likely to deter intending
depositors, particularly if there was no compulsion to return Commonwealth records, Archives Regulation 9
(c) was made in 1988. This provides that depositors have a right of access to Commonwealth records which they have transferred to
the custody of Australian Archives, regardless of whether or not the records have reached the open access period. This right of access
does not extend to records of the Parliament, Executive Council or Cabinet, for which specific authority is required. Depositors
may access or authorise others to access non Commonwealth records which they have transferred to the Archives as they see fit.
The official records of ministers are a significant element in Commonwealth recordkeeping. They should be defined clearly as Commonwealth
records and be subject to the same obligations as departmental records. The only variation recommended to these obligations is that
depositors should continue to have an unrestricted right of access to the records. It would be open to the NAA to consider, and if
appropriate authorise, any request made by depositors in relation to the custody of the records. This might include the temporary
loan of records to depositors for the purpose of writing autobiographies.
The status of the official records of former ministers would be clarified if the legislation provided that any record in the possession
of a minister is a Commonwealth record unless it is obviously a private document or carries an endorsement that it is a private document.
In addition, as an administrative measure, the NAA should encourage Commonwealth agencies forwarding official papers to ministers'
offices to endorse the papers as being Commonwealth records.
Draft recommendation 11.9.
The legislation should provide that
any records created or received by ministers in the course of undertaking their ministerial responsibilities are Commonwealth records
all Commonwealth records in the possession of ministers must be transferred to the custody of the NAA not later than when the minister
leaves office
such records are subject to the public access provisions of the legislation
notwithstanding the fact that the records are subject to the public access provisions the person who deposited them has a continuing
right of unrestricted access to them
decisions about the public access status of the records when they reach the open access period should be made by the NAA in consultation
as appropriate with agencies responsible for the functions to which the records relate
the NAA may not, during the lifetime of a former minister, destroy or otherwise dispose of Commonwealth records received from the
minister without his or her approval. This requirement would become void in the event of the death of the depositor or if the depositor
failed to respond within a reasonable time to approaches from the NAA.
Draft recommendation 11.10.
The legislation should provide that any record in the possession of a minister is a Commonwealth record unless it is obviously a
private document or carries an endorsement that it is a private document. As an administrative measure, the NAA should encourage
Commonwealth agencies forwarding official papers to ministers' offices to endorse the papers as being Commonwealth records.
para 11.12–17.
12. Custody
Introduction
The custodial role of the National Archives of Australia
The 'controlling agency' concept
Non archival custody of records of enduring value: general issues
Non archival custody of records of enduring value: security and intelligence issues
Non archival custody of records of enduring value: electronic records
The present section 64 provision relating to non archival custody
The custody of records bearing national security classifications
Returning records to the custody of other agencies
The 'exempt material' provisions relating to Commonwealth collecting institutions
The custodial role of the Australian War Memorial
The location of the National Archives of Australia's custodial facilities
Samples of records and objects of archival significance
Introduction
Custody is the physical possession (or at least the effective control) by an archival institution of records created within the jurisdiction
which the archival institution serves and which have been identified as being worthy of long term preservation for administrative,
evidential or research purposes. However the fact that the archival institution has custody of the records does not necessitate that
it own them or that it have sole responsibility for determining how they may be used.
The basic objective of custody has been to give sanctuary to records of enduring value. This includes housing them, maintaining them
in good condition and arranging and describing them in a way that allows them to be accessed effectively. In some jurisdictions the
transfer of records to archival custody has also been regarded as an act of authentication, so that the very fact that they have
been received by the archival authority is a confirmation of their reliability and their standing in the jurisdiction which created
them. Even in jurisdictions such as the Commonwealth where there is no specific legal basis for the concept of archival authentication
there has been a long tradition of major inquiries, legal actions and a wide range of administrative activities seeking out archival
records as a crucial resource and accepting the validity of those records unless there was some specific ground on which to challenge
The custodial role of the National Archives of Australia
The Act gives Australian Archives a central role in the custody of Commonwealth records. The functions set out in s 5(2)(e) in effect
give the Archives the right to have custody of all non current Commonwealth records, regardless of whether or not they are of enduring
value. The powers of the Archives include in s 6(a) the power to establish and control repositories or other facilities to house
or exhibit the material of the Archives.
Australian Archives' role in the custody of Commonwealth records is elaborated in Part V of the Act.
Section 24 gives the Archives the sole power, subject to certain exceptions, to authorise the transfer of the custody or ownership
of Commonwealth records.
Section 27 requires that when a Commonwealth record has ceased to be required to be readily available to a Commonwealth institution
it must be transferred to the custody of the Archives. If such a transfer has not taken place by the time the record has reached
the age of 25 years it must be undertaken as soon as practicable thereafter. However s 29 provides for certain exceptions to this
regime, not all of which require the approval of the Archives.
Section 28 provides that the Archives is entitled, for the purposes of the Act, to full and free access at all reasonable times to
records in the custody of Commonwealth institutions other than the Archives. This provision was intended to pave the way for records
to pass into archival custody by facilitating processes such as appraisal and series registration.
Section 64 permits the Archives to entrust the custody of material of the Archives to a person where it is appropriate to do so.
This provision is intended to facilitate and protect the loan of Commonwealth records on a short or long term basis where there is
a particular reason for them to be placed in the custody of an individual or organisation other than the Archives.
The s 27 provision that all records must be transferred to Australian Archives once they are no longer required to be readily available
for current business, and at the latest by the age of 25 years, reflects a custodial regime which has already been partially superseded.
In general Australian Archives no longer accepts custody of records which need to be retained for less than 30 years, or of records
which have yet to be evaluated. The storage of such records is now
the responsibility of the agencies which created them. These agencies either store the records themselves or contract the storage
to private companies. It is possible that in the future Australian Archives will also cease to accept custody of some or all records
which are needed for administrative purposes beyond the age of 30 years, but which are not of enduring value.
Submissions predominantly supported a continuing role for the NAA as the central custodian of records of enduring value, except in
cases in which there is a strong administrative or technological case for the distributed custody of specific categories of records.
Most Commonwealth agencies and the professional and research organisations whose members use archival records argued strongly for
the archival authority to remain the custodian of records of research interest. The Commission endorses this role.
The Commission does not recommend that the NAA should abandon all responsibility in relation to the storage of records which are
not of enduring value. This would be contrary to the 'single mind' philosophy which requires that the legislation should provide
a coherent framework for the management of all Commonwealth records. The Commission has considered whether the NAA should continue
to be the designated custodian of all Commonwealth records no longer immediately required by the creator, with the NAA having the
right to approve alternative arrangements for the storage of records which are not of enduring value. However, this seems to be a
needlessly complex option and has already been superseded in practice. The better option would be to confine the requirement to transfer
records to archival custody to records of enduring value. The legislation would not require records which are not of enduring value
to be transferred to archival custody. The storage and preservation of such records would, however, be subject to the general records
management standards issued and monitored by the NAA. Compliance with these standards would be the legislative responsibility of
chief executive officers.
The legislation should also make it clear that standards issued by the NAA extend to Commonwealth records stored on behalf of Commonwealth
agencies by private contractors. Any contractual arrangements entered into for the storage of records should refer to the standards
and include adequate provisions for ensuring that they are complied with. This would include monitoring by the NAA.
Draft recommendation 12.1.
The present s 27(1) requirement that records be transferred to the custody of Australian Archives once they cease to be required
to be reasonably available for current administrative purposes is outdated and should be removed.
Draft recommendation 12.2.
The present s 27(2) requirement that records be transferred to the custody of Australian Archives by the age of 25 years, or as soon
as practicable thereafter, should be limited to records of enduring value.
Draft recommendation 12.3.
The NAA should have the power to issue and monitor standards for the storage of all Commonwealth records. The standards should address
the physical integrity of the records and the protection of their security, privacy, functionality and evidential integrity. Chief
executive officers should be responsible under the legislation for ensuring that these standards are implemented.
Draft recommendation 12.4.
The legislation should ensure that the NAA's storage standards apply equally to Commonwealth records stored by private contractors
and that chief executive officers have a responsibility to put in place contractual and monitoring arrangements to ensure that this
Draft recommendation 12.5.
The NAA should have a reasonable right of access to records stored by Commonwealth agencies and private contractors in order to monitor
and report on the implementation of the standards.
The 'controlling agency' concept
In some archival jurisdictions, records of enduring value pass into the full control of the archival authority at a specified age.
This means that the archival authority becomes the final arbiter of issues relating to their management and accessibility, although
this may be done in consultation with the agency which created them.
The present Act includes several provisions which give the agencies which created records (or their functional successors) ongoing
rights over the records which override those of Australian Archives indefinitely. These include
the s 24(4) provision that agency approval must be obtained if Australian Archives wishes to destroy records in its custody
the s 29 provisions under which Ministers and the security and intelligence agencies may withhold records from archival custody without
the concurrence of Australian Archives
the s 34 provision permitting Ministers to certify conclusively that a record is an exempt record
the s 35 provision requiring Australian Archives to consult Ministers or their delegates about arrangements for assessing the suitability
of records for public release.
Some Commonwealth agencies take a strongly protective interest in even their oldest records. This interest is most apparent in Cabinet
records, in records bearing the higher levels of national security classification and in the personnel and welfare records of former
members of the armed services. In principle the Commission supports the view that once records of enduring value reach a certain
age they should pass into the effective control of the NAA, even if they remain in the physical control of some other agency. This
does not mean that special arrangements should not be made for particular groups of records where it is appropriate to do so. But
it does mean that the NAA should be the final arbiter of such arrangements.
However, in the light of submissions it is clear that conferment of ultimate authority over archival records on the NAA would meet
with strong opposition from some agencies, who would argue that a range of obligations and sensitivities associated with their records
would make it inappropriate for the NAA to assume full control of them even at the age of 25 or 30 years. If that opposition were
to prevail the options would be either a continuation of the present regime or a statement of principle about control passing to
the NAA heavily circumscribed in practice by exceptions. The former would probably be the clearer and more realistic option, although
the residual rights of agencies in relation to their archival records should be presented more transparently than they are in the
present Act.
Some Commonwealth government functions have remained within what is essentially the same agency for many years, but others have had
a complex history of reorganisation and movement between agencies. In some cases it would be impossible for the NAA to determine
clearly which, if any, current agency should have responsibility for certain groups of records. The legislation should provide that
in such cases the controlling agency rights for the records should pass to the NAA.
Draft recommendation 12.6.
Records of enduring value which have reached the age of 25 years should, to the fullest extent possible, pass into the effective
control of the NAA.
Draft recommendation 12.7.
The legislation should recognise the concept of the 'controlling agency' and set out any residual rights of controlling agencies
over records of enduring value more than 25 years old.
Draft recommendation 12.8.
If the NAA is unable to identify any current Commonwealth agency with functions relevant to particular records in its custody then
the NAA should become solely responsible for any decisions about those records made in accordance with the legislation.
Non archival custody of records of enduring value: general issues
While accepting that there may be circumstances in which records of enduring value might appropriately remain in the custody of an
agency other than the NAA, the Commission considers that such retention should not threaten the preservation of the records or frustrate
public knowledge of or access to them. This view was generally supported in submissions, in most cases subject to the qualification
that the NAA must approve such retention. Accordingly the Commission recommends the retention of a provision along the lines of the
present s 29(1) permitting the NAA to agree to records more than 25 years old being withheld from archival custody. There should
be an express proviso that any such determination should not operate in a way that would adversely affect the preservation or accessibility
of the records concerned.
These provisions should be specifically confined to records which have been appraised as consisting wholly or partially of records
of enduring value, or records which, in the opinion of the NAA, are likely to include records of enduring value. The custody of records
not of enduring value would be dealt with according to the NAA's general custodial guidelines.
The s 29(2) provision under which the Minister responsible for a particular record may determine that it need not be transferred
to the custody of the Archives has never been used. The possible use of this provision in relation to security and intelligence records
is discussed below.
Other than in relation to security and intelligence records the Commission's view is that s 29(2) is unnecessary.
Draft recommendation 12.9.
The present s 29(1) provision should be retained, subject to the following conditions.
It should apply only to records which are of enduring value, or are likely to be so.
Any records subject to such a determination must be managed in accordance with general or specific standards approved by the NAA.
Draft recommendation 12.10.
The s 29(2) provision for the responsible Minister to determine that records need not be transferred to the custody of the NAA should
be removed, except in relation to security and intelligence records.
Non archival custody of records of enduring value: security and intelligence issues
The Commission recognises the high degree of sensitivity attaching to some records beyond the age of 25 years and the need for custodial
arrangements for such records to be seen as adequate and appropriate by all stakeholders.
The Commission believes that, if a security or intelligence agency wishes to withhold records under its control from transfer to
archival custody beyond the age of 25 years, it should first seek the concurrence of the NAA with such retention. In the event of
the NAA refusing its concurrence the agency concerned should have the right to ask the Minister to which it is responsible for a
determination that the records need not be transferred to archival custody. This determination would be binding on the NAA. Any such
determinations should be required to be notified to the NAA and also be tabled in the Parliament. Each determination would be supported
by a statement describing the records to be withheld and the reasons for doing so, but not in a way which would involve the release
of information which would itself merit exemption from public release under the legislation.
Provisions along these lines would supersede s 29(8) and s 29(9) which exempt the security and intelligence agencies and the Australian
Federal Police (in relation only to certain witness protection records) from seeking the concurrence of the Director-General of Australian
Archives to the withholding of records from the custody of the Archives.
The Commission notes the concern raised by the security and intelligence agencies that many sensitive records originating from them
are now held by agencies not subject to the present s 29(8) provision. In principle it appears reasonable that such records should
be subject to the same right of ministerial custodial determination as is proposed for the records of the security and intelligence
agencies themselves. However any extension of the right to withhold records from archival custody without need for the concurrence
of the NAA should be confined to situations in which it is clearly appropriate. In some agencies security and intelligence records
are held quite separately from other records. In other agencies such material may be scattered widely through general policy and
correspondence recordkeeping systems. It is not appropriate that any special custodial provisions should extend to the latter group,
which include security and intelligence records only because of poor management procedures in the past. If the right of ministerial
custodial determination can be extended to all recordkeeping systems established and maintained solely for the handling of security
and intelligence records then it would be appropriate to do so. If a workable distinction can not be established between these specialised
systems and the general recordkeeping systems of the major departments then the right of ministerial determination should be confined
to the records of the security and intelligence agencies themselves.
Draft recommendation 12.11.
The legislation should provide that
where a security or intelligence agency wishes to retain custody of any records under its control, or
where the Australian Federal Police wishes to retain custody of any records relating to witness protection (being records currently
subject to s 29(9)),
the agency concerned should first seek the concurrence of the NAA with such retention. If the NAA refuses its concurrence, the agency
may refer its application to the relevant minister whose decision on the matter shall be final. Sections 29(8) and 29(9) would be
superseded by these provisions and should accordingly be repealed. Where the relevant minister approves such an application the minister's
determination should be notified to the NAA and tabled in the Parliament.
Draft recommendation 12.12.
A determination by a minister authorising the withholding from the custody of the NAA of security or intelligence records may be
expressed to apply also to such records held in a recordkeeping system of another agency maintained specifically for the keeping
of security and intelligence records.
Non archival custody of records of enduring value: electronic records
In the present state of technology there are electronic recordkeeping systems in Commonwealth agencies which could not be transferred
to the custody of the NAA without a risk that information would be lost or linkages between records would be damaged. As the technology
develops it may move closer to a seamless web of Commonwealth electronic recordkeeping in which new strategies become possible and
the boundaries between 'agency' and 'archival' custody are diminished or removed. The challenge for the Commission is to suggest
legislative provisions which are sufficiently flexible both to safeguard records in the present environment and to accommodate new
technologies.
The starting point for the effective management of electronic records of enduring value is adherence to adequate documentation standards
as part of the system design process. This will ensure that records are created and maintained appropriately. Even if the NAA is
not directly involved in the design stage it is important that its appraisal strategies make it aware of records of enduring value
at an early stage of their existence in order to be assured that adequate management strategies are in place for them. These strategies
must include an agreement between the NAA and the creating agency as to long term custodial and accessibility arrangements.
The Commission has already recommended that the NAA should continue to have the power to delegate the custody of records of enduring
value. However this provision alone may not always deal adequately with the custody of electronic records of enduring value. It is
based on the assumption that certain agencies will wish to retain custody of records and that a mechanism is therefore required under
which such arrangements may be approved by the NAA. In the light of views put to the Commission in submissions and consultations
it is possible that the situation with electronic records of enduring value may be the reverse of that envisaged by the present s
29, namely that some agencies will wish to transfer responsibility for their older records to the NAA but that for technological
reasons the NAA will not be able to receive them.
There are clearly administrative and financial issues to be addressed in relation to the distributed custody of electronic records.
Nevertheless the legislation must ensure that records of enduring value are protected adequately. Such protection must include provision
for a 'worst case scenario' in which an agency is reluctant to maintain responsibility for records of enduring value which the NAA
does not have the technology to manage adequately. The Commission accordingly considers that the legislation should include a provision
under which the NAA may require an agency to retain the custody of records of enduring value in cases in which the NAA is unable
to provide appropriate custodial facilities itself.
Even in cases in which agencies are readily prepared to retain custody of electronic records it is essential that they should be
aware of their obligation to maintain the functionality and accessibility of the records concerned. The legislation should require
agencies having custody of records of enduring value to maintain them in accordance with standards set by the NAA.
Draft recommendation 12.13.
The NAA should have the power to require agencies to retain custody of records of enduring value if, in the opinion of the NAA, this
is necessary to ensure their preservation and accessibility.
Draft recommendation 12.14.
Agencies retaining custody of records of enduring value must maintain them in accordance with standards set by the NAA.
The present section 64 provision relating to non archival custody
Section 64 permits the Director-General of Australian Archives to make arrangements with a person to have the custody of material
of the Archives. Any such arrangements are required to provide for the care of the material concerned and for its regular inspection
by the Archives. Section 64 has been used only occasionally, mainly to sanction the loan of individual items for display.
The use of the wording 'material of the Archives' limits the use of the provision to records already in the custody of the Archives.
This has proved to be an inhibiting factor in the use of s 64, since any Commonwealth institution with the facilities and expertise
to run its own archives is likely to be holding records which have never been in the custody of Australian Archives. An example is
the Reserve Bank of Australia, whose custody of its own archival records had to be authorised under s 29 rather than s 64 because
the records had never been in the Archives' custody.
The Commission has already accepted in relation to the existing s 29 provisions that there should be some mechanism under which the
NAA may permit agencies to retain custody of records of enduring value beyond the age of 25 years. A provision is also required for
the NAA to be able to authorise the loan of Commonwealth records in the custody of the NAA or of the agency which created them to
some other Commonwealth agency, private organisation or individual. Such loans would generally be on a short term basis for purposes
such as exhibition or research. They should be subject to the following conditions.
The NAA must set and monitor appropriate conditions for the physical care of the records.
The rights and reasonable expectations of other potential users of the records should not be prejudiced by a loan arrangement.
Draft recommendation 12.15.
The legislation should permit the NAA to authorise a Commonwealth institution, a non Commonwealth institution or an individual to
have custody of records of enduring value, subject to appropriate conditions.
The custody of records bearing national security classifications
Australian Archives has said that it is essential that all non-electronic national security classified records, irrespective of whether
they are of temporary or enduring value, should be transferred to the custody of the NAA once they are no longer required for administrative
purposes. This would ensure that they would be stored at an appropriate standard of security.
The Commission accepts that it is important that security classified records should be stored appropriately. It does not, however,
accept that the NAA should have custody of records which are not of enduring value simply to ensure their safe custody. That should
be the responsibility of the chief executive officer of the relevant agency. In discharging those responsibilities chief executive
officers would be bound, under the scheme proposed by the Commission, to comply with mandatory custody standards applying to both
enduring and non enduring records. These standards would make specific provision for the custody of records bearing national security
classifications.
Draft recommendation 12.16.
The scheme proposed by the Commission for records of both enduring and non enduring value should apply equally to national security
classified records as to other records.
Returning records to the custody of other agencies
Section 30(2) provides that where a record more than 25 years old is made available to a Commonwealth institution it should not leave
the custody of the Archives unless this is necessary for the proper conduct of the business of that institution. The object of this
provision is to protect records which are in, or close to, the open access period by ensuring that they do not become inaccessible
to members of the public or risk being lost or altered by being reabsorbed into a departmental recordkeeping system. Australian Archives
has always sought to minimise the loan of open access period records to other agencies, but a considerable number of such loans have
taken place either to serve current administrative needs or to obtain the agency's advice about the public access status of the record
concerned. The Commission agrees that older records should leave archival custody only if there is a compelling administrative need
for them to do so and that the issue is sufficiently important to be recognised in legislation. The s 30(2) provision should therefore
be retained, although it need apply only to records of enduring value.
Draft recommendation 12.17.
The legislation should continue to provide that records of enduring value more than 25 years old should leave the custody of the
NAA only if there are compelling administrative needs for them to do so.
The 'exempt material' provisions relating to Commonwealth collecting institutions
When the Archives Bill was under consideration during the 1970s there was some concern among the various Commonwealth collecting
institutions that the definition of Commonwealth record might be read so widely that it would encompass not merely any official written
records which they might hold but also material such as books and paintings. In consequence the Act defines as 'exempt material'
(and thereby excludes from the definition of 'Commonwealth record') the memorial collection of the Australian War Memorial, the library
material of the National Library of Australia, the collection of works of art maintained by the National Gallery of Australia, historical
material in the possession of the National Museum of Australia and the collection of the Australian National Maritime Museum.
The exempt material provisions address two separate issues. Firstly they clarify that Commonwealth owned cultural material such as
books, paintings and artefacts do not fall within the definition of 'Commonwealth record'. Secondly they recognise that certain official
records, as a result of present or past administrative arrangements, are held by the Australian War Memorial or the National Library
of Australia rather than by Australian Archives.
If it is still considered necessary for the legislation to state explicitly that Australian Archives' responsibilities do not extend
to such materials as books and paintings then this should, in the Commission's view, be done through the general definition of the
term 'record' rather than through an 'exempt material' provision. However in drafting the definition regard should be had to the
fact that some books, paintings, models and other materials might be justifiably defined as Commonwealth records because their subject
matter is so closely related to other Commonwealth records. Provision should therefore be made for material to be added to the definition
of 'record' by legislative instrument.
The National Library of Australia has raised the issue of official records which came into its custody prior to the proclamation
Archives Act
among deposits of personal papers received from former ministers and senior officials. The Library has reiterated its concern that
the pre 1984 material should remain in its custody, noting that much of it duplicates records held by the Archives and that the Library
and the Archives operate similar access regimes. The Commission agrees that there is no reason to disturb the pre 1984 material,
but considers that, if its custodial status is still considered to require formal regulation, this should be done though the NAA's
general power to authorise custodial arrangements rather than through a continuation of the 'exempt material' provision.
Draft recommendation 12.18.
The present 'exempt material' provisions relating to material such as books and paintings in the custody of other Commonwealth collecting
institutions should be removed. The legislation should make clear that such materials do not normally fall within the definition
of 'record', while providing scope for particular items to be included in the definition in exceptional circumstances by legislative
regulation.
Draft recommendation 12.19.
The existing custodial arrangements for official records acquired by the National Library of Australia prior to 1984 should be confirmed
by the NAA in the exercise of its custodial powers rather than by a continuation of the 'exempt material' provision.
The custodial role of the Australian War Memorial
The Australian War Memorial has always been recognised as the custodian of operational records created by Australian military agencies
in wars and warlike operations. It is thus responsible for the custody, care and accessibility of an important group of official
records. The 'exempt material' formula in the
Archives Act
excludes from the definition of 'Commonwealth record' any 'material included in the memorial collection within the meaning of the
Australian War Memorial Act 1980
', although there is provision for such records to be deemed to be Commonwealth records by regulation. Some of the War Memorial's
official records (that is records which would have been Commonwealth records but for the 'exempt material' provision) were subsequently
made subject by regulation to certain provisions of the
Archives Act
, in particular those relating to public access. The managers of the War Memorial's official records have always worked closely with
Australian Archives and common access procedures and descriptive standards have been adopted.
The War Memorial's role in the management of official records should be recognised positively in the archives legislation rather
than, as at present, through a somewhat negative combination of an exclusion and a complex regulation. The Commission recommends
that the War Memorial's right to custody of records created by Australian military agencies in war, warlike operations and peacekeeping
operations be incorporated expressly in the legislation, while making it clear that this in no way diminishes the application of
the archives legislation in all other respects to those records.
For the past 15 years intermittent negotiations have taken place between Australian Archives and the War Memorial to establish a
detailed agreement on the classes of official records which should pass to the custody of the War Memorial. It is clearly desirable
that these negotiations should be brought to a satisfactory conclusion as expeditiously as possible, not least for the guidance of
Commonwealth agencies which may be uncertain as to which institution they should deliver records. It would be appropriate for the
proposed provision relating to the War Memorial to be framed as to ensure early completion of the negotiation of such an agreement.
Draft recommendation 12.20.
The legislation should expressly recognise the Australian War Memorial's custodial role in relation to certain Commonwealth records.
This would enable the present 'exempt material' provision to be dispensed with.
Draft recommendation 12.21.
The NAA and the Australian War Memorial should be required to bring to a conclusion the negotiation of arrangements specifying the
classes of records to be held by the Australian War Memorial.
The location of the National Archives of Australia's custodial facilities
requires Australian Archives, in determining where records are to be located, to take into account
the convenience of persons likely to require access to the material
the desirability of keeping related material in the same place
the appropriateness of keeping in a State or Territory material that relates in particular to that State or Territory or to places
in that State or Territory.
Australian Archives operates public research facilities in every State and mainland Territory capital city. Records created by Commonwealth
agencies are normally held in the office of the Archives in the State or Territory in which they were created, so that the spirit
has been respected. Indeed the records of the national government are more widely distributed geographically in Australia than in
many other countries.
The making of any recommendation about
is complicated by the fact that it cannot be assumed that the NAA would continue to be able to operate in each State and Territory,
although the Commission notes an encouraging trend towards the establishment of joint Commonwealth/State archival facilities. For
example, in 1997 Australian Archives and the Public Record Office of Victoria opened a joint public research facility in central
Melbourne. Other such cooperative ventures are under consideration. Joint research facilities can enhance the visibility and efficiency
of both institutions involved and also help researchers navigate the often complex interface between Commonwealth and State functions.
It is certainly preferable from the user's viewpoint for Australian Archives or the new NAA to participate in a joint venture rather
than to withdraw entirely from a State or Territory and transfer all the records relating to that State or Territory to some other
part of the country.
In the longer term the development of electronic records and of electronic networks to access them will overcome some of the problems
was intended to address. However much of the history of the nation and its citizens will continue to be held on paper in a single
location. The general intention of
remains valid today, but in a rapidly changing world it is probably of little benefit to include such an advisory provision in legislation.
Draft recommendation 12.22.
should be deleted.
Draft recommendation 12.23.
As an administrative objective the NAA should, if it becomes necessary to terminate or significantly reduce its presence in any State
or Territory, endeavour to enter into a cooperative arrangement with the relevant State or Territory archival authority to accept
custody of Commonwealth records of enduring value.
Samples of records and objects of archival significance
Section 61 provides that an object which is the property of the Commonwealth or of a Commonwealth institution may be declared by
the Minister to be an object of archival significance. Objects subject to such a declaration can not be destroyed without the permission
of the Archives and must be transferred to the custody of the Archives when no longer required for current administrative purposes.
The purpose of s 61 is to provide for the preservation of material of enduring value which is relevant to the history of the Commonwealth
but which does not fall within the normal definition of a record. The requirement for a ministerial declaration was seen to reflect
the exceptional nature of such a decision and the need to ensure that the Archives was in fact the most appropriate custodian for
the object.
provides that, to the extent required by the Archives, the Reserve Bank must provide samples of current bank notes, the Royal Australian
Mint must provide samples of current coins and the Australian Postal Commission must provide samples of current postage stamps. In
addition the Minister has the power to declare that any other objects that are the property of the Commonwealth or of a Commonwealth
institution are subject to the requirement to provide samples to the Archives.
Submissions did not address either provision, perhaps because they have been little used and appear to serve little current purpose.
Australian Archives does not exercise its right to obtain samples of notes, coins and stamps, which are, in any event, housed and
presented by the institutions which created them. Any other obligations to retain samples of records are set out in records disposal
authorities, avoiding the need for specific ministerial determinations.
The Commission acknowledges that there should be some provision for material that does not fall within the general definition of
records but which merits preservation and for which the NAA is the most appropriate custodian. However the disparate nature of the
material involved, the low level of use of the existing provisions and the fact that both values and custodial options may change
over time suggests that the most flexible option would be to deal with specific instances as they arise either by accepting custody
of material outside the mandatory provisions of the legislation or by a regulation adding the material concerned to the definition
of a record.
Draft recommendation 12.24.
The present s 61 and
provisions should be deleted. If it is considered appropriate to extend the statutory provisions of the legislation to material that
does not constitute a record as defined in the legislation this should be achieved by regulation.
paras 12.17–20.
See Chapter 8 for discussion of the term 'record'.
13. Preservation
The preservation role of the National Archives of Australia
Preserving the functionality of electronic records
Protecting records in archival custody
The preservation role of the National Archives of Australia
In the archival context the word 'preservation' has generally been taken to mean not only ensuring the survival of records but also
maintaining them in reasonable condition. With the advent of electronic records it has gained the additional meaning of preserving
the functionality of records so that their evidential value is not impaired.
In addition to the general
prohibition on the unauthorised destruction or damage of Commonwealth records the Act contains several specific provisions relating
to the preservation of records. These are aimed essentially at the protection of records of enduring value already in the custody
of Australian Archives by providing mechanisms which can be used to prohibit inappropriate forms of access to, or use of, records
by either agencies or the public.
Many submissions addressed the preservation issue. Preservation guidelines already issued by Australian Archives in areas such as
paper standards have clearly proved useful to other Commonwealth agencies. There was general support for the NAA having the power
to issue standards for the preservation of records. Some submissions supported the NAA having a monitoring and reporting role, while
others saw enforcement in relation to records in the custody of agencies as being the sole responsibility of chief executive officers.
The obligation to preserve records in good order for as long as they are needed is as fundamental as the obligation to create records.
Indeed the need for guidance on preservation issues is even greater because of the technical complexity of issues such as paper deterioration
and fire or water damage. The Commission has recommended in Chapter 9 that the NAA be empowered to issue standards for all phases
of the recordkeeping continuum, including preservation.
As recommended in Chapter 9 primary responsibility for the auditing of standards for the management of Commonwealth records should
reside with the Auditor-General. However it is important that the NAA should have an opportunity to gather information about how
the standards which it issues operate in practice. The Commission has also recommended in Chapter 9 that the present s 28 provision
giving Australian Archives a reasonable right of entry to the premises of other Commonwealth agencies should be maintained for the
NAA and extended to the premises of contractors storing records on behalf of the Commonwealth.
Draft recommendation 13.1.
The NAA should be empowered to issue standards for the appropriate preservation of Commonwealth records. The standards should apply
equally to private contractors storing records on behalf of the Commonwealth.
Draft recommendation 13.2.
The NAA should have a reasonable right of access to the premises of agencies and contractors for the purpose,
, of ensuring that the preservation standards are being implemented adequately.
Preserving the functionality of electronic records
An electronic record which has become inaccessible or corrupted is as useless as a paper record which has become illegible. Even
if an electronic record remains retrievable its functionality may be significantly reduced if its linkages with other records in
the system, or with other systems, are reduced or broken by software changes. The recommended general requirement for the adequate
preservation of records implies a requirement to maintain functionality. However the point is so important that it would be appropriate
to reinforce it with a specific provision that 'preservation' includes an obligation to protect the evidential value of a record
by maintaining its functionality.
Draft recommendation 13.3.
The legislation should make it clear that the term 'preservation' includes the maintenance of an adequate level of functionality
for electronic records.
Protecting records in archival custody
Section 36(4)(c) provides that, where acceding to an application for access to a record in a particular form (for example an opportunity
to inspect the original or to purchase a copy) would be detrimental to its preservation, access to the record in that form may be
refused and access granted in another form. Section 37 provides that the Director-General may, for the purpose of ensuring the safe
custody and proper preservation of a record, determine that it be withheld from public access or made available only subject to reasonable
conditions. If access to the original record is withheld the Archives must provide a copy if this can be done without detriment to
the preservation or safe custody of the original. Decisions under s 37 are subject to the access appeal provisions, but those under
s 36(4)(c) are not.
The existing preservation provisions relating to Commonwealth records already in the custody of Australian Archives appear to have
worked adequately. Only a very small proportion of records sought by members of the public have been subject to limitations under
s 36(4)(c) or s 37 and in most cases in which originals have been withheld copies have been made available. Submissions did not indicate
that these provisions were either unnecessary or that there were any problems with them. There have been no appeals to the Administrative
Appeals Tribunal over decisions to withhold or modify access to records on preservation grounds and only occasional applications
for internal reconsideration of such decisions. Nevertheless the very presence of an appeal system is an important element in accountability
and the Commission sees no reason to remove it. It would be appropriate to extend the right of appeal to decisions under the present
s 36(4)(c).
Draft recommendation 13.4.
The NAA should retain the right to refuse or restrict access to records on preservation grounds and to provide copies in place of
access to original records. Such decisions should be subject to the normal access appeal process.
14. Records of the Parliament, the Commonwealth Courts and royal commissions
Present arrangements for the records of the Parliament
Present arrangements for the records of the Commonwealth Courts
Simplifying arrangements for the records of the Parliament and the Commonwealth Courts
Distinguishing between the core and secondary records of the Parliament and the Courts
Creating, maintaining and disposing of the records of the Parliament and the Courts
Accessing the records of the Parliament and the Courts
The records of royal commissions
Present arrangements for the records of the Parliament
The records of the Parliament are Commonwealth records as defined in the Act. However the effect of s 18 and s 20 is that Division
2 (which includes the disposal and custody provisions) and Division 3 (the access provisions) do not apply to records in the possession
of the Senate, the House of Representatives or a Parliamentary department unless regulations are made to that effect. Such regulations
can only be made after consultation between the Minister, the President of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives.
Divisions 4 and 5 of the Act (which deal principally with the review of access decisions, special and accelerated access and defamation
protection) apply automatically to Parliamentary records. However Division 4 is in effect inoperative unless the records are made
subject by regulation to the access provisions in Division 3.
The Archives (Records of the Parliament) Regulations were made in 1995. The regulations divide the records of the Parliament into
two categories, identified as Class A records and Class B records.
In summary, Class A records consist of
the records of the proceedings of the Senate and the House of Representatives
records laid before or tabled in the Senate or House of Representatives
records presented to a Parliamentary committee in camera or on a confidential or restricted basis and which have not been authorised
to be published
records prepared by a Parliamentary department and which relate to records presented to a Parliamentary committee.
Class B records comprise all records in the possession of the Senate, the House of Representatives or a Parliamentary department
which are not Class A records.
Class A records are those over which the Parliament essentially retains effective control. They are subject to the Act's basic obligations
in relation to disposal (s 24(1)) and alteration (s 26(1)), although dealings with records under those provisions may be authorised
by the Presiding Officers or by resolution of the Senate. The application to Class A records of s 27 (transfer of records to archival
custody), s 28 (access to the records by Australian Archives) and s 29 (withholding records from archival custody) is at the discretion
of the Presiding Officers. Class A records are exempt records under s 33, so that any public release of them is purely discretionary.
Class B records are subject to the main statutory obligations of the Act, although the regulations modify the way in which some of
the provisions operate. For example the disposal of a Class B record may take place in accordance with a Parliamentary practice,
while a record over 25 years old may be altered with the permission of a Presiding Officer. Class B records are, however, subject
to mandatory transfer to archival custody and to the public access and appeal provisions.
Since the regulations were made Australian Archives, in consultation with officers of the Parliament, has issued records disposal
authorities for the records of the Senate and the House of Representatives. Australian Archives has custody of a substantial volume
of records of the Parliament.
Present arrangements for the records of the Commonwealth Courts
The records of the Commonwealth Courts are Commonwealth records as defined in the Act. However s 19 provides that, subject to s 20
and s 21, Divisions 2 and 3 do not apply to records in the possession of a Court or of the registry of a Court. Under s 20(1) regulations
may be made to bring Court records under some or all of the provisions of Divisions 2 and 3. Section 20(3) provides that such regulations
can only be made after consultation between the Minister and the Chief Justice, Chief Judge or the judicial officer with principal
responsibility for the administration of the Court concerned.
Section 19(2) provides that Divisions 4 and 5 of the Act do not apply to records in the possession of a court, other than records
that are of an administrative nature. This means that even if Court records are brought by regulation under the public access provisions
in Division 3 it would not be possible to appeal against a decision to exempt records from public access unless the records concerned
were administrative records.
No regulations under s 20 have ever been made in relation to Court records. Australian Archives has worked with the Commonwealth
Courts to develop records disposal authorities and to take many of the Courts' older records into its custody. Records disposal authorities
have been completed for the High Court and the Federal Court and the authority for the Family Court is close to completion. The Courts
can also make use of the General Disposal Authorities. The authorities are not legally binding on the Courts until such time as they
are regulated into Division 3. However their existence means that in practice the Courts are adhering to a records disposal regime
consistent with that applied to other Commonwealth records.
The High Court is the only Commonwealth Court with significant volumes of records of enduring value which have reached the open access
period. These have been made available for public access at Australian Archives' Canberra office subject to the withholding of any
material the High Court has considered unsuitable for release.
Simplifying arrangements for the records of the Parliament and the Commonwealth Courts
Issues Paper 19 asked whether the new archival authority should have a role in the custody and disposal of the records of the Parliament
and the Commonwealth Courts and, if so, whether that role would be affected by the authority becoming an independent statutory authority.
Few submissions addressed this issue in detail. The agencies immediately involved appear to broadly support a continuation of the
present arrangements, as does Australian Archives. A small number of submissions suggested that the records of the Parliament should
be brought fully into the general provisions of the legislation, particularly if the NAA became a statutory authority.
The records of the Parliament and the Commonwealth Courts are a vital part of the record of the Commonwealth. The Commission endorses
the principle that they should be subject to the legislation to the maximum extent possible consistent with maintaining the separation
of the legislative, judicial and executive functions. The present Act recognises the basic principle that the records of the Parliament
and the Courts are Commonwealth records, but leaves many of the most significant provisions of the legislation to be implemented
by regulation. The Act has now been in operation for 13 years, regulations have been made for the records of the Parliament and Australian
Archives has built up an extensive working relationship with the Parliament and the Courts, particularly in relation to the disposal
of records. In the Commission's view it is now appropriate for provisions relating to these institutions to be included in the legislation
itself rather than in regulations.
Draft recommendation 14.1.
The records of the Parliament and the Commonwealth Courts should be subject to the legislation to the maximum extent possible consistent
with maintaining the separation of the legislative, judicial and executive functions.
Draft recommendation 14.2.
Provisions relating to the Parliament and the Commonwealth Courts should be included in the legislation itself rather than in regulations.
Distinguishing between the core and secondary records of the Parliament and the Courts
The Commission acknowledges that it is not appropriate to treat all records of the Parliament and the Courts in the same way. The
need for some degree of differentiation is recognised in the distinction between Class A and Class B records in the regulations dealing
with the records of the Parliament
and in the s 19(2) wording 'records in the possession of a court or of a registry of a court' and 'records that are of an administrative
nature.' In both cases these provisions seek to distinguish between records which are fundamental to the independent authority of
the Parliament and the Courts and those which support their functions. These distinctions should be maintained and included in the
legislation itself. An attempt should, however, be made to simplify the quite complex existing definition of Class A records.
Draft recommendation 14.3.
The present distinction between Class A and Class B records of the Parliament should be maintained and set out as concisely as possible
in the legislation rather than in regulations.
Draft recommendation 14.4.
The present distinction between the judicial and administrative records of the Courts should be maintained and set out in the legislation.
Creating, maintaining and disposing of the records of the Parliament and the Courts
In the Commission's view, the Parliament and the Courts should be subject, in common with all other Commonwealth agencies, to the
mandatory standards issued by the NAA for the creation and maintenance of records. However the NAA should be required to consult
with the institution concerned and to issue guidelines which address its particular circumstances.
The Parliament and the Courts should be subject generally to the custodial provisions of the legislation, but Presiding Officers
and Chief Justices should have a right to issue determinations that Class A records of the Parliament and judicial records of the
Courts respectively would not be required to be transferred to the custody of the NAA.
Final authority for the disposal of the Class A records of the Parliament and the judicial records of the Courts should reside with
the institutions concerned. However the institution should be required to consult the NAA before disposing of records. In practice
this should entail a continuation of the current practice whereby the institution and Australian Archives cooperatively develop non-mandatory
records disposal authorities. The Class B records of the Parliament and the administrative records of the Courts should be subject
to the normal disposal provisions of the legislation.
Draft recommendation 14.5.
The Parliament and the Courts should be required to adhere to recordkeeping standards issued by the NAA after consultation with the
institution concerned.
Draft recommendation 14.6.
The Parliament and the Courts should be subject to the custodial provisions of the legislation. However the relevant Presiding Officer
or Chief Justice should be able to determine that Class A records of the Parliament or judicial records of the Courts should not
be required to be transferred to the custody of the NAA.
Draft recommendation 14.7.
The Parliament should continue to have the right to dispose of Class A records as it sees fit, provided that it first consults with
the NAA. Disposal of Class B records should require the approval of the NAA.
Draft recommendation 14.8.
The Courts should continue to have the right to dispose of their judicial records as they see fit, provided that they first consult
with the NAA. Disposal of the administrative records of the Courts should require the approval of the NAA.
Accessing the records of the Parliament and the Courts
The Class A records of the Parliament and the judicial records of the Courts should not be subject to a mandatory public access regime.
Decisions about the suitability of such records for public release should be made by resolution of the relevant House of the Parliament
or by the Chief Justice of the relevant Court. Such decisions would not be appealable.
If Class A records of the Parliament and the judicial records of the Courts are not to be subject to a statutory right of access,
the legislation should require those responsible for them to ensure that their public access status is determined once they reach
the open access period. It should also require that, in making such determinations, the decision maker have regard to any guidelines
issued by the NAA in respect of such records. This would help to ensure that the accessibility of these records was addressed in
as consistent and proactive a way as possible.
The Class B records of the Parliament and the administrative records of the Courts should be subject to the normal public access
provisions of the legislation. However it would not be appropriate for access decisions relating to these records to be subject to
internal reconsideration by the NAA or appeal to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal. If access is refused applicants should have
a right to request a review of the decision by the Clerk of the relevant House of the Parliament or by the Registrar of the relevant
Draft recommendation 14.9.
The Class A records of the Parliament and the judicial records of the Courts should not be subject to the public access provisions
of the legislation. The Class B records of the Parliament and the administrative records of the Courts should be subject to the public
access provisions.
Draft recommendation 14.10.
Public access decisions relating to the records of the Parliament and the Courts should not be subject to the internal reconsideration
and external review provisions. However any decision to refuse access to a Class B record of the Parliament or an administrative
record of a Court should be reviewable by the Clerk of the relevant House of the Parliament or by the Registrar of the relevant Court.
Draft recommendation 14.11.
If Class A records and the judicial records of the Courts are not to be subject to a statutory right of access the legislation should
require those responsible for them to ensure that their public access status is determined once they reach the open access period
and that in making such determinations the decision makers have regard to any relevant guidelines issued by the NAA.
The records of royal commissions
Section 22 provides that the Commonwealth is entitled to possession of records no longer required by royal commissions and that they
are Commonwealth records for the purposes of the Act. Once the records reach the open access period the public access provisions
of the Act override any restrictions on their publication made by the royal commission. Records created by Commonwealth royal commissions
working in conjunction with State royal commissions are subject to the Act only to the extent agreed between the governments concerned.
Royal commission records are subject to the public access provisions of the Act, but Australian Archives is not entitled to custody
of them unless this has been authorised by the Minister responsible for the administration of the
Royal Commissions Act 1902
(currently the Prime Minister).
Royal commission records are an important element of the history of the Commonwealth. The Commission recommends that they should
continue to be subject to the legislation and that to avoid any uncertainty this should continue to be the subject of specific provisions.
Draft recommendation 14.12.
The legislation should continue to specify that
royal commission records are Commonwealth records for the purposes of the Act,
once royal commission records reach the age of 30 years the access provisions of the Act prevail over any restriction on access to
them imposed by that royal commission,
the Minister responsible for the
Royal Commissions Act 1902
(Cth) exercises the controlling agency function for them,
the status of the records of joint royal commissions should be determined by agreement between the governments concerned.
See paras 14.3–7 above.
Accessing records of enduring value
15. An access regime
Introduction
A need for an access regime
The open period and FOI legislation
The relationship with FOI legislation
Maintaining the concept of an open period
Setting a time frame for the open period
Closing the 'access gap'
Improving open access to records
An accessibility obligation
Encouragement and guidelines for proactive release
Legislative support for proactive release and other discretionary releases
Legislative protection for proactive release and other discretionary releases
Block examination techniques
Relationship with the
Open period access and other legislation
Introduction
Access to government held information is
an important element of a democratic society. Open access can improve
the quality of government
decision making by increasing public
awareness and participation in the decision making process. Without an
access regime there
is no obligation on the government to make records
available to the public. In times of decreasing resources and competing
this could easily translate into the reduction or cessation
A need for an access regime
The archival records of the Commonwealth
are a national resource which the people of Australia have a need and a
right to access.
This access cannot be guaranteed unless an effective
and non-discretionary access regime is in place. Legislative
recognition of
a right of access, with a right of review of a refusal
of access, is necessary. However a
prima facie
right of public
access must be balanced against competing interests such as the
protection of personal privacy and national security.
These competing
interests, as exceptions to a right of access, must also be clearly
defined in legislation.
The traditional access regime is based
on the concept of paper records and how to provide access to paper
records. The reality
is that Commonwealth records are created and
stored in a number of different formats. These include not only records
computers but also video, film, and audio records.
Technology will generate many other formats, all of which need to be
by the new legislation. The development of an access regime
must consider records of the past, present and future and ensure that
all of these records can be made accessible under the same access
Draft recommendation 15.1.
The access regime should continue
to be enshrined in legislation, including a right of access to
Commonwealth records, a clear
definition of any exceptions to that
right, and effective review mechanisms.
Draft recommendation 15.2.
The access regime should apply to
all records regardless of format. Development of legislation and
administrative procedures should
take into consideration the need to
encompass all record formats.
The open period and FOI legislation
The relationship with FOI legislation
As part of its consideration of the
ideal access regime the Commission has looked at the relationship
between the FOI Act and the
Archives Act
. Regardless of the age of the
records the emphasis should be on releasing records to the public as
soon as possible. A number of
submissions suggested enacting a single
Information Act
which would cover access to all records
regardless of age. A single Access to
Information Act
would permit
greater flexibility for developing a tiered approach to access, phasing
out exemptions over time as opposed to a uniform
open period and two
separate sets of exemptions.
During their review of the FOI Act the
Commission and the Administrative Review Council met strong opposition
to an amalgamation
of the FOI Act, the
and the Archives
Act. In the final report there was no recommendation for amalgamation.
Submissions to this review presented the same arguments against the
amalgamation of all three Acts. Whilst combining just the FOI
Archives Act
into a single Access to
Information Act
would have the
advantage of providing a single point of legislative reference, there
would still be difficulties in addressing
the different objectives of
each regime. Amalgamation might also mean that the proposed new regime
of Commonwealth records management
which the Commission has recommended
of this report would need to be set out in a separate piece
of legislation to ensure that it was clearly defined and understood.
At the present time the complexities
associated with drafting and implementing a new piece of legislation,
particularly the costs
of educating staff and the public, outweigh the
possible benefits of a single act.
Draft recommendation 15.3.
The archives legislation and FOI Act should not be amalgamated.
Maintaining the concept of an open period
The Commission recognises the attraction
of a tiered access system and progressive release of records which
takes into account
the sensitivity of the record rather than its age.
Such a system could assist to overcome a reluctance to release records
they are 30 years old, regardless of the content. At the same
time the Commission was presented with strong support for the existing
simpler, uniform open access arrangements, particularly from public
users and Australian Archives. Their submissions expressed
concern that
a tiered system would diminish the strength of the principle that at
some date all records should be released to the
public, resulting in a
practical reduction in the numbers of records made available. Having a
uniform open access arrangement appears
also to be the least resource
The Commission considers that a
graduated system of access could enhance access to government
information. However, the complexities
and resource implications
associated with creating and implementing a tiered system outweigh the
possible benefits. Difficulties
include identifying classes of records
and applying time frames, assessment of records at an appropriate time,
notification to
the public of the availability of records, education of
staff to reduce 'cultural secrecy' trends, and education of the public
to ensure that the right to access is fully utilised with the minimum
of confusion. All of these difficulties could be overcome
in time, with
the injection of suitable resources. It is likely, however, that the
short term result would be confusion and indecision,
conservative access decisions and an erosion of the concept of open
Draft recommendation 15.4.
The existing concept of an open
access period at a defined age should be retained as the complexities
and resource implications
of a tiered access system would be likely to
outweigh the benefits.
Setting a time frame for the open period
Thirty years, the time period currently
in use, is seen as a suitable balance between open access and the
protection of continuing
sensitivities. There was some support for the
reduction of the period, but the majority of submissions supported
retention of the
. The Commission recommends
the retention of a 30 year period, but only in conjunction with the
closing of the access gap so that
the FOI Act and archives legislation
meet and the implementation of proactive administrative schemes
designed to release non-sensitive
records prior to reaching 30 years of
age. The 30 year rule should be seen as a guarantee, providing minimum
standards of access,
and should not inhibit a proactive approach to the
earlier release of records.
Draft recommendation 15.5.
The open access period should continue to commence at 30 years.
Closing the 'access gap'
The existing relationship between the
FOI Act and the
Archives Act
has a 'gap' in the coverage of the right
of access to Commonwealth records. Whilst the
Archives Act
provides for
access to all records in the open period the FOI Act only provides
access to records created after 1 December 1977.
Thus there is a gap in the right of access to records created between 1 January 1967 and 1 December 1977.
This 'access gap' is an historical anomaly that needs to be corrected
to provide a guaranteed right of access to all government
records, both
now and in the future. Closure of this gap was recommended by the
Commission and the Administrative Review Council
in their 1995 review
of the FOI Act.
As the Commission has recommended that
the 30 year open period be retained, it is concerned that, without such
action, the 'access
gap' will continue to exist, albeit on a
diminishing basis, for another ten years. There is strong community
support for closing
the gap. The historical arguments concerning
resource implications of closing the gap have lost much of their
relevance in the
light of the passage of time, particularly as the
majority of FOI applications are for personal information.
The continued existence of the access gap is now seen as a flaw in the
Commonwealth access system. There is no good reason why
records of a
certain age should not be subject to a right of access when both
younger and older records are accessible.
Draft recommendation 15.6.
The coverage of the FOI Act should
be extended to all records which do not fall within the open period as
defined in the archives
legislation.
Improving open access to records
An accessibility obligation
Whilst the Commission recommends the
retention of a uniform open access period, it strongly supports access
decision making based
on the content and nature of the records rather
than their age. The difficulties associated with a legislatively
mandated tiered
system could, in the Commission's view, be obviated to
a significant extent through administrative programs while the
open period would continue to provide stability and security
for both agencies and the public.
To support this concept the Commission
favours including in the legislation a basic obligation on all
Commonwealth agencies to
make records of enduring value accessible to
the public at the earliest possible time. At present there is a
legislative obligation
on Australian Archives to make records in the
open period accessible, regardless of whether they are in the custody
of the Archives
or of an agency.
which have custody of open period records are required to make
arrangements to enable Archives to meet its accessibility
obligation.
Records of enduring value are held in agency custody for at least some
period of time before they reach 30 years of age, and sometimes
the records are in the open period. The obligation to make records
accessible at the earliest possible time should extend
Commonwealth agencies, not merely the NAA.
This would not reduce or relieve the
NAA's continuing obligation to make records accessible. The NAA would
continue to have primary
responsibility for making any records in its
custody accessible to the public regardless of their location. In
addition the Commission
is making a number of recommendations for the
NAA to develop guidelines and strategies to help other agencies meet
their accessibility
obligations.
could meet their obligations either by transferring the records to the
NAA, or providing appropriate facilities for obtaining
The Commission would not propose that
any time limits be placed on the accessibility obligation. Unlike the
current obligation
which extends only to records in the open period,
the obligation to make all records of enduring value accessible to the
should not have temporal boundaries. This would not mean that
sensitive records must be released to the public. It would simply
recognition that all records of enduring value should be released as
soon as possible, regardless of the age of the record.
Draft recommendation 15.7.
There should be a statutory
obligation on all Commonwealth agencies to make records of enduring
value accessible to the public at
the earliest practicable time but no
later than approximately 30 years after creation with all sentencing
and access exemption
work completed.
Encouragement and guidelines for proactive release
There are a number of administrative
measures which could be taken to assist all agencies to meet the
proposed accessibility obligation.
The Commission is particularly keen
to encourage programs which provide for the making of access decisions
at the point of creation
of the record. Early identification of records
suitable for release is crucial to the wider provision of access,
particularly in
the case of electronic records. Records in an
electronic format will not be as easy to scan at a later date as paper
format records;
thus the metadata
collected at
the time of creation will be particularly useful for both current and
future users of the records. Whilst it is recognised
that not all
access decisions can be made at the point of creation, identifying
metadata can help to group records into categories
for making decisions
at a later date. Upfront access decision making would require shifts in
records management thinking as well
as new records management tools.
The implementation of new records
management systems, in accordance with standards to be set by the NAA,
would provide all agencies
with the opportunity to endorse access
information on the records from the point of creation. Early
identification and release
could then benefit agencies by reducing the
number of FOI applications, reducing resources required for intensive
examination of
records of enduring value at a later date, and more open
communication with clients and the public.
The NAA has a large role to play in
advising and guiding agencies to develop suitable mechanisms and
procedures for the introduction
of a proactive release scheme. It would
be the role of the NAA to encourage agencies to utilise open release
mechanisms by providing
assistance and guidance with technical details
and promoting the benefits of public release prior to 30 years. Due to
the importance
of the NAA's participation in the administrative schemes
the Commission proposes that a legislative obligation be placed on the
NAA to establish appropriate guidelines. The emphasis of the guidelines
should be on identifying records of enduring value which
released prior to the open period and then providing information about
these records to the public. They could be released
to the public
either through transfer to the NAA or by release through the public
access facilities established by the agency.
In both cases the
information should be transferred to the NAA for inclusion in its
information databases and finding aids.
The Commission also envisages that
future technology would assist the speedy identification of records
suitable for public release.
This technology should be harnessed and
utilised by administrative open release programs within agencies.
Draft recommendation 15.8.
There should be a legislative
obligation on the NAA to establish appropriate guidelines for the
implementation of proactive release
schemes by Commonwealth agencies
and to incorporate information about those records which are released
prior to 30 years of age
into its information databases.
Legislative support for proactive release and other discretionary releases
All Commonwealth agencies should have
a power to release records to the public beyond the basic statutory
requirements of the FOI
Act or the archives legislation. This is
necessary to support the administrative proactive release schemes. At
Archives Act
and s 14 of the FOI Act provide that
the Acts do not prevent a person giving access to records (including
exempt records) beyond
the provisions of the Acts where he or she can
properly do so. These existing discretionary release provisions are
little used.
They are framed in a purely permissive sense, and are not
supported by protections against prosecution for defamation, breach of
confidence or infringement of copyright.
Another way in which records can be
released prior to 30 years without the need for FOI access applications
is by accelerated release.
The accelerated
release provision in s 56(1), which provides for proactive release of
records prior to 30 years, has only been
used twice. This is partly
because the section requires that accelerated release be approved by
the Prime Minister. Whilst the
provision is open to making general
arrangements for accelerated release approved by the Prime Minister,
general arrangements have
never been promulgated.
It is clear to the Commission that
agencies not only need permission to release on a discretionary basis,
they also need guidance
as to when it is proper to do so.
The discretionary release provisions
Archives Act
and s 14 of the FOI Act should be retained
in their current formats. However, the NAA should have the power to
issue guidelines
which give direction as to when it would be proper to
release beyond the mandatory release provisions of each Act. These
should reinforce that it would be proper to make a proactive
release of non-sensitive records prior to reaching 30 years of age.
With the recognition that proactive
release schemes were permissible within the provisions of the FOI Act
or the archives legislation
there would be no need for an accelerated
release provision in the archives legislation. Its continued existence
in archives legislation
would merely provide confusion over the use of
discretionary powers to release prior to 30 years. Thus the accelerated
provision in s 56(1) should be removed.
Draft recommendation 15.9.
Discretionary release provisions,
based upon those in
Archives Act
and s 14 of the FOI Act,
should be retained in both the FOI Act and the archives legislation to
provide for the release of records,
including exempt records, otherwise
than in pursuance with the legislation where it is proper to do so or
otherwise required by
Draft recommendation 15.10.
The NAA should have the power to
issue guidelines as to when it would be proper to release records under
the discretionary release
provisions of the FOI Act or the archives
legislation.
Draft recommendation 15.11.
The accelerated release provision in
Archives Act
should not be included in the new archives legislation.
Legislative protection for proactive release and other discretionary releases
As additional support for proactive
release, officers making legitimate releases to the public should be
offered the same protection
from prosecution as a release made under a
standard access application. Protection currently exists under
Archives Act
for accelerated release and special access and, under
both the Archives and FOI Act, for release in conjunction with an
application. The lack of protection for release 'outside the
Act' is a significant inhibitor of more open access decisions,
particularly
in relation to records under the FOI Act.
The Commission strongly supports the
extension of legal indemnity to any bona fide release by an authorised
officer of the responsible
guidelines issued by NAA in relation to a proper use of the
discretionary release provisions would provide useful guidance
when a release was bona fide, but would not limit the circumstances.
Legal indemnity should extend to a release if the record
would not have
been exempt under the Act (such as in a proactive release of
non-sensitive records) and a release where there was
a bona fide
decision not to claim an exemption, whether these decisions have been
made in conjunction with an access application
under the relevant Act
or through the discretion to release beyond the minimal provisions of
the Act. This recommendation supports
the concept that the right of
access should be the minimum standard of access by protecting any
legitimate decision to release.
Draft recommendation 15.12.
Both the archives legislation and
the FOI Act should provide that an authorised officer who releases
records where it is proper
to do so, the records being either not
exempt or in respect of which exemption was not being claimed, should
be protected from
action for defamation, breach of confidence or
infringement of copyright.
Block examination techniques
There is an obligation under s 38 of
Archives Act
for Australian Archives to provide access to as much
of a record as possible. Thus when a part of a record is exempt the
parts of the record, wherever possible, must be made
accessible to the public. This is generally done by providing copies of
record with the exempt information cut out or effectively masked.
The obligation created by
necessarily involves individual
examination of records. The introduction of a power to exclude public
access by means of block
exemptions would remove the need for time
consuming and expensive individual examinations. It would also have the
undesirable effect
of excluding access to records, particularly those
relating to security and intelligence that, whilst often containing
exempt information,
also contain significant amounts of non-exempt
material within the records. For this reason the Commission does not
use of block exemptions.
The Commission does, however, see
advantages in using block examination methods for identifying groups of
records which can be
opened without individual examination. Where
blocks of records were identified as containing possible exempt
information they should
be individually examined. The Commission would
strongly encourage the continuing use of block methods of examination
for records
in the open period and for younger records with a view to
facilitating release.
Draft recommendation 15.13.
The existing requirement in
to provide access to the non-exempt portions of exempt records should be retained.
Draft recommendation 15.14.
As an administrative measure,
open access decisions should be made wherever possible on blocks of
records without detailed examination
of individual records.
Relationship with the Privacy Act
At present the Information Privacy
Principles contained in the
do not apply to records in the
open period. Thus access decisions made under the
Archives Act
need to adhere to the Privacy Principles. Application of the Principles
to records more than 30 years of age would be overly
restrictive.
Providing access to records in the open period must take into
consideration the fact that sensitivities attaching
to information may
diminish after 30 years. Preventing the disclosure of all personal
information, including names of individuals,
would greatly inhibit the
provision of open access to archival records. This does not mean that
making access decisions. Chapter s
19 and 20 contain recommendations in relation to privacy and access.
Open period access and other legislation
A number of statutes other than the
Archives Act
include restrictions on who may access information
collected under the statute, or place obligations on certain officers
disclose information to which they have access. The present
absence from the
Archives Act
of any reference to non-disclosure
provisions in other legislation makes the relationship between the
Archives Act
and other acts difficult to interpret. There is a need for
a provision to be inserted into the archives legislation to clarify the
The Commission considers that any
information which remains sensitive beyond 30 years should be able to
be protected by general
exemption provisions within the archives
legislation. It is recognised, however, that the Parliament should
retain the right to
extend specific protections to information beyond
30 years of age. The need to do this should be thoroughly considered
and weighed
against the concept of the open period. While the
Commission does not consider that there would be many instances in
a decision would need to made, the decision should remain in
the hands of the Parliament.
Draft recommendation 15.15.
The legislation should expressly
provide that non-disclosure provisions in other legislation do not
override the public access
provisions of the archives legislation
unless this is expressly provided for in the legislation concerned.
Australian Law Reform Commission Report No 77/Administrative Review Council Report No 40
Open government: a review of the federal
Freedom of Information Act 1982
Sydney 1995 (ALRC 77/ARC 40), para 5.6.
Unless the document contains the applicant's personal information
or information relating to the applicant's business, commercial
financial affairs: FOI Act s 12(2).
In 1998 this will become a gap in access to records created between 1 Jan 1968 and 1 Dec 1977.
Australian Law Reform Commission Report No 77/Administrative Review Council Report No 40
Open government: a review of the federal
Freedom of Information Act 1982
Sydney 1995 (ALRC 77/ARC 40), para 5.7.
Applications for personal information are not subject to the
limitation placed on other applications that can only be made for
created after 1 December 1977.
Archives Act
Archives Act
See draft recommendation 15.8.
Metadata is a common term for information about records.
See draft recommendation 16.6 which recommends that all agencies be
obliged to provide information about records of enduring value
NAA to be included on the publicly accessible databases.
See Chapter 4 for the ideas being developed at the Commonwealth level.
Section 56(2)
Archives Act
also provides for special access to records in limited circumstances: see Chapter 18.
The Commission and Administrative Review Council have previously
recommended an extension of legal indemnity for any bona fide release
under the FOI Act: ALRC 77/ARC 40 para 4.20–4.21.
16. Responsibility for access decisions
Introduction
Decisions made prior to the open period
Decisions on open period records
Coordinating access applications
Providing information about records
Location of records during examination
Introduction
As discussed in Chapter 12, all records have a controlling agency which continues to have some responsibilities for them once they
are in the open period.
In many jurisdictions it is the controlling agency, as opposed to the archival authority, which makes access decisions. A balance
needs to be maintained between the specialist knowledge which an agency may have about its own records, and the general knowledge
of government records accumulated by the staff of the NAA. This balance can be affected by the time at which access decisions are
made, the stability of an agency or a government function, and physical access to the records.
Decisions made prior to the open period
As outlined in the previous chapter, the Commission is strongly supportive of early identification of non-sensitive records. Thus
wherever possible access decisions should be made before the records reach the open period. In such cases decisions will ordinarily
be made (perhaps with the guidance and assistance of the NAA) by the controlling agencies. Agencies should, therefore, be responsible
for all access decisions made on records less than 30 years of age. This would be consistent with both the fact that agencies are
responsible for making access decisions under the FOI Act and the Commission's recommendation to amend the FOI Act to close the 'access
Procedures for access decision making would need to be put in place accordingly and to provide methods for accumulating access decision
information in a centrally accessible location.
Decisions on open period records
In Australia open period records have traditionally been in the custody of the archival authority. Thus the physical presence of
the records suggest that the archival authority should have responsibility for access decision making. Often, however, the controlling
agency maintains a continuing interest in the records. In the current climate of moves towards distributed custody, larger numbers
of records in the open period can be expected to remain in the custody of agencies. The present
Archives Act
recognises that agreement needs to be reached between Australian Archives and agencies over access decision making, but is not clear
for open period records.
Whilst some agencies urged that primary responsibility be given to the controlling agency, there are other factors which clearly
favour giving the primary responsibility and power to the NAA. These include the need to deal effectively with records of defunct
functions and records passed from agency to agency where controlling agencies no longer care about the existence or condition of
the records. Considerations relating to the access decision making capabilities of agencies with limited resources and the actual
physical custody of records of enduring value may also suggest that the NAA is best placed to cater for access decisions over such
records. Centralising access decision making with the NAA may also facilitate the standardising of access decisions across all government
This would not mean that the controlling agency should be totally removed from the access decision making process. If the agency
so requested, the NAA should be able to enter into an agreement with the agency about access decision making. The agreement might
result in all access decisions being made by the agency, access decisions over certain material being made by the agency, or decisions
being made by the NAA after conferral with the agency. Whenever there was no such agreement with a current agency about access decision
making the power and responsibility should lie with the NAA.
In cases where an agency sought an agreement, but the agency and the NAA could not settle the terms of the agreement, there would
be a need for an ultimate arbiter. The Commission believes that the Minister responsible for the function of the agency entering
the agreement should be the arbiter in the event of any such disagreement.
An agreement about access decision making responsibilities would have legal implications that would require it to be legislative
in character. In particular it would have the effect of conferring the initial decision making responsibilities on the agency instead
of the NAA and thus affect the rights of applicants making access applications under the legislation. Access agreements should therefore
be given the standing of legislative instruments.
The effect would be to require consultation at the creation stage and subject the agreement to disallowance by the Parliament. This
would ensure that the agreement was established in an accountable manner as well as in a clear and concise format.
An access agreement should encompass all access decisions which might be made relating to records in the open period. These would
include decisions relating to access by a record subject
and special access.
The agreement should also acknowledge the responsibility of the controlling agency to review its primary access decisions.
The legislation would need to make clear that the agency which makes the access decision is also responsible for the procedural matters
relating to the decision. These matters would include communicating directly with the applicant where appropriate, providing a statement
of reasons, and recording details about the access decision. This obligation would then tie into another recommendation by the Commission
under which an agency has an obligation to provide all information relating to the content, location and accessibility of records
of enduring value in its custody and/or control to the NAA.
Draft recommendation 16.1.
The NAA should have responsibility for making access decisions on open period records unless there is in place an agreement with
the agency with functional responsibility for the records agreeing upon alternative arrangements for access decision making. Where
an agreement can not be reached over responsibility for access decisions, the Minister responsible for the agency function should
make the final determination.
Draft recommendation 16.2.
Agreements between the NAA and a controlling agency regarding access decisions should have the standing of legislative instruments.
Draft recommendation 16.3.
Where an agency agrees with the NAA that the agency will become responsible for the making of access decisions that agency should
thereby become responsible for all aspects of the decision making process, including the recording of the access decision and advising
the NAA of the decision.
Coordinating access applications
Responsibility for making access decisions and responsibility for accepting access applications are two separate things. Regardless
of the physical location of records and who makes access decisions, the Commission is concerned about keeping records as publicly
accessible as possible. This requires that the public have a clear and identifiable line of communication when using archival records,
including a single line of contact for making access applications.
At present all access applications are made through and processed by Australian Archives. If this were not the case access to archival
records would need to involve an FOI type procedure whereby researchers would have to approach individual agencies to make access
applications. Given that the records in the open period would be 30 years or more of age this requirement that the researcher determine
which agency had responsibility for access decisions would be oppressive, reducing the accessibility of archival records.
The Commission therefore considers that the making of applications and the provision of access in general should continue to be coordinated
through the NAA. This would require the NAA and a decision making agency with which it had entered an access agreement to develop
a sound working relationship relating to the transfer of applications and information. This would not stop agencies from directly
communicating with applicants but would assist in the prompt completion of access requests.
Draft recommendation 16.4.
All access applications should be lodged initially with the NAA for processing by the NAA or by the controlling agency under an agreement
with the NAA.
Providing information about records
In order to lodge an effective access application, an applicant must access information about the types of records that are available
and from whom they may be available. It is also necessary for the applicant to know whether a particular record has already been
opened for public access. This need not be limited to records in the open period if an agency has made a decision to open records
which are less than 30 years of age. There needs therefore to be some mechanism for the collation of information about records, particularly
records of enduring value.
Just as there needs to be a coordinating body for the lodgment and receipt of access applications, there is also a need to give one
body the responsibility for collecting, collating and making accessible information about records of enduring value. The NAA is the
obvious body to assume this responsibility. Even if it ceased to be the physical repository for the majority of Commonwealth records
of enduring value, the NAA should be the repository of knowledge about all records of enduring value. This would ensure that the
public could confidently approach one body and conduct research across all Commonwealth records.
To enable the NAA to meet this obligation there would need to be close cooperation with all Commonwealth agencies which should be
obliged to provide information to the NAA about all identified records of enduring value in their custody and/or control. If any
agency decided to open an enduring value record for public release, either before or after it reached the open period, or determined
that a record in the open period was subject to an exemption, this information would also need to be given to the NAA. Only in this
way could there be a government wide accessibility regime.
There will of course be situations where the content or very knowledge of the existence of a record will be exempt information. In
these cases information should not be required to be transferred to the NAA. Applications for access may still affect these records,
and if access is denied by the agency the decision will be subject to the same review mechanisms as any other refusal to grant access
under the legislation.
Draft recommendation 16.5.
There should be a statutory obligation on the NAA to collect and disseminate information about the content, location and accessibility
of records of enduring value.
Draft recommendation 16.6.
There should be a statutory obligation on all Commonwealth agencies to provide all possible information about the content, location
and accessibility of records of enduring value to the NAA, unless that information would be exempt information under the archives
legislation.
Location of records during examination
Section 35(2)
Archives Act
requires access examination to be conducted on the premises of the Archives.
This requirement is a relic of the paper age which fails to take account of developing concepts such as distributed custody and the
future likelihood of arrangements being made for controlling agencies to make access decisions. In the Commission's view, therefore,
this location requirement is no longer appropriate and should be removed. The inspection place should, in future, be determined as
part of the access arrangement between the NAA and the controlling agency.
Draft recommendation 16.7.
Access examination should no longer to be required to take place on the NAA's premises.
In some cases the controlling agency may be the NAA itself. See para 12.9–13 for a discussion of 'controlling agency'.
See draft recommendation 15.6.
In the case of records of Parliament it should be the presiding officer, and in the case of records of a Court the Chief Justice of
the Court should be the final arbiter. See Chapter 14 for a discussion of records of Parliament and the Courts and access arrangements.
It is expected that the
Legislative Instruments Bill 1996
will be passed by Parliament in early 1998.
See Chapter 20.
See Chapter 18.
See Chapter 21.
See draft recommendation 16.6 below.
Except for records exempted from transfer by s 29 of the Act.
17. Access procedures
Introduction
Application requirements
Personal details
A record identification test
Time limits on access decision making
Problems with time limits
Retaining a 90 day time limit
Encouraging communication between decision maker and applicant
Deleting s 31(4)
Factors affecting access decision making
A workload test
Lost or destroyed records
Giving reasons for decisions
Introduction
Efficient procedures for access examination are an essential part of an effective access scheme. In order to ensure that proper processes
are upheld a range of procedural provisions need to be enshrined in legislation. Supporting mechanisms are better dealt with administratively.
Application requirements
Personal details
Where a record has not been previously examined for access or an applicant wishes to have a previous access decision reconsidered,
the applicant is required to complete an application for access. Completing applications should be made as simple as possible. At
the same time applicants need to provide adequate information to assist the agencies to process the application.
Current provisions require that as part of an application for access an applicant must specify an address in Australia.
In some countries there has been a deliberate move to restrict rights of access to citizens or taxpayers in the jurisdiction. Access
to Commonwealth records in the open period is not, however, restricted to Australian citizens or taxpayers. Foreigners can apply
to access records while they are in Australia or supply the Australian address of a friend, relative or agent. The requirement of
an Australian address seems to be of little point, therefore, except perhaps to ensure that overseas postage or freight is not incurred.
Moreover, it fails to recognise the fact that Australian Archives, as the Commonwealth archival authority, attracts a number of foreign
researchers and that these numbers are likely to increase as international communication improves and Australian Archives' databases
find a wider audience on the Internet.
Account also needs to be taken of the fact that Australian researchers often derive much benefit from the use of archival institutions
in other countries.
Thus in the pursuance of a cooperative international research community, foreign researchers should not be seen to be needlessly
restricted from using archival records in Australia by having to make arrangements for an Australian address.
The essential requirement for an application should be to provide an address at which the applicant can be contacted. A contact address
would be needed if the agency required further information, to send the applicant copies of records, or to notify the applicant of
a delay in decision making or a refusal to grant access. In today's electronic world an e-mail address is just as viable a contact
address as an ordinary street address in Australia. The key factor should be whether or not the applicant can be reasonably contacted
at the stated address.
Draft recommendation 17.1.
An application for access should include the name of the applicant, the means by which the applicant can reasonably be contacted
(which may be an electronic address), the applicant's postal address and the date of the application.
A record identification test
The nature of archival records often makes it difficult to locate specific records. This is often due to poor records management
practice at the time of creation of the records. Agency resources should be preserved by ensuring that applications provide clear
information about the sought after records to avoid wasted time and effort. At the same time the right to access records should not
be eroded by stringent application requirements which, in an archival context, may be impossible to meet.
Section 40(1)(d) of the Act requires an application to include such particulars about the records sought, if any, as are contained
in the Australian National Guide to Archival Material (ANGAM). Australian Archives has developed ANGAM in electronic database format.
The ANGAM database lists records at an item level, providing a method of searching for items using words in the title or by date.
The database also includes information about the series of records in which an item can be found, and any access decision which has
been made about the item.
The database was primarily developed to record access decisions; thus the majority of records on ANGAM have been examined for access.
The fact that no items of relevance can be found on ANGAM does not mean that there are no relevant records in the open period. Information
from other sources is needed to identify the relevant records. A specific requirement to include information from the ANGAM database
on an access application does not greatly improve the efficiency of access decision making procedures.
A number of submissions supported the idea that there should be some form of record identification requirement in the access application,
primarily to help reduce implementation costs. The Commission considers that it may be inappropriate to demand that reference be
made to particular systems or databases currently in use. It does, however, recognise the need to reduce confusion and provide as
straightforward an application as possible.
Finding aids developed by the NAA can assist to identify relevant records, but the task of detailing information about the millions
of items in the open period is near impossible. Without identification access examiners must act as researchers themselves, because
public users cannot be expected to know more than the NAA or an agency about the records in their custody. Empowering access decision
makers to refuse to process an application on the basis of inadequate information would unjustly restrict the right of access.
For these reasons the Commission considers that some reasonable level of identification of records should be required to be included
in an application, but that the application should not be able to be refused for the insufficiency of information. Where the application
does not include adequate information, communication between the decision maker and the applicant is more likely to produce a workable
result than review and appeal mechanisms.
To meet identification requirements applicants would often need some assistance. The
Archives Act
already contains the necessary statutory obligation for Australian Archives to give all reasonable assistance to applicants to provide
particulars about records.
As the repository of information about records of enduring value, the NAA should continue to have an obligation to assist applicants.
This can be achieved both through physical assistance and the publication of further guides, databases and other finding aids.
Draft recommendation 17.2.
The legislation should include a requirement that the access application provide all reasonably available information about the records
required to make identification as simple as possible. Failure to meet this requirement should not be able to be used as a basis
for refusal to process the application.
Draft recommendation 17.3.
The legislation should reaffirm a statutory obligation on the NAA to assist applicants to meet the requirement to provide all reasonably
available identifying information about the records.
Time limits on access decision making
Problems with time limits
The legislation should include limitations on the time within which an application must be processed. Without time limits the right
of access is seriously devalued. At present applications are required to be processed within 90 days. If an applicant does not receive
notice of a decision within 90 days there is a deemed decision to refuse access and the applicant is entitled to appeal directly
to the AAT.
A number of agencies highlighted the difficulties of meeting the current 90 day requirement, particularly where external consultation
is required. Other submissions conceded that simple access applications could in fact be dealt with in a much shorter time frame.
The evidence presented to the Commission suggested that many problems arose due to a lack of communication between applicants and
agencies, with misunderstandings resulting in dissatisfaction and discontent over service.
A more flexible approach to time limits was suggested by some submissions. While the Commission can see the potential of flexibility,
particularly in the context of agreements being reached between the applicant and the agency concerned, it would be reluctant to
recommend the removal of ultimate time obligations on agencies and erode the rights of applicants.
Increased communication can promote understanding of the requirements and difficulties faced by both agencies and applicants, and
can reduce the need for applicants to resort to using their legislative appeal rights. However there needs to be some remedy for
applicants when an application is not processed within a reasonable time. The existing provision, which deems a failure to make a
decision within the specified period to be a refusal of access, should remain in the legislation, thus guaranteeing a right of appeal.
Retaining a 90 day time limit
Some submissions supported the reduction of the application time period to as little as 30 days. As a general rule, such a short
time period would, however, be too stringent, particularly in cases where referral to an external body is required. Despite some
suggestions supporting extension of the 90 day period to cope with external reference requirements, the Commission favours the retention
of the 90 day limit. After 90 days a failure to notify an applicant of a decision should continue to be deemed a refusal to grant
access. A right of appeal directly to the external review body, without the need for internal review, should be maintained.
While the NAA would be the agency which received an application for access,
the agency responsible for making the access decision should be held responsible for a deemed decision of refusal of access.
There was some suggestion that, if the 90 day limit is not met, the record should be automatically declared open to the public without
further need for examination. Such a provision would, however, have far reaching consequences, particularly at the international
level and in relation to security and intelligence records. The Commission considers that the deemed decision to refuse access and
the right to initiate an external review remains the best balance between the competing purposes of providing effective access while
effectively protecting sensitive information.
Draft recommendation 17.4.
If a period of 90 days has elapsed since the application was received by the NAA and the applicant has not received notice of the
decision, the legislation should continue to provide that there has been a decision refusing to grant access to the record on the
ground that the record is an exempt record. An entitlement to appeal directly to an external review tribunal should then apply.
Encouraging communication between decision maker and applicant
As many submissions acknowledged, a 90 day time limit is excessively long for the majority of access applications. The Commission
considers that greater flexibility leading to earlier release should be encouraged, particularly by communication between applicants
and the responsible agency.
Australian Archives has administratively imposed upon itself an informal 30 day time limit on processing applications. Around 90%
of access decisions made by Australian Archives are completed within the 30 days.
The Commission believes that agencies which enter agreements with the NAA to make decisions in relation to their own records should
likewise devote similar resources to meet an informal 30 day limit for general access applications. Applications requiring more than
30 days usually involve consultation with another agency or with an external body. In these cases even 90 days has sometimes proven
to be inadequate, particularly as foreign governments and organisations that are required to be consulted cannot be forced to meet
our domestic deadlines. In other cases where access decisions exceed 30 or 90 days the cause may be the need to examine a large volume
of records thus straining the resources of the decision maker. In all of these situations it is important to let the applicant know
of real or possible delays, and to do so as soon as possible. The Commission considers that, if an application is not processed within
30 days, the decision maker should be required to contact the applicant (if not contacted previously), informing the applicant of
the progress of the application. Such communication of the reasons for delay may well alleviate misunderstandings or help to clarify
the applicant's needs.
The Commission would not propose any penalty or consequence for failure to contact the applicant, although it is hoped that the necessity
to enter into correspondence with the applicant if the process exceeds 30 days would encourage agencies to meet the 30 day requirement.
The Commission would expect the review tribunal to examine the respondent's attention to this requirement.
Draft recommendation 17.5.
The legislation should include a provision requiring all agencies to take all available steps to process access applications within
30 days after the NAA has received the application. If an application is not processed within 30 days the agency responsible for
making the decision should be required to notify the applicant forthwith of the reasons for the delay and invite the applicant to
communicate with the agency about the application. The appeal tribunal should be entitled to comment on the failure to respond within
30 days where appropriate.
Deleting s 31(4)
Section 31(4)
, which deals with the time required for access examination, has never been used by Australian Archives. The section appears to permit
the indefinite withholding of records from public access pending access examination. There is no clear relationship between
and the normal 90 day time limitations on access applications. The Commission is unconvinced of the need to retain
Once a record becomes the subject of an access application there would seem to be no justifiable reason why a record should be withheld
from the public beyond the usual time limits. Resource problems should be dealt with in other ways, either through effective communication
with the applicant or through adequate provision of resources to access programs. There would seem to be no need for the added protection
Draft recommendation 17.6.
Section 31(4)
, which provides Australian Archives with the power to withhold records from the public pending access examination, should be removed
from the legislation.
Factors affecting access decision making
A workload test
A number of submissions called for the insertion into the archives legislation of a workload test along the lines of the existing
test in the FOI Act.
Such a test would permit agencies to refuse to grant access without processing the application if the work would substantially and
unreasonably divert the resources of the agency from its other operations.
The Commission does not support the application of a workload test to access applications in the open period. Access to records in
the open period should not be equated with access under the FOI Act. The ideal of the open period is that records should generally
be available to the public with a minimum of inconvenience. To facilitate this ideal the open period does not commence until 30 years
after the record is created, a time at which the balance between administrative inconvenience and the concept of public access weighs
heavily in favour of public access. The current legislation was also drafted in the expectation that all records would be cleared
for access at 30 years of age. Whilst this aspiration may never be completely achieved, the Commission's recommendations attempt
to bring reality closer to the ideal. Only those records which are not cleared for access prior to reaching the open period will
need to be subject to an access application.
Thus those records which might be subject to a workload test would primarily be those records not previously examined, either due
to the complicated nature of the records or through inadequate resources devoted to access examination programs. In either case it
should not be the applicant and the concept of public access which should suffer.
The idea of a workload test is to relieve an agency where resources would affect the core business of the agency. As one of the primary
obligations of the NAA is to provide access to archival records, the NAA should have no recourse to a workload test.
The workload test was strongly supported by a number of agencies which would wish to enter into an arrangement with the NAA to enable
them to make access decisions over their own records. In the Commission's view, if an agency wants to enter an agreement with the
NAA to take on responsibility for access decisions, it should be prepared to devote the necessary resources to provide adequate accessibility
to the records. If not, it should leave responsibility with the NAA which, as discussed above, ought not to be able to invoke a workload
Draft recommendation 17.7.
The new archives legislation should not include a provision for a workload test.
Lost or destroyed records
The matter of lost records, on the other hand, needs to be addressed in legislation. Although the Commission agrees in principle
with those who argue that the grounds for refusal of access should not be increased, the practical reality is that records are sometimes
lost or destroyed and the present Act is deficient in not dealing with such situations.
There is a need for a provision in the legislation which provides a method of bringing applications to a definite conclusion in cases
where the records can not be found or are thought to be destroyed. The provision should not, however, be able to be used as an escape
route for agencies. Thus the requirements for notifying an applicant of a decision that the records can not be found must be rigorous.
The decision must also be appealable. The Commission considers that internal review is appropriate as the first level of review,
and then review by an external body. As there is no record upon which a review can be based, the review needs to be able to examine
the procedures undertaken to locate the record and determine if they were satisfactory.
Draft recommendation 17.8.
The legislation should include a provision enabling an access application to be met with a decision that the record cannot be located.
Notification of a decision that a record cannot be located should be permitted only in one of the following three situations
there is no evidence that the record was ever created
the record was created but can not now be located
the record was created and destroyed — details of evidence of destruction should be included in the notification.
In all situations the notification should be required to include details of the search undertaken, including where and by whom.
The decision should be appealable in the same way as a decision to exempt a record. The legislation should state that the review body
is to look at the procedures undertaken to locate the record. If they are found to be unsatisfactory then the tribunal should be
able to order the responsible agency to undertake a more extensive search.
Giving reasons for decisions
Notification of reasons for a decision to refuse access is an essential part of the decision making process. Section 40(5) of the
Act requires a notification of a decision to refuse access to include a statement of the reasons for the decision.
A statement of reasons is the commencement of the review process and the basis upon which the applicant decides if an appeal could
be beneficial. There is a need to retain the requirement for a statement of reasons as a part of the notification of the decision.
However, problems have arisen in practice relating to the content of statements of reasons. In particular, skeletal statements of
reasons have been found to be of little use to the applicant. On the other hand, if more detailed statements were required there
would be a danger of including information which would risk revealing the exempt information in the record.
The Commission considers that the inclusion in the legislation of detailed requirements for the contents of statements of reasons
is not desirable. In particular, the range of matters that might be included varies so much from case to case that the prescription
of a comprehensive list to cover all contingencies would be too broad and unwieldy to be of real use. To date there has been no judicial
comment on the sufficiency or otherwise of the contents of statements of reasons under the
Archives Act
, and there is a division of opinion over whether or not AAT and Federal Court decisions relating to FOI statements of reasons should
be followed. While the Commission recognises that the NAA, and agencies authorised to make access decisions under arrangements with
the NAA, may need additional guidance in this area, it is not convinced that any legislative change to the existing provisions is
warranted. It does, however, believe that the NAA would be well placed to monitor performance in this area and provide advice for
the assistance of agencies that are not familiar with access decision making and agencies whose performance relating to statement
of reasons comes under criticism.
Draft recommendation 17.9.
The legislation should retain provisions for notifying applicants of decisions to refuse access based upon the existing provisions
Draft recommendation 17.10.
The NAA should be required to monitor the standard of notifications, particularly statements of reasons, and provide advice to agencies
Archives Act
s 40(1)(c).
The Archives of Australia databases can be found at http://www.aa.gov.au/AAIndexpage.html
ANGAM is used in conjunction with the RINSE database which provides more detailed information about records series and Commonwealth
agencies which have created or control the records series.
Archives Act
Archives Act
See draft recommendation 21.2.
See draft recommendation 16.4.
The responsible agency would be either the NAA or, if there is an access decision making agreement, the controlling agency: see draft
recommendation 16.1.
See statistics for 1995–96 and 1996–97 in Australian Archives
Annual Reports of Australian Archives and Advisory Council on Australian Archives 1996–97
Canberra 1997, 30.
FOI Act s 24(1)(a).
Unless an applicant wishes a previous decision to exempt a record to be reviewed.
The notice is not required to contain any matter that is of such a nature that its inclusion in a record would cause that record to
be an exempt record:
Archives Act
18. Privileged access
Introduction
Special access under the
Archives Act
The need for special access
Access to voluntary deposits of records
Access by Governors-General, Ministers and Secretaries
Access to exempted information
Grounds for special access
Application charges for special access
Reviewing special access decisions
Monitoring use of exempt records
Introduction
Previous chapters have discussed making records available more freely where they can be identified as containing no sensitive material.
There will also be occasions where people require access to records which should otherwise be exempted from public access. Any form
of access to these latter records is privileged access.
Special access under the Archives Act
Section 56(2)
Archives Act
provides for what has become known as special access. Special access is access to records which have not otherwise been released
to the public, either because they are not in the open period or because they are exempt records. To fully understand the extent
of special access familiarity with s 56(2) of the Act, Archives Regulation 9 and arrangements as approved by the Prime Minister is
This makes special access complicated and unnecessarily restrictive. At present the special access provisions permit special access
in the following circumstances
(a) Governors-General, Ministers, Secretaries and other senior officials
may access records which would have been dealt with by them while holding their respective offices for the purpose of refreshing
their memories about the records
(b) Governors-General, Ministers, Secretaries and other senior officials
may access records which would have been dealt with by them while holding their respective offices for the purpose of preparing their
biographies
(c) where Commonwealth records have been deposited with Australian Archives by a person who is not a Commonwealth institution and
the person has an arrangement with Archives relating to the custody and management of those records
(d) a person is carrying out research for the purposes of preparing a work for publication and the Minister has approved the work
on the grounds that the work is likely to make a substantial contribution to the recording and assessment of events in the political,
social, economic, cultural, scientific or other development of Australia, particularly as that development relates to the administration
of the affairs of the Government of the Commonwealth.
The arrangements approved by the Prime Minister set out details of application procedures and identify those who may approve special
access decisions. The arrangements provide that, in the case of applications referred to in paragraphs (a) and (b) above, there is
a right of access if the stated circumstances are shown to exist. Special access in relation to applications referred to in paragraph
(c) above are usually determined according to the arrangements between Australian Archives and the depositor established at the time
of deposit; thus there is generally a guaranteed right of access. Special access under paragraph (d) is at the discretion of the
person or agency given responsibility for making the access decision. There is no procedure for administrative review of special
access decisions, although judicial review is available under the ADJR Act.
The need for special access
Archives Act
was drafted special access was required for a number of reasons: to permit access to records which were in the 'access gap' between
the FOI Act and the
Archives Act
(as there was no other formal procedure for accessing these records), to permit access to records which were otherwise exempted from
public access, to permit access by a depositor to Commonwealth records voluntarily deposited with Australian Archives, and to provide
access for special purposes to particular classes of persons, such as Governors-Generals, Ministers and other senior officials.
The Commission has recommended that the access gap between the FOI Act and the
Archives Act
be removed by amending the FOI Act to apply to all records which have not reached the open period.
Removal of the access gap would result in a formalised right of access to all records, regardless of age. Thus there would be no
need for special access to apply to these records.
Some would argue that, even with the removal of the access gap, special access could still assist researchers who required access
to large volumes of records which had not reached the open period. It is said in support of this argument that the alternative of
FOI access would be so costly as to inhibit research. Additionally FOI access is said to be much more cumbersome than special access.
Taking the last point first, the Commission notes that special access too can be a detailed and time consuming process, for both
researchers and agencies. As regards costs, in the event that FOI charges would be inappropriate, the discretionary powers under
s 14 of the FOI Act and
Archives Act
would provide sufficient capacity to deal with a research request even more effectively than by the special access route.
It next falls to consider the continuing need for the remaining three situations in which special access can be resorted to. They
are, firstly, records voluntarily deposited with the NAA, secondly, records of Governors-General, Ministers, Secretaries and other
senior office holders, and thirdly, access to exempt records.
Access to voluntary deposits of records
In relation to access by persons who have voluntarily deposited records with the NAA, the Commission has, in Chapter 11 on the recovery
of records, already recommended an arrangement that would reinforce the right of privileged access by the depositor to the deposited
Access by Governors-General, Ministers and Secretaries
The retention of access privileges for Governors-General, Ministers, Secretaries and other senior officials
(referred to collectively in this section as senior office holders) was generally supported by submissions. Senior Commonwealth office
holders are in a special position in relation to the records which they have participated in creating during their terms of office.
Access to the records is clearly desirable in affirming and clarifying their recollections of events of importance to the nation.
The Commission agrees that, because of their special place in the development of the nation's history, these senior officer holders
should continue to be accorded privileged access beyond normal access granted to the public as a whole. It is a separate issue as
to whether this privilege should continue to be granted as of right or be discretionary. Nothing presented to the Commission would
lead it to conclude that the present access right should be replaced by the introduction of access discretion. Moreover there is
a danger that the introduction of a discretion might lead to the politicisation of access decisions.
The Commission accordingly supports the retention of a right of access for these senior office holders. However, the existing restrictions
specified within the regulations should continue. Thus the right should only extend to records that were, or could reasonably be
presumed to have been, seen or personally dealt with by the person in the course of the exercise of the duties of the office. The
purposes for seeking access should continue to be limited to refreshing memory or for biographical purposes.
In the Commission's view this right of access should now be included in the primary legislation. In order to achieve desirable alignment
between records in the open period and records less than 30 years of age, corresponding provisions should also be placed in the FOI
Draft recommendation 18.1.
The archives legislation should reaffirm the right of privileged access for former Governors-General, Ministers, Secretaries and
other specified senior officials, to Commonwealth records relating to their respective terms in office for the purposes of refreshing
their memories or preparing biographical works. This right should apply only in relation to records in the open period.
Draft recommendation 18.2.
Identical provisions should be inserted in the FOI Act in relation to records which are not yet in the open period.
Access to exempted information
Grounds for special access
The remaining situation where special access continues to be relevant is where a person requires access to records which are exempted
from public access. Records are exempted to protect sensitive information. Both the FOI Act and archives legislation would continue
to include sections detailing the types of information which may require exemption. Particularly in the open period, exemptions would
only apply to records with continuing sensitivities that require protection from public disclosure.
Providing access to exempted records negates the protection which these records should otherwise receive.
There are a number of situations in which a researcher may require access to exempt records. In some cases access to the exempted
information may be specifically required. In other cases the researcher may require access to records which include exempt information,
though may not necessarily require access to the exempt information. As access examination and physically masking the exempt information
can be time consuming in some cases it is often easier for the researcher to request access to the exempt information. In each of
the above situations the researcher would become privy to information which should not be disclosed to the public. Thus granting
special access to otherwise exempted records should only be granted in appropriately circumscribed circumstances and use of the information
should be strictly monitored.
Archives Regulation 9(d) establishes grounds for considering special access in relation to research work. These grounds restrict
the type of applicant who may apply for special access by imposing the following requirements
the applicant must be carrying out research for the purpose of preparing a work for publication
the Minister, or a person authorised by the Minister, must approve the research work
the work will only be approved if it is likely to make a substantial contribution to the recording and assessment of events in the
political, social, economic, cultural, scientific or other development of Australia, particularly as that development relates to
the administration of the affairs of the Government of the Commonwealth
the records requested must be relevant to the research.
A number of submissions have raised the fact that these grounds for special access are very restrictive. Most students, including
postgraduate students, would not be eligible due to the publication requirement, despite the value of their work. In addition a number
of submissions criticised the narrow interpretation of the grounds which has been made by some agencies. There was also a suggestion
that some agencies favoured certain researchers and disadvantaged other areas of research. At present the decision to grant special
access is discretionary. Without any avenue for administrative review a number of persons considered by some to be appropriate applicants
have been unable to make use of the special access provisions.
The Commission is of the opinion that access to these kinds of records should necessarily be strictly limited, having regard to the
character of exempt records. Thus, access to records which have been identified as requiring protection from public disclosure should
only be permitted where the research in question would clearly benefit the public as a whole. The grounds set out in Archives Regulation
9 are therefore seen as appropriately limiting the circumstances in which special access should be permitted to records which would
otherwise be exempt.
In order to ensure uniformity and clarity across the whole range of Commonwealth records, the Commission considers that identical
provisions should be included in the FOI Act in relation to records less than 30 years of age. The provision in the archives legislation
would, therefore, apply only to records in the open period. Responsibility for making special access decisions would lie with either
the controlling agency
in accordance with an access agreement between the NAA and the agency,
or, in the absence of an agreement, the NAA.
Draft recommendation 18.3.
Provision should be included in the archives legislation establishing a regime for granting special access to records which would
otherwise be exempt under the archives legislation. The permitted circumstances should be based on those in Archives Regulation 9,
requiring the applicant to be undertaking research of an important nature, of relevance to Australia or the Commonwealth Government,
and in preparation for publication. The provisions should apply only to records in the open period, with the NAA responsible for
making the access decision unless the controlling agency is so entitled under an access agreement.
Draft recommendation 18.4.
Identical provisions should be included in the FOI Act in relation to records which are not yet in the open period.
Application charges for special access
In Chapter 7 the Commission has recommended that the NAA should investigate the effect of introducing a charge for access applications.
This recommendation recognises that there are a number of important factors to take into consideration before applying charges, such
as statutory obligations, the concept of the open period and the ability of applicants to meet the costs. However, as special access
is a form of privileged access beyond the statutory rights available to the public in general, the Commission considers that applicants
should be required to contribute towards the costs of providing access to the records.
While special access applicants are required to be preparing a work for publication, this does not necessarily mean that the applicants
can afford expensive charges. Any charges applied to special access applications should not inhibit the use of special access but
should acknowledge the resources required to process the application. The Commission considers that the current charges for general
applications under the FOI Act would be suitable, that is a $30 application fee, plus a search and retrieval fee of $15 per hour
and a decision making fee of $20 per hour. These charges should apply equally to special access applications under both the FOI Act
and the archives legislation.
Draft recommendation 18.5.
Applications for special access, under both the FOI Act and the archives legislation, should attract application, search and retrieval,
and decision making fees based upon those applied under the FOI Act for general access applications.
Reviewing special access decisions
The decision to grant special access should remain a discretionary one. This will enable the controlling agency or the NAA to assess
each application on its merits and to make a judgment whether the access would be appropriate for the research in question. That
said, the Commission is sensitive to the assertions raised in submissions relating to narrow interpretations and prejudice shown
by agencies and the absence of recourse to administrative review.
The Commission considers that there should be some form of administrative review of decisions to refuse special access. Judicial
review is open to applicants under the ADJR Act, but applications to the Federal Court can be expensive and time consuming. The other
disadvantage of judicial review is the need to establish legal grounds for overturning the decision. Administrative review on the
merits is usually a preferable option. In view of the subjective element involved in special access decisions, such decisions are
considered highly appropriate for administrative review.
Internal review is the cheapest and easiest form of administrative review.
However, the Commission does not consider that internal review would be appropriate for special access decisions, particularly in
light of evidence suggesting that special access applications are made at a senior level. There would seem to be little benefit to
a researcher in seeking internal review if a senior officer has made the initial decision. External review on the merits would be
more appropriate.
The legislation should therefore include a right to seek review of a decision to refuse special access by the AAT or a similar external
merits review tribunal.
This review should be similar to that currently available for review of a decision to refuse access to records under the
Archives Act
While applications to the AAT can be costly and time consuming, they are not as complex or expensive as applications to the Federal
Court under the ADJR Act. In addition, the mere existence of an avenue of review can have beneficial consequences for the quality
of initial decision making.
Draft recommendation 18.6.
The proposed special access provisions in the FOI Act and the archives legislation should include a right to seek review of a decision
to refuse special access by an external merits review tribunal.
Monitoring use of exempt records
Due to the sensitive nature of the information to which special access might be sought, there needs to be some mechanism for administering
and controlling special access. The current arrangements for special access include detailed conditions under which special access
should be granted.
Section 56(3)
Archives Act
provides a $2000 penalty if conditions of special access are contravened. This penalty has never been enforced.
The Commission has been impressed by the development in other jurisdictions of the research contract. A similar concept has also
been used by Australian Archives in its agreement to provide extended access to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander individuals
and groups undertaking family and community research. The research contract could be used as a tool to monitor the use which is made
of the information accessed. Contracts would clearly set out the terms and conditions of access and the consequences for breach of
the contract conditions. A successful applicant should be required to enter into a research contract as part of the special access
procedures. Only those persons who are clearly identified in the contract should have permission to access the records in question.
The other advantage of research contracts is that they can be individually designed to cater for the type of information being accessed
and the particular situation of the applicant. Research contracts should cover the following types of issues: confidentiality of
the applicant, security of information in copies and notes in the applicant's custody, power to review work prior to publication,
and provisions for breach of contract including withdrawal of access privileges, defined monetary damages and other legal remedies.
Draft recommendation 18.7.
The special access provisions in the archives legislation and the FOI Act should require successful special access applicants to
enter a research contract specifying the conditions of access and the consequences of breaching those conditions.
Special arrangements currently in use date from November 1988.
These specified circumstances are set out in Archives Regulation 9.
Other senior officials must be specifically approved by the Prime Minister to fall within the ambit of this provision.
Other senior officials must be specifically approved by the Prime Minister to fall within the ambit of this provision.
Draft recommendation 15.6.
At present other senior officials must be specifically approved by the Prime Minister to be eligible for special access.
The Commission has recommended that the exemption categories in the archives legislation be narrowly defined and all subject to a
public interest test to ensure that the minimum necessary information is exempted from the public in the open period: see Chapter
The controlling agency is the agency with functional responsibility for the records: see para 12.9–13.
See Chapter 16 which develops the concept of an access agreement between the NAA and controlling agencies which determines responsibility
for making access decisions on records in the open period.
Draft recommendation 7.10.
See para 21.3.
The Commission notes the current investigation of options for external merits review tribunals: see para 21.9.
See Chapter 21 for the Commission's recommendations relating to the review of access decisions.
See para 21.11.
This could cover the situation relating to research assistants to ensure they are bound by the same conditions and obligations as
the principal researcher.
Sensitive records — access and review
19. Exemption issues
Introduction
The objective of exemption provisions in archives legislation
Legislative structure of exemption provisions
A public interest test
Need to demonstrate actual harm or detriment
Proposed exemption categories for the archives legislation
Security, defence and international relations
Information given in confidence
Confidential source of information
Commonwealth financial and property interests
Law enforcement
Endangering life or physical safety
Personal affairs
Business affairs
Deleting some existing exemption categories
Legal professional privilege
Special information exemptions
Defining a confidential source of information
Guidelines for protecting information relating to personal affairs
Limitations or sunsets on exemption categories
Cabinet notebooks
Ministerial conclusive certificates
Application of certificates
Time limits on certificates
Other restrictions on access
Where knowledge of the existence of a record would be exempt information
Consultation with States and Territories
Security classification
Introduction
The Commission has recommended the
retention of an open period commencing at 30 years. The object of an
open period is to provide
the best possible public access to records
after a certain period of time. After 30 years the majority of records
can and should
be released to the public with as few procedural
inconveniences or exemptions as possible. Chapters 15–18 have
the procedural aspects of access. This chapter examines
general issues relating to the exemption of records in the open period.
The objective of exemption provisions in archives legislation
Archives Act
a series of exemption categories, defining the types of information
which may be considered to be sensitive and warrant
protection beyond
30 years. If a record or part of a record falls within one of these
categories a decision may be made to exempt
the record from public
The current
has clearly been
derived from the exemption categories set out in the FOI Act. During
drafting stages in the 1970s the Archives
Bill became linked to the
development of freedom of information legislation. The result was one
of the most comprehensive and detailed
access regimes for archival
records ever incorporated into legislation. The access provisions of
Archives Act
are essentially a replication of those introduced
under the FOI Act, with certain variations intended to take account of
of the records.
The Commission does not consider it
appropriate to continue to base access in the open period on the same
precepts as access under
the FOI Act. For an open period to be
effective there needs to be stronger recognition of open access in the
exemption regime.
The key difference between FOI and open
period access is the age of the records. Exemption categories under the
FOI Act were designed
with a view to protecting sensitive information
within current records. However, sensitivity of information is temporal
In some cases information ceases to be sensitive within a
year of its documentation. In other cases sensitivity will diminish
a period of decades. The Commission has recommended the retention
of a 30 year rule to reflect the time at which it can be presumed
most records will have ceased to be sensitive. After 30 years there is
a strong general presumption that the public interest
in accessing
records outweighs claims of sensitivity.
Accordingly the objective of the
exemption provisions should be to protect from disclosure such
information, and such information
only, as is of such clearly
demonstrable continuing sensitivity that the public interest in
withholding it displaces the strong
general presumption of disclosure.
Legislative structure of exemption provisions
The Commission believes that the
presumption that all records in the open period are available for
public access should be made
expressly clear in the legislation. The
necessary consequence of such a presumption is that a clear onus would
be placed on a decision
maker to point to considerations which rebut
the presumption and establish the grounds upon which the exemption is
being claimed.
This in turn leads to the need to
determine the circumstances in which this presumption of access should
be overridden. Detailed
consideration is given in this chapter to
identifying the categories of information that should attract exemption
and to how those
exemptions might be expressed so as to advance the
overall objectives of the archives legislation. The legislation should,
with the objective and presumption stated above, provide
specifically that the exemptions are to be construed strictly.
Draft recommendation 19.1.
The provisions relating to exemptions should be prefaced with a strong affirmation that
there is a presumption that all records in the open period should be open to the public
exemption categories listed within the provisions should accordingly be construed strictly
the onus is on the decision maker to demonstrate conclusively that
the record falls within the scope of the relevant exemption provision
and to articulate clearly the basis for the exemption.
A public interest test
The presumption that all records in the
open period are open to the public without exception should be able to
be rebutted only
in limited circumstances. The Commission does not
consider that narrowly construed exemption categories alone would be
to ensure that only records with a continuing sensitivity
are exempted from public access beyond 30 years.
In court proceedings it is generally
in the public interest to provide all relevant information about the
case to the court in
order to provide a fair hearing. At common law
information is not required to be disclosed in court proceedings if it
falls within
public interest immunity. This public interest immunity
applies only where it can be clearly demonstrated that it would be
the public interest to disclose the information. A public
interest test is currently incorporated into the s 33(1)(c) exemption
relating to financial and property interests of the Commonwealth and
the s 33(2) exemption relating to legal professional privilege.
number of submissions raised the possibility of attaching a public
interest test to all exemption categories, whilst other submissions
specifically rejected public interest tests relating to particular
categories.
As already discussed, providing access
to records involves balancing the competing interests of public access
and protecting continuing
sensitivities in government records. A 30
year open period, though arbitrary, is based on the expectation that
after 30 years the
balance favours public access in all but a very few
cases. Thus records should only be withheld from the public after 30
if disclosure would be contrary to a clearly demonstrable public
The Commission believes therefore that
if a record is found to fall within the description of one of the
defined exemption categories,
its non-disclosure should then be
subjected to a public interest test. The decision maker's reasons for
claiming exemption should
therefore include both the reasons for
claiming that the information falls within the relevant exemption
category and the public
interest grounds justifying non-disclosure.
At common law categories of public interest justifying non-disclosure have included the preservation of national security,
Cabinet secrecy,
protection of informers to investigatory bodies,
and the protection of Aboriginal traditional secrets and other minority group beliefs.
The list of categories justifying non-disclosure in the public interest is not closed.
However, the key to each claim should be a determination whether the
information continues to have a sensitivity which justifies
protection in the public interest. If no such continuing sensitivity
can be conclusively demonstrated the public should be
entitled to
access to that information.
Draft recommendation 19.2.
The exemption provisions in the
archives legislation should also include a public interest test, so
that records within any of
the exemption categories would not be exempt
unless disclosure would also be contrary to the public interest.
Need to demonstrate actual harm or detriment
A number of the existing exemption
categories in
Archives Act
provide for the protection of an
interest where disclosure would, or could reasonably be expected to,
cause a specific harm or
detriment. This formula was translated from
the exemption provisions within the FOI Act. Consistent with the strong
emphasis that
it believes should be given to reinforcing the
presumption of accessibility to records in the open access period, the
has considered whether this broad formula should be narrowed
to require demonstration of actual harm or detriment.
While the Commission can see the
justification for retaining that test in a number of FOI exemption
categories, bearing in mind
the application of the FOI Act to current
records, it is not satisfied that such a broad formula can be justified
in relation to
records that are at least 30 years old. This conclusion
is reflected in the exemption categories proposed by the Commission in
the immediately following section.
Proposed exemption categories for the archives legislation
In the light of the forgoing
discussion, and taking into account the views as proposed in
submissions and public consultations,
the Commission is of the view
that the number of exemption categories should be reduced from the
existing 15 categories in the
Archives Act
to the following 8
categories and an additional special category relating to information
considered to be secret or sacred under
the customary law of Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander people.
Security, defence and international relations
Information the disclosure of which would damage the security, defence or international relations of the Commonwealth.
This category is similar to the existing
s 33(1)(a).
Information given in confidence
Information given in confidence to the Commonwealth or a
Commonwealth authority by a foreign government, an international
organisation,
or any other person, where disclosure of the information
would constitute a breach of confidence, but not in cases where the
information
has otherwise been made public knowledge.
This is a combination of the existing
However, the category should not apply in situations where, while the
Commonwealth is in a continuing relationship of confidentiality,
information has become public knowledge through another source. Due to
the uncertainty of the definition of 'breach of confidence'
the Commission recommends the addition of a specific reference to this kind of information in the exemption category.
Confidential source of information
Information which would disclose, or enable a person to ascertain,
the existence or identity of a confidential source of information
relation to the enforcement and administration of the law.
This category is similar to the existing
s 33(1)(e)(ii)
, which should exist as a separate exemption category.
Commonwealth financial and property interests
Information the disclosure of which would have a substantial
effect on the financial or property interests of the Commonwealth or
a Commonwealth institution.
This category is similar to the existing
s 33(1)(c).
Law enforcement
Information the disclosure of which would prejudice the enforcement
or administration of the law, including the prejudicing of
investigations,
trials, and lawful methods or procedures.
This category is an amalgamation of the existing
s 33(1)(e)(i)
(f)(i), (f)(ii), and (f)(iii). The Commission considers there is no
need for separate categories covering each of these types
information.
Endangering life or physical safety
Information the disclosure of which would endanger the life or physical safety of any person.
This category is similar to the existing
s 33(1)(e)(iii)
, which should exist as a separate exemption category.
Personal affairs
Information relating to personal affairs the disclosure of which would cause harm to any person.
This category corresponds to the existing
s 33(1)(g).
with the other proposed exemption categories, this category should only
extend to information relating to personal affairs
which would cause
harm, whether that be physical or mental harm, to any person.
The Commission considered recommending changing the term 'personal
affairs' to 'personal information' to align the archives legislation
and, since 1991, the FOI Act. However the
Commission does not support the adoption of the broader term 'personal
information' within
the exemption provisions of the archives
legislation. The term 'personal affairs' presents a much clearer
indication of the type
of information which may require protection
beyond 30 years.
Business affairs
Information, including trade secrets or other information of
commercial value, relating to a person's business or professional
or relating to an organisation's business, commercial or
financial affairs, where disclosure of that information would adversely
affect that person or organisation.
This category combines the existing s 33(1)(h) and (j).
Draft recommendation 19.3.
A Commonwealth record would be an
exempt record if it contains information which, subject to the
application of a public interest
balancing test, would be information
the disclosure of which would damage the security, defence or international relations of the Commonwealth or
given in confidence to the Commonwealth or a Commonwealth
authority by a foreign government, an international organisation, or
any other person, where disclosure of the information would constitute
a breach of confidence, but not in cases where the information
otherwise been made public knowledge or
which would disclose, or enable a person to ascertain, the
existence or identity of a confidential source of information in
to the enforcement and administration of the law or
the disclosure of which would have a substantial effect on the
financial or property interests of the Commonwealth or of a
Commonwealth
institution or
the disclosure of which would prejudice the enforcement or
administration of the law, including the prejudicing of investigations,
trials, and lawful methods or procedures or
the disclosure of which would endanger the life or physical safety of any person or
relating to personal affairs, the disclosure of which would cause harm to any person or
including trade secrets or other information of commercial value,
relating to a person's business or professional affairs, or relating
an organisation's business, commercial or financial affairs, where
disclosure of that information would adversely affect that
organisation.
Deleting some existing exemption categories
Legal professional privilege
The possible uses of the legal
professional privilege exemption in s 33(2) more than 30 years after
the creation of a record are
very restricted. This category has been
used only once, and in that case the same information was also
protected by another exemption
category. Given that records will be a
minimum of 30 years of age, any information attracting the privilege is
likely to fall within
another general exemption category. The
Commission sees no need to retain specific protection for legal
professional privilege.
Draft recommendation 19.4.
Section 33(2), which exempts records covered by legal professional privilege, should be removed from the legislation.
Special information exemptions
Section 33(3) is a special exemption
for information relating to personal or business affairs which should
not be disclosed under
taxation laws. In effect the category extends
the restrictions on access which are provided in specific tax laws to
open period
records. The Australian Taxation Office is particularly
eager to ensure the continued protection of confidential information
30 years. The Australian Bureau of Statistics is also eager to
protect information provided to it in confidence. These are valid
concerns, yet the Commission is not convinced that extra protection for
these records is required. Most of the records of concern
provision are routinely destroyed before they reach 30 years of age.
For those records which are not destroyed the Commission
considers that
the sensitive information would be adequately protected by other
exemption categories, including information given
in confidence,
personal affairs and business affairs. If Parliament is particularly
concerned about providing special protection
for information over and
above the general exemption provisions within the archives legislation,
it should make this clear in the
legislation which establishes how the
information is to be collected.
Draft recommendation 19.5.
Section 33(3), which provides
special protection for personal or business affairs relating to
taxation laws, should be removed
from the legislation.
Defining a confidential source of information
The Act currently includes in s 33(1A)
a definition section setting out particular situations which should be
regarded under s
33(1)(e)(ii) as a confidential source of information.
This is not an exhaustive provision but includes important government
introduced to protect individuals and organisations which
provide confidential information to government agencies. The Commission
would not recommend the inclusion of detailed schemes or situations in
the primary legislation. Regulations, which are more flexible
amendment than primary legislation, are a more suitable place to
provide this kind of definitional assistance.
Draft recommendation 19.6.
Section 33(1A) should be removed
from the Act and the substance of the section, establishing clear but
non-exhaustive definitions
of confidential sources of information,
should be included in regulations under the archives legislation.
Guidelines for protecting information relating to personal affairs
With regard to information relating to
personal affairs the Commission can see the need for some kind of
guidelines for access
decision makers determining what would cause harm
by the disclosure of personal affairs. The public should also have
information about the kinds of records usually withheld under
the provision. These guidelines need to be created in consultation
other experts in personal information, particularly the Privacy
Commissioner, and other agencies with experience in dealing
records containing information relating to personal affairs. They
should be reviewed and updated as appropriate and made accessible
both Commonwealth agencies and the public.
Draft recommendation 19.7.
The NAA, in consultation with the
required by the legislation
to establish and publish guidelines to
assist in the administration of the personal affairs exemption category.
Limitations or sunsets on exemption categories
Information which has a continuing
sensitivity at 30 years will not necessarily continue to be sensitive
at 40 or 50 years. If
information is no longer sensitive it should no
longer be exempted from public access. A number of submissions urged
the Commission
to consider placing ultimate limits on the times for
which exemption categories under the archives legislation should
to apply. Such limits are often referred to as sunset
exemption clauses. Concerns were raised about the current lack of
for later review of decisions to withhold access to records
(other than immediate appeal rights). Once a decision is made that an
exemption applies, that exemption is only reconsidered upon a new
application for access from a member of the public. Although
the Act provides for administrative arrangements to be made for the
reconsideration of earlier decisions, such arrangements
are not widely
used, predominantly for resource reasons.
The application of sunset exemption
clauses based on the age of records for each exemption category raises
a number of problems.
For instance, in order to ensure the continued
protection of sensitive information the time periods applied to each
category would
be likely to be overstated for the majority of records
that would fall within the category. There is then a risk that this
time period might become a standard period for which all
information within the category should be withheld, regardless of the
actual sensitivity of the information. The Commission does not support
the inclusion of individual sunset clauses in the legislation.
While not considering individual
sunset clauses to be appropriate, the Commission is nevertheless
supportive of an ultimate sunset
exemption clause for all records.
Evidence suggests that there is an age when any remaining sensitivity
would be so low that release
to the public could not cause any harm. At
100 years the resources involved in examining records would, in the
Commission's view,
far outweigh any possible risk of harm from
continuing sensitivities.
Draft recommendation 19.8.
All exemptions should cease to have effect 100 years after the date a record was created.
Cabinet notebooks
There is only one category of records
currently subject to an unappealable exemption beyond 30 years of age,
namely Cabinet notebooks.
Until 1994 the Act specifically excluded
Cabinet notebooks from the definition of a Commonwealth record, thereby
excluding them
from all disposal and public access obligations.
Following amendments in 1994, Cabinet notebooks are now subject to the
However, under s 22A, they are subject to
a mandatory 50 year exemption from public access. As most Cabinet
ministers are no longer
involved in political life after 50 years, the
50 year exemption was seen as a reasonable compromise between public
Cabinet confidentiality.
Despite this history, the Commission
has not been made aware of any compelling evidence that the extra 20
years of total exemption
beyond the normal 30 years would change the
sensitivity of the information within Cabinet notebooks. Additionally
the Commission
can see no reason why, as occurs with security and
intelligence records, specific information in Cabinet notebooks which
to be sensitive could not be exempted through the normal
The Commission has concluded therefore
that, if Cabinet notebooks are to be retained as part of the enduring
record of the nation,
they should be available for access no later than
all other Commonwealth records of enduring value. The Commission
supports making
all records more than 30 years of age available for
public access, subject only to clearly defined and appealable
exemptions. No
category of records in the open period should be exempt
without the right of review.
Draft recommendation 19.9.
Cabinet notebooks should enter the open period at 30 years subject to the same exemptions as all other records.
Ministerial conclusive certificates
Application of certificates
The right of ministers to apply
conclusive certificates to groups of records, exempting these records
from the public without the
need for examination, is diametrically at
odds with the presumption of openness for 30 years or older records.
The submissions
showed both strong support for and opposition to the
retention of conclusive certificates. The certificate system was
in both the FOI Act and the
Archives Act
to provide a
mechanism for ministers to ensure that particularly sensitive
information is protected. The low level of use of ministerial
certificates under the
Archives Act
suggests that there has been a
responsible attitude by agencies towards access to archival records.
The Commission does not recommend any
major changes to the system of ministerial certificates provided that
some form of review
of the decision is retained. While strongly
committed to the presumption of accessibility, the Commission is
nevertheless aware
that in exceptional circumstances records can be of
such continuing sensitivity that national interests can be put at risk
by allowing
access to them. Ministers should therefore continue to have
some avenue for ensuring the protection of certain records. The
system of limited review by the AAT provides an adequate
balance between the right to have administrative decisions reviewed and
the need to uphold ministerial responsibility.
At present ministerial certificates
can be applied to information which would be exempt under
and (b), that is to information relating to national security, defence
and international relations, or to information given in
confidence by a
foreign source to the Commonwealth. The Commission considers that the
application of ministerial certificates should
continue to be limited.
Earlier in this chapter the Commission has recommended the retention of
an exemption category relating
to national security, defence or
international relations, and that there be a general provision relating
to information given to
the Commonwealth in confidence by a foreign
source or any other person. The application of ministerial certificates
to these two
categories would be appropriate. However, consistent with
draft recommendation 19.2 above, information within these categories
should only be exempt if disclosure is not in the public interest.
Ministerial certificates should continue to be applied only to
which would be exempt under the legislation. Thus the external review
power to determine whether the application of a
ministerial certificate
was reasonable would take into consideration the public interest test.
Draft recommendation 19.10.
The current system of ministerial
conclusive certificates should be retained with a limited power of
review on the question of
the reasonableness of the making of the
certificate being vested in an external tribunal. Certificates should
only be able to be
applied to information relating to national
security, defence or international relations, or to information given
to the Commonwealth
in confidence by a foreign source or any other
person, in each case subject to a public interest.
Time limits on certificates
There is one change which the
Commission considers should be made to the ministerial certificates
regime, namely the placing of
a 5 year limitation on the currency of
the certificate. Despite the existing power to prescribe time periods
for certificates,
certificates issued under
Archives Act
have no time limitation and will therefore continue
indefinitely until expressly revoked. The placement of a time
limitation on
certificates would not restrict ministerial power,
particularly as there would be no impediment to the issuing of further
ministerial
certificates if that was considered justifiable. The need
for a minister to reconsider the circumstances surrounding the issue of
the certificate in such cases is seen as enhancing both the objectives
of accessibility and good public administration. However,
Commission considers that, consistent with draft recommendation 19.8,
ministerial certificates should not be able to be applied
which are more than 100 years of age.
The existing power under s 34(4) of
the Act to prescribe time limits on ministerial certificates enables
the making of regulations
providing specific time limits. The
Commission favours the inclusion of the proposed 5 year limit in the
primary legislation as
a matter of importance that ought not be left to
subordinate legislation.
Draft recommendation 19.11.
The current system of ministerial
conclusive certificates should be retained with the proviso that a
certificate ceases to have
effect after 5 years, but is renewable.
Certificates should not be able to have effect in relation to records
which are more than
100 years old.
Other restrictions on access
Where knowledge of the existence of a record would be exempt information
Section 39 of the Act permits an
agency to neither confirm nor deny the existence of a record if
knowledge of the record's existence
would constitute exempt
information. Section 39 is a safeguard provision. It provides a
necessary protection in cases where even
a clear admission or denial of
the existence of a record could cause harm. Despite its low level of
formal use the provision should
be retained. However, the decision as
to whether or not the information merits exemption should be subject to
the same public interest
test as any other claim for exemption.
Draft recommendation 19.12.
The legislation should continue
to permit an agency to neither confirm nor deny the existence of a
record if knowledge of its existence
would be exempt information,
subject to a public interest test.
Consultation with States and Territories
Section 32 of the Act requires
consultation with the States and Territories about access decisions
where appropriate. Whilst the
section does not extend the categories of
exemption, the requirement of consultation could be used to delay or
frustrate access
to certain records. The Commission considers that the
interests of the States and Territories can be adequately taken into
consideration
within normal access decision making procedures using the
exemption categories and public interest test that have been proposed.
The requirement to consult with the States and Territories should
therefore be removed from the legislation.
Draft recommendation 19.13.
The requirement to consult with
the States and Territories in relation to access decisions should be
removed from the legislation.
Security classification
Some records of enduring value will
continue to be subject to security classifications applied by the
creating agencies even after
they enter the open period. Section 59 of
Archives Act
states that security classifications cease to have
effect for any purpose if the record becomes available for public
access under
the Act. This does not mean that all security
classifications cease when a record reaches 30 years of age. Security
classification
continues to apply where a record has not been examined,
or where a record is found to have continuing sensitivities and thus
from public access. However, the existing security
classification does not affect the decision to exempt or release a
record. The
legislation should maintain this situation by express
Draft recommendation 19.14.
The legislation should continue
to provide expressly that security classifications cease to apply for
any purpose once a record
is found to have no continuing sensitivities
and is opened to the public.
Alister v R
(1983) 154 CLR 404
Sankey v Whitlam
[1978] HCA 43
(1978) 142 CLR 1
Commonwealth v Northern Land Council
[1993] HCA 24
(1994) 112 ALR 409
D v National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children
[1977] UKHL 1
[1978] AC 171
Aboriginal Sacred Sites Protection Authority v Maurice
(1986) 65 ALR 247
Aboriginal Sacred Sites Protection Authority v Maurice
(1986) 65 ALR 247
Sankey v Whitlam
[1978] HCA 43
(1978) 142 CLR 1
The need for this additional special category is dealt with in Chapter 23.
There has been suggestion that an original confidant is not
released from a relationship of confidence even if the information has
otherwise been made public:
Speed Seal Products Ltd v Paddington
[1986] 1 All ER 91
at 94-95. But compare the approaches of Lord Griffiths and Lord Goff in
Attorney-General v Guardian Newspapers Ltd (No 2)
[1990] 1 AC 109 at 271 and 107-108 respectively.
See para 15.30–31 on the relationship between the archives legislation and non-disclosure provisions in other legislation.
The amendments were contained in the
Prime Minister and Cabinet (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1994
Only five ministerial conclusive certificates have been issued under the
Archives Act
Archives Act
20. Personal information in Commonwealth records
Introduction
The rights of the record subject and public release
Taking into consideration the identity of the applicant
Access by record subjects to information about themselves
Access by next of kin or legal representatives
Counselling for persons given access to exempted personal information
Altering personal information
Amending records in the open period
Annotating records in the open period
Introduction
The previous chapter includes a recommendation for an exemption category to protect information relating to personal affairs where
disclosure would cause harm. However, there are a number of other issues to consider which relate to personal information in Commonwealth
This chapter considers three particular issues relating to personal information. The first concerns the right of a record subject
to be informed of a disclosure of personal information. The second issue concerns the right of a record subject to have access to
their own personal information in Commonwealth records. The Commission also considers extending this right of access to next of kin
of a record subject. The third issue for consideration concerns the right to seek alteration of personal information where it is
incomplete, incorrect, out of date or misleading.
The rights of the record subject and public release
A number of submissions raised concerns about the rights of the record subject where personal information is released to the public.
Personal information is a wide term, extending from the name of a person to their intimate medical details. The personal affairs
exemption category does not restrict access to non-sensitive personal information. This means that some personal information can
be released to the public. Some submissions suggested that this release should only take place if the record subject has been contacted
and given their approval for the release. This would be consistent with the Information Privacy Principles of the
The operation of the
Archives Act
has, however, deliberately been exempted from the
. This is a recognition that after 30 years there may be different sensitivities attaching to personal information. It also recognises
that the relationship between the record subject and the creator of the record will be significantly weaker than at the time of creation
or may no longer exist. Protections of privacy have been carefully built into the
Archives Act
, and should continue to apply in the new archives legislation. Any material released to the public would have been examined and considered
not to be of a sensitive nature. The further step of establishing a mandatory procedure for seeking to identify and contact the record
subject would become more difficult as the record becomes older, mostly due to simple problems such as changes in names and addresses,
or the death of the record subject. The Commission considers that the privacy of record subjects would adequately be protected in
open period records by the personal affairs exemption provision. The resources required to implement procedures to attempt to contact
every record subject would be overwhelming and, in the Commission's view, clearly out of proportion to the possible risk of interfering
with personal privacy.
This would not stop the NAA from implementing contact procedures in specific cases, or in relation to a group of records of particular
Draft recommendation 20.1.
It would not be practicable to oblige access decision makers to seek to contact record subjects prior to releasing non-sensitive personal
information to the public.
Taking into consideration the identity of the applicant
Access by record subjects to information about themselves
Record subjects should, however, have rights to access their own information above and beyond those of the general public. Under
Archives Act
decisions are made to open records to the public in general, thus the identity of the applicant is not taken into consideration.
If the record is not suitable for general release, it will not be released to anyone, even the record subject. While discretionary
practices are in place to take account of the identity of the applicant, the Commission has considered what further measures might
be incorporated into the legislation.
Access to one's own personal information is an area where the boundaries of the FOI and the Archives Acts overlap. Under the FOI
Act individuals may apply for information about themselves, whether or not it is exempt as personal information or as information
relating to that person's business or professional affairs.
There is no date restriction on this entitlement; thus records in the open period can be accessed in this way. The Commission does
not, however, consider that this right operates effectively in relation to records in the open period. This is due to two reasons.
The first relates to administrative effectiveness. To pursue the right of access under the FOI Act, an applicant must apply directly
to the responsible agency. The majority of records in the open period are in the custody of Australian Archives. As a result considerable
resources of the agency, Australian Archives, and the applicant are used to locate, transfer, make access decisions and provide access
to the applicant. This time consuming exercise could be greatly simplified with consequent savings if the NAA had the power to accept
an application directly from the applicant.
The second reason is that a number of agencies whose records are subject to the
Archives Act
are exempted from the provisions of the FOI Act. No right of access to a person's own information is available in respect of these
For the above reasons, the Commission considers that the archives legislation should confer rights of access to personal information
in the open period comparable to the right given by the FOI Act. The Commission would not, however, see the need for any modification
of the existing right under the FOI Act. While this would have the effect in some cases of creating parallel rights for the record
subject, one under the FOI Act and one under the archives legislation, this would cumulatively provide the best possible access to
the applicant, particularly in cases where the total information required is included in records which are both less than and greater
than 30 years of age, or where the record subject has an established long term relationship with the agency. While this situation
might create the possibility of 'forum shopping', duplicative action could be avoided by agencies most likely to be affected in this
way entering into access decision making arrangements with the NAA.
Draft recommendation 20.2.
The archives legislation should include a right to access an applicant's own personal information which is more than 30 years old.
The parallel right under the FOI Act should continue.
Access by next of kin or legal representatives
A number of submissions were supportive of creating a right of next of kin to access otherwise exempted personal information. The
Commission believes there are merits in this suggestion in so far as it can envisage situations in which a person has a genuine need,
for example for medical purposes or in order to trace a family member, to have access to information relating to the personal affairs
of a family member. The Commission can also envisage circumstances where the legal relationship between the record subject and another
person is such that there is a demonstrable need for that person to have access to exempt information relating to the personal affairs
of the record subject. The relationship between a legal guardian, a trustee or an executor of the estate of a record subject, are
situations which come readily to mind.
The major difficulty in framing an appropriate access provision to meet such circumstances is that of defining eligibility for access.
In relation to kinship, in particular, it would be impossible to define those kinship relationships that qualified and those that
did not. An added difficulty is that kinship may not be the only personal relationship that should qualify. This is particularly
so in today's society where many close personal relationships do not involve any legally recognised kinship relationship.
The Commission believes that the solution to these difficulties lies in the fashioning of a statutory right for any person to seek
access to otherwise exempt information relating to the personal affairs of a record subject provided that the person can demonstrate
a special need, based on their personal or legal relationship with the record subject. The Commission would propose that the decision
maker be required to impose such conditions as might be necessary to preserve the privacy of the information in question and that
the NAA be required to issue guidelines to assist in the assessment of applications. In view of the subjective nature of such an
access decision, a right of review and appeal to an external merits review tribunal should be permitted.
Draft recommendation 20.3.
The legislation should entitle any person to seek access to otherwise exempt information relating to the personal affairs of a record
subject provided that the person can demonstrate a special need for such access by reason of their personal or legal relationship
with the record subject.
Any grant of access should be on such conditions as are necessary to ensure that the privacy of the information in question is protected
to the maximum extent possible. The NAA should be required to issue guidelines to assist in the assessment of applications.
A refusal to grant access should be reviewable and subject to appeal to an external merits review tribunal.
Counselling for persons given access to exempted personal information
In line with similar requirements under the FOI Act,
the Commission favours the inclusion in the legislation of an obligation to consider the effect of disclosure of exempted information
to the record subject. Even if the record subject has some idea of what information may be contained in a record, its disclosure
could sometimes have a distressing impact. Where it is considered that disclosure might be detrimental to the record subject's physical
or mental health or well-being, the record subject should be advised that they may wish to seek the professional assistance of a
qualified person. The decision should be in the hands of the record subject.
A similar obligation should apply in relation to the release of information about the personal affairs of a record subject to a person
to whom access is granted by reason of special need arising out of their personal or legal relationship with the record subject.
Draft recommendation 20.4.
The legislation should require a decision maker to consider the need for counselling where otherwise exempted information is released
to a record subject or to a person who has demonstrated a special need to have access to the information by reason of their personal
or legal relationship with the record subject.
Altering personal information
Amending records in the open period
The amendment and annotation of personal information in records is another area of overlap between the FOI Act and the
Archives Act
. Under the FOI Act an individual may request an amendment, involving an alteration of a record or an addition of a note by the agency,
or they may request an annotation, involving placing a statement made by the applicant onto the record.
The right to request amendment or annotation has no time limitations; thus records in the open period can be the subject of alteration
or annotation in accordance with the FOI Act.
The Commission is strongly of the view that the ability to amend records in excess of 30 years of age should be discontinued. Amendment
of a record can involve alteration of the record or the inscription on the record of a notation with accurate information specifying
that the agency is satisfied the information was previously inadequate. The Commission does not consider that either of these options
is suitable in relation to records in the open period. After 30 years, the original information on the record can be of considerable
importance in documenting the historical aspect of decisions taken by the agency, whether they were based on accurate or inaccurate
information. In addition, after 30 years the resources required to determine if the information is incomplete, incorrect, out of
date or misleading would increase proportionately with the time since the information was documented. An amendment after 30 years
is both difficult to implement and can undermine the integrity of the records.
The open access period provides an obvious date at which the integrity of the record should be upheld, regardless of the fact that
the information is incomplete, incorrect or misleading.
Draft recommendation 20.5.
The FOI Act should be amended to provide that records in the open period may not be amended.
Annotating records in the open period
It is not, however, the Commission's intention that principles of privacy as reflected in the
should be eroded. The right under the FOI Act to add an annotation to a record in the open access period should therefore be retained.
Additionally (and particularly to cover the records of those agencies that are covered by the archives legislation but not the FOI
Act) the archives legislation should confer a corresponding right for all records in the open period. Annotation involves placing
an amending statement on the record. The statement is written by the applicant, and the agency may add comments to the statement.
Under the FOI Act a right to annotate, unlike a request to amend, cannot be refused unless the annotating statement is irrelevant,
defamatory or unnecessarily voluminous.
The archives legislation should include a similar provision.
As there are only minor grounds for refusal of annotation, there should be little need to 'forum shop' if the rights under the FOI
Act and the archives legislation are identical.
The right under the archives legislation should be restricted, as under the FOI Act, to the record subject. As existing administrative
procedures for the annotation of ASIO records show, the discretionary power of the NAA could be used to provide next of kin with
the ability to annotate in appropriate and exceptional cases where the record subject is deceased.
Draft recommendation 20.6.
The archives legislation should include a right to request annotation of personal information in the open period by placement of a
statement on the record. The right of annotation in the archives legislation should be identical to that in the FOI Act.
Information Privacy Principle 11.
FOI Act s 41(3)–(8).
FOI Act s 50(2). The requirements for an application for amendment are set out in s 49. Where practicable the alteration should not
obliterate the existing text of the record: FOI Act s 50(3).
FOI Act s 51B. The requirements for an application for annotation are set out in s 51A.
See also para 10.29–31 about alteration of records more than 25 years of age.
FOI Act s 51B.
Despite the absence of a specific legislative power, ASIO and Australian Archives have worked together to establish administrative
procedures to permit next of kin to request alteration of ASIO records in the open period where the record subject is deceased. This
is made possible by the power of the Archives to permit alteration of records which are more than 25 years of age:
Archives Act
21. Review of decisions
Introduction
Internal review
Maintaining internal review procedures
Time limitations on internal review decisions
An external merits review tribunal
Possible changes to the AAT
Tribunal procedures
Costs of Tribunal hearings
Preliminary conferences
Responsibility for review decisions
Establishing primary responsibility
Joining respondents to external tribunal proceedings
Other formal avenues of review
Introduction
The existing mechanisms for reviewing access decisions are similar to those in the FOI Act. In their entirety they were the most
strongly supported part of the current access regime, with few suggestions for change made in the submissions. The Commission supports
the retention of the basic review structure.
Internal review
Maintaining internal review procedures
Internal review is a practice used in many jurisdictions as the first step of review of administrative decisions.
Archives Act
currently includes a statutory internal review process which is generally compulsory before any further review can be sought.
The decision is formally made by Australian Archives, although in practice the views of the responsible agency, if any, are taken
into consideration. If the applicant is not notified of a decision within 14 days,
permits the applicant to seek review by the AAT.
None of the submissions recommended the removal of the internal review process. There are a number of compelling reasons for retaining
internal review procedures for review of access decisions. These include to provide an opportunity for both parties to revisit the
decision and reach a satisfactory conclusion, to allow senior officers to monitor decision making in their agencies and take corrective
action, the cost effectiveness of internal review for the applicant and agency, and the reduction of numbers of appeals to the AAT.
Statistics from Australian Archives endorse the success of internal reconsideration as a form of review, showing a large number of
decisions being reversed wholly or partially at internal review level.
Some suggestions were made that an applicant should have a choice to appeal directly to an external tribunal for review of an access
decision. Evidence to the Commission, however, clearly underlined the desirability of internal review as a preliminary to external
review. As mentioned, a large number of decisions are altered as a result of internal review, and the process has many advantages
over external review in terms of costs and time for the applicant, the NAA, and any other involved agency.
While there is no doubt, therefore, that internal review serves a very useful purpose in this area, it does not necessarily follow
that direct access to external review should be excluded. Indeed, it is the Commission's view that the usefulness of internal review
would be reinforced rather than weakened if the legislation were to recognise that there are occasions on which the level of contest
between the parties is such that the best interests of all would be best served by direct access to external review. The Commission
is satisfied that the cost difference between internal review and tribunal proceedings would be sufficient to ensure that inappropriate
use of the option to seek direct external review did not occur.
The Commission notes that some uncertainty currently exists as to whether internal review of a ministerial conclusive certificate
is technically necessary under the
Archives Act
before an appeal regarding the reasonableness of the certificate can be made to the AAT. Clearly, internal review is meaningless
in such circumstances and its exclusion from the process should be made clear in the legislation.
At present the legislation recognises one situation where the right of appeal is directly to the external tribunal. This is in
in the case of a deemed decision to refuse access where a decision is not made within 90 days. The Commission has recommended that
this situation continue.
Draft recommendation 21.1.
Internal review procedures should be maintained as the first stage of a statutory right of appeal but should not be a prerequisite
to external review of a decision to refuse access.
Draft recommendation 21.2.
The legislation should reaffirm that an applicant may appeal directly to the external tribunal where there is a deemed decision to
refuse access after 90 days have elapsed since the original application.
Draft recommendation 21.3.
The legislation should put beyond question that internal review should not be available in relation to records subject to a ministerial
conclusive certificate.
Time limitations on internal review decisions
of the current Act, where an applicant has not been notified of a decision on an internal review within 14 days they have the right
to make an application for review by the AAT. A large number of submissions supported the extension of the period of notification
for decisions of internal review on the basis that 14 days is too short a period of time to effect a genuine review of a decision,
particularly in cases where external consultation is required. The Commission notes that 30 days is allowed for external review under
the FOI Act.
This seems to the Commission to be a much more realistic time frame for similar decisions under the archives legislation. At the
same time the Commission would favour retention of the existing obligation in
Archives Act
to notify the applicant of a decision as soon as possible.
Draft recommendation 21.4.
The statutory period of notification for internal review decisions should be extended from 14 to 30 days with the retention of an
obligation to notify the applicant of a decision as soon as possible.
An external merits review tribunal
Possible changes to the AAT
The structure of the AAT is currently under review by the Government which has announced that the AAT will be amalgamated with four
other tribunals in a new general tribunal.
While details of the new tribunal are yet to be announced, its structure is unlikely to hinder the Commission's recommendations regarding
review of archival access decisions so long as there continues to be an external, independent merits review tribunal.
A review on the merits by the AAT of a decision to refuse access has been seen by many to be one of the successes of the Commonwealth
access system, both under the FOI Act and the
Archives Act
. The AAT ordinarily provides a less formal and lower cost mechanism for reconsideration of the case than a court of law. It also
provides a forum for review on the merits as opposed to judicial review.
Few archives cases have proceeded to decision by the AAT. None has been taken to the Federal Court. While there is little formal
record of tribunal decisions against which the value and effectiveness of external review can be measured, there seems little doubt
that the prospect of such review has a beneficial effect on decision making at both initial and review levels. The Commission therefore
recommends the retention of external review on the merits of the case by an independent tribunal similar to the AAT.
Draft recommendation 21.5.
External review on the merits of decisions to withhold access should be retained. This review should be undertaken by the AAT or a
similar independent tribunal.
Tribunal procedures
Archives Act
currently includes a number of detailed provisions relating to procedures before the AAT. A number of submissions recommended the
removal of these provisions from the archives legislation to the
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1975
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act
is a general Act establishing the AAT and general procedures for cases before the AAT. However, the AAT has a wide number of jurisdictions,
many requiring slight variations in procedures. The provisions relating to the AAT which are currently included in the
Archives Act
apply specifically to procedures for review of access decisions made under the
Archives Act
. With the proposed merging of the AAT and other existing tribunals, there is likely to be an even greater need for detailed procedural
provisions to be established in other legislation. Whilst the Commission would support making these provisions as simple and accessible
as possible, the need to include these kinds of provisions in the archives legislation cannot be avoided.
Costs of Tribunal hearings
The Commission makes no recommendations regarding the costs of external review, but does recommend that the existing provisions giving
the AAT a general power to waive an applicant's fee remain in place.
This is an important safeguard for many applicants who should have the opportunity to approach the AAT but who are unable to afford
the expense.
Draft recommendation 21.6.
The external tribunal's power to waive the applicant's fee to the tribunal for applications relating to the archives legislation should
be retained.
Preliminary conferences
Evidence to the Commission has shown that a large number of records have been released prior to and during AAT hearings, reducing
the number of records ultimately at issue in those proceedings. Preliminary conferences, built into the procedures of the AAT, have
A number of submissions suggested that preliminary conferences should be held at the internal review level to reduce the need for
appeals to the more costly external tribunal. The Commission is concerned that any formal conference mechanism would merely duplicate
the existing procedures of the external tribunal and be unlikely to reduce costs for agencies or applicants. The Commission's recommendations
relating to increased communication with applicants at the initial decision making level should assist to develop good relationships
which can continue throughout all levels of the review process.
Draft recommendation 21.7.
Formal use of preliminary conferences should be limited to merits review by an external tribunal.
Responsibility for review decisions
Establishing primary responsibility
Under the existing Act all access decisions are formally made by Australian Arch-ives; thus Australian Archives makes all internal
review decisions and is the respondent to any review by the AAT. However, in practice interested agencies have a great influence
over the internal review decisions made by Australian Archives. Particularly with regards to the Commission's recommendations relating
to responsibility for making initial access decisions,
consideration must be given to how this practice should be reflected in the new legislation.
The most logical option is to give responsibility for making internal review decisions to the agency which takes responsibility for
the initial access decision.
It would also follow that the agency which undertakes internal review should then be the respondent to any further action before
the external tribunal. This option would reflect the realities of access decision making and ensure that the real decision makers
are responsible at all levels for their decisions.
Against this, it might be said that, in those case where the decision maker is not the NAA, the value of the NAA's extensive experience
is lost and the risk of uneven decision making across agencies increases. In this context, instances have been pointed to in which
Australian Archives has been instrumental in helping to overturn some of the more conservative access decisions of other agencies
and, at the same time, communicate understandable reasons for exemptions to applicants.
The Commission is not convinced, however, of the need for the NAA to be involved in the review of all decisions to refuse access
under the archives legislation. Where an agency seeks to take responsibility for making access decisions and enters into an agreement
with the NAA to enable it do so, that agency should assume the full responsibility of reviewing that decision and defending it before
an external tribunal.
Draft recommendation 21.8.
The responsibility for reviewing and/or defending a decision to refuse access should lie with the agency which has responsibility
for making the initial access decision, whether this is the NAA or another responsible agency acting in accordance with an access
Joining respondents to external tribunal proceedings
A number of submissions raised the possibility of joining parties to external review proceedings in order to better represent agency
interests in access decisions. It is likely that many of these concerns would be assuaged if the Commission's recommendations to
share responsibility for access decision making are adopted. However, there may be situations in which the NAA, with an overarching
role of establishing access decision making guidelines, might wish to participate in external review proceedings in particular cases.
The AAT currently has the discretion to join another party, at that party's request, to the proceedings in appropriate circumstances.
As the NAA would continue to have an interest in the outcome of tribunal decisions, regardless of the initial decision maker, there
should be a clear legislative recognition that the NAA would have an interest in all external tribunal proceedings relating to access
decisions in the open period. The legislation should expressly recognise the tribunal's discretion to join the NAA to proceedings.
For that purpose the NAA should have the right to approach the tribunal on its own motion.
Draft recommendation 21.9.
The archives legislation should include a provision recognising the interest which the NAA has in any proceedings before an external
tribunal relating to access decisions under the archives legislation. The tribunal should have the discretion to join the NAA to
the proceedings and the NAA should have the right to approach the tribunal for that purpose on its own motion.
Other formal avenues of review
Another aspect of the review of access decisions is the ability to seek assistance from the Ombudsman or to seek judicial review
by the Federal Court under the ADJR Act. These avenues provide a wider review of any decision made under the legislation, not merely
a decision to refuse access. The Commission does not suggest any alteration of these avenues of review.
Draft recommendation 21.10.
The right to make a complaint to the Ombudsman should be maintained.
Draft recommendation 21.11.
The ability to seek judicial review of decisions by the Federal Court under the ADJR Act and on appeal from the external merits review
tribunal should be maintained.
Where there is a deemed decision to refuse access the applicant may appeal directly to the AAT:
Archives Act
See statistics for 1994–95, 1995–96 and 1996–97 in Australian Archives
Annual Reports of Australian Archives and Advisory Council on Australian Archives 1996–97
Canberra 1997, 31.
FOI Act s 55(3).
This was recommended by the Administrative Review Council in its Report No. 39
Better Decisions: review of Commonwealth Merits Review Tribunals
AGPS Canberra 1995. See also Attorney-General and Minister for Justice, press release, 20 March 1997; and Attorney-General and Minister
for Justice, press release, 13 July 1997.
Situations where the prescribed fee is not payable or can be waived by the Tribunal are set out in Administrative Tribunal Regulation
paragraph 19.
See Chapter 16.
If no agreement is entered the NAA has responsibility for making access decisions: see draft recommendation 16.1.
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1975
Other significant issues
22. Services to the public
Introduction
A charter of service obligations
Security of reading rooms
Access to information about records
Personal assistance
Improving access to the records
Using archival records with Crown copyright
Introduction
To be effective a right of access must
be supported by adequate information about access and service delivery
procedures. These
in turn must be effective.
A number of submissions drew attention
to the fact that the use of archival records in Australia is not very
high. Comparisons
between the State archival institutions and
Australian Archives also indicate that Australian Archives does not
have a high public
profile. A number of reasons were suggested for this
phenomenon including difficulties in accessing records due to
geographical
location, lack of education about archival systems of
arrangement, and ignorance concerning the wealth of information
within Commonwealth records.
A charter of service obligations
The Commission has made recommendations
throughout this report supporting the conferment of a number of
statutory obligations on
the NAA and other agencies which would support
the provision of enhanced services to the public, including obligations
all agencies to make records of enduring value accessible to the public at the earliest possible time
the NAA to collect and disseminate information about the content, location and accessibility of records of enduring value
the NAA to create adequate finding aids in appropriate formats.
However, the inclusion of various service obligations in the
legislation would not of itself suffice as an effective method of
communicating
with the general public.
Many submissions supported the creation
of a charter of service. A charter of service would, in the
Commission's view, be a suitable
vehicle for pulling together these
obligations and identifying how the public can access and benefit from
the resultant services.
Accordingly a charter of service would, both
through its creation and its existence, play an important communication
role between
the NAA and the public. The charter should also include
relevant user obligations, including security and preservation
requirements
in relation to the records.
Australian Archives is subject to a general government requirement that such a charter be established by June 1998.
Under this initiative all Government departments, agencies and business
enterprises who deal with the public are required to develop
service charters according to standardised principles. Those principles
are detailed in a guide published by the Department
of Industry,
Science & Tourism.
A unit has also been established within that Department to specifically assist agencies to develop service charters.
There is a further issue whether the
service charter should be incorporated into legislation itself, or
whether it needs to be
more flexible and 'aspirational' than might be
possible with a legislative charter.
Commission does not think that it is appropriate to enact the charter
as a part of the legislation. Service charters include
legislative
obligations but provide much more detail about the daily relationship
between the agency and the public. These details
change with time,
often in order to provide a better service based upon experience. There
must be a capacity to update the charter
of service as and when
The Commission notes that a number of
submissions from researchers and researcher bodies raised the
possibility of extending opening
hours of reading rooms. This is an
issue which should be fully considered when the charter of service is
being drawn up.
Draft recommendation 22.1.
The NAA should have a statutory
obligation to create a charter of service, but the charter itself
should not be incorporated into
the legislation.
Security of reading rooms
Australian Archives has asked the
Commission to consider recommending that the NAA be given powers to
remove persons from its premises.
These powers would be able to be used
in cases where persons were disruptive, offensive, or have damaged
property, or where staff
or other members of the public were under
threat. The Commission considers that there are already in existence a
number of options
for the NAA to pursue if such situations arise.
Options include common law rights of occupiers, the
Public Order (Protection of Persons and Property) Act 1971
(Cth) and the
Crimes Act 1901
(Cth), and the NAA's powers to protect and preserve Commonwealth
records. All of these options could be used to remove persons
reading rooms. It is not appropriate to give the NAA any additional
powers to remove persons from its premises.
Access to information about records
In Chapter 16 the Commission has
recommended that the NAA have a statutory obligation to collect and
make accessible information
This recommendation is an essential part of ensuring access to records.
Even if the records were not in the custody of the NAA,
the NAA would
still be required to act as a repository of information about the
records. It would then be essential that this information
be properly
accessible.
Finding aids are tools which assist
the public, government users and NAA staff to locate relevant records.
Finding aids can include
arrangements of records, guides to particular groups of records, and
one page sheets
with general information about records on a particular
topic. Finding aids are usually put together as a result of research or
from the experience and knowledge of staff members. Finding aids assist
the public to make use of information about the records
and, thereby,
the records themselves. The greater the number of finding aids the
easier it is to locate records of relevance to
any particular inquiry.
Under the present Act, Australian
Archives is required to establish and maintain three particular finding
aids: the National Register
of Records,
the Australian National Guide to Archival Material (ANGAM),
and the Australian National Register of Research Involving Archives.
While the ideas behind each of these finding aids are commendable,
practical difficulties have limited Archives' ability to meet
these obligations. ANGAM, which is required to record details of items
which have been examined for access, has been fully
developed, becoming
the most popular and widely used tool for reference work. Another
has been developed as part
of the obligations towards developing a National Register of Records.
It has not, however, been practical
to fully implement that Register or
the Australian National Register of Research Involving Archives.
Despite not completing these
obligations relating to the prescribed finding aids, Australian
Archives has nevertheless made progress
on accumulating and making
accessible knowledge about the records in its custody. It has developed
a range of finding aids including
recent innovation of 'Fact Sheets' which provide concise information
on certain topics. There is also an increasing
use of electronic technology, enabling users to access information from
a distance.
The existing obligations to establish
the prescribed finding aids should, in the Commission's view, be
replaced with a more general
obligation to create adequate finding aids
in appropriate formats, thus leaving it to the NAA to determine from
time to time how
best to discharge its obligations. This flexibility
would not only permit appropriate finding aids to be created upon
demand, but
also in the most appropriate formats as new technologies
become available.
Draft recommendation 22.2.
The current statutory obligations
to establish the Australian National Register of Records, The
Australian National Guide to Archival
Material, and the Australian
National Register of Research Involving Archives, should be replaced
with a general statutory obligation
on the NAA to create adequate
finding aids in appropriate formats and to promote their availability.
Personal assistance
Given the often complicated nature of
archival systems, the Commission sees the need for experienced and
knowledgable staff to
assist public users to identify and locate
relevant records. Access to staff members needs to be as widely spread
as possible,
and not merely through telephone or other electronic
links. The use of technology has not yet created a situation where all
can access any required information from their homes, although
such services are rapidly improving. Many submissions praised the
assistance of Australian Archives' reference staff. Their personal
assistance goes beyond the services available electronically,
invaluable assistance such as teaching public users to access
systems of organisation, and guiding users to the most appropriate
records. This form of assistance should not be reserved
users able to visit Canberra or a major east coast city.
As a minimum requirement the NAA
should be required to locate information staff in every capital city.
These staff would provide
the general and specialised knowledge to
assist public users in each region as well as providing contacts with
other archives offices
where appropriate.
Maintaining an information office in
each capital city would require resources to accommodate staff and
materials, and to maintain
communication between the offices. In order
to overcome resource problems the Commission encourages examination of
alternative
options for the housing of information staff. In this
regard the Commission has been impressed by a cooperative venture
the Public Records Office of Victoria and Australian Archives
in establishing a joint facility for the public in Melbourne. More
cooperative ventures such as this involving the sharing of resources,
experience and information with other government archival
institutions
are to be encouraged.
Draft recommendation 22.3.
An information office of the NAA
should be maintained in each capital city with knowledgable staff to
assist with the identification
of appropriate records.
Improving access to the records
Information and personal assistance
only provides limited aid if the public cannot access the actual
records. The geographical
spread of Commonwealth records around the
country creates initial problems of access, problems which would be
exacerbated if existing
repositories in certain cities were closed and
records located in a single location. Resources need to be allocated
towards the
development of alternative methods of accessing records.
Harnessing the possibilities of networking electronic records will help to reduce access restrictions in the future,
but paper based records will continue to pose problems. For
preservation reasons original records are not transported between
offices. A copying service is provided for remote users, but the user
has no way of selecting relevant material from the original
Traditional methods of microfilming original records and providing
copies of microfilms to Archives' offices have greatly
accessibility to popular records. New technology is being harnessed by
archival institutions and the possibilities provided
by electronic
digitisation of records are being explored. The Internet also promises
to become a useful tool for reaching a wider
While all of these methods require
resources, the Commission strongly encourages the application of
resources to these kinds of
projects. Efforts should be concentrated on
selecting popularly used records so as to make the most efficient
possible use of resources.
The provision of access to records is a core
function of the NAA and improvements to that service should always be
Providing increased access to
information about records, through providing both finding aids and
staff, is still not enough to
improve access to Commonwealth records.
There needs also to be an increased awareness of the records and
services available. Australian
Archives has attempted to improve
awareness with the Public Programs section, which has worked
effectively to promote the image
of Australian Archives through
exhibitions, publications, marketing, and working with schools. This
kind of awareness raising needs
to continue.
Draft recommendation 22.4.
The NAA should expand the
availability of records, particularly through new technologies, and
through public promotion of the availability
of the records.
Using archival records with Crown copyright
Public users often wish to reproduce
records, sometimes for private purposes and sometimes for commercial
purposes such as in books,
posters, or films. The
(Cth) permits copying for purposes of research or study, covering most
situations where a public user wants copies for their own
private use.
Greater problems arise where the public user wishes to use the record for commercial purposes.
Many Commonwealth records were created
by or on behalf of the Commonwealth. Thus the copyright in the records
is Crown copyright,
belonging to the Commonwealth.
For administrative convenience the Australian Government Publishing
Service (AGPS) administers copyright on behalf of the Commonwealth.
When a member of the public wishes to make use of a record in a way
which would otherwise infringe Crown copyright, they are required
approach the AGPS for permission. However, in the case of video and
audio format records the agency which created the record
formats have greater commercial value. This value
is highly prized by
individual agencies. As AGPS functions focus on published records, the
agency must also be approached directly
where the record has not been
A large number of Commonwealth records
in the open period are unpublished records. In the case of records with
Crown copyright,
the copyright exists for 50 years after the first
publication. Thus unpublished records have an indefinite period of
protection.
This means that a
public user would need to ascertain the creating agency and contact the
agency or its successor for permission
to use an unpublished record. It
is then the responsibility of the agency to consider all of the issues,
including the value of
the intellectual property in the record,
concepts of public access, confidentiality, defamation, and whether or
not the permission
would affect the Commonwealth's capacity to earn
revenue from selling copies of the record.
In the case of records of enduring
value in the open period, some agencies retain a close relationship
with their records whilst
others are almost unaware of the records for
which they are responsible. The NAA would be an agency in a unique
position to assess
the value of a record which is more than 30 years of
age. The NAA would have the general knowledge of the extent of
Commonwealth
records of this age, understand which records are popular
for either informational or display value, and which records are
for their place in the history of the Commonwealth.
The Commission sees no need to alter
the current administrative arrangements in relation to Crown copyright
in published Commonwealth
records or records in a video or audio
format. In these cases public users should be required to contact the
AGPS or the creating
agency respectively. However, there appears to be
a need to simplify administrative arrangements for approving the use of
unpublished
Commonwealth records.
In the case of current records, the
knowledge and understanding of the records is best situated with the
creating agency. Thus
the creating agency should continue to have
the case of
unpublished records in the open period, the Commission
considers that centralised administration of Crown copyright by the NAA
would be the most preferable administrative arrangement. Awareness and
knowledge of archival records differ greatly between Commonwealth
agencies. Thus a centralised body would provide the public with a more
focused and simplified procedure for obtaining permission
unpublished open period records for commercial purposes.
A relationship with the AGPS should be
established in order to administer Crown copyright in a uniform manner,
regardless of the
age of the records. Communication with agencies about
their perceived value of the records should also be encouraged.
the NAA should be the body from which to seek permission to
use the relevant records, and the body which makes the decision about
any such application.
Draft recommendation 22.5.
An administrative arrangement
should be established to enable the NAA to have the primary
responsibility for administering Crown
Commonwealth records which are in the open period.
Draft recommendation 15.7.
Draft recommendation 16.5.
See draft recommendation 22.2 below.
G Prosser, Minister for Small Business and Consumer Affairs, press release, 26 March 1997.
Putting Service First: Principles for Developing a Service Charter
, AGPS Canberra 1997.
The Service Charters Implementation Unit is situated in the
Department of Industry, Science and Tourism in Canberra. It has a home
page at http://www.dist.gov.au/consumer/charters
Phillipa Smith 'Service Charters: The Latest Fad or Last Hope'
Admin Review
See draft recommendation 16.5.
RINSE is a useful database compiling information about records
series and the Commonwealth agencies which have created or control
records series. RINSE is the basis of the Australian Archives database
available on the Internet at http://www.aa.gov.au/AAIndexpage.html
For a discussion of developments in this area see Chapter 4.
It should be noted that in most cases where a record is created by
another person or organisation and sent to the Commonwealth, copyright
resides in the creator of the record, not the Commonwealth. In addition
most statutory authorities of the Commonwealth own copyright
records separately from the Commonwealth. In these cases the records
are not regulated by Crown copyright.
Although see
which permits
copying of unpublished works in archives and libraries in certain
situations where it is 75 years since the work
was created.
In practice most government bodies consult with AGPS on such matters.
23. Records relating to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people
Introduction
Ownership of records relating to Indigenous people
Intergovernmental transfers of records relating to Indigenous people
Appraisal and disposal of records relating to Indigenous people
Access to records by Indigenous people
General public access to records relating to Indigenous people
Representation — advisory groups and forums
Scholarships for Indigenous archivists
Introduction
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people have had a significant but troubled relationship with recordkeeping by governments,
churches and other organisations and individuals. Much of the written history of Indigenous people and communities over the past
two centuries has been documented by Europeans in records over which Indigenous people had, and often still have, little or no control.
At best many of these records now seem intrusive and patronising. At worst they can be cruel, malicious and misleading.
Yet the records created by Europeans are also of great importance to Indigenous people. For communities which had no tradition of
written recordkeeping and which were subject to fierce external pressures and dislocation, the European records provide vital evidence
on issues such as land rights and the reunification of families from whom children were removed forcibly.
The Commission received submissions from the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Commission, the North Australian Aboriginal Legal
Aid Service and the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Social Justice Commissioner. The Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
Social Justice Commissioner asked the Commission to take into account relevant recommendations of the Human Rights and Equal Opportunity
Commission's national inquiry into the separation of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander children from their families. The Commission
also met members of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander groups concerned with archival issues in Darwin.
The submissions and meeting raised a wide range of issues, some of which are relevant to all records and are dealt with in other
chapters. However some issues relate particularly to records about Indigenous people and it is appropriate to consider them together
in this chapter.
Ownership of records relating to Indigenous people
Many Indigenous people feel that it is unjust that records of great sensitivity and importance to them should be owned by non Indigenous
organisations and people. The records are often held far away from the communities to which they relate. They are subject to management
regimes which may be seen as complex and intimidating, although there is an acknowledgment of the progress made towards greater openness
in some archival jurisdictions. They are subject to public access regimes which at times seem to hinder those who have a personal
interest in the records, while at the same time making information available too freely to those who have not. In many cases, particularly
in the past, they have been subject to inappropriate disposal decisions.
Issues Paper 19 raised the question of whether groups or individuals who were the subject of Commonwealth records should have the
right to claim custody of those records. The issue was put in relation to a range of records, but most of the submissions which responded
to it commented in particular on issues relevant to Indigenous people. Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander organisations favoured
a greater degree of control (but not necessarily exclusive ownership) over the records both to protect their sensitivities and to
make them more accessible to Indigenous communities. Submissions from archivists, research organisations and Commonwealth agencies
opposed the transfer of ownership of the records away from the Commonwealth, although various options were suggested for custodial
arrangements and for safeguarding privacy.
of the present Act gives the Director-General of Australian Archives the power to authorise the transfer of custody or ownership
of records to some other person. The Commission has supported the retention of this provision
which could be used, for example, to authorise the transfer of the custody of records relating to a particular community to a keeping
place associated with that community. Normal archival practice would be for the NAA to copy the records and then retain either the
original records or copies of them.
The critical issue is whether the moral claim of Indigenous people to the records is so compelling that it would be appropriate for
them to take over their ownership, thus removing them from the coverage of the Act. Many Indigenous people would see this as an act
of restitution. It might also be argued, however, that the records are significant to the history of all Australians and that, with
appropriate protections, they should be available in due course to all researchers. Submissions indicated that there is also a strongly
held view among archivists and historians that the ownership of Commonwealth records of enduring value should not be dispersed. This
is seen by some as a matter of absolute principle, regardless of the moral imperatives of individual cases. There are also practical
problems in separating records which relate specifically to Indigenous people from the larger recordkeeping systems of which they
form part. The Commission recommends that, as under the present legislation, transfers of the ownership or custody of records should
only take place with the approval of the NAA.
Within the framework of discretionary decision making already available the Commission considers that the NAA should do all it reasonably
can to assist the development of keeping places for records of particular significance to Indigenous people, especially where the
location of existing archival facilities makes it difficult for those who have most need of the records to access them. The first
step in this process might be the establishment of a comprehensive copying program so that the most important records could be made
available to all groups with an interest in them. The Memorandum of Understanding concluded in March 1997 between Australian Archives
and Northern Territory Indigenous organisations stated in general terms that Australian Archives would assist with copying and also
participate in discussions on keeping places.
Draft recommendation 23.1.
Within the framework of the existing legislation Australian Archives should do all it reasonably can to make copies of records of
particular significance to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people available more readily, in particular by assisting in the
development of keeping places.
Draft recommendation 23.2.
Ownership or custody of Commonwealth records should only be transferred to Indigenous organisations with the approval of the NAA.
Intergovernmental transfers of records relating to Indigenous people
The ownership of many records relating to Indigenous people was transferred from the Commonwealth government to the Northern Territory
government after the establishment of self government in the Northern Territory. As the Northern Territory does not have archival
legislation these records are not now subject to any statutory access or disposal obligations. Submissions recommended that any transfers
of ownership in the future should take place only with the approval of the record subjects and with copies of the records being retained
in the Commonwealth jurisdiction. The Commission endorses this recommendation in principle. However there are substantial practical
difficulties in locating and consulting individual record subjects. It would probably be more realistic to conduct consultations
through community groups rather than individual record subjects.
Draft recommendation 23.3.
The ownership of Commonwealth records should not be transferred to another government without appropriate consultation with all stakeholders.
No such transfer should take place in a way that diminishes existing rights and protections relating to the records.
Appraisal and disposal of records relating to Indigenous people
There is evidence that at least until the 1970s, and perhaps even in recent years, some Commonwealth records which would have assisted
Aboriginal people in areas such as family reunification were destroyed. In some cases this destruction was due to a failure to recognise
the value of the records. In others it may have been a deliberate attempt to bury the past. In an attempt to ensure that all such
records were evaluated adequately Australian Archives imposed a 'disposal freeze' on 1 May 1996. Its effect is to withhold from destruction
any records relating to the Commonwealth administration of Indigenous people up to 1970, in particular records which have value as
evidence in establishing family and community connections or histories of Aboriginal people who were separated from their families.
Australian Archives plans to review the operation of the freeze during 1997–98.
In addition to the older records which are the focus of current research the Commonwealth continues to create many records which
document individual Indigenous people and their communities. These range from policy and project files to individual case files in
areas such as education, employment and welfare. Not all case files necessarily identify the subject as an Aboriginal or Torres Strait
Submissions from Indigenous organisations have recommended that records relating to Indigenous people should be destroyed only with
the approval of the record subjects or their communities. The Commission appreciates the reasons for this recommendation. However,
at least in relation to case files, it raises significant administrative workload issues. In the Commission's view it is a question
that can be dealt with best by cooperative policy development between the NAA and Indigenous groups. As a first step Australian Archives
should prepare a discussion paper on the appraisal of records likely to include material relevant to Indigenous people.
Draft recommendation 23.4.
Australian Archives should prepare and circulate a discussion paper on the appraisal of records relating to Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander people.
Access to records by Indigenous people
During the past decade Indigenous people have made extensive use of Commonwealth records held by Australian Archives. In March 1997
a Memorandum of Understanding was concluded between Australian Archives and Indigenous groups. The Memorandum permits Indigenous
people and their accredited representatives to have unrestricted access to records more than 30 years old, including records subject
to public access exemptions, for the purposes of family research. Access arrangements for records less than 30 years old are still
determined by the agency with functional responsibility for them.
The conclusion of the Memorandum of Understanding appears to have overcome Indigenous people's main concern about the legislation,
namely that the operation of the s 33(1)(g) personal affairs exemption category locked them out of information relating to their
own communities. Indigenous people would prefer that the Memorandum be extended to records less than 30 years of age, as is proposed
to be done in a similar Memorandum under negotiation between Indigenous groups and the Northern Territory Government. Such an extension
is complicated in the Commonwealth jurisdiction by the age based division between the archives and FOI Act access jurisdictions.
However it is desirable that this problem be addressed, since some material relevant to family reunions is still less than 30 years
old. Relevant Commonwealth agencies should negotiate a separate Memorandum of Understanding for records less than 30 years old.
Draft recommendation 23.5.
The Commission endorses the present Memorandum of Understanding between Australian Archives and Indigenous groups regulating access
by Indigenous people to sensitive records more than 30 years old. A similar Memorandum of Understanding should be negotiated by relevant
Commonwealth agencies for records less than 30 years old.
General public access to records relating to Indigenous people
Some Indigenous people have suggested that the public access policies applied by Australian Archives to records more than 30 years
old have led to the release of material that is distressing to Indigenous people and their communities. Submissions did not give
specific examples of such releases, although Australian Archives staff advised informally that on occasions users of the records
had expressed concern about some material available for general public access.
Australian Archives issued guidelines in 1990 on the interpretation of the s 33(1)(g) personal affairs exemption in relation to Indigenous
people. The guidelines are currently scheduled for revision. This revision should be undertaken as soon as possible so that a draft
of a new guideline can be discussed with Indigenous consultative groups. Some of the releases of information about which Indigenous
people have expressed concern may predate the guidelines. However there is an issue as to whether the personal affairs exemption
category adequately addresses the concerns of Indigenous people.
There are two areas in which the legislation's protection of information considered sensitive by Indigenous people might be strengthened.
The first relates to secret or sacred information the revelation of which would contravene customary law. It would be appropriate
for the legislation to include a specific exemption category to protect such material. The common law has already recognised that
there is a public interest in protecting information of this kind from public disclosure.
The exemption would be subject to a public interest test and the normal appeal process.
The second area is that of accumulations of large amounts of information about the members of specific Indigenous communities. Government
officials often recorded social and medical information about individuals and families in great detail. Some Indigenous people have
suggested that the general public release of such information causes affront to the entire community concerned and that the piecemeal
exemption of information relating to specific individuals under the s 33(1)(g) personal affairs exemption category is an inadequate
protection.
The Commission acknowledges the concern of Indigenous people that Commonwealth records have subjected them to more detailed and intrusive
scrutiny than probably any other group. However it may be difficult to frame an exemption category relating to general community
sensitivities in a way that would not be too broad or subjective. As a first step Australian Archives should revise the present s
33(1)(g) guidelines in consultation with Indigenous groups. This may alleviate the present concerns. If it does not consideration
should then be given to how a specific exemption category relating to Indigenous communities might be framed.
Draft recommendation 23.6.
In consultation with community representatives Australian Archives should revise its guidelines for the application of the s 33(1)(g)
personal affairs exemption category to records relating to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people.
Draft recommendation 23.7.
An exemption category should be added to the archives legislation to protect information considered to be secret or sacred under the
customary law of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people.
Representation — advisory groups and forums
Under the Commission's recommendations, the functions of the existing Advisory Council on Australian Archives would be subsumed under
the functions of the proposed new governing Council and advisory groups established by the Council. The Commission has recommended
in Chapter 5 that the legislation should include a general direction that the Council should be so chosen as to ensure wide ranging
stakeholder opinion and expertise. In this regard the Commission notes that Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people have a very
significant stake in Commonwealth records and it is important that they should have an appropriate voice in the Council and in the
advisory groups supporting it.
The Commission also envisages the convening of forums by the governing Council from time to time to deal with issues of special importance.
It would expect such forums to be conducted where necessary to deal with particular matters of sensitivity or importance which have
been raised by Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities.
Draft recommendation 23.8.
In making appointments to the governing Council appropriate regard should be had to the significance of Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander people as stakeholders in Commonwealth records.
Draft recommendation 23.9.
In establishing advisory groups or convening consultative forums, and in making appointments to advisory groups, the governing Council
of the NAA should give particular attention to the concerns and needs of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities.
Scholarships for Indigenous archivists
In recent years Indigenous people and the staff of Australian archival institutions have worked together much more closely than ever
before. There is clearly a need for more Indigenous people to be trained as archivists so that they can help to further bridge the
gap between their own communities and the mass of records relating to those communities held by non Indigenous organisations. One
practical way of achieving this objective would be for Australian Archives to offer support to Indigenous people who wish to train
as archivists and who might, when qualified, join the Archives' staff. The NAA should then continue to offer scholarships of this
kind upon its establishment.
Draft recommendation 23.10.
Australian Archives should offer scholarships to assist Indigenous people to train as archivists.
See Chapter 10.
Aboriginal Sacred Sites Protection Authority v Maurice
(1986) 65 ALR 247.
24. Records relating to functions and services provided by contractors
Introduction
The records of contractors providing services on behalf of government
The records of contractors providing services to government
Issues relating to the outsourcing of information technology functions
Introduction
The drafters of the present Act did not fully envisage the complexities which would be caused for the management of Commonwealth
records by the corporatisation, privatisation, outsourcing and contracting in of large areas of Commonwealth activity. Issues relating
to the corporatisation and privatisation of Commonwealth agencies have been dealt with in Chapter 8. This chapter considers the recordkeeping
relationships which can now exist between the Commonwealth and the private sector in the provision of services to and on behalf of
the Commonwealth and the ways in which they should be addressed by the legislation.
The records of contractors providing services on behalf of government
It is increasingly common for services which form part of ongoing Commonwealth responsibilities to be delivered on behalf of the
Commonwealth by private contractors. As was noted in the 1995 review of the FOI Act this raises significant accountability issues.
Where an agency contracts with a private sector body to provide services to the public on behalf of government, public information
access considerations arise because it is the public, not the contracting agency, that is the ultimate recipient of the service.
It is in this situation that the traditional distinction between the public and private sectors becomes blurred. So long as the service
is provided in an acceptable manner, the fact that it is provided by a private sector body rather than a government agency is likely
to be of little consequence to the public. However, if any problems occur in relation to the provision of the service, it is members
of the public who will be affected and whose ability to seek redress may be reduced by the fact that they are not party to the contract.
Issues Paper 19 raised the general question of extending the legislation to the private sector. Most responses were also in general
terms, but a few addressed the specific problem of records of functions which are contracted out.
The fact that the Commonwealth government is disbursing public funds for these services should be a basis for retaining a public right
of access to the records generated by the contracted services and for placing an onus on the service providers to create and maintain
those records which should enable public "scrutiny, discussion, comment and review". The increasing variety of means of
delivering government services is an argument for maintaining a strong legislative framework for ensuring accountability through
recordkeeping and strong regulatory mechanisms to protect individuals' privacy and preserve public access.
Australian Archives, in both its submission and in guidelines issued for Commonwealth agencies in April 1997, recommended that
Where the Commonwealth or a Commonwealth body enters into an agreement or arrangement with another party (whether it is a state, territory,
private business or an individual etc), which requires that party to provide services
on behalf of the Commonwealth or Commonwealth body
, then physical and intellectual ownership of existing or new records resulting from the arrangement should be vested in the Commonwealth
(or the Commonwealth body if it can own property in its own right) and subject to the requirements of the
Archives Act
. The advice is articulated in the 'Attorney-General's Legal Services Guidelines' issued 1 July 1995.
The main objective of the archival legislation is to ensure the creation, preservation and accessibility of records of enduring value.
It may be that the enduring record of a function contracted to the private sector is documented adequately in the records of the
Commonwealth agency responsible for the function, although this can not be assumed. The Commission does not recommend that records
created by contractors undertaking Commonwealth functions should be subject automatically to the archives legislation, since the
circumstances relating to individual contracts will vary widely. A more flexible approach would incorporate the following elements.
If legislation is enacted to authorise the contracting out of particular functions or services to private sector bodies then the
legislation should provide that the archives legislation is to apply to records created by such contractors but only in respect of
records that relate to the provision of those functions or services.
Where there is no statutory scheme, contracts for the provision of functions or services on behalf of the Commonwealth should ensure
that appropriate recordkeeping obligations and access arrangements are put in place in relation to the provision of those functions
or services.
Australian Archives has already provided advice to Commonwealth agencies on recordkeeping issues relating to the outsourcing of functions
and is currently preparing detailed guidelines and a General Disposal Authority (to be issued in January 1998) on the same subject.
These guidelines will assist the preparation of individual contracts.
Draft recommendation 24.1.
If legislation is enacted to authorise the contracting out of particular functions or services to private sector bodies then the
legislation should provide that the archives legislation is to apply to records created by such contractors but only in respect of
records that relate to the provision of those functions or services.
Draft recommendation 24.2.
Where there is no statutory scheme, contracts for the provision of functions or services on behalf of the Commonwealth should ensure
that appropriate recordkeeping obligations and access arrangements are put in place in relation to the provision of those functions
or services.
The records of contractors providing services to government
Services provided to the Commonwealth, as opposed to services provided on behalf of it, include a wide range of administrative support
functions, among them information technology services, property management and vehicle hire.
The Commission accepts that it is not always appropriate for records created by contractors in the course of providing such services
to the Commonwealth to be subject to the archives legislation, provided of course that the Commonwealth agency which contracted to
receive the service maintains adequate records of the transaction. It is already common practice for contracts to state whether records
generated in the course of delivering a service are owned by the Commonwealth or by the contractor. Records of services provided
to Commonwealth agencies by contractors will also be covered by the guidelines and General Disposal Authority expected to be issued
by Australian Archives in January 1998.
Draft recommendation 24.3.
Contracting agencies should ensure that contracts for the provision of services to the Commonwealth contain such recordkeeping obligations
as are necessary to ensure the completeness and integrity of the agency's records, taking account of relevant guidelines issued by
Issues relating to the outsourcing of information technology functions
Paper records exist physically within the walls of the Commonwealth agency responsible for them. However the situation in relation
to electronic records can be more complex. An electronic recordkeeping system may be operated from a computer situated in a location
distant from the agency for which it was created. Agency staff would have direct access to the system through terminals on their
desks, but this would not necessarily guarantee that the records it contained always remained accessible and functional. For example
the recordkeeping system of a Commonwealth agency might be operated by a private contractor on a computer located in another country.
If the operating company became bankrupt or suffered major fire damage there might be little the Commonwealth agency could do to
recover its recordkeeping system. Even if the contract included stringent conditions for backup facilities the loss of access to
key operating systems might adversely affect their functionality.
The contract itself is the basic means of ensuring adequate protection for Commonwealth recordkeeping systems managed by private
sector bodies. Contracts must ensure that adequate backup facilities for the system are maintained within Australia and that the
functionality of the backup system can be maintained even in the event of catastrophic damage to the main operating site.
The consequences for the Commonwealth of any failure to achieve adequate protection, particularly in the case of large financial
or case management systems, are so serious that the need to ensure that adequate safeguards are in place should also be dealt with
specifically in the recordkeeping standards which the Commission recommends should be issued by the NAA.
Draft recommendation 24.4.
Contracts relating to the management of Commonwealth recordkeeping systems by private sector organisations, especially electronic
systems, should be required to include provisions to ensure the maintenance of the integrity and functionality of the system in any
eventuality.
Draft recommendation 24.5.
The mandatory recordkeeping standards to be issued by the NAA should include specific guidance on maintaining the integrity and functionality
of recordkeeping systems, especially electronic systems, subject to outsourcing arrangements.
Australian Law Reform Commission Report No 77/ Administrative Review Council Report No 40
Open government: a review of the federal
Freedom of Information Act 1982
Canberra 1995 (ALRC 77/ARC 40), 15.12.
Submission 79.
Australian Archives
Submission 56.
Appendix A: Participants
Deputy President
Team Leader
Research Officer
Consultants
The Division of the Commission constituted under the
Australian Law Reform Commission Act 1996
for the purposes of this reference comprises the following:
Alan Rose AO
Deputy President
David Edwards PSM
Dr Kathryn Cronin
Michael Ryland (to 29 November 1996)
Team Leader
Dr Jim Stokes
Research Officer
Lani Blackman
Joanna Longley,
Emma Joneshart
Library Officer
Yasmin Catley
Library Officer
Anna Hayduk
Consultants
Peter Bayne, Australian National University
Bill Blick, Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet
The Hon Lionel Bowen AC, formerly Federal Attorney-General and Chairman, Council of the National Gallery of Australia
Madeline Campbell, Office of the Australian Government Solicitor
Kathryn Dan, Australian Society of Archivists
Judith Ellis, Archival Systems Consultants
Chris Hurley, National Archives of New Zealand, formerly Public Record Office of Victoria
Professor Ross Johnston, University of Queensland
Gavan McCarthy, Australian Science Archives Project
Ron McLeod, Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security
Associate Professor Sue McKemmish, Monash University
David Roberts, Archives Authority of NSW
Emeritus Professor Michael Roe, formerly University of Tasmania
Bob Sharman, formerly State Archivist of Tasmania, Queensland and Western Australia
Matthew Storey, North Australian Aboriginal Legal Aid Service
Eric Wainwright, James Cook University, formerly National Library of Australia
Appendix B: Written submissions
Submission number
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Commission
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Social Justice Commissioner, Michael Dodson
Administrative Appeals Tribunal
Administrative Review Council
Advisory Council on Australian Archives
Agencies of the Australian Intelligence Community
Archives Authority of New South Wales
Australasian Federation of Family History Organisations Inc
Australia Post
Australian Agency for International Development
Australian Archives
Australian Broadcasting Commission
Australian Bureau of Statistics
Australian Council of National Trusts
Australian Council of Professional Historians Associations Inc
Australian Customs Service
Australian Federal Police (partially confidential)
Australian Heritage Commission
Australian Historical Association
Australian Library and Information Association
Australian National Maritime Museum
Australian Science Archives Project
Australian Secret Intelligence Service (confidential)
Australian Securities Commission
Australian Security Intelligence Organization
Australian Society of Archivists Inc
Australian Society of Archivists Inc SA Branch
Australian Taxation Office
Australian War Memorial
Baiba Berzins
Brisbane History Group Inc
Mark Brogan
Graeme Byrne
Helen Cross
Department of Defence
Department of Education, Employment, Training and Youth Affairs
Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade
Department of Health and Family Services
Department of Immigration and Multicultural Affairs
Department of Industrial Relations
Department of Librarianship, Archives and Records, Monash University
Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet
Department of Veterans Affairs
Eccleston Associates
June Edwards
Family Court of Australia
Federal Court of Australia
Federation of Australian Historical Societies Inc
Genealogical Society of Queensland Inc
Matthew Gordon-Clark
Health Insurance Commission
Historical Society of the Northern Territory Inc
History Council of New South Wales
History Institute, Victoria Inc
Chris Hurley
Robert Hyslop
Independent Scholars Association of Australia Inc
Independent Scholars Association of Australia Inc Sydney Chapter
Inspector-General of Security and Intelligence, RL McLeod
International Social Service Australia
John Curtin Prime Ministerial Library
Joint House Department, Parliament of Australia
Library and Information Service of Western Australia (confidential)
Vince Morabito
National Film & Sound Archive
National Library of Australia
North Australian Aboriginal Legal Aid Service Stolen Generation Litigation Unit
Elizabeth J Nunn
Office of Government Information Technology
Office of the Clerk of the Senate
Dr Gregory Pemberton
Dr FE Peters
Barbara Poniewierski
Professional Historians & Researchers Association (WA) Inc
Professional Historians Association NSW Inc
Queensland Family History Society
Records Management Association of Australia
Reserve Bank of Australia
Kim Rubenstein
Allan Seymour
Robert Sharman
Society of Australian Genealogists
South Australian Government
Dr Lucy Taksa and Rosemary Webb
Greg Terrill
The Genealogical Society of Victoria Inc
The Law Society of New South Wales
The Treasury
Laurie Varendorff
Rosemary Webb and Dr Lucy Taksa
Western Australian Genealogical Society Inc
JA & J Winterbotham
Table of legislation
Commonwealth
Other jurisdictions
Commonwealth
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1975
Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977
Archives Act 1983
s 33(1)(e)(i)
s 33(1)(e)(ii)
s 33(1)(e)(iii)
Audit Act 1901
Auditor-General Act 1997
Australian Broadcasting Corporation Act 1983
Australian War Memorial Act 1980
Civil Aviation Act 1988
Commonwealth Authorities and Companies Act 1997
Crimes Act 1914
Evidence Act 1995
Federal Airports Corporation Act 1986
Freedom of Information Act 1982
National Gallery Act 1975
National Library Act 1960
Prime Minister and Cabinet (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1994
Public Order (Protection of Persons and Property) Act 1971
Public Service Act 1922
Royal Commissions Act 1902
Other jurisdictions
State Records Act 1997
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people
consultation with
disposal of records
exemptions relating to
ownership of records
representation of
scholarship
access agreements
access to records
accelerated release
application requirements
block examination
identification of records
location of records
lost or destroyed records
obligations
open period
principles and policy
proactive release
release outside the Act
responsibility for applications
responsibility for decisions
restrictions on preservation grounds
statement of reasons
time limits
workload test
exemptions,
Freedom of Information Act
, review of decisions, special access
Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT)
alternative body
preliminary conferences
respondents
review of decisions
Administrative Review Council
advisory bodies
Advisory Council on Australian Archives
amendment of records
Australian National Guide to Archival Material
review of decisions
archival resources of the Commonwealth
archival system
principal elements of
Archives Bill (1974-83)
Archives Act 1983
development of
relationship with
Freedom of Information Act
relationship with other legislation
relationship with
Archives Authority of New South Wales
Auditor-General
Australia Post
Australian Archives
development of
operation of
Australian Bureau of Statistics
Australian Federal Police
Australian Government Publishing Service (AGPS)
Australian National Audit Office (ANAO)
Australian National Guide to Archival Material (ANGAM)
Australian National Maritime Museum
Australian National Register of Records
Australian National Register of Research Involving Archives
Australian Security Intelligence Organization (ASIO)
security and intelligence records
Australian Taxation Office (ATO)
Australian War Memorial
breach of confidence
business/professional affairs
Cabinet records
Census records
access applications
agency charges
general charging regime
public charges
special access
charter of service
chief executive officer of the archival authority
National Archivist
chief executive officers (CEOs)
responsibilities under legislation
Commonwealth controlled associations or companies
Commonwealth financial/property interests
Comonwealth Funds Management
Commonwealth record
compensation
recovery of records
confidential source of information
consultation
stakeholders
contractors
services on behalf of government
services to government
controlling agency
corporatisation
Council of the archival authority
composition
counselling
Courts (Commonwealth)
application of legislation to
relationship with the NAA
creation of records
recordkeeping
custody of records
alternative custodial arrangements
charges for
electronic records
loan of records
location of records
mandatory transfer of records
ministerial determination to withhold records
non-Commonwealth records
objects of archival significance
policy and principles
role of the NAA
security and intelligence records
security classified records
danger to life/safety
archival resources o the Commonwealth
authority of the Commonwealth
Commonwealth record
records of enduring value
Department of Industry, Science and Tourism
discretionary release of records
disposal of records
appraisal criteria
appraisal policy
disposal authorities
electronic records
external scrutiny
functional appraisal
general disposal authority (GDA)
normal administrative practice
present disposal regime
quality control
records disposal authority (RDA)
responsibility for
unauthorised disposal
documentation standards
recordkeeping
electronic records
disposal of
effect on Commonwealth recordkeeping
preservation
enduring value, records of
relationship with the NAA
exempt material
ministerial conclusive certificates
other restrictions
public interest test
sunset clauses
Family Court of Australia
Federal Court of Australia
financial structure of the NAA
finding aids
Freedom of Information Act 1982
relationship with
Archives Act
1995 review
functional appraisal
functions of the NAA
funding structure
Governors-General
guides and registers
High Court of Australia
Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission
information about records
information locater system
Information Management Steering Committee
Information Privacy Principles
information technology
effect on recordkeeping
outsourcing of
internal review
review of decisions
international relations
ground for exemption
law enforcement
legal professional privilege
legislative instruments
Memorandum of Understanding
access to records
conclusive certificates
official records held by
power of direction
name of archival authority
name of legislation
National Archivist
relationship with Council
National Gallery of Australia
National Library of Australia
National Museum of Australia
national security
classification
ground for exemption
New Zealand National Archives
objects clause
objects of archival significance
Office of Government Information Technology (OGIT)
open period
access to records
opening hours
organisational theory
outsourcing
application of legislation to
relationship with NAA
representation on Council
Personal Records Service
personal affairs
ground for exemption
personal information
access by next of kin and legal representatives
access by record subject
amendment or annotation of
power of ministerial direction
powers of the NAA
preservation of records
access restrictions
electronic records
general policy
principal elements
personal affairs, personal information
relationship with archives legislation
privatisation
privileged access
professional leadership
Public Programs
Public Records Office of Victoria
Public Service Act Review Group
Public Service Board
record subject
notification regarding release
records continuum
records management
recordkeeping
recordkeeping
reporting on state of
policy and principles
problems with
standards for creation and maintenance
Records Management Office of NSW
recovery of records
compensation
copying of records
general policy
individuals
research contracts
Reserve Bank
review of decisions
external merits review
internal review
other avenues
responsibility for decisions
special access
Administrative Appeals Tribunal
right of entry
royal commissions
samples of objects
security and intelligence records
security classified records
security of reading rooms
service charters
charter of service
service delivery
role of the NAA
Shared System Suite
special access
exempted information
existing provisions
Governors-General, Ministers and Secretaries
research contracts
responsiblity for
review of decisions
staff of the NAA
stakeholders
consultation with
representation on Council
application of
creation and issuing
mandatory nature
monitoring of
Standards Australia
State and Territory governments
consultation with on access to records
statutory authority
storage of records
taxation records
terms of reference
trade secrets
voluntary deposits of records
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter