URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/lawreform/NSWLRCIP/2004/25.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:36:28
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Expert witnesses - Issues Paper [2004] NSWLRCIP 25
Issues Paper 25 (2004) - Expert Witnesses
Table of Contents
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of Issues
INTRODUCTION
TO THE REFERENCE
Recent developments overseas
Australian experience
SCOPE OF THE REFERENCE
Rules and procedures
COMMISSION’S PROPOSED ACTION PLAN
The structure of this Issues Paper
TO ENHANCE THE OBJECTIVITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY OF EXPERTS
INTRODUCTION
PARTISAN PRESSURES
Differences of opinion may be legitimate
FORMULATION OF
STANDARDS; CODES OF CONDUCT
ACCREDITATION OF
'NO WIN NO FEE’
ARRANGEMENTS
SANCTIONS FOR
INAPPROPRIATE OR UNETHICAL CONDUCT BY EXPERT WITNESSES
TO INCREASE TRANSPARENCY
FOR THE EFFICIENT USE OF EXPERTS
REQUIREMENTS
FOR EXPERTS TO CONSULT, AND/OR REPORT ISSUES
RECEIVING EXPERTS’ EVIDENCE
TO LIMIT THE NUMBER OF EXPERTS
INTRODUCTION
THE (NON-EXCLUSIVE)
COURT EXPERT
THE SINGLE EXPERT
ALTERNATIVES
THE ROLE OF
ASSESSORS, REFEREES, EXPERT ASSISTANTS
Issues Paper 25 (2004) - Expert Witnesses
Terms of reference
Updates and background for this project (Digest)
In a letter to the Commission received on 16 September 2004, the Attorney General, the Hon R J Debus MP required the Commission:
1. To inquire into and report on the operation and effectiveness of the rules and procedures governing expert witnesses in New South
2. In undertaking this inquiry, the Commission should have regard to:
recent developments in New South Wales and other Australian and international jurisdictions in relation to the use of expert witnesses,
including developments in the areas of single or joint expert witnesses, court-appointed expert witnesses, and expert panels or conferences;
current mechanisms for the accreditation and accountability of expert witnesses for the purposes of court proceedings, including the
practice of expert witnesses offering their services on a “no win, no fee” basis;
the desirability of sanctions for inappropriate or unethical conduct by expert witnesses; and any other related matter.
3. The Commission to report no later than 31 March 2005.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of contents
Issues Paper 25 (2004) - Expert Witnesses
Participants
Updates and background for this project (Digest)
Pursuant to
Law Reform Commission Act 1967
(NSW) the Chairperson of the Commission constituted a Division for the purpose of conducting the reference. The members of the Division
The Hon Justice Michael Adams*
Professor Richard Chisholm
Dr Duncan Chappell
Hon Justice David Kirby
Hon Gordon Samuels AC CVO QC
Professor Michael Tilbury
* denotes Commissioner-in-charge
Officers of the Commission
Executive Director
Mr Peter Hennessy
Legal Research and Writing
Professor Richard Chisholm
Research and Other Assistance
Ms Sharminie Niles
Rhys Bortignon
Ms Anna Williams
Desktop Publishing
Mr Terence Stewart
Administrative Assistance
Ms Wendy Stokoe
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of contents
Issues Paper 25 (2004) - Expert Witnesses
Submissions
Updates and background for this project (Digest)
The Commission invites submissions on the issues relevant to this review, including but not limited to the issues raised in this Issues
All submissions and enquiries should be directed to:
Mr Peter Hennessy,
Executive Director
NSW Law Reform Commission
Postal addresses:
GPO Box 5199, Sydney NSW 2001
or DX 1227 Sydney
Street Address:
Level 17, 8-12 Chifley Square, Sydney NSW
nsw_lrc@agd.nsw.gov.au
Telephone (02) 9228 8230
Facsimile (02) 9228 8225
TTY (02) 9228 7676
The closing date for submissions is Friday 11 February 2005.
Confidentiality and use of submissions
In preparing further papers on this reference, the Commission will refer to submissions made in response to this Issues Paper. If
you would like all or part of your submission to be treated as confidential, please indicate this in your submission. The Commission
will respect requests for confidentiality when using submissions in later publications.
Copies of submissions made to the Commission will also normally be made available on request to other persons or organisations. Any
request for a copy of a submission marked “confidential” will be determined in accordance with the
Freedom of Information Act 1989
Other publication formats
The Commission is committed to meeting fully its obligations under State and Commonwealth anti-discrimination legislation. These laws
require all organisations to eliminate discriminatory practices which may prevent people with disabilities from having full and equal
access to our services. This publication is available in alternative formats. If you have any difficulty in accessing this document
please contact us.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of contents
Issues Paper 25 (2004) - Expert Witnesses
List of issues
Updates and background for this project (Digest)
Refer to the links indicated below for a discussion of the issues listed.
The Commission invites submissions on the extent of partisanship or bias on the part of expert witnesses, and the value of the measures
considered in Chapter 2 in reducing such a problem.
The Commission would welcome comments on the contents and effectiveness of codes of conduct for expert witnesses, and on other ways
in which to convey guidelines and principles to expert witnesses, litigants, and lawyers.
The Commission invites comments on the existence and operation of any accreditation schemes in New South Wales or other jurisdictions
relating to the role of expert witnesses and on their effectiveness and desirability.
The Commission invites comments on the extent to which ‘no win no fee’ arrangements are currently used, and whether any
of the measures indicated, or other measures, would be desirable.
How serious is the problem of inappropriate or unethical conduct by experts? Again, the Commission would welcome comments, both on
the extent of the problem and on ways in which it might be sanctioned or controlled.
The Commission would welcome any submissions on the effectiveness of current measures relating to expert witnesses that are designed
to increase transpaency and any issues that they are seen to raise.
It is the Commission’s impression that rules requiring experts to consult are generally seen as desirable. The Commission would
welcome submissions on this topic.
The Commission invites submissions on the experience with the use of different methods of receiving expert evidence, and on whether
the rules should generally make provision for such methods to be available in suitable cases.
The Commission would welcome comments on the experience of appointing (non-exclusive) Court Experts, and the advantages and disadvantages
of this measure.
The Commission invites submissions on the experience to date with rules providing for appointment of single experts, and the advantages
and disadvantages of this measure. In particular, the Commission invites comments on the following:
(a) To what extent can it be said that existing problems relating to expert witnesses make it necessary or appropriate that the courts
(or some courts) should have the power to appoint a Single Expert?
(b) Is it objectionable in principle (because it is contrary to the adversary system or to justice), that the Court should ever be
able to appoint a Single Expert?
(c) Are rules providing for single experts authorised by a legislative rule-making power relating to ‘practice and procedure’,
or is it necessary that there be a clearer statutory basis?
(d) If the Court is to have power to appoint a Single Expert, what guidelines should the rules provide as to the circumstances in
which a Single Expert should be appointed? Should the rules merely provide that it is one of the options available to the court,
or provide lists of factors to be taken into account, or go further and create a presumption favouring (or disfavouring) the appointment
of a single expert?
(e) How should the appointment be made? Is it generally appropriate for the rules to provide for an appointment based on the parties’
consent, or, where there is no consent, on the Court’s own motion? How is the appointment best managed within case management
(f) How is the single expert to be instructed? What version of the facts should be given? If the facts change between the report
and the trial, what is to happen? What communications can there be between the parties and the expert leading up to the hearing?
Can a party object to something in a report, or have the expert consider a possible error, before the hearing? Can the expert seek
further information, or raise some issue about the nature of his or her brief?
The Commission would welcome comments on the use of assessors, referees and expert assistants, on their effectiveness and acceptability,
and on whether they are particularly appropriate in particular types of cases.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of contents
Issues Paper 25 (2004) - Expert Witnesses
1. Introduction
Updates and background for this project (Digest)
Background to the reference
Scope of the reference
The Commission’s proposed action
BACKGROUND TO THE REFERENCE
1.1 This reference appears to have been stimulated by expressed
concerns about the widespread use of expert witnesses, the costs
possible bias and other associated problems. These concerns
are shared by some members of the judiciary as well as the Legal
Commissioner who has received complaints about the use of
expert witnesses.
1.2 The reference also co-incides with world-wide reassessment
and change relating to the management of court business generally and
expert witnesses in particular.
Recent developments overseas
1.3 In England, the Woolf Report in 1996 identified problems
with the existing system and recommended major changes. In relation to
the system generally, Lord Woolf wrote:
The defects I identified in our present system were that it is too
expensive and that the costs often exceed the value of the claim;
slow in bringing cases to a conclusion and too unequal: there is a lack
of equality between the powerful, wealthy litigant and
under-resourced litigant. It is too uncertain: the difficulty of
forecasting what litigation will cost and how long it will last
the fear of the unknown; and it is incomprehensible to many litigants.
Above all it is too fragmented in the way it is organised
since there
is no one with clear overall responsibility for the administration of
civil justice; and too adversarial as cases are
run by the parties, not
by the courts and the rules of court, all too often, are ignored by the
parties and not enforced by the court.
In relation to expert evidence, Lord Woolf said that one of the major
generators of unnecessary cost in civil litigation was uncontrolled
expert evidence. As summarised by a leading expert:
He said that a large litigation support industry, generating a multi-
million pound fee income, had grown up among professions such
accountants, architects and others, and new professions had developed
such as accident reconstruction and care experts. This went
against all
principles of proportionality and access to justice. In his interim
report, he had recommended that the calling of expert
evidence should
be under the complete control of the court. Within that framework, he
had argued for a wider use of “single”
“neutral” experts. He recorded that most respondents to his
interim report had favoured retaining the full scale adversarial
expert evidence and had resisted proposals for wider use of single
experts. As to the full “red blooded” adversarial
this was only appropriate if questions of cost and time were put aside.
The existing system worked well for lawyers and
judges, but ordinary
people were being kept out of litigation. The basic premise of his new
approach was that the expert’s
function was to assist the court.
There should be no expert evidence at all unless it will help the
court, and no more than one expert
in any one speciality unless this is
necessary for some real purpose.
Lord Woolf’s recommendations were generally adopted, and were
implemented in the Civil Procedure Rules of 1998. They feature
case management by the Court. The Rules expressly provide that
‘the court may control the evidence’ by giving
on such matters as ‘the issues on which it requires
evidence’ and ‘the nature of the evidence which
it requires
to decide those issues’.
In relation to expert
evidence, the rules provide that it ‘shall be restricted to that
which is reasonably required to resolve
the proceedings’. Parties
need the Court’s permission to lead expert evidence at all,
and the Court may direct that evidence on an issue is to be given by
one expert only, known as a ‘single joint expert’.
Australian experience
1.6 In Australia, there has also been a trend towards active
case management, and some Australian courts have introduced new rules
influenced by the English developments.
1.7 The Commission will be considering the English experience
and, especially, the recent experience in Australian jurisdictions
to expert witnesses, both in those jurisdictions that have
introduced new measures, and in those that have not.
SCOPE OF THE REFERENCE
1.8 The Reference requires the Commission to assess the rules
governing expert witnesses in courts and tribunals in New South Wales.
Especially in the light of the deadline of 31 March 2005, it is
obviously impossible to conduct a comprehensive review of each
or in the final Report to recommend what particular rules
should apply in each jurisdiction.
1.9 The Commission intends, however, to review the various
measures and issues set out in the Terms of Reference. The final Report
will review the relative merits of the various measures, and make
recommendations intended to assist each jurisdiction in formulating
suitable rules for its particular circumstances.
Rules and procedures
1.10 The Commission understands the phrase ‘rules and
procedures’ in the Terms of Reference to refer to rules of court
and matters of practice and procedure, rather than to the law of
evidence as such.
1.11 Rules and guidelines about these matters are generally
made by the judges of each court, rather than by the legislature.
the governing Act will have a provision to the effect that
the judges of the court may make rules of court on matters of practice
and procedure. Rules of court made in this way regulate the proceedings
of the court. They are usually quite detailed, and are usually
relatively frequently.
1.12 In addition to rules of court, guidelines are sometimes
contained in Practice Directions, generally made by the most senior
of the jurisdiction (no doubt after consultation within the
Court). In this Issues Paper, the word ‘rules’ will
be used to refer both to rules of court and to practice
directions.
1.13 In a court that has different divisions, such as the
Supreme Court of New South Wales, the rules may provide that some rules
are specific to some of its divisions, or particular lists,
as well as rules that apply to all proceedings in the Court.
1.14 It is always possible for the court to depart from the
rules in a particular case, where their application would be unjust or
inappropriate. Thus the rules constitute a framework for the ordinary
processes of the court, guiding litigants, but they do not
prevent the court from making procedural rulings that are tailored for
the particular case.
1.15 Sometimes, the rules contain principles and objectives, indicating what they are intended to achieve.
1.16 The Commission’s Terms of Reference are not limited
to any particular jurisdiction, or even to courts as distinct from
1.17 Although the Terms of Reference are not expressly limited
to civil law, the Commission considers that it was unlikely that the
reference was intended to include criminal law. The developments
referred to in paragraph 2 of the Terms of Reference all relate
developments in the area of civil law. The Commission is not aware of
any similar rules in criminal law, and on the face of it
they would be
inappropriate in criminal law. Nor is the Commission aware of any
precedents for such measures in criminal law, or
of any views that they
should be introduced to criminal law. For these reasons the Commission
does not anticipate that the Report
will deal with criminal law matters.
THE COMMISSION'S PROPOSED ACTION PLAN
1.18 Since receiving this reference in September 2004, the
Commission has commenced the process of writing to the many individuals
and organisations known to have an interest in the issues, seeking
their comments and assistance.
1.19 The publication and distribution of this Issues Paper is
intended to indicate some of the major issues, and to encourage people
to make submissions on any aspect of the Reference, including any
issues that they think important but may not have been addressed
this Issues Paper.
The structure of this Issues Paper
1.20 Broadly speaking, measures relating to expert witnesses are
intended to enable expert evidence to be made available in a way
minimises bias and avoids unnecessary delays, and private and public
costs. In this Issues Paper, the discussion is organised
by reference
to the more specific purposes of the various measures to be considered.
Each of these matters will be considered in
turn, describing the
existing situation and inviting comments and submissions on the
numbered issues for consideration.
1.21 Chapter 2, entitled “Measures to enhance the
objectivity and accountability of experts”, considers measures
are designed to ensure so far as possible that experts adopt an
unbiased approach, even if they are called on behalf of one party.
These measures tend to stress that experts’ task is to assist the
Court. One prominent measure of this kind is the Code of
Conduct. This
chapter also considers mechanisms for the accreditation and
accountability of expert witnesses for the purposes of
proceedings, and the problem of expert witnesses offering their
services on a ‘no win, no fee’ basis. Finally,
chapter, we consider the desirability of sanctions for inappropriate or
unethical conduct by expert witnesses.
1.22 Chapter 3, “Measures to increase
transparency”, deals with measures such as requirements that
experts spell out the
basis on which they are acting, requiring the
disclosure of expert reports prior to the hearing, and restricting
private communications
between parties and the experts.
1.23 Chapter 4, “Measures for the efficient use of
experts”, focuses on measures designed to avoid duplication and
wasting, and to ensure that the Court’s time is used to deal
with issues really in dispute. These measures include requirements
experts consult in advance and identify the matters on which they agree
and those on which they disagree, and also techniques
involving experts
giving evidence in court at the same time.
1.24 Chapter 5, “Measures to limit the number of
experts”, deals with measures designed to reduce the number of
and to eliminate or reduce the use of experts called by each
party. The most important of these are provisions for a Court Expert,
or a Single Expert (in which case the parties are not allowed to call
other expert evidence on the topic in question).
1.25 Chapter 6, “Alternatives to experts”,
considers measures designed to provide technical assistance to the
Court other
than through the use of experts. These include the use of
assessors and referees.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of contents
. The Right Hon. The Lord Woolf Final Report to the Lrd Chancellor
of the Civil Justice System in England and Wales (July 1996)
. ATK...May, “The English High Court and Expert Evidence (2004) 6
The Judicial Review
. CPR (UK) r 31.1.
. CPR (UK) r 35.4(1).
. CPR (UK) r 35.7.
. An example is Pt 14C Professional Negligence List, of the
SCR, and Practice Note 104, Professional Negligence List, which
a code of conduct for experts appearing in that list.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of contents
Issues Paper 25 (2004) - Expert Witnesses
2. Measures to enhance the objectivity and accountability of experts
Updates and background for this project (Digest)
Introduction
Partisan pressures
Formulation of standards; codes of conduct
Accreditation of experts
'No win no fee’ arrangements
Sanctions for inappropriate or unethical conduct by expert witnesses
2. MEASURES TO ENHANCE THE OBJECTIVITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY OF EXPERTS
INTRODUCTION
2.1 The measures to be considered in this chapter are intended
to ensure, as far as possible, that experts give honest and impartial
evidence. The measures are intended to reduce problems of bias and
partiality that are often thought to arise, particularly in the
of the adversary system.
PARTISAN PRESSURES
2.2 It is commonplace in the literature that where experts are
engaged directly by the parties in relation to litigation, there are
pressures on them to adopt a partisan position. Thus Justice Sperling
of the New South Wales Supreme Court has written:
The actual role of the expert witness, particularly in major
litigation, is that the expert is part of the team. He - it usually
a “he” - contributes to the way the case is framed and
indirectly to decisions as to what evidence is to be got in
a basis for his opinion. His report is honed in consultation with
counsel. Then, when it comes to the trial, he is a front
line soldier,
carrying his side’s argument on the technical issues under the
fire of cross-examination.
Natural selection ensures that expert witnesses will serve the
interests of their clients in this way. If the expert measures up he
will be kept on and he will be used again by the same client, the same
solicitors and others. If he does not measure up, he will
from the case or never used again by anyone. He then disappears from
the forensic scene.
2.3 Although they may represent a
minority of instances, there are numerous examples of judges finding
that in particular cases expert
witnesses have lacked objectivity. In a
recent Australian survey, about 1 in 4 of the judges who responded said
they encountered
bias often, and about 2 in 5 said that partisanship
was a significant problem for the quality of fact-finding.
Differences of opinion may be legitimate
2.4 It is not obvious, however, that even a universal
replacement of partisanship with objectivity would eliminate all
differences
between experts. It seems likely that sometimes experts
will take different views not because any of them are lacking in
objectivity or expertise, but simply because there is room
for genuine differences of opinion among qualified experts in the
discipline. When the views of a particular expert are known,
the expert may be selected by a party who knows that the expert’s
genuinely held views are likely to accord with that client’s
case. For example solicitors regularly representing injured plaintiffs
in compensation matters may choose expert witnesses from among medical
practitioners whose opinions are such that their evidence
is likely to
benefit the plaintiff’s case. If so, there may well be situations
in which the views of each side’s expert
are predictable and
favour the party calling the expert, but in which there is no lack of
objectivity on the part of either of the
experts. It may be misleading
to use phrases such as ‘hired guns’, or to suggest bias, in
relation to experts whose views
are predictable only because those
calling them are aware of the witnesses’ views on professional
issues relevant to the case.
2.5 It would seem that the measures discussed in this chapter
would have no impact on such situations. They may, however, reduce
of bias, whether conscious or unconscious.
The Commission invites submissions on the extent of partisanship
or bias on the part of expert witnesses, and the value of the measures
considered in this chapter in reducing such a problem.
FORMULATION OF STANDARDS; CODES OF CONDUCT
2.6 From early times, courts have on occasion expressed concerns
abound with judicial exhortations that experts should be unbiased,
notwithstanding that they have been called by one party. For example,
Lord Wilberforce said in 1981:
While some degree of consultation between experts and legal advisers is
entirely proper, it is necessary that expert evidence presented
court should be, and should be seen to be, the independent product of
the expert, uninfluenced as to form or content by the
exigencies of
litigation …
2.7 More elaborate statements have followed, in one case the court referring to:
a duty to express only opinions genuinely held and which are not
biased; a duty not to mislead by omission; and a duty to consider
the material facts and not to omit to consider material facts which
could detract from the concluded opinion.
In more recent times, a number of courts have published codes of
conduct for expert witnesses. For example, the Supreme Court’s
Code of Conduct for expert witnesses
provides that an
expert witness has ‘an overriding duty to assist the Court
impartially on matters relevant to the expert’s
expertise’ and that the expert witness’s ‘paramount
duty’ is to the Court, not to the person retaining
the expert.
The code also deals with the contents of the expert’s report and
conferences with other experts directed by the
The Commission would welcome comments on the contents and
effectiveness of codes of conduct for expert witnesses, and on other
in which to convey guidelines and principles to expert witnesses,
litigants, and lawyers.
ACCREDITATION OF EXPERTS
2.9 Normally, expert witnesses have professional qualifications and
accreditations, and the Court would of course take these into
when considering the admissibility of the expert’s evidence, and
the weight to be given to it. It might be expected
that these matters
would also be considered by parties when selecting expert witnesses,
since they would want the evidence to impress
the Court favourably.
2.10 The Commission understands the reference to accreditation
in the Terms of Reference to refer to experts being accredited, by
Court, specifically as expert witnesses.
2.11 At this stage, the Commission is aware of some examples
of courts having a panel of experts in a particular field, from which
it can select a court expert in particular cases,
but this seems unusual.
2.12 No doubt such schemes might have the advantage of improving
the quality of expert evidence available to the Court, and, in some
areas, reducing the difficulty of finding available and competent
2.13 There may however be concerns about such a process.
For example, it might be thought inappropriate for the Court to have
such a role, lest accredited experts be given an unfair advantage
well-qualified experts who have not been accredited by the Court. If,
for example, the only experts who were accredited took
a particular
view of some matter that was controversial within the discipline, the
criticism might be made that the process would
undermine the
Court’s impartial role, since a litigant whose expert witness
took a different view, and was not accredited,
might be seen as
unfairly disadvantaged. Apart from this, the Court may not have the
resources or expertise to maintain a list of
accredited experts.
2.14 Another approach would be that the relevant professional
association would have a form of accreditation specifically relating
the role of expert witnesses, as distinct from accreditation to
practice in the relevant area of expertise.
The Commission invites comments on the existence and operation of
any accreditation schemes in New South Wales or other jurisdictions
relating to the role of expert witnesses and on their effectiveness and
desirability.
‘NO WIN NO FEE’ ARRANGEMENTS
2.15 A ‘no win no fee’ arrangement refers to an
arrangement where a party to litigation engages an expert witness on
basis that the expert will be paid only if the case succeeds.
According to press reports, this practice has appeared among some
accountants, engineers and property valuers.
2.16 There is an obvious difficulty with such arrangements,
since they would create a financial incentive for the witness to give
evidence favouring the litigant who engaged him or her, contrary to the
principle that the expert witness should seek to assist the
Court in an
objective way.
Some professional associations are reported
to have rules against such practices, and it seems that they have been
widely prohibited
in the USA.
2.17 On this view, it might be suggested that the law should
prohibit or discourage such arrangements. There might be a number of
ways this could be done. For example:
Such arrangements could be treated as contempt of court or an abuse of process.
The relevant code of conduct could expressly forbid such arrangements.
The Court could decline to receive evidence of an expert witness who had been shown to have made such an arrangement.
The making of such arrangements could be expressly
stated to be unprofessional conduct by lawyers. (Although such a rule
apply to unrepresented litigants).
If there were to be some form of accreditation, such behaviour could disentitle the expert to be accredited.
The Commission invites comments on the extent to which
‘no win no fee’ arrangements are currently used, and
whether any
of the measures indicated, or other measures, would be
SANCTIONS FOR INAPPROPRIATE OR UNETHICAL CONDUCT BY EXPERT WITNESSES
2.18 The measures just mentioned, in relation to ‘no win no
fee’ arrangements, could also be considered in relation to
witnesses who engaged in other forms of inappropriate or unethical
conduct. The most obvious example of such conduct would
be a deliberate
attempt to mislead the court by giving evidence that the witness knows
to be untrue or misleading.
How serious is the problem of inappropriate or unethical conduct
by experts? Again, the Commission would welcome comments, both on
extent of the problem and on ways in which it might be sanctioned or
controlled.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of contents
. H D Sperling, “Expert Evidence: The Problem of Bias and
Other Things” (speech to the Supreme Court of NSW Annual
Conference,
Terrigal, Australia, 3-4 September 1999). Similarly, the
Review of the Law of Negligence Report has referred to “a
perception that, in many instances, expert witnesses
consciously or sub-consciously slant their testimony to favour the
retains them”: Australia, Review of the Law of
Negligence Final Report (September 2002) at para 3.74.
. Sperling, above, citing I Freckelton, P Reddy, H Selby,
Australian Judicial Perspectives on Expert Evidence
An Empirical Study
(Australian Institute of Judicial Administration Inc, Carlton, 1999) (“the Freckelton report”).
. G Davies distinguishes between ‘polarisation of
opinions’ and ‘adversarial bias’ in ‘Court
Experts’ (paper to Annual Supreme and Federal Court
Judges’ Conference, Aukland, NZ, 29 January 2004.)
Whitehouse v Jordan
[1981] 1 WLR 246 at 256-257.
. Cazalet J in
[1991] FCR 193
, 226. Perhaps the best known is the 10-paragraph code of conduct formulated by Creswell J in
National Justice Cia Naviera SA v Prudential Assurance Co Ltd
(the “Ikarian Reefer”) [1993] 2 Lloyd’s Rep 68, 81-82, endorsed by Stuart-Smith LJ on appeal:
National Justice Cia Naviera SA v Prudential Assurance Co Ltd
(the “Ikarian Reefer”)
[1995] 1 Lloyd’s Rep 455, 496. See also Garland J in
Polivitte Ltd v Commercial Union Assurance
[1987] 1 Lloyd’s Rep 379, 386; Evans LJ, in
Vernon v Bosley
[1997] 1 All ER 577
. Schedule K to the Supreme Court Rules since January 2000.
. A Cannon, “Courts using their own experts”
(2004) 13 JJA 182-194 (panel of building experts, to assist the SA
Magistrates
Court on technical issues).
. A R Abadee, “The Expert Witness in the New
Millennium” (paper delivered to the General Surgeons Australia,
Scientific Meeting, 2 September 200, Sydney), agreeing with
the views of Justice Williams: “Accreditation and Accountability
of Experts” (paper delivered to Medico-Legal Conference, Gold
Coast, Queensland, 5 August 2000.)
. Chief Justice Spigelman has been quoted as expressing
concern, in this connection, that the expert ‘then has a
financial interest
in the success of the case and is then unlikely to
be impartial’: Jonathon Pearlman, “Professional Witness
Newcastle Herald
(6 September 2004) at 2.
. American Bar Association,
Model Rules of Professional Conduct
, 2003 at 80-81.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of contents
Issues Paper 25 (2004) - Expert Witnesses
3. Measures to increase transparency
Updates and background for this project (Digest)
3.1 It is now common practice that judges and
other judicial officers exercise control over the preparation of cases
for trial through
systems of ‘case management’. Such
systems attempt to reduce what is often called ‘trial by
ambush’ and to
encourage the parties at an early stage to
identify the real issues, and to achieve a realistic view of the case,
in order to maximise
the chance of early resolution.
3.2 Consistently with this, there are a number of common
provisions relating to expert witnesses that seem designed to increase
transparency.
These may be briefly summarised as follows.
a. Providing the other party with advance copies of any reports to be used in the case.
b. Disclosing any expert reports that a party obtains, whether or not to be used in the case.
c. Disclosure of instructions to expert (normally contained in expert’s report anyway).
d. Disclosure of all communications between the party and the party’s expert.
Such measures are to be found, variously expressed, in the rules of a
number of jurisdictions. The detailed rules generally form
part of the
case management systems of each jurisdiction.
The Commission would welcome any submissions on the effectiveness
of current measures relating to expert witnesses that are designed
increase transparency, and any issues that they are seen to raise.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of contents
Issues Paper 25 (2004) - Expert Witnesses
4. Measures for the efficient use of experts
Updates and background for this project (Digest)
Requirements for experts to consult, and/or report issues
Methods of receiving experts’ evidence
REQUIREMENTS FOR EXPERTS TO CONSULT, AND/OR REPORT ISSUES
4.1 In many jurisdictions, there are now rules to the effect
that the Court may require experts to consult with each other before
the hearing, and produce for the court a statement setting out the
matters on which they agree and those on which they disagree.
The purpose of such rules is to assist the parties to identify
misunderstandings and assist the experts to adopt reasonable positions,
thereby maximising the chances of settlement and, in the cases that do
not settle, reducing the time spent at the trial.
It is the Commission’s impression that rules requiring
experts to consult are generally seen as desirable. The Commission
welcome submissions on this topic.
METHODS OF RECEIVING EXPERTS' EVIDENCE
4.2 Commonly, expert evidence is contained in a written form (for
example, a report or affidavit) and filed on behalf of the each
parties before the hearing. Ideally, this process gives each party the
opportunity to consider the issues and consult with
their own expert,
before the hearing, maximising the chance that agreement may be
reached. Typically, the rules provide for this
the hearing, the experts are normally available for cross-examination.
In addition, it is generally open to the court to direct
evidence in chief may be given orally rather than in writing, and it is
not uncommon for experts to give brief oral evidence
in chief of an
updating kind, before cross-examination commences, as for example where
a valuer gives oral evidence of some relevant
event that has happened
since the written report was filed.
4.3 At the hearing, the usual approach has been that each
expert in turn gives any oral evidence in chief and is then
cross-examined.
In recent years, however, there has been some interest
in modifying this approach, so that the relevant experts in a
particular area
are all sworn in at one time and remain together in
court. They then give their evidence by way of answering questions on
topics, rather than the evidence of each expert being taken
separately.
Such methods, sometimes beguilingly called
‘hot-tubbing’, are seen as having merits in some
situations, making it easier
for the court to understand the issues
4.4 Rules that deal with these matters usually provide that the
court may make directions for evidence to be given in such ways. The
Commission is not aware of any rule that requires evidence to be given
in this way, or that such methods have become a routine or
The Commission invites submissions on the experience with the use
of different methods of receiving expert evidence, and on whether
rules should generally make provision for such methods to be available
in suitable cases.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of contents
. See eg Supreme Court Rules (NSW) Pt36 r13CA(1), and Practice
Note 121, “Joint Conferences of Expert Witnesses”;
Court Rules
. Under the NSW Land and Environment Court’s
Expert Witness Practice Direction 2003
where the experts in a joint report specify a matter on which they
agree, a party may not lead evidence on that matter without the
Court’s leave: see especially paragraph 6(6).
. Some rules deal with such matters in detail. For example,
the Federal Court rules provide for obtaining the factual evidence
the experts give evidence, and for the experts to indicate
whether their views have changed because of certain evidence: see
O34Ar3(2)(c)
. For example, under the Federal Court rules (O34Ar3(e),
(f), (g), (h), (i)), the court can order that each expert be sworn one
immediately
after the other; that when giving evidence witnesses are
not necessarily in the box; each can give opinion on issue and on other
experts; manner and sequence of cross-examination can be organised. An
illustration of the process is
Re Queensland Independent Wholesalers Ltd
(1995) ATPR 41-438
at 40,925 (Lockart J). The process is also used,
with as many as six experts sworn in at the same time, by the NSW Land
and Environment
Court: P McClennan, “Problems with
Evidence” (Speech for the Government Lawyers’ Annual
Dinner, NSW Parliament
House, 7 September 2004).
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of contents
Issues Paper 25 (2004) - Expert Witnesses
5. Measures to limit the number of experts
Updates and background for this project (Digest)
Introduction
The (non-exclusive) court expert
The single expert
INTRODUCTION
5.1 Arguably, all the measures considered so far are consistent
with what is referred to as the ‘adversary system’, in
the parties alone put the evidence before the Court. The measures
affect the way the evidence is handled, but – with the
exception of a panel of Court-accredited experts - do not involve the
Court playing any part in the selection of evidence.
By contrast, the
measures to be considered in this section do involve the court playing
a part in deciding what expert evidence is
to come before it.
5.2 Some of these measures, such as referees and assessors,
and the court’s power to call its own witnesses, have long been
part of the law, although in many jurisdictions they have been little
used. Others, however, notably rules that limit the parties’
ability to call as many experts as they wish, and rules that provide
for a single expert, are more recent. They have been introduced
of an effort to reduce costs and delay, and, to some extent, to reduce
or eliminate what have been seen as unsatisfactory
aspects of the
existing practice. These measures have sometimes been controversial.
THE (NON-EXCLUSIVE) COURT EXPERT
5.3 We use the term ‘Court Expert’ to refer to an
expert called by the Court, in circumstances where there is no
restriction
on the parties’ rights to call their own expert
evidence on the topic.
5.4 Although such a power has existed for many years, its use, while by no means unknown, has generally been sparing.
There would seem to be a number of possible reasons for this.
5.5 First, once a hearing has begun, it will generally be
difficult for the court to make arrangements for the appointment of its
own expert without adjourning the case, with unwanted consequences of
delays and increased costs, both for the parties and for the
would seem that for practical reasons, the appointment of a court
expert will often be possible only if the court engages
intensive case management, such that a judicial officer will be able to
form the view that a court expert is needed, and
take the necessary
steps, well before the trial commences. Broadly speaking, intensive
case management is a relatively modern phenomenon,
and thus until
recent times it may have usually been impracticable for courts to
appoint their own expert.
5.6 Secondly, the court may often consider that calling a court
expert would be likely to complicate the hearing, and increase costs
and delay, without evident advantage in the particular case.
5.7 Thirdly, the court may consider it inappropriate in
adversary proceedings to call its own expert. It may consider that the
are the best judge of what evidence to lead, and that justice
will most likely be done by the court adjudicating on the evidence
parties choose to put before it. Perhaps, too, the court may feel that
the decision to call an expert, and to identify that expert,
seen as indicating a degree of pre-judgment or bias on its part.
5.8 Justice Sperling has summarised the arguments for not appointing a Court Expert as follows:
It has been said that the appointment by the court of its own expert
witness is contrary to the fundamental premise of the adversarial
system; that the parties have the right to present their own case and
to call witnesses of their own choice to support that case;
court appointed expert may be unable to deal satisfactorily with a
situation where more than one acceptable expert view of
the matter in
question is held in the professional community; that the court might
place undue reliance on the evidence of the court
expert, with the
result that it will be the expert rather than the judge who decides the
case; that, if the parties are permitted
to call their own experts in
order to reduce that concern, the appointment of a court expert may
cause delay and an increase in costs
without any countervailing
benefit; and that, even if parties are precluded from calling their own
experts, they would still have
to incur the cost of retaining experts
to advise on the likely outcome of the proceedings and to assist in
preparation for cross-examination
of the court expert, so that the
saving in costs might be less than anticipated.
There may, however, be reasons for appointing a court expert, and the
Commission will be studying the occasions in which such
appointments
have been made. For example, it might be thought in a particular case
that the appointment of a Court Expert would be
likely to help the
parties resolve the issue, or provide the Court with evidence that is
more objective, or more satisfactory, than
that provided by the
parties. Again, the appointment of a Court Expert may perhaps offset an
unequal situation between the parties.
The Commission would welcome comments on the experience of
appointing (non-exclusive) Court Experts, and the advantages and
disadvantages
of this measure.
THE SINGLE EXPERT
5.10 The term ‘Single Expert’ is used in this Issues Paper to refer to the following:
An expert (the Single Expert) is appointed by the Court; and
Parties are not permitted to call their own expert evidence on the same subject-matter.
5.11 The literature also speaks of a ‘Joint Expert’. This
term indicates that the Expert may be appointed jointly by
the parties.
Indeed, rules providing for a Single Expert normally provide that the
appointment may be made on the basis of the parties’
although if the parties cannot agree the appointment can be made by the
Court. For the purpose of this issues Paper, the
term Single Expert is
preferred, because it indicates the distinctive feature of this
measure, namely that the Court appoints one
person and permits no other
person to give expert evidence on the particular subject matter.
5.12 The appointment of a Single Expert may be considered a
stronger or more drastic step than the mere appointment of a Court
because it limits the expert evidence that the parties can
call. Not surprisingly, it seems to have been the most controversial of
the measures discussed in this Issues Paper.
5.13 Some Australian jurisdictions, influenced by the Woolf reforms in England, have recently adopted this kind of approach.
In Queensland, there is provision for the parties jointly to appoint an
expert, or for the Court to do it of its own motion. The
main expressed
purposes of the provisions include:
(b) [To] ensure that, if practicable and without compromising the
interests of justice, expert evidence is [to be given by the single
expert] ...; and
(c) avoid unnecessary costs associated with the parties retaining different experts; and
(d) allow, if necessary to ensure a fair trial of a proceeding,
for more than 1 expert to give evidence on an issue in the proceeding.
5.14 Unless the Court otherwise orders, the expert is to be the only expert to give evidence on the issue.
Somewhat similar rules have been formulated in the Family Court of Australia.
5.15 In New South Wales, the Land and Environment Court has used its
rules to appoint experts, and since March 2004 ‘has imposed
presumption that in relation to any issue requiring expert evidence, a
court expert will be appointed’. Where there is a
court expert, a
party needs leave to call an expert retained by that party. The Chief
Judge of the Court has written:
Generally, provided the Court is satisfied that the additional expert
will add useful information to the discussion, leave is granted.
Experience has shown that the court expert’s opinion is not
always accepted by the judge or commissioner but that in every
integrity of the decision made has been significantly enhanced.
… it would appear that in cases where a court expert has
been appointed, many have settled without the need for a hearing and
others have taken significantly les time for the hearing to be
The consistent comment from the judges, commissioners and legal
practitioners is that the evidence from persons appointed as court
experts reflects a more thorough and balanced consideration of the
issues than was previously the case…
appointment of a Single Expert has been seen as having a number of
advantages. First, by preventing other expert evidence
on the matter in
question, the appointment of a Single Expert is seen as reducing the
time of the hearing, and thus saving public
and private costs. Some
would say, however, that such savings are not as evident as might be
thought. They would point to the costs,
both public and private, of the
pre-trial processes that are required for the appointment of the Single
Expert. They would also argue
that each party will often need to engage
an expert to advise them on the assessment of the evidence to be given
by the Single Expert,
and to assist in the preparation of
cross-examination of the Single Expert. In some cases at least, they
would argue that it might
be cheaper for the parties each to have one
expert than to have to pay for the Single Expert and also for their own
experts. They might add that if the Single Expert
were to be discredited in cross-examination at the trial, there would
expert evidence and there would need to be an adjournment,
causing increased delays and costs.
5.17 Secondly, the appointment of a Single Expert is supported as
providing more objective evidence than would otherwise be available.
The argument is that this will assist the parties in attempting to
resolve the matter (because the outcome will be more predictable)
will also provide more reliable evidence for the Court if the matter
goes to a hearing.
5.18 On the other hand, some would argue that such an
appointment may (or on one view, does) undermine the essential function
Court: that the appointment of a particular Single Expert may
involve a pre-judgment (eg that a particular view among experts is
correct one), and that the Single Expert’s evidence, being
unchallenged by other experts, would be so persuasive as to
the decision-making role of the Court.
5.19 The above paragraphs are not intended to be a
comprehensive account of the issues raised by the Single Expert, but
only to indicate
some of the differences that have arisen. There are
other issues, some of them detailed and technical, relating to the
Single Expert.
The Commission invites submissions on the experience to date with
rules providing for appointment of single experts, and the advantages
and disadvantages of this measure. In particular, the Commission
invites comments on the following:
(a) To what extent can it be said that existing problems
relating to expert witnesses make it necessary or appropriate that the
(or some courts) should have the power to appoint a Single
(b) Is it objectionable in principle (because it is contrary
to the adversary system or to justice), that the Court should ever be
able to appoint a Single Expert?
(c) Are rules providing for single experts authorised by a
legislative rule-making power relating to ‘practice and
procedure’,
or is it necessary that there be a clearer statutory
(d) If the Court is to have power to appoint a Single Expert,
what guidelines should the rules provide as to the circumstances in
which a Single Expert should be appointed? Should the rules merely
provide that it is one of the options available to the court,
provide lists of factors to be taken into account, or go further and
create a presumption favouring (or disfavouring) the appointment
single expert?
(e) How should the appointment be made? Is it generally
appropriate for the rules to provide for an appointment based on the
consent, or, where there is no consent, on the
Court’s own motion? How is the appointment best managed within
case management
(f) How is the single expert to be instructed? What version
of the facts should be given? If the facts change between the report
the trial, what is to happen? What communications can there be
between the parties and the expert leading up to the hearing? Can
party object to something in a report, or have the expert consider a
possible error, before the hearing? Can the expert seek further
information, or raise some issue about the nature of his or her brief?
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of contents
. The existence of a power in the court to call its own expert
does not of itself preclude the parties from calling their own experts.
And sometimes their power to do so is made explicit. Thus the Federal
Court rules expressly provide that where there is a court expert,
party may adduce evidence of one other expert on the same question, if
the party has given notice to the other parties of intention
See O34 rr 2, 6.
. The Freckelton Report, above. In the United States, as
early as 1952, the rules of the Supreme Courts of the Bronx and New
provided for the appointment of an impartial doctor from panels of
willing eminent doctors supplied by the local medical societies.
doctor would examine the patient, file a report, and be available for
cross-examination. The rules were said to have had some
encouraging settlement and discouraging fraudulent or exaggerated
claims. See P F Rothstein,
Federal Rules of Evidence
(updated to December 2003), Article VII, Opinions and Expert Testimony; Rule 706: Court Appointed Experts.
. Sperling, above, citing
[1962] 1 WLR 968 per Lord Denning MR at 972;
Kian v Mirro Aluminium Co
at 356 (Mich 1980);
Woolf, Access to Justice
(Final report to the Lord Chancellor on the Civil Justice System in
England and Wales, HMSO, London, July 1996) at p.186, (Interim
to the Lord Chancellor, HMSO, London, June 1995) at p.142; Australian
Law Reform Commission,
(Review of the Adversarial
System, Background Paper 6, Jan 1999) at pp.47-49; R Chesterman,
“Dealing with Expert Witnesses”
Law Society Journal
; Editorial, “Expert Evidence” (1991) 59
Medico-Legal Journal
67; V Plueckhahn, “Legal Dilemmas in the Use of ‘Expert Medical Evidence’” (1982)
Australian Journal of Forensic Sciences
. See Jonathon Pearlman, “Doctors wary of being caught in web of litigation”
Sydney Morning Herald
(6 September 2004) at 11, reporting that solicitors acting for injured
parties in medical negligence cases complain about the difficulty
finding medical experts willing to testify against other doctors.
. Queensland, Uniform Civil Procedure Rules, Part 5 –
Expert Evidence
. Rule 423.
. Rule 429N.
Family Law Rules
See generaly Family Court of Australia,
The Changing Face of the Expert Witness
. P McClennan, ‘Problems with Evidence’ (Speech
for the Government Lawyers’ Annual Dinner, NSW Parliament House,
7 September 2004).
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of contents
Issues Paper 25 (2004) - Expert Witnesses
6. Alternatives to experts
Updates and background for this project (Digest)
The role of assessors, referees, expert assistants
THE ROLE OF ASSESSORS, REFEREES, EXPERT ASSISTANTS
6.1 There has long been provision for courts to be assisted by
assessors, referees, or expert assistants (a recent term). The role
such persons is in some ways similar to that of witnesses, in that they
provide information and opinions that the Court takes
into account.
Sometimes a panel is used, sometimes an individual. However although
they may provide a report to the Court, they do
not give evidence, and
they are not subject to cross-examination.
6.2 A recent example of this approach can be found in the
Federal Court. Under the rules of that Court, an ‘Expert
may be appointed to assist the Court. The Expert
Assistant must give a report, and may at the Court’s direction
comments. The Expert Assistant must give the report to each
party. The Court must give each party reasonable opportunity to comment
and to adduce evidence on the issue, but not to examine or
cross-examine the expert assistant. The parties are not to communicate
with the Expert Assistant without leave. The Expert Assistant may not
give evidence.
6.3 The Commission’s preliminary inquiries suggest that
measures of this sort are relatively uncommon, but that in some
they are used for particular sorts of specialised
The Commission would welcome comments on the use of assessors,
referees and expert assistants, on their effectiveness and
acceptability,
and on whether they are particularly appropriate in
particular types of cases.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of contents
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter