URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/lawreform/ALRCDP/2007/73.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:31:38
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Client Legal Privilege and Federal Investigatory Bodies [2007] ALRCDP 73
PDF version
is also available for viewing and download.
ALRC Discussion Paper 73
Client Legal Privilege and Federal Investigatory Bodies
Terms of Reference
List of Participants
List of Proposals
1. Introduction to the Inquiry
Background to the Inquiry
Scope of the Inquiry
Law reform processes
Overview of Discussion Paper 73
2. Rationale of Client Legal Privilege
The need to identify rationale
A range of rationales
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s views
3. Overview of Client Legal Privilege
Introduction
The development of client legal privilege
Client legal privilege today
The comparative dimension
4. Overview of Federal Bodies with Coercive Information-Gathering Powers
Introduction
Criminal law enforcement
Prosecutions
Competition laws and consumer protection
Financial markets
Intelligence and security
Public administration
Building and construction
Social security
Health and aged care
Human rights
Border control and immigration
Communications
Environment
Royal Commissions of inquiry
5. Client Legal Privilege in Federal Investigations
Introduction
Legislative provisions
Need for clarification
Achieving clarity
A uniform approach?
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s views
Achieving uniformity
6. Modification or Abrogation of Privilege?
Introduction
Should client legal privilege be abrogated?
Possible models of modification
Extension to other professionals
7. Safeguards
Introduction
Representation of a client in an investigation
Restrictions on the use of privileged information
Availability of privilege against third parties
Practice and procedure
8. Practice and Procedure
Introduction
Notification of application of privilege
Making a privilege claim
Unrepresented persons
Third parties
Resolving privilege disputes
Electronic material
Other policies and procedures
9. Ensuring Professional Integrity - Education and Accountability
Introduction
Examples of alleged abuse
The extent of the problem of abuse
Responding to abuse
Legal education
Appendix 1. Table of Legislation
Appendix 2. List of Submissions
Appendix 3. List of Consultations
Appendix 4. List of Abbreviations
This Discussion Paper reflects the law as at 31 August 2007.
© Commonwealth of Australia 2007
This work is copyright. You may download, display, print and reproduce this
material in whole or part, subject to acknowledgement
of the source, for your
personal, non-commercial use or use within your organisation. Apart from any
use as permitted under
(Cth), all other rights are reserved.
Requests for further authorisation should be directed by letter to the Commonwealth
Administration, Copyright Law Branch, Attorney-General’s Department,
Robert Garran Offices, National Circuit, Barton ACT
2600 or electronically via
www.ag.gov.au/cca.
ISBN 978-0-9804153-0-8
Commission Reference: DP 73
The Australian Law Reform Commission was established on 1 January 1975 by the
Law Reform Commission Act 1973
(Cth) and reconstituted by the
Australian Law
Reform Commission Act 1996
(Cth). The office of the ALRC is at Level 25, 135
King Street, Sydney, NSW, 2000, Australia.
All ALRC publications can be made available in a range of accessible formats
for people with disabilities. If you require assistance,
please contact the
Telephone: within Australia (02) 8238 6333
International +61 2 8238 6333
TTY: (02) 8238 6379
Facsimile: within Australia (02) 8238 6363
International +61 2 8238 6363
E-mail: info@alrc.gov.au
ALRC homepage: www.alrc.gov.au
Printed by Ligare Pty Ltd
Making a submission
Any public contribution to an inquiry is called a submission and these are actively
sought by the ALRC from a broad cross-section
of the community, as well as those
with a special interest in the inquiry.
Submissions are usually written, but there is no set format and they need not
be formal documents. Where possible, submissions
in electronic format are preferred.
It would be helpful if comments addressed specific questions or numbered paragraphs
in this paper.
Open inquiry policy
In the interests of informed public debate, the ALRC is committed to open access
to information. As submissions provide important
evidence to each inquiry, it
is common for the ALRC to draw upon the contents of submissions and quote from
them or refer to
them in publications. As part of ALRC policy, non-confidential
submissions are made available to any person or organisation upon
request after
completion of an inquiry, and also may be published on the ALRC website. For
the purposes of this policy, an
inquiry is considered to have been completed
when the final report has been tabled in Parliament.
However, the ALRC also accepts submissions made in confidence. Confidential
submissions may include personal experiences where
there is a wish to retain
Any request
for access to a confidential submission is determined in accordance
with the federal
Freedom of Information Act 1982
, which has provisions designed
to protect sensitive information given in confidence.
In the absence of a clear indication that a submission is intended to be confidential,
the ALRC will treat the submission as non-confidential.
Submissions should be sent to:
The Executive Director
Australian Law Reform Commission
GPO Box 3708
SYDNEY NSW 2001
E-mail: privilege@alrc.gov.au
Submissions may also be made using the online form on the ALRC’s homepage:
<www.alrc.gov.au>
The closing date for submissions in response to DP 73 is 1 November 2007.
Terms of Reference
Legal professional privilege and Commonwealth
investigatory bodies
I, Philip Ruddock, Attorney-General of Australia,
having regard to:
the fact that legal professional privilege is a common law
the fact that legal professional privilege, like other common law
rights, can be modified or abrogated by legislation in cases where
legislature affords a competing public interest consideration a higher relative
the fact that questions of legal professional privilege commonly
arise in relation to the exercise of coercive information gathering
Commonwealth bodies
the many different forms of Commonwealth statutory provisions
affecting the question of legal professional privilege in that context,
the provisions of the
Evidence Act 1995
dealing with client
legal privilege
refer to the Australian Law Reform Commission
(‘the Commission’) for inquiry and report, pursuant to
Australian Law Reform Commission Act 1996
, matters relating
to the application of legal professional privilege to the coercive information
gathering powers of Commonwealth
1. In performing its functions in relation to this reference, the Commission
(a) consider the investigatory or associated functions of Commonwealth bodies
that have coercive information gathering or associated
powers including the
Australian Federal Police, Australian Crime Commission, Australian Competition
and Consumer Commission, Australian
Prudential Regulation Authority, Australian
Securities and Investments Commission, Australian Taxation Office, Australian
Communications
and Media Authority, Centrelink, Medicare Australia, Commonwealth
royal commissions, Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions,
and any other
relevant Commonwealth bodies, and
(b) consider the following questions:
(i) would further modification or abrogation of legal professional
privilege in some areas be desirable in order to achieve more
performance of Commonwealth investigatory functions?
(ii) would it be desirable to clarify existing provisions for the
modification or abrogation of legal professional privilege, with
harmonising them across the Commonwealth statute book?
(iii) would it be desirable to introduce or clarify other statutory
safeguards where legal professional privilege is modified or abrogated,
view to harmonising them across the Commonwealth statute book? And
(iv) any related matter.
2. The Commission will identify and consult with relevant stakeholders.
3. The Commission is to report no later than 3 December 2007.
Dated 29th November 2006
Philip Ruddock
Attorney-General
List of Participants
Australian Law Reform Commission
Senior Legal Officers
Research Manager
Project Assistant
Legal Interns
Advisory Committee Members
List of Participants
Australian Law Reform Commission
The Division of the ALRC constituted under the
Australian Law Reform
Commission Act 1996
(Cth) for the purposes of this Inquiry comprises the
Professor David Weisbrot (President)
Professor Rosalind
Croucher (Commissioner in Charge)
Professor Les McCrimmon
(Commissioner)
Justice Robert French (part-time Commissioner)
Susan Kenny (part-time Commissioner)
Justice Susan Kiefel (part-time Commissioner until August 2007)
Senior Legal Officers
Kate Connors
Isabella Cosenza
Research Manager
Lani Blackman
Carolyn Kearney
Project Assistant
Alayne Harland
Legal Interns
Anna Garsia
Caitlin Goss
Michael Hung
Lisa Le Provost
Advisory Committee Members
Professor Bob Baxt AO, Freehills
Mr David Bennett AO QC,
Solicitor-General of Australia
Mr Damian Bugg AM QC, Commonwealth Director of
Public Prosecutions
Mr James Carter, Office of the Commonwealth Director
of Public Prosecutions
Mr Brian Cassidy, Australian Competition and Consumer
Mr Peter Brereton, Banco Chambers
Mr Simon Daley, Australian
Government Solicitor
Mr Will Day, Australian Taxation Office
D’Aloisio, Australian Securities and Investments Commission
Faulkner PSM, Legal Services and Native Title
Division, Attorney-General’s Department
Mr Will Irving, Telstra
Corporation Limited
Dr Sue McNicol, Joan Rosanove Chambers
Dr Christine
Parker, University of Melbourne
Mr Bret Walker SC, St James’ Hall
List of Proposals
5. Client Legal Privilege in Federal Investigations
6. Modification or Abrogation of Privilege?
7. Safeguards
8. Practice and Procedure
9. Ensuring Professional Integrity—Education and Accountability
List of Proposals
5. Client Legal Privilege in Federal
Investigations
Proposal 5–1
The Australian Parliament should enact legislation
of general application to cover various aspects of the law and procedure
client legal privilege claims in federal investigations (hereafter
referred to as federal client legal privilege legislation) in
accordance with
the proposals in this Discussion Paper.
Proposal 5–2
Federal client legal privilege legislation should
provide that, in the absence of any clear, express statutory statement to the
client legal privilege applies to the coercive information-gathering
powers of federal bodies.
Proposal 5–3
Any legislative scheme which seeks to abrogate or
modify client legal privilege must do so by express reference to the particular
sections or divisions within that scheme that confer coercive
information-gathering powers which abrogate or modify the privilege.
Proposal 5–4
To promote national harmonisation, the
Attorney-General of Australia should lead a process through the Standing
Committee of Attorneys-General
to encourage the states and territories to adopt
the Commonwealth model proposed in Proposals 5–1 to 5–3 above.
6. Modification or Abrogation of
Proposal 6–1
Federal client legal privilege legislation should
provide that, in special circumstances, the Australian Parliament may legislate
to abrogate client legal privilege in relation to a particular Royal Commission
of inquiry or investigation undertaken by a federal
investigative body.
The factors to be considered in determining whether such legislation should
be enacted are:
(a) the subject of the Royal Commission of inquiry or investigation,
including whether the inquiry or investigation concerns a matter
(or matters) of
major public importance that has (or have) a significant impact on the community
in general or on a section of the
community or is a covert investigation;
(b) whether the information sought can be obtained in a timely and complete
way by using alternative means that do not require abrogation
of client legal
privilege; and especially
(c) the likelihood and degree to which the privileged information will
benefit the Royal Commission or investigation, particularly
where the legal
advice itself is central to the issues being considered by the Commission or
federal body.
Proposal 6–2
The Australian Parliament should amend the
Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security Act
Ombudsman Act 1976
(Cth) to state that where client legal privilege
cannot be claimed over legal advice given to a Minister, an agency or an
of the Commonwealth, this abrogation applies to litigation privilege
as well as advice privilege.
Proposal 6–3
Federal client legal privilege legislation should
provide that a person who is required to disclose information under a coercive
information-gathering power of a federal body is not required to disclose a
document that is a tax advice document prepared for that
A ‘tax advice document’ should be defined as a
confidential document created by an independent professional accounting
for the dominant purpose of providing that person with advice about the
operation and effect of tax laws. It does not include
documents’, such as documents which record transactions or arrangements
entered into by a person (for example,
formal books of account or ledgers).
An independent professional accounting adviser must be a registered
‘tax agent’ for the purpose of s 251L(1)(b) of the
Tax Assessment Act 1936
No privilege should apply where a tax advice document is created in
relation to the commission of a fraud or offence or the commission
that renders a person liable to a civil penalty; or where the person or the
accounting adviser knew or ought reasonably
to have known that the document was
prepared in furtherance of a deliberate abuse of power.
Claims that a document is a tax advice document may be required to
be certified by a lawyer in accordance with the procedures set
out in Proposal
7. Safeguards
Proposal 7–1
Federal client legal privilege legislation should
provide that, if another federal statute expressly abrogates or modifies client
legal privilege, such abrogation or modification does not extend to legal advice
that relates to the investigation itself, or to
the representation of the client
in the investigation, provided that, or to the extent that, the investigation
concerns offences
alleged to have been committed prior to the commencement of
the investigation.
Proposal 7–2
Federal client legal privilege legislation should
provide that, in the absence of any clear, express statutory statement to the
where federal legislation abrogates the application of client legal
privilege to the exercise of a federal coercive information-gathering
(a) a federal body that seeks to rely on otherwise privileged information as
evidence in any court proceedings must apply to the court
for permission to do
(b) the court will have a general discretion to allow use of the information
as evidence, balancing the public interest in allowing
the information to be
used against a consideration of whether the use of that information would be
unfairly prejudicial to a party;
(c) a federal body is precluded from using otherwise privileged information
against the holder of client legal privilege in any administrative
proceedings.
Proposal 7–3
Federal client legal privilege legislation should
provide that where client legal privilege has been abrogated in respect of any
coercive information-gathering power, federal bodies should be required
to notify persons the subject of such powers, as well as
those who produce
information on a voluntary basis,
safeguards apply to the use of otherwise privileged information in subsequent
proceedings.
Proposal 7–4
Where client legal privilege is abrogated or
modified in a federal investigation that takes place in a public
setting—such as
a Royal Commission—evidence that may disclose
communications subject to client legal privilege should be presented in-camera,
or may be subject to a non-publication order.
Proposal 7–5
Federal client legal privilege legislation should
provide that, in the absence of any clear, express statutory statement to the
where other federal legislation abrogates or modifies client legal
privilege in federal investigations that abrogation or modification
affect the holder of the privilege from maintaining privilege against a third
Proposal 7–6
The Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions
(CDPP) should amend its
Statement on Prosecution Disclosure
clear that the exception to disclosing unused privileged information to the
defence applies irrespective of whether the
privilege holder is the federal
investigatory body that refers the matter to the CDPP, or a party that produced
information to that
federal investigatory body in the course of its
investigation.
Proposal 7–7
If client legal privilege is abrogated or modified
in respect of any federal body with coercive information-gathering powers, that
federal body should be required to:
(a) implement appropriate document management systems to ensure that
documents the subject of a client legal privilege claim are:
(i) clearly identified or recorded as such;
(ii) stored and managed appropriately; and
(iii) returned, as soon as practicable, to the person who produced them;
(b) publish its policies and procedures in this regard.
8. Practice and Procedure
Proposal 8–1
Federal client legal privilege legislation should
require federal bodies with coercive information-gathering powers—the
of which raise, or are likely to raise, the issue of the application of
the privilege—to notify persons the subject of those
powers, as well as
those who provide information on a voluntary basis, whether or not client legal
privilege applies to:
(a) the exercise of a particular power; and
(b) the voluntary production of information.
Proposal 8–2
Federal bodies with coercive information-gathering
powers—the exercise of which raise, or are likely to raise, the issue of
the application of client legal privilege—should develop and publish
policies and procedures in relation to the manner of notifying
persons whether
the privilege applies to the exercise of their information-gathering powers and
to the voluntary production of information.
Proposal 8–3
Federal client legal privilege legislation should
provide a mechanism for the making of privilege claims in federal
investigations.
Those provisions should include a requirement that persons be
given a reasonable opportunity to claim privilege, and where a federal
requests particulars that:
(a) the person specify the grounds on which client legal privilege is
claimed; and
(b) where claims are made in respect of communications contained in
(1) the person making the claim describes the documents or in the case of a
bundle of documents of the same or similar nature, describe
each bundle,
sufficiently to enable the document or bundle to be identified;
(2) communications prepared by or involving an in-house counsel should be
(3) in respect of the in-house counsel referred to in the list, the
claimant is to provide sufficient details about that person’s
independence;
(4) ‘tax advice documents’ (defined in Proposal 6–3)
prepared by a professional accounting adviser should be indicated;
(5) where a federal body so requests:
(i) the particulars of the privileged documents and the basis for the
claims are to be verified on oath or affirmation by the
person making the claim;
(ii) where the person is represented in the federal investigation or has
otherwise received legal advice in relation to the preparation
particulars of documents subject to a claim for privilege, the person’s
lawyer is to certify that having reviewed the
documents the subject of a
privilege claim, that in his or her opinion there are reasonable grounds for the
making of the claim.
Proposal 8–4
Federal client legal privilege legislation should
specify that providing a description of the documents or bundle of documents in
accordance with legislative requirements of itself will not amount to waiver of
the privilege.
Proposal 8–5
Federal client legal privilege legislation should
specify that the
particulars of documents subject to a claim for
privilege are to be provided to the federal body within the time frame defined
that body, which must be reasonable having regard to the circumstances of
each particular request for information. The types of factors
that may be
relevant include:
(a) the number of documents that a claimant is required to review;
(b) the need to access and identify electronically-stored documents;
(c) whether the information is required pursuant to the exercise of a search
warrant (or a search without warrant);
(d) the urgency and seriousness of the investigation being conducted by the
federal body; and
(e) the time frame for production of documents pursuant to the coercive
Proposal 8–6
Federal client legal privilege legislation should
provide that where a person fails to comply with a federal body’s request
to provide particulars of communications in respect of which privilege is
claimed the federal body may apply for a declaration that
privilege is not
maintainable unless particulars are provided to the court forthwith or within a
designated time determined at the
discretion of the court.
Proposal 8–7
Federal client legal privilege legislation should
provide that where a person is represented in the federal investigation—or
has otherwise received legal advice in connection with the production of
information pursuant to a coercive power—and the federal
body requests
that any claims for client legal privilege made by the person be certified by
his or her lawyer, and the lawyer fails
to certify any or all of the privilege
claims made by that person:
(a) the federal body should inform the person that the lawyer has not
certified some or all of the claims (if it appears that the
person may not be
aware of this fact) and of the consequences of failure to certify (as set out
(b) the federal body may apply to the court for a declaration that, unless
the court otherwise orders, if certification is not made
within the time
provided by the court, the claim for privilege is not maintainable; and
(c) the person may apply to the court for a declaration that privilege
applies despite the lack of certification.
Federal bodies with coercive information-gathering
powers—the exercise of which raise, or are likely to raise, the issue of
the application of client legal privilege—should develop and publish their
policies and procedures for addressing apparent
unintentional disclosures by
unrepresented persons of material likely to be subject to a claim of client
legal privilege; particularly
the circumstances in which they recognise such
persons should be given an opportunity to seek legal advice about whether to
or waive the privilege.
Proposal 8–9
Federal client legal privilege legislation should
provide that, other than in covert investigations, where a federal body receives
apparently privileged information from a person other than the privilege holder
(the notice recipient)—pursuant to the exercise
of a coercive power that
does not abrogate client legal privilege—the federal body should take
reasonable steps to give the
privilege holder an opportunity to establish that
privilege had not been waived by the privilege holder’s provision of the
information to the notice recipient.
Proposal 8–10
The Federal Court and the Supreme Court of each
state and territory should have appropriate arrangements in place to cater for
applications on short notice concerning disputes about client legal
privilege claims in federal investigations.
Proposal 8–11
Federal client legal privilege legislation should
provide that, where a federal body (other than a Royal Commission), disputes a
claim (after having received particulars of the documents in respect
of which a claim of privilege is made in answer to the exercise
of a coercive
A claimant should be given the opportunity within a defined time to
agree to an independent review mechanism to resolve the claim.
Where a claimant does not agree to have the claim assessed by an
independent reviewer or reviewers, the claimant must commence proceedings
superior court within 14 days seeking a declaration that the disputed material
is subject to client legal privilege.
The federal body may also commence proceedings within 14 days but
the onus of establishing client legal privilege is on the claimant.
Where the claimant fails to commence proceedings, the federal body
will be entitled to regard the claim as having been waived, in
the absence of
special circumstances that negate this inference.
Federal bodies (other than Royal Commissions) with coercive
information-gathering powers—the exercise of which raise, or are
raise, the issue of the application of client legal privilege—should
develop and publish procedures in relation to
the resolution of disputed
privilege claims. Such procedures should, as far as practicable, be uniform.
(See Proposals 8–13
Proposal 8–13
The Attorney-General’s Department in
consultation with federal bodies with coercive information-gathering
powers—the exercise
of which raise, or are likely to raise, the issue of
the application of client legal privilege—should establish a model
for resolving disputed privilege claims in federal investigations.
Proposal 8–14
Where a federal body disputes a privilege claim,
the model procedure for resolving the claim (referred to in Proposal 8–13)
should include the following features:
(a) Where possible, the federal body should adopt a flexible approach to the
mechanism used to resolve the claim.
(b) The federal body should notify the claimant of the availability of an
independent review process to resolve the dispute, in accordance
procedures, and give the claimant a reasonable time limit in the circumstances
within which to indicate whether or not
he or she agrees to submit to that
review process.
(c) The claimant may agree to the engagement of a mutually acceptable
independent reviewer or reviewers (with appropriate legal qualifications)
make a non-binding assessment of the claim, although the claimant and federal
body may agree to accept the assessment as binding.
(d) Upon signing a confidentiality undertaking, those conducting the
independent review should be given access to the documents containing
communications in dispute and should make an assessment of each in the following
categories:
(i) privileged;
(ii) not privileged;
(iii) partly privileged; or
(iv) unable to make an assessment.
(e) Upon receiving the assessment of the independent review, either party
may within seven days (or another period agreed to by the
parties) commence
proceedings seeking declarations from a superior court in relation to whether
the documents are privileged.
(f) If the independent review’s assessment is that a document is
privileged, the claimant is entitled to retain possession of
the document unless
the federal body obtains a declaration that the document is not privileged.
(g) If the independent review’s assessment is that a document is
partly privileged, the claimant should mask those parts that
are assessed to be
privileged, and produce the remainder of the document to the federal body,
unless the claimant seeks declaratory
relief within the required time frame.
(h) If the independent review’s assessment is that a document is not
privileged, the claimant should produce the document to
the federal body, unless
the claimant seeks declaratory relief within the required time frame.
(i) If an independent review process takes place, the parties may agree on
who is to pay the costs of the reviewers but the ordinary
presumption is that
the costs will be shared equally. A federal body may, in its discretion, agree
to meet the entire costs.
(j) Liability for costs for any court proceedings are to be determined by
courts in accordance with their rules.
Proposal 8–15
Federal client legal privilege legislation should
enable superior courts to authorise the extension of a limitation period where a
federal body intends to challenge a privilege claim, if granting the extension
is in the interests of justice.
Proposal 8–16
Federal client legal privilege legislation should
provide that where information which may be subject to a claim for client legal
privilege is stored on the same electronic medium as non-privileged information
that falls within the scope of a Commonwealth search
(a) the executing officer is not precluded from copying or imaging that
medium and causing it to be removed from the premises for
further inspection;
(b) such copying or imaging does not amount to a waiver of privilege.
Proposal 8–17
The Law Council of Australia, the Australian
Federal Police, the Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions, and relevant
professional bodies in consultation with (a) federal bodies that
possess search and seizure powers and (b) computer forensic experts,
devise a set of guidelines to
cover the resolution of client
legal privilege claims in respect of electronically-stored information (The ESI
Guidelines). The ESI
Guidelines should be adaptable for use at searches of
premises of lawyers and accountants, other premises and searches of the person,
and should be provided to persons at the time a Commonwealth search warrant is
executed. The ESI Guidelines should, as far as possible,
be consistent with the
processes for dealing with the resolution of privilege claims in respect of
information in paper form.
Proposal 8–18
Federal bodies with coercive information-gathering
powers—the exercise of which raise, or are likely to raise, the issue of
the application of client legal privilege—should develop and publish
policies and procedures in relation to managing and resolving
privilege in respect of electronically-stored information. The policies and
procedures should, as far as possible, be
consistent with the processes for
dealing with the resolution of privilege claims in respect of information in
paper form.
Proposal 8–19
The Australian Federal Police and the Law Council
of Australia should revise the
General Guidelines between the Australian
Federal Police and the Law Council of Australia as to the Execution of Search
Warrants on
a Lawyers’ Premises, Law Societies and Like Institutions in
Circumstances where a Claim of Legal Professional Privilege is
(a) refer to the proposed method of making a claim, as set out in the
proposed federal client legal privilege legislation;
(b) allow the claimant an opportunity to agree to an independent review
process to resolve the claim. The process to be adopted should
meet the minimum
requirements set out in Proposal 8–14;
(c) state that the Guidelines apply to any part of non-legal premises that
contain the work space of in-house counsel; and
(d) refer to the procedures for making and resolving claims in respect of
electronically-stored information. (See Proposal 8–17).
Proposal 8–20
The Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions,
in consultation with relevant federal bodies that possess search warrant powers,
should amend the following documents which are attached to Commonwealth search
Claims for Legal Professional Privilege: Premises other than those
of Lawyer, Law Society or Like Institution
(Non-Legal Premises Notice) and
Claims for Legal Professional Privilege: Searches of the Person
include the matters referred to in Proposal 8–19 (a), (b) and (d)
Proposal 8–21
The Australian Federal Police, the Australian
Taxation Office and legal and accounting professional bodies should negotiate
concerning the execution of search warrants on the premises of
professional accounting advisers in circumstances where a claim of
client legal
privilege is made. The guidelines should include the matters referred to in
Proposal 8–19 (a), (b), and (d) above.
Proposal 8–22
Federal bodies with coercive information-gathering
powers—the exercise of which raise, or are likely to raise, the issue of
the application of client legal privilege—should develop and publish their
policies and procedures in relation to:
(a) notifying persons that they may wish to seek independent legal advice
concerning their response to a coercive power or, if applicable,
representation; and
(b) making claims for
privilege—which should be consistent with the proposed legislative
procedures.
9. Ensuring Professional
Integrity—Education and Accountability
Proposal 9–1
State and territory legal professional associations
should clarify their professional conduct rules to provide specific guidance
a lawyer’s ethical duties with respect to making and maintaining a
claim of client legal privilege.
Proposal 9–2
State and territory legal
professional associations should clarify their professional conduct rules to
provide that a certification
of documents as privileged—in line with
Proposal 8–3—without reasonable grounds, is an example of conduct
contravenes the relevant professional conduct rules.
Proposal 9–3
University and other legal education programs on
legal ethics and professional responsibility that are accepted for admission
should include specific consideration of the ethical responsibility of
lawyers in relation to making and maintaining a claim of client
legal privilege.
Proposal 9–4
The study of legal ethics requirement found in
state and territory rules and Uniform Admission Rules governing admission to
as a lawyer should include the responsibility of lawyers in relation to
making and maintaining a claim of client legal privilege.
Proposal 9–5
Continuing legal education programs (including
those required for the maintenance of a current practising certificate) should
a regular review of the law and responsibilities in relation to the
making and maintaining of a claim of client legal privilege.
Proposal 9–6
Professional associations should issue to their
members ‘best practice’ notes from time to time, about the law and
responsibilities
in relation to making and maintaining a claim of client legal
1. Introduction to the
Background to the Inquiry
Scope of the Inquiry
Terms of Reference
Matters outside the Inquiry
Terminology
Law reform processes
Advisory Committee
Community consultation
Community consultation documents
Written submissions
Time frame for the Inquiry
Overview of Discussion Paper 73
Focus of proposals
Chapter structure
1. Introduction to the
Background to the
1.1 On 29 November 2006, the Attorney-General of Australia, the Hon Philip
Ruddock MP, asked the Australian Law Reform Commission
(ALRC) to inquire into
the application of legal professional
to the coercive
information-gathering powers of Commonwealth bodies—such as the Australian
Federal Police, the Australian Crime
Commission, the Australian Securities and
Investments Commission (ASIC) and federal Royal Commissions of inquiry.
1.2 Coercive information-gathering powers include the power to compel the
production of documents, the answering of questions, and
the entering of
premises under warrant to search and seize records. To date, the proliferation
of bodies with coercive information-gathering
powers has presented a challenge
to the common law doctrine of client legal privilege. Was the doctrine limited
to curial proceedings,
or did it have wider application? If it did have wider
application, what was the reason for it? In what circumstances should privilege
not apply at all?
1.3 The ALRC has been directed to consider the investigatory functions of
Commonwealth bodies, and whether it is desirable to modify
or abrogate client
legal privilege in order to achieve a more effective performance of those
functions in the public interest. The
ALRC also has been asked to consider
whether it is desirable to clarify all existing federal provisions that modify
or remove client
legal privilege, with a view to harmonisation.
1.4 The ALRC considered client legal privilege in the investigatory context
in its 2002 Report,
Principled Regulation: Federal Civil and Administrative
Penalties in Australia
The ALRC noted the significant
inconsistencies in the availability of the privilege across regulatory statutes
and recommended that
a review be undertaken of federal investigatory powers that
compel the disclosure of information and the operation of client legal
in that context, with a view to providing greater certainty and consistency.
1.5 More recently, the ALRC, the New South Wales Law Reform Commission
(NSWLRC) and the Victorian Law Reform Commission (VLRC) considered
client legal
privilege in the evidentiary context in the 2005 Report,
Uniform Evidence
(ALRC 102).
The Commissions
considered that ‘a dual system of client legal privilege operating in any
one jurisdiction is undesirable’
and recommended that:
The client legal privilege provisions of the uniform Evidence Acts should apply
to any compulsory process for disclosure, such as
pre-trial discovery and the
production of documents in response to a subpoena and in non-curial contexts
including search warrants
and notices to produce documents, as well as court
proceedings.
1.6 The application of client legal privilege in the context of Royal
Commissions arose as an issue of some contention in 2006 in
the inquiry
undertaken by Commissioner Terence Cole QC into the Australian Wheat Board (AWB)
and the Oil-for-Food Programme (the
AWB Royal Commission). Extensive claims for
privilege were asserted by AWB, generating what Commissioner Cole identified as
between the public interest in discovery of the truth which is a prime function
of a Royal Commission, and the fundamental right
of persons to obtain legal
advice under conditions of
confidentiality.
1.7 Commissioner Cole recommended that consideration be given to amending the
Royal Commissions Act 1902
(Cth) to permit the Governor-General in
Council by Letters Patent to determine that, in relation to the whole or a
particular aspect
of the matters the subject of inquiry, client legal privilege
should not apply.
Scope of the
1.8 In relation to the application of client legal privilege to federal
bodies with coercive information-gathering powers, the Terms
of Reference
require the ALRC to consider whether it would be desirable to:
modify or abrogate the privilege in some areas in order to achieve
more effective performance of Commonwealth investigatory functions;
clarify existing provisions for the modification or abrogation of
the privilege, with a view to harmonising them across the Commonwealth
introduce or clarify other statutory safeguards where the privilege
is modified or abrogated, with a view to harmonising them across
Commonwealth statute book.
1.9 The Terms of Reference also direct
the consideration of ‘any related matter’. This provides an
opportunity—to
a limited extent—to consider issues of a broader
nature than those specifically enumerated.
1.10 While the Inquiry is focused on client legal privilege in the context of
federal agencies with coercive powers, any modification
or abrogation will have
wider implications because of the potential for flow-on effects in the domain of
legal advice. At the point
in time when a person is seeking legal advice it will
usually not be known whether, at some possible future time, that advice may
subject to a coercive investigatory power. The wider implications also stem from
the fact that many coercive powers are exercisable
against persons who are not
necessarily suspected of any wrongdoing, but are believed to have information
that may assist an agency
in its investigation.
1.11 The exercise of coercive information-gathering powers can generate
complex questions in particular investigations. There may
be multiple and
parallel regulatory or investigatory proceedings. The HIH transactions, for
example, were subject to investigation
or inquiry by ASIC, the Australian
Prudential Regulation Authority (APRA) and eventually a Royal
Commission.
1.12 One particular matter that was raised in the Issues Paper in this
Client Legal Privilege and Federal Investigatory Bodies
concerned whether client legal privilege should arise in the context of legal
advice on taxation matters when given by accountants.
This prompted a number of
responses and is considered in detail in this Discussion Paper.
Matters outside the
1.13 In this Inquiry, the ALRC is not conducting an evaluation of the
appropriateness or otherwise of federal coercive information-gathering
themselves.
1.14 The Terms of Reference limit the ALRC’s Inquiry to the application
of client legal privilege in federal investigations
and do not extend to a
consideration of client legal privilege in court
proceedings.
Such claims were the
subject of consideration in ALRC 102. The Uniform Evidence Bill has been
approved by the Standing Committee
of Attorneys-General and is on the agenda for
the current parliamentary
1.15 Consideration of client legal privilege in the context of federal
investigations, however, does naturally prompt a consideration
of the privilege
in its wider jurisprudential context. This was evident in a number of
submissions, where comments were made about
the way the doctrine operated more
generally—for example the extent to which copies of documents are
considered to be privileged,
the application of the Uniform
Evidence Act
provisions to the Administrative
Appeals Tribunal.
comments were made, they are noted at relevant points in this Discussion
Terminology
Client legal privilege
1.16 Although the Terms of Reference use the phrase ‘legal professional
privilege’, the ALRC preferred the term ‘client
privilege’ for the Issues Paper and this Discussion Paper. This is the
manner in which this privilege is described in
Evidence Act 1995
and reflects the nature of
the privilege as one belonging to the client, rather than the lawyer.
The privilege is commonly described as legal professional privilege, which is
unfortunate, because it suggests that the privilege
is that of the members of
the legal profession, which it is not. It is the client’s privilege, so
that it may be waived by
the client, but not by the
The Daniels Corporation International Pty Ltd v Australian
Competition and Consumer Commission
quoted the words of Advocate-General Slynn in the European Court of Justice,
which reiterated the concept of the privilege
as one focusing upon the client:
‘whether it be described as the right of the client or the duty of the
lawyer, this principle
has nothing to do with the protection or privilege of the
1.18 When client legal privilege is discussed, both in judgments and in
scholarly literature, various terms are used in relation to
the kind of
‘legal’ relationships that invoke the privilege—such as those
involving barristers, solicitors, attorneys,
legal practitioners, and so on.
Section 117
of the uniform Evidence Acts uses the expression
‘lawyer’, which is defined as including a barrister or solicitor.
1.19 In ALRC 102, the ALRC, NSWLRC and VLRC rejected a requirement for a
practising certificate to qualify for the
consistently with the
decision in the ACT Court of Appeal in
Commonwealth v
‘lawyer’ will be used for the purposes of this
Inquiry—including, unless specifically stated, lawyers with
practising certificates.
Law reform processes
1.20 A key aspect of ALRC procedures is the establishment of an expert
Advisory Committee, or ‘reference group’, to assist
with the conduct
of ALRC Inquiries.
1.21 Advisory Committees provide advice and assistance to the ALRC, and have
particular value in helping the ALRC to identify the
key issues and determine
priorities, providing quality assurance in the research, writing and
consultation processes, and assisting
with the development of proposals and
recommendations for reform as the Inquiry progresses. Ultimate responsibility
for the Report
and recommendations, however, remains with the Commissioners of
1.22 The membership of the Advisory Committee for this Inquiry includes
judicial officers from a number of federal and state courts,
corporate counsel,
regulators, legal practitioners and academics with expertise in the area. The
full membership is detailed in the
List of Participants at the front of this
publication.
1.23 The Advisory Committee met for the first time on 15 March 2007, to
consider the questions to be included in the Issues Paper.
The Advisory
Committee met for the second time on 26 July 2007, to consider the proposals
contained in this Discussion Paper. A third
(and final) meeting will be held
before the completion of the final Report, to consider the draft recommendations
for reform.
consultation
1.24 One of the most important features of ALRC inquiries is the commitment
to widespread community
consultation.
The ALRC maintains
an active program of direct consultation with stakeholders and other interested
parties throughout every Inquiry.
The nature and extent of this engagement are
normally determined by the subject matter of each reference. While some areas
seen to be narrow and technical, and of interest mainly to experts, other
ALRC inquiries involve a significant level of interest
and involvement from the
general public and the media.
1.25 The Terms of Reference for this Inquiry indicate that the ALRC
‘will identify and consult with relevant stakeholders’.
In addition,
under the provisions of the
Australian Law Reform Commission Act 1996
(Cth), the ALRC ‘may inform itself in any way it thinks fit’ for
the purposes of reviewing or considering anything that
is the subject of an
1.26 The ALRC has developed a consultation strategy for this Inquiry that
encourages participation and input from a wide spectrum
of stakeholders. To
date, the ALRC has conducted 36 consultation meetings (many of them involving a
number of participants) including
former Royal Commissioners, judges, lawyers,
community legal centres, representative bodies of lawyers and tax advisers,
investigatory bodies, and academics. A full list of consultations is set
out in Appendix 3.
1.27 The ALRC’s commitment to widespread community consultation also
has a geographic dimension. Although the ALRC is based
in Sydney, in recognition
of the national character of the Commission, consultations have been conducted
in other states and territories
during the Inquiry.
consultation documents
1.28 The ALRC’s standard operating procedure is to produce two
community consultation documents—an Issues Paper and a
Paper—before proceeding to a final report with recommendations for reform.
Each document invites submissions in
relation to specific questions—in the
Issues Paper; and proposals—in the Discussion Paper.
1.29 IP 33 was organised into seven chapters with 31 questions. It included a
review of the current state of federal law in relation
to coercive
information-gathering powers of federal investigatory bodies, including Royal
Commissions; claims of client legal privilege
in response; as well as a review
of the over 40 investigatory bodies themselves. Five hundred hard copies and 56
CD copies of IP
33 were distributed.
1.30 This Discussion Paper contains a more detailed treatment of the issues,
and indicates the Inquiry’s current thinking in
the form of specific
reform proposals.
submissions
1.31 This Inquiry has strongly encouraged interested persons and
organisations to make written submissions to help advance the process
developing recommendations. To date, the ALRC has received 76 written
submissions. Lists of the submissions are set out in Appendix
1.32 Nearly all of the submissions received so far have been in response to
IP 33, addressing the issues and questions raised in that
paper and, in the case
of federal investigatory bodies, also addressing questions specifically put to
them by the ALRC concerning
their use of their particular coercive
information-gathering powers and their approach to privilege issues. Only two
submissions
have been designated as confidential, although some agencies
indicated that parts of their submissions should be treated as confidential.
1.33 Submissions were received from: federal investigatory bodies; individual
lawyers; groups of companies or persons affected by
the exercise of coercive
information-gathering powers—for example, QBE Insurance Group and the
Australian Institute of Company
Directors; groups representative of persons
affected by the exercise of coercive information-gathering powers—such as
legal centres and legal aid bodies; bodies representing particular
groups of lawyers—such as the Australian Corporate Lawyers
Association;
bodies representative of professional groups of lawyers and
accountants—such as the Law Council of Australia,
the New South Wales Bar
Association, NSW Young Lawyers, the Taxation Institute of Australia and the
Institute of Chartered Accountants;
academics and law students.
1.34 The length of submissions varied considerably, from short contributions
singling out specific areas of the law or practice for
comment, to long
expository submissions prepared on behalf of representative bodies—for
example those of the Law Council of
Australia, the Institute of Chartered
Accountants and the New South Wales Bar Association. Three submissions were from
teams of pairs
of law students who were selected as the 2007 finalists for the
Kirby Cup Law Reform
competition.
1.35 With the release of this Discussion Paper, the ALRC once again invites
individuals and organisations to make submissions to the
Inquiry prior to the
release of the final Report.
1.36 There is no specified format for submissions.
Although not essential, the ALRC prefers electronic communications. The ALRC
accept gratefully anything from handwritten notes and emailed dot-points,
to detailed commentary and comprehensive scholarly analyses
concerning client legal privilege. Submissions can be made by contributing
comments online at the ALRC’s
The ALRC also accepts
confidential submissions.
1.37 The time frame for the Inquiry is set by the Terms of Reference and the
necessity to embark upon a thorough and staged process
of consultation. The ALRC
appreciates that the tight deadline for making submissions places considerable
pressure upon those who
wish to participate in the Inquiry and acknowledges the
considerable amount of work undertaken by those who have contributed to the
consultative process to date.
1.38 The time frame for
making submissions in response to the proposals in this Discussion Paper is
similarly strict—once again
the pressure this puts on those wishing to
participate is acknowledged openly. A number of submissions in response to the
Paper—including from key stakeholders—were received after the
closing date. Given the deadline for delivering the final
Report to the
Attorney-General and the need to consider fully the submissions received in
response to this Discussion Paper, all
submissions must be submitted on
1.39 It is the invaluable work of participants that enriches the whole
consultative process of ALRC Inquiries. The quality of the
outcomes is assisted
greatly by the understanding of contributors in needing to meet the deadline
imposed by the reporting process
itself. This Inquiry is no exception.
In order to ensure
consideration in the forthcoming final report,
submissions addressing the
proposals in this Discussion Paper must reach the ALRC by Thursday 1 November
. Details about how to make a submission are set out at the front of
this publication.
Time frame for the
1.40 Under the Terms of Reference, the ALRC is required to report to the
Attorney-General by 3 December 2007.
1.41 Both IP 33 and this Discussion Paper may be obtained free of charge in
hard copy or on CD from the ALRC or may be downloaded
free of charge from the
ALRC’s website:
www.alrc.gov.au
1.42 The proposals contained in this Discussion Paper do not represent the
final recommendations of the Inquiry. It is not uncommon
in ALRC inquiries for
there to be some significant changes of approach between the Discussion Paper
and the final Report. If there
are passages in this paper that appear to imply
that definitive conclusions have already been drawn about the final
recommendations,
this is unintended and not meant to inhibit full and open
discussion of policy choices before the Inquiry’s program of research
consultation is completed.
1.43 As mentioned above, the ALRC’s final Report is due to be presented
to the Attorney-General by 3 December 2007. Once tabled
in Parliament, the
Report becomes a public
The final Report will
not be a self-executing document—the Inquiry provides recommendations
but implementation is a matter for
1.44 In recent reports, the ALRC’s approach to law reform has involved
a mix of strategies, including legislation and subordinate
regulations; official
standards and codes of practice; industry and professional guidelines; education
and training programs; and
so on. Although the final Report will be presented to
the Attorney-General, it is likely that some of its recommendations will be
directed to other government and non-government agencies, professional
associations and institutions for action or consideration.
1.45 Finally, it should be noted that in the past the ALRC often drafted
legislation as the focus of its law reform effort. The ALRC’s
practice has
since changed, and it does not produce draft legislation unless specifically
asked to do so in the Terms of Reference
for a particular Inquiry. This is
partly because drafting is a specialised function better left to the
parliamentary experts and
partly because the ALRC’s time and resources are
better directed towards determining the policy that will shape any resulting
legislation. The ALRC has not been asked to produce draft legislation in this
Inquiry, but its final recommendations will specify
the nature of any desired
legislative change.
Overview of
Discussion Paper 73
1.46 The central premise in the proposals is that client legal privilege is a
doctrine of fundamental importance in the common law
and should not be abrogated
or modified except in limited circumstances. In such cases where abrogation is
to occur, it is proposed
that it should be the province of Parliament to
consider—and include expressly in legislation.
1.47 A key theme in submissions was that, to the extent that there was a
problem in relation to client legal privilege in the context
investigatory bodies, it lay in the domain of practice and procedure. If there
were greater transparency, clearer guidelines
and procedures, many of the
present problems could be solved—and a greater framework of co-operation
and trust could be generated,
while still respecting the fundamental principle
of client legal privilege. Many argued that if you remedy the problems in
to practice and procedure—on both sides, client (lawyer) and
federal body—many of the other concerns would be addressed.
1.48 Hence a number of proposals in this Discussion Paper go to the
establishment of a clearer and more consistent framework for the
operation of
client legal privilege in the federal investigatory context.
1.49 Complementing the proposals in relation to procedure are ones that focus
upon the ethical responsibilities of lawyers in the
making and maintaining of
claims by ensuring thorough consideration of client legal privilege in initial
training, admission requirements,
continuing education and professional
accountability.
1.50 This Discussion Paper is organised into nine chapters. Proposals for
reform are not spread evenly throughout. Some chapters provide
mainly contextual
or background material, which did not lend itself to specific reform proposals.
Other chapters are more focused
on the technical aspects of the law and practice
and procedure—it is in these chapters that the reform proposals are mainly
1.51 Chapter 2 considers the rationale for client legal privilege in light of
the submissions and consultations received in response
1.52 Chapter 3 describes the current state of the law in relation to client
legal privilege under the common law and the
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth)—when it can be claimed; when it cannot; and when it may be
waived or abrogated. The chapter also includes a consideration
doctrines in a comparative and international context. The chapter then considers
the operation of the fraud and crime
exception to the privilege and the
application of the privilege to corporations.
1.53 Chapter 4 provides an overview of the investigatory and associated
functions of federal bodies that have coercive information-gathering
powers, and the nature of those powers. The bodies discussed include those
nominated in the Terms of Reference as well
as a number of other federal
agencies and departments. Where the information is available, the chapter
addresses the frequency with
which federal bodies use coercive powers and their
policies in this regard.
1.54 Chapter 5 considers the law on client legal privilege in the specific
context of federal investigations. Legislative provisions
that abrogate, modify
or preserve the privilege, and significant cases dealing with the application of
the privilege, are discussed.
This chapter contains proposals aimed at achieving
greater clarity in the law on the application of privilege to federal coercive
information-gathering powers. It also considers the issue of whether there needs
to be greater consistency in the law on the application
of privilege to those
powers. A key proposal in this chapter is that a statute of general application
be enacted to cover various
aspects of the law and procedure governing client
legal privilege claims in federal investigations.
1.55 Chapter 6 focuses on whether it is desirable to modify or abrogate
client legal privilege in order to achieve a more effective
performance of
federal investigatory functions. The chapter considers some of the problems that
arise from the application of client
legal privilege to federal investigations
and outlines arguments for and against modification or abrogation of the
privilege as a
means of addressing these problems. The chapter proposes a
limited set of circumstances in which abrogation of the privilege is
appropriate,
these being Royal Commissions and investigations where there is a
greater public interest in having all material available, and where
legal advice
is central to the issues under consideration. Chapter 6 also considers the
availability of otherwise privileged material
to government watchdog bodies.
Finally, the chapter considers whether privilege should be extended to
non-lawyers who provide legal
advice to clients.
1.56 Chapter 7 contains proposals about the types of safeguards that might be
put in place if client legal privilege were to be abrogated
or modified. It
considers restrictions on the use of privileged information obtained by
compulsion.
1.57 Chapter 8 discusses a number of issues concerning the practice and
procedure of making and resolving client legal privilege claims.
issues may arise depending on the varying circumstances under which information
can be obtained, the form in which information
is held and from whom the
information is compelled. The chapter considers the respective
obligations of persons the subject of coercive
information-gathering powers, and
the federal bodies exercising those powers. It contains proposals aimed at
achieving transparency,
clarity and uniformity in procedures, as well as
reducing delay.
1.58 Finally, Chapter 9 raises issues concerning ensuring professional
integrity in relation to claims of client legal privilege,
focusing, in
particular, on the role of professional disciplinary proceedings and legal
ethics education. The chapter considers whether
existing disciplinary frameworks
are adequate to deal with alleged abuses of claims of client legal privilege and
whether there is
sufficient training in relation to legal ethics and
professional responsibility, in particular in relation to making claims of
legal privilege.
Hereafter called ‘client legal
privilege’—see section on ‘Terminology’
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Principled Regulation: Federal Civil and Administrative Penalties in
, ALRC 95 (2002).
Law Reform Commission, New South Wales Law Reform Commission and Victorian Law
Reform Commission,
Uniform Evidence Law
the Inquiry into Certain Australian Companies in relation to the UN Oil-for-Food
(2006), [7.66].
Although in formulating proposals in
relation to the practice of making claims of client legal privilege in federal
investigations,
the ALRC draws, by analogy, on the practices of making claims in
the context of discovery obligations in
litigation.
See ‘Case Study:
Uniform Evidence Law (ALRC102, 2005)’, Australian Law Reform Commission,
Annual Report 2006–07
, for a report on the progress of
implementation of the proposals.
Prompted by the decision in
Australian Federal Police v Propend Finance
(1997) 188 CLR 501.
Prompted by the
decision in
Ingot Capital Investments Pty Ltd v Macquarie Equity Capital
Markets Ltd
[2006] NSWSC 530
(2006) 67 NSWLR 91.
Evidence Act 1995
, div 1. The term was also adopted in
the uniform Evidence Acts after the ALRC’s 1985 and 1988 Reports on
: Australian Law Reform Commission,
(1985); Australian Law Reform Commission,
, ALRC 38 (1987).
Baker v Campbell
[1983] HCA 39
, 85 (Murphy J).
Daniels Corporation International Pty Ltd v Australian Competition and Consumer
[2002] HCA 49
(2002) 213 CLR 543.
AM & S Europe Ltd v Commission of the European Communities
QB 878, 913, cited by Kirby J in
The Daniels Corporation International Pty
Ltd v Australian Competition and Consumer Commission
[2002] HCA 49
(2002) 213 CLR 543
Australian Law Reform
Commission, New South Wales Law Reform Commission and Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Uniform Evidence Law
, ALRC 102 (2005),
[14.82]–[14.100]. See further Ch
Vance v McCormack
ACTR 12. The conclusion in
was supported in Australian Law Reform
Commission, New South Wales Law Reform Commission and Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Uniform Evidence Law
, ALRC 102 (2005),
B Opeskin, ‘Engaging the
Public: Community Participation in the Genetic Information Inquiry’
Australian Law
Reform Commission Act 1996
Information on the Kirby Cup is
http://www.alrc.gov.au/events/events/kirbycup/guidelines.htm.
Located at www.alrc.gov.au.
Attorney-General must table the Report within 15 sitting days of receiving it:
Australian Law Reform Commission Act 1996
However, the ALRC has a strong
record of having its advice followed. About 59% of the Commission’s
previous reports have been
fully or substantially implemented, about 29% of
reports have been partially implemented, 4% of reports are under consideration
8% have had no implementation to date: Australian Law Reform Commission,
Annual Report 2005–06
2. Rationale of Client Legal
The need to identify rationale
A range of rationales
Instrumental rationales
Rights-based rationales
Submissions and consultations
Questions posed
Overall justification
Rights analysis
Identifying the real problem
ALRC’s views
2. Rationale of Client Legal
need to identify rationale
2.1 As the Inquiry considers the application of client legal privilege in the
context of federal bodies—and questions of abrogation
modification—it necessarily touches on the underlying justifications of
the doctrine itself. The aspiration of the Inquiry
should be, as Dr Sue McNicol
commented, that ‘the rationale should provide the foundation, the
justification and the explanation
privilege’.
This should
result in ‘a happy marriage between the privilege and its
rationale’,
so that when the privilege is looking to be delimited or extended by the courts,
the rationale can be resorted to as a solid foundation
against which to test the
proposed delimitation or extension. If consistency cannot be achieved between
the proposed delimitation
or extension of the privilege on the one hand and the
enshrined rationale on the other, then a strong case should be made out before
the scope of the privilege is
2.2 The challenge of connecting underlying rationale to contemporary doctrine
is a significant one, as the consequences of a successful
claim of client legal
privilege can be profound. To quote McNicol again:
The effect of a successful claim to privilege is often that information which
may be vital and relevant to the proper administration
of justice is suppressed.
Hence it is important to ascertain whether there are worthwhile rationales
behind each head of privilege
such that each privilege can be defended against
the valid competing claims of the proper administration of justice. It may be
an exploration of the rationales behind each of the existing privileges
leads to the conclusion that the law has gone too far in
protecting certain
interests against interference from the legal process. On the other hand, it may
be decided that the law has not
gone far enough in that there are other
legitimate interests which the law has failed to protect under the head of
privilege. Many
of the conclusions reached will depend upon where one strikes
the balance between the utilitarian philosophy that all relevant information
should be available to legal officials in order to achieve justice properly and
fairly and the libertarian philosophy that individual
rights and interests
should be protected against undue interference from the
2.3 Identifying the relevant rationale for privilege in each particular set
of circumstances may assist in meeting the complementary
concerns that, on the
one hand, client legal privilege is ‘travelling beyond the underlying
rationale to which it is intended
expression’;
and, on the
other, that ‘the underlying rationale is travelling beyond the necessary
application of the
privilege’.
2.4 Questioning rationale also assists the consideration of any reform and
the shape it might take. As Professor Andrew Paizes commented:
How do you apply a legal concept that is the product of an outmoded rationale
and a flawed philosophy to situations which are the
product of new
socio-political realities? Do you adapt the concept to meet the demands of a
changing world by adding patches to its
worn and faded fabric, stretching and
stitching it in ways unimagined by its original designer? Or do you fashion the
material anew,
tailoring it precisely to fit the exigencies of fresh
2.5 A range of rationales has been offered for client legal privilege, all
within an overarching justification of ‘public interest’,
expressed. Interwoven in the ‘public interest’ arguments is the
element of the private interest of clients
in being assured of the
confidentiality of their communications with legal advisers. The threads of
rationale often intertwine and
interlock; different aspects of rationale may be
seen to support claims of client legal privilege in relation to the particular
and communications under consideration at any given
2.6 Chapter 1 of the Issues Paper,
Client Legal Privilege and Federal
Investigatory Bodies
(IP 33), considered arguments for and against client
legal privilege within the broad context of public interest. As the submissions
and consultations—considered further below—strongly endorsed the
retention of the doctrine in the context of federal
investigations, this section
explores the arguments in favour of the doctrine in more detail.
2.7 Client legal privilege has two distinct limbs: ‘advice
privilege’ and ‘litigation privilege’. These are
considered in
detail in Chapter 3. While the limbs have different origins, the arguments in
support have drawn increasingly together.
Arguments in favour of client legal
privilege can be grouped broadly under two separate
headings—‘instrumental rationales’
and ‘rights-based
rationales’.
Instrumental
2.8 Instrumental rationales focus upon the outcome served by the particular
doctrine in question. In the context of client legal privilege,
the broadest
instrumental argument is that client legal privilege is a necessary aspect of
the administration of justice.
High Court in
Grant v Downs
expressed it as follows
The rationale of this head of privilege, according to traditional doctrine, is
that it promotes the public interest because it assists
and enhances the
administration of justice by facilitating the representation of clients by legal
advisers, the law being a complex
and complicated discipline. This it does by
keeping secret their communications, thereby inducing the client to retain the
and seek his advice, and encouraging the client to make a full and
frank disclosure of the relevant circumstances to the solicitor.
The existence
of the privilege reflects, to the extent to which it is accorded, the
paramountcy of this public interest over a more
general public interest, that
which requires that in the interests of a fair trial litigation should be
conducted on the footing
that all relevant documentary evidence is
2.9 The instrumental rationale of the administration of justice is reflected
in a number of sub-themes, principally:
encouraging full and frank disclosure;
encouraging compliance;
discouraging litigation and encouraging settlement; and
promoting the efficient operation of the adversarial
Encouraging full and frank
2.10 The protection of the communications between a client and his or her
lawyer is said to foster a candid relationship. Hence a
client would be
discouraged from making full and frank disclosure of all relevant facts unless
the confidential nature of the communication
were assured. This was expressed in
1833 by Lord Brougham in
Greenough v Gaskell
in this way:
It is out of regard to the interests of justice, which cannot go on without the
aid of men skilled in jurisprudence, in the practice
of the courts, and in those
matters affecting rights and obligations which form the subject of all judicial
proceedings. If a privilege
did not exist at all, everyone would be thrown on
his own legal resources. Deprived of all professional assistance, a man would
venture to consult any skilful person, or would only dare to tell his
counsellor half his case.
2.11 In the High Court of Australia case of
Attorney-General (NT) v
Mason and Brennan JJ commented similarly that:
The raison d’être of legal professional privilege is the furtherance
of the administration of justice through the fostering
of trust and candour in
the relationship between lawyer and
2.12 This rationale suggests, therefore, that by protecting lawyer-client
communications the value and integrity of those communications
is ensured. This
is a predominant theme in discussions of the instrumental rationale of client
legal privilege.
Encouraging compliance
2.13 As clients can obtain the fullest legal advice only where the lawyer is
in possession of all relevant facts, the protection of
communications is said to
encourage greater compliance with the law as the client is in the best position
to be informed as to what
amounts to complying conduct. In
Wilson J stated that:
It is not only a matter of protection of the client. The freedom to consult
one’s legal adviser in the knowledge that confidential
communications will
be safeguarded will often make its own contribution to the general level of
respect for and observance of the
law within the
2.14 The argument is that where clients feel secure that their communications
with their lawyers will be kept confidential, it is
likely to promote the
disclosure of all relevant information and thus permit lawyers to provide legal
advice that encourages the
greatest compliance with the law. Dr Jonathan Auburn
notes the broader social impact of the doctrine in stating that:
The rationale is concerned with many benefits beyond those accruing to the
client. Society benefits through, for example, increased
compliance with the
law, greater efficiency for attorneys in the adversary system, an easing of the
burden on courts and, arguably,
greater accuracy of
fact-finding.
Discouraging litigation or encouraging
2.15 It is sometimes suggested that litigation is avoided if all facts are
placed before the legal adviser. Conversely, litigation
is increased if the
client ‘cautiously avoids any statement except that which he thinks will
support his cause’.
2.16 In suggesting that the object of fostering the administration of justice
was a wider notion than the demands of the adversarial
system in judicial and
quasi-judicial proceedings, Wilson J in
Baker v Campbell
The perfect administration of justice is not confined to legal proceedings. The
object and indeed the result of consulting a solicitor
will often be the
settlement of a dispute which otherwise may have had to be fought out in court.
The fostering of a professional
relationship which obviates recourse to
litigation is very much in the public
2.17 The settlement of disputes is dependent on successful negotiations,
requiring ‘a fully briefed lawyer who can give the
client a frank
assessment of his or her prospects in
Promoting the efficient operation of the
adversarial system
2.18 While the first limb of client legal privilege—the advice
limb—has emphasised the ‘trust and candour’
argument, the
litigation limb has emphasised the ‘protection of the brief’,
ensuring the confidentiality of the information
(brief) of each party from
disclosure to the other side.
This is considered fundamental to the effective operation of the accusatorial or
adversarial system itself.
Roskill LJ explained in
Causton v Mann Egerton (Johnsons) Ltd
So long as there is an adversary system, a party is entitled not to produce
documents which are properly protected by privilege if
it is not to his
advantage to produce them, and even though their production might assist his
adversary if his adversary or his solicitor
were aware of their contents, or
might lead the court to a different conclusion from that to which the court
would come in ignorance
2.19 This logic is also reflected in the ‘work-product’ aspect of
the privilege doctrine in the United States. This was
referred to by the New
South Wales Court of Appeal in
Woods (t/as Turner Freeman) v
During the hearing Handley JA referred to a passage in an article on
‘Discovery of Documents’ … [where it was said
a party’s solicitor can secure useful material, not by his own efforts,
but simply by raiding that secured
by the solicitor for the opposing party, then
neither will have much incentive to individual diligence in gathering together
material, at least before the trial. As Maguire once said ‘…we
must not let the drones sponge upon the busy bees. Otherwise
it would not be
long before all lawyers became drones.’: JM McGuire
Evidence: Common
Sense and Common Law
Chicago, Foundation Press, 1947 at 91.’
That is entirely apt and while it expresses no principle of law it is good
sense. Solicitors should not, as a general rule, be permitted
to secure by
subpoena the fruits of the labour of other solicitors, thereby avoiding the
necessity to undertake for themselves the
burden of securing evidence for
presentation at trial, particularly where there is a readily available source
which involves the
invasion of no-one’s
2.20 The privilege was extended beyond the communications between the lawyer
and the client to cover third party communications obtained
as ‘part of
the brief’,
brief in action’,
connected to litigation. It was considered ‘necessary’ to prepare
the brief properly; were it otherwise, ‘it
would be impossible to employ a
solicitor to obtain the evidence and information necessary to support a
An overarching rationale
2.21 While there are particular arguments for each of the two limbs of
privilege, there are common elements of justification that
may be seen to
comprise one overarching rationale. In
Carter v The Managing Partner,
Northmore Hale Davy and Leake
), for example, Brennan CJ
expressed the ‘the basic justification for allowing the privilege’,
as ‘the public interest
in facilitating the application of the rule of
2.22 As McNicol notes, the arguments in support of each limb have been
increasingly conflated, with the result that:
one is left with a broad rationale which furthers and promotes both the
administration of justice and an effective adversary system
of litigation. Legal
professional privilege is said to achieve both these objectives by, first
fostering candour and trust in the
lawyer-client relationship, and secondly,
protecting the information of each party from disclosure to the other
2.23 This conflation or blurring of the distinction between the limbs is
Pratt Holdings Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Taxation
where Stone J indicated that the advice limb of privilege could extend to
third party communications.
If … the policy implicit in the rationale for legal professional privilege
is not to be subverted, the dominant purpose criterion
must be applied
recognising that the situations in which people need legal advice are
increasingly complex and that the client may
need the assistance of third party
experts if he or she is to be able to instruct the legal adviser
appropriately.
Distinguishing the limbs
2.24 Notwithstanding this blurring of the rationales for each limb under a
broad instrumental justification, arguments still arise
that express the limbs
in distinct terms—particularly in the consideration of third party
communications. As Pincus J explained
Dingle v Commonwealth Development
Bank of Australia
—decided before
if the rationale
of client legal privilege is the preservation of confidentiality of
communications between clients and their lawyers,
then there are difficulties in
justifying the protection of third party communications:
The difficulty about this body of doctrine, in so far as it protects
communications other than between solicitor and client, is simply
that it is not
defensible as preserving the confidentiality of communications between solicitor
and client. For that reason, the
relevant rules may, in the end, be held to be
more soundly based on a separate and narrower principle, namely that a party is
in general bound to reveal to the court statements taken from witnesses and
the like for the purposes of litigation. … That
principle was expressed by
James LJ in
Anderson v Bank of British Columbia
(1876) 2 Ch D 644
‘… that as you have no right to see your adversary’s brief,
you have no right to see that which comes into
existence merely as the materials
for the brief’.
2.25 Statements such as these suggest separate rationales for the two limbs
of the doctrine, rather than one blended rationale and
that client legal
privilege ‘properly so called’ should be distinguished from the
question of protecting communications
which have come into existence for the
purpose of litigation.
Public Transport Authority of Western Australia v Leighton
Contractors Pty Ltd
the Court of Appeal of Western Australia considered whether the two limbs of
privilege expressed different rationales.
2.27 The issue arose in the context of litigation over a contract for the
construction of a railway by Leighton Contractors Pty Ltd.
The Public Transport
Authority (PTA) engaged the Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) to produce a
table that was relevant to a
‘rise and fall’ provision. The
PTA’s solicitors obtained witness statements from ABS employees. The
relevant documents
sought through discovery concerned communications between the
PTA’s solicitors and ABS or its solicitors and internal communications
between ABS employees for the purpose of preparing witness statements for the
proceedings. The claim for privilege related to draft
statements of witnesses
and communications concerning them.
2.28 A central issue was whether such documents lay outside the scope of
client legal privilege. The PTA submitted that the rationale
for the two
categories of privilege was different and, in consequence, that confidentiality
was not a necessary condition of litigation
2.29 In considering this submission, the Court of Appeal noted that
‘the High Court has yet to make clear whether litigation
privilege has an
existence and rationale distinct from advice
privilege’.
2.30 While there was prior authority in Western Australia that had suggested
that litigation privilege did not require that communications
independent witness and the lawyer be
confidential,
the Court of
Appeal referred to the ‘numerous general statements’ which were
‘to the effect that the privilege
only attached to confidential
communications’.
2.31 In reviewing the arguments in the case, the Court of Appeal commented
is recognised in this
different rationale to that of advice
privilege’.
2.32 The Court referred to two Canadian cases that had quoted with approval
comments from a lecture by RJ Sharpe on claiming privilege
in the discovery
process, distinguishing the two limbs of privilege:
… the rationale for solicitor-client privilege is very different from that
which underlies litigation privilege …
Litigation privilege aims to facilitate a process (namely, the adversary
process), while solicitor-client privilege aims to protect
a relationship
(namely, the confidential relationship between a lawyer and a
2.33 In support of the width of litigation privilege, the Court of Appeal
referred to the ‘lawyer’s brief’ rule,
protecting the
lawyer’s preparation of a client’s case, linking the ‘reason
for the rule’ to the adversarial
proceeding. This ‘reason’ was
described as the
‘rationale’.
2.34 Considering each limb of client legal privilege as against its
particular background may provide a useful basis for comparison
of the doctrine
in its common law form with similar or analogous doctrines in the civil law.
This is considered further in Chapter
Rights-based
2.35 The language of ‘rights’ increasingly has appeared in
discussions, both judicial and academic, concerning client
legal privilege. This
arises both in terms of privacy rights and rights of access to justice.
Protecting privacy
2.36 One thread in discussions of rationale places emphasis on the privacy of
the client against intrusion by, for example, the state.
This can be seen in the
judgment of Murphy J in
Baker v Campbell
The client’s legal privilege is essential for the orderly and dignified
conduct of individual affairs in a social atmosphere
which is being poisoned by
official and unofficial eavesdropping and other invasions of privacy. The
individual should be able to
seek and obtain legal advice and legal assistance
for innocent purposes, without the fear that what has been prepared solely for
that advice or assistance may be searched or seized under warrant. Denying the
privilege against a search warrant would have a minimal
effect in securing
convictions but a major damaging effect on the relationship between the legal
profession and its clients. It would
engender an atmosphere in which citizens
feel that their private papers are insecure and that relationships they
previously thought
confidential are no longer safe from police intrusion. As
Douglas J stated in
Couch v United States
, ‘The constitutional
fences of law are being broken down by an ever-increasingly powerful Government
that seeks to reduce every
person to a
2.37 A focus on the importance of client legal privilege in protecting the
comment of Wilson J in
Baker v Campbell
, that ‘the adequate protection according to law of
the privacy and liberty of the individual is an essential mark of a free
2.38 The concern for privacy goes beyond the protection of the confidential
relationship of lawyer and client to protecting the individual
from intrusion
from state agencies. As Deane J commented in
Baker v Campbell
[The principle of client legal privilege] represents some protection of the
citizen—particularly the weak, the unintelligent
and the ill-informed
citizen—against the leviathan of the modern state. Without it, there can
be no assurance that those in
need of independent legal advice to cope with the
demands and intricacies of modern law will be able to obtain it without the risk
of prejudice and damage by subsequent compulsory disclosure on the demand of any
administrative officer with some general statutory
authority to obtain
information or seize documents.
2.39 The protection of the privacy of the lawyer also was identified in
Woods (t/as Turner Freeman) v
where the New South
Wales Court of Appeal cited a passage from the United States case of
Historically, a lawyer is an officer of the court and is bound to work for the
advancement of justice while faithfully protecting
the rightful interests of his
clients. In performing his various duties, however, it is essential that a
lawyer work with a certain
degree of privacy, free from unnecessary intrusion by
opposing parties and their counsel. Proper preparation of a client’s
demands that he assemble information, sift what he considers to be the relevant
from the irrelevant facts, prepare his legal
theories and plan his strategy
without undue and needless interference. That is the historical and the
necessary way in which lawyers
act within the framework of our system of
jurisprudence to promote justice and to protect their clients’
Protecting access to justice
2.40 The decision in
signalled that the doctrine of client legal privilege in Australia was not
confined to judicial and quasi-judicial proceedings—and
hence was more
than ‘a mere rule of
Since then, the
trend in Australian cases has been to include the language of
‘rights’ in speaking of the rationale of
client legal privilege.
Baker v Campbell
, for example, Deane J commented that:
the general and substantive principle underlying legal professional privilege is
of fundamental importance to the protection and
preservation of the rights,
dignity and equality of the ordinary citizen under the law in that it is a
precondition of full and unreserved
communication with his
J echoed this in describing client legal privilege as ‘not a mere rule of
evidence but … a substantive and fundamental
principle’.
2.43 The common thread in such judgments is that client legal privilege plays
a role in enforcing rights, rather than being a right
in itself. In this way it
is facilitative of rights, or as Toohey J commented in the
‘of fundamental importance to the protection and preservation of the
right, dignity and equality of the ordinary citizen
Such statements are
also echoed in comments of Commissioner Cole in the AWB Royal Commission, in
describing ‘the fundamental
right of persons to obtain legal advice under
conditions of
confidentiality’.
2.44 The statement in the European Court of Justice case,
Europe Ltd v Commission of the European Communities
), that privilege may be seen as ‘a practical guarantee of
fundamental, constitutional or human
is often cited in
discussions of rationale.
manner in which privilege acts as such a guarantee is explained in the judgment
of Toulson J in
General Mediterranean Holdings v
In summary, the common law (1) recognises the right to legal confidentiality
which arises as between a person and his legal adviser
(save where the client is
trying to use the relationship for an unlawful purpose) as a matter of
substantive law, and (2) regards
it as a right of great constitutional
importance, because it is seen as a necessary bulwark of the citizen’s
right of access
to justice whether as a claimant or defendant. Legal
professional privilege is an attribute or manifestation of that right. It is
also, as Lord Taylor CJ said in
R v Derby Magistrates’ Court, ex p B
[1995] UKHL 18
[1995] 4 All ER 526
[1996] AC 487
much more than an ordinary rule of
evidence, being considered a fundamental condition on which the administration
of justice rests.
2.45 The analysis of client legal privilege in terms of a right of access to
justice de-emphasises the distinction between the advice
and litigation limbs of
the common law doctrine. For example, in
, in searching for a
rationale that linked both limbs of the doctrine, McHugh J commented
By protecting the confidentiality of communications between lawyer and client,
the doctrine protects the rights and privacy of persons
including corporations
by ensuring unreserved freedom of communication with professional lawyers who
can advise them of their rights
under the law and, where necessary, take action
on their behalf to defend or enforce those rights. The doctrine is a natural, if
not necessary, corollary of the rule of law and a potent force for ensuring that
the equal protection of the law is a
the High Court used the term
‘right’ but explained it in the sense of an
‘immunity’,
evident in the joint judgment of Gleeson CJ, Gaudron, Gummow and Hayne JJ:
Legal professional privilege is not merely a rule of substantive law. It is an
important common law right or, perhaps, more accurately,
an important common law
immunity. It is now well settled that statutory provisions are not to be
construed as abrogating important
common law rights, privileges and immunities
in the absence of clear words or a necessary implication to that
2.47 Similarly, McHugh J also noted that:
Legal professional privilege describes a person’s immunity from compulsion
to produce documents that evidence confidential
communications about legal
matters made between a lawyer and client or between a lawyer and a third party
for the benefit of the
client. The immunity also protects the disclosure of
documents that record legal work carried out by the lawyer for the benefit of
client, such as research memoranda. The immunity embodies a substantive legal
A right in itself
Kirby J progressed from speaking of client
legal privilege as a doctrine that was protective of rights (as in
to describing it in
terms of itself a right:
In so far as this Court has dealt with the topic of legal professional
privilege, save for
, it has consistently emphasised the importance
of the privilege as a basic doctrine of the law and a ‘practical guarantee
fundamental rights’, not simply a rule of evidence law applicable to
judicial or quasi-judicial proceedings. It has been increasingly
accepted that
legal professional privilege is an important civil right to be safeguarded by
the law. Of course, derogations appropriate
to the needs of a democratic society
may be contemplated. However, vigilance is required against accidental and
unintended erosions
of the right.
Legal professional privilege is also an important human right deserving of
special protection for that
2.49 Similarly, in
R (Morgan Grenfell & Co Ltd) v Special Commissioner
of Income Tax
Morgan Grenfell
Lord Hoffman spoke in terms of
‘human rights’, describing client legal privilege as ‘a
fundamental human right long
established in the common
2.50 International covenants may provide an avenue for analysis in terms of
human rights. Article 14 the
International Covenant on Civil and Political
provides for basic minimum rights to an accused; and articles 6 and 8
European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental
provide for the right to a fair trial and the right to respect for
private and family life.
2.51 Some common law jurisdictions also have superimposed Bills or Charters
of Rights upon the common law. These may provide an avenue
for rights-based
analyses of client legal privilege, directly or indirectly. So, for example,
section 10(b)
of the Canadian
Charter of Rights and Freedoms
right ‘on arrest or detention … to retain and instruct
Similarly, the
Bill of Rights Act 1990
of New Zealand provides the right of access to a
lawyer and the right to representation; and in Hong Kong, client legal privilege
is protected as a constitutional right under the
In Victoria, the
Charter of Human Rights and Responsibilities 2006
provides that a person
has the right not to have his or her privacy or correspondence unlawfully or
arbitrarily interfered with;
a right to a fair hearing and to communicate with his or her lawyer in criminal
proceedings.
Consequences of rights analysis
2.52 Characterising client legal privilege as a doctrine fundamental to the
common law, using the language of ‘rights’,
may be seen to have two
consequences: first, its application is not restricted to court proceedings;
and, second, it cannot be overridden
except by the clear language of parliament
to that effect. This was the essence of the Australian decisions in
and then in
—but it has
the potential to go much
2.53 Where client legal privilege is seen as a principle or tenet of the
common law, it is, as such, amenable to re-interpretation,
modification and
abrogation by statute. Where it is seen as a civil or human right, there is, as
McNicol argues, potentially a radical
shift in thinking towards a
‘rights-based’
2.54 The rights analysis may have particularly significant consequences in
relation to questions of
abrogation.
Once Lord Hoffmann
Morgan Grenfell
described client legal privilege as a human right,
McNicol considered that he had ‘locked himself in’ to the view that
client legal privilege is ‘virtually immutable or
untouchable’.
When a court
has to consider the issue of abrogation, it therefore has ‘a stark
It could start with a concentration on the common law human right that is now
said to be the basis of legal professional privilege
or it could start with a
focus on the words of the statute and the overall purpose of the legislation.
… [However] this latter
task … is both redundant and artificial if
the court has started with the proposition that legal professional privilege is
a fundamental human right.
2.55 A human rights approach also raises the issue of the application of the
doctrine to corporations. As McNicol argues,
if the instrumental rationale of encouraging candour and trust in the
lawyer-client relationship is the favoured rationale, then
corporations should be entitled to the benefit of legal professional privilege
… If, however, the human right
rationale for privilege is treated as the
predominant rationale, it is less clear that corporations should be entitled to
the benefit
of the privilege.
2.56 The introduction of ‘rights’ language into the discussion of
the rationale for client legal privilege has not gone
uncriticised. For example,
, Brennan CJ expressly rejected aspects of the use of rights
terminology, saying ‘I do not subscribe to the view that legal
professional privilege is a fundamental human right which sterilises the
operation of any law which infringes
2.57 In his study of the law and theory of client legal privilege, Auburn
distinguishes between situations where client legal privilege
entrenched in some instrument; and where it is a matter of common law doctrine.
Of the former, he states:
Where a human rights instrument expressly provides for, or has been interpreted
as providing for, a right to legal professional privilege,
or some other form of
professional secrecy which is capable of overriding compulsion by a court or
agency of the executive, then
the privilege may rest on a constitutional or
statutorily entrenched right, and the scope of this constitutional or statutory
may be determined largely by reference to the provision establishing
the right and its associated
jurisprudence.
2.58 In contrast, where there is no constitutional or statutory basis for the
protection of confidential communications between a
client and his or her
lawyer, the nature, scope and rationale of the privilege is found in the common
2.59 Auburn argues that the use of a rights analysis in the common law cases
is not particularly convincing:
The stated approach in cases which decided the extra-curial applicability of the
privilege was to look first to the privilege’s
underlying rationale, and
then apply the rationale to the novel fact situation. However in reality the
exercise was conducted the
other way round. Courts decided that the privilege
should apply to search warrants, and then fashioned a new rationale to justify
this extension. The implicit logic advanced is that once the privilege applied
beyond the threat of disclosure in court, then it
must be a common law
2.60 Further, Auburn maintains that rights-based reasoning is unnecessary to
achieve the expansion of the doctrine and that simply
emphasising the importance
of the rule as a common law doctrine is
There are statements to
the effect that irrespective of statutory human rights provisions, the common
law privilege has, in any event,
developed into a substantive common law
2.61 Auburn suggests that the relationship between human rights legislation
and the common law privilege is far from clear and ‘the
way in which the
common law privilege doctrine fits within [the] new rights framework has never
been adequately settled’.
The elevation of common law doctrine into the constitutional, or rights, arena,
arguably makes issues of abrogation more complex,
Submissions
and consultations
2.62 In IP 33, the ALRC posed a number of questions in relation to the
rationale for client legal privilege in Australia today. It
sought comment on
the following :
What are the best contemporary rationales for the doctrine of client
legal privilege?
Does client legal privilege serve broad ‘public
interests’? What is/are they? Does client legal privilege essentially
amount to a private right?
Do the underlying rationales accord with actual current
Is there a different rationale for particular contexts such as the
context of Commonwealth investigatory bodies, including Royal
Commissions?
2.63 The comments in submissions and consultations
clustered around the following broad areas: support for the continuation of the
doctrine as serving the administration of justice; a consideration of the
doctrine in terms of rights aspects; the question of abolition;
and identifying
where the real problems lie.
justification
2.64 The overwhelming thrust of submissions was in favour of the continuation
of client legal privilege on the basis that it provides
an essential plank in
the administration of justice—protecting the confidentiality of particular
communications with lawyers
and others, thereby facilitating full and frank
disclosure, driving compliance with the law and encouraging settlement of
2.65 Support for retention of the doctrine came from many different groups,
representing a wide range of those involved in matters
that may give rise to
issues of client legal privilege.
Protecting the citizen
2.66 Strong support for the retention of client legal privilege was presented
in submissions from community legal centres and legal
aid groups. A key aspect
of such support was the role of the doctrine in protecting the citizen against
2.67 In its submission, Victoria Legal Aid presented a range of arguments in
support of the doctrine:
Access to justice
(a) Enabling people to seek legal help
[Client legal privilege] serves the public interest in access to justice by
enabling people to seek legal advice or representation.
The High Court has
acknowledged that the relationship between lawyer and client has special
significance because it is part of the
functioning of the law itself. If
[client legal privilege] did not exist, people might litigate without the
benefit of legal advice
or representation. It is generally acknowledged that it
is more difficult for an unrepresented person to access justice. In some
circumstances, the law acknowledges that an unrepresented litigant is unable to
get a fair hearing.
(b) Fostering a candid lawyer client relationship
[Client legal privilege] facilitates access to justice by fostering a candid
relationship between lawyer and client. If [client
legal privilege] did not
exist, clients may not make full and frank disclosure of all relevant facts to
their lawyers. Alternatively,
lawyers may refrain from asking relevant
questions, taking proper file notes or providing written legal advice. As a
result, clients
may not receive appropriate legal advice or adequate
representation.
The Victorian Legal Aid Act recognises the fundamental importance of fostering a
candid lawyer client relationship—by preserving
[client legal privilege]
even where information is disclosed for the purposes of getting a grant of
assistance.
(c) Supporting the adversarial system
[Client legal privilege] facilitates access to justice by supporting the
adversarial system. The system is based on a series of interlocking
balances that ensure all litigants receive a fair hearing. [Client legal
privilege] helps to redress any power imbalance
between the litigants (eg.
between the state and an individual) by allowing the ‘weaker’ party
to get help from a lawyer
without damaging their legal position.
Administration of justice
(a) Facilitating compliance with the law
[Client legal privilege] serves the public interest in the efficient
administration of justice by enabling people to obtain legal
advice before
proceedings are issued. Lawyers have an ethical obligation to encourage
compliance with the law. Facilitating compliance
with the law may reduce the
likelihood of future litigation.
(b) Facilitating early settlement
[Client legal privilege] also assists the administration of justice by
facilitating early settlement. Cases are more likely to settle
when the client
is represented by a fully briefed lawyer. This allows the lawyer to give the
client a frank assessment of their prospects
and advise them about negotiating
an appropriate resolution.
(c) Minimising unrepresented litigants
[Client legal privilege] facilitates the administration of justice by enabling
people to obtain legal representation for court hearings.
This generally
results in hearings that are fairer and are conducted more
efficiently.
2.68 Such arguments were also supported in the submission from National Legal
Aid, which warned that ‘any change to current
protections would undermine
our ability to assure clients that their information will be
protected’.
2.69 Submissions from community legal centres were also strongly in support
of client legal privilege, particularly in relation to
the kinds of clients
served by such centres. The Federation of Community Legal Centres (Vic) Inc, for
example, stated that:
The Federation believes that the client-legal privilege is absolutely essential
to clients obtaining and receiving accurate legal
advice … Client legal
privilege is particularly important given the client base of Federation members.
Community Legal Centres
have expertise in working with excluded and
disadvantaged communities and people from culturally and linguistically diverse
backgrounds.
We provide a bridge between disadvantaged and marginalised
communities and the justice system. We work with the communities of which
a part. We listen, we learn, and we provide the infrastructure necessary for our
communities’ knowledge and experiences
to be heard.
In this framework, it is essential that our clients are prepared to seek advice
from a lawyer and to speak openly and honestly to
their lawyer. If clients feel
that what is discussed may not remain confidential (unless of course disclosure
is authorised by the
client) this may reduce a client’s willingness to
speak openly. In turn, this will affect the quality and accuracy of legal
that lawyers can provide.
2.70 Similarly, Sussex Street Community Law Service commented that:
As a nation with very limited constitutional rights it is important for us to
respect the rights we do have, which provide protection
to the Australian
Client legal privilege has a preventative and curative effect. It allows for
more effective legal advice which would prevent clients
from straying beyond the
limits of the law, creating a more law-abiding society. It also allows for legal
advisers to provide a competent
defence in the case of legal proceedings, the
right to a defence being an essential aspect of our legal
2.71 Others also commented on the important role of client legal privilege in
protecting the citizen and the impact that further erosion
of the doctrine might
have in the federal regulatory context. The New South Wales (NSW) Bar
Association, for example, submitted that:
One of the rationales for the privilege is to maintain some parity between the
citizen and the state
prosecutor. The proposal
to qualify the privilege only in respect of the coercive information-gathering
powers of Commonwealth investigatory
bodies directly undercuts this rationale.
We submit that so direct a challenge to an established basis of the privilege
must discharge
a substantial justificatory onus; in particular in respect of the
Commonwealth investigatory bodies should be the sole
beneficiaries of the loosening of the immunity when they typically enjoy
broad enforcement resources and
2.72 Dr Keith Thompson also argued that the ‘interests of
justice’ are best served by regarding client legal privilege
‘premised at its most fundamental level in concepts of fairness and
equality’, which protect the individual
Corporate compliance
2.73 The key role of client legal privilege in facilitating compliance with
the law was a particular aspect of the doctrine emphasised
in relation to
corporate clients. The Law Council of Australia (Law Council) wished to
the important role lawyers play in encouraging compliance with the law. Since
lawyers owe a paramount duty to the court and the administration
of justice,
they are required to encourage their clients to obey the law. One aspect of this
work, within the corporate sphere, is
assisting the client to comply with
relevant legal regulatory regimes, by ensuring that the client understands the
legal constraints
within which it operates. Most corporations genuinely attempt
to fulfil their legal obligations. Lawyers play an important role in
them to do this by advising on relevant obligations, and helping to detect and
address potential and actual
2.74 The QBE Insurance Group emphasised the role that client legal privilege
plays in relation to ‘the smooth functioning of
the business
community’:
Corporations must have confidence that they can engage with their legal advisers
in an ethical, but also candid and informed, manner
to assess their legal rights
and obligations …
We acknowledge that some corporations have been found to have misused Privilege.
However it is important to recognise that the vast
majority of corporations are
responsible citizens of the business community and should not be penalised for
the actions of a small
2.75 The submission of National Australia Bank Limited and others also
stressed the importance of the doctrine, in saying that ‘the
retention of
[client legal privilege], in principle, is absolutely essential for the
effective operation of Australian
2.76 The Australian Institute of Company Directors suggested that the
question was not the one posed in IP 33 about finding contemporary
for the doctrine:
The issue is whether the doctrine is sound in principle. There are a number of
fundamental legal principles which remain sound and
incontrovertible, no matter
what the circumstances. These include the presumption of innocence, the burden
of proof, the right to
a fair trial and client legal
Expanding regulatory context
2.77 The protection provided by client legal privilege was seen to be all the
more important in the context of the expanding powers
of investigatory bodies.
As Sussex Street Community Law Service commented,
Client legal privilege strengthens the adversarial system under which all
Commonwealth investigatory bodies operate. For our clients,
the adversarial
system has the consequence of setting powerful government bodies against weaker
individuals and it is the legal rights
such as client legal privilege that
prevent these individuals from being mistreated. Client legal privilege has the
effect of balancing
the advantages between parties of contrasting power, and
providing a fairer judicial
2.78 To similar effect is the submission of the Fitzroy Legal Service
the doctrine of client legal privilege is vital to the administration of justice
in the sense of introducing some measure of equality
into the relationship
between the state and individuals through the free dissemination of information
and confidential support of
the individual by the legal practitioner.
The excessive use of power by investigating and prosecuting authorities where
such protections are absent in our view runs contrary
to the rule of law and
administration of justice and should not be abrogated in relation to
individuals.
2.79 The argument that the expansion of regulation increased the need to
retain client legal privilege to foster compliance with the
law is evident in
the submissions of bodies representing different groups of lawyers. For example,
the NSW Bar Association commented
If anything, there is a stronger case for retaining the privilege in the current
legal environment. There is such a proliferation
of statutes and laws that a
citizen (whether corporate or natural person) more than ever needs to be able to
get advice in confidence
as to his, her or its legal rights, whether before
committing to some course of action or after an issue has arisen. The community
also has an interest in the citizen being able to get that advice: a citizen
fully informed of legal rights is more likely to obey
the law or to understand
where he, she or it may have breached the law, reducing the need for enquiries
by investigative agencies
and ultimately reducing the number, length and cost of
cases required to be decided before
2.80 The Corporate Tax Association drew attention to the particular
complexity of taxation law in relation to the need to obtain proper
ensure compliance with the
2.81 The Law Council also commented that:
It is obviously important that a corporate client’s officers feel no
constraints about raising compliance issues with the corporation’s
lawyers. Abrogation of [client legal privilege] would have a chilling effect on
officer/lawyer communications and so render much
more difficult the
corporation’s task of compliance with the huge amount of regulation now
governing corporate behaviour. This
result would not, of course, be in the
interests of either good corporate governance, or the administration of
Federal agency perspective
2.82 A number of the federal investigatory bodies themselves endorsed the
retention of client legal privilege. For example, the Inspector-General
Intelligence and Security commented that:
There are cogent reasons for generally maintaining client legal privilege. While
some of the rationales for privilege given in the
first chapter of Issues Paper
33 are debatable, it is difficult to put aside the rationales of full and frank
disclosure, encouraging
compliance and protecting the fairness of the
adversarial system.
2.83 The Australian Securities and Investments Commission, while submitting
that there may be particular contexts in which client
legal privilege may be
overreached, nonetheless acknowledged the importance of the doctrine:
Although client legal privilege embodies a private ‘right’, its
principal rationale is that it serves the public interest
by promoting the
effective administration of justice by encouraging clients to seek legal advice
and communicate fully and frankly
with their lawyers. Doing so promotes
compliance with the law, reduces the incidence of and encourages earlier and
more effective
resolution of legal
2.84 The Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission (HREOC) strongly
endorsed the doctrine as an aspect of the right to a fair
trial as set out in
article 14(1) of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political
HREOC submits that LPP is fundamental to a client’s right to a fair trial.
Removing this protection is likely to undermine
the confidential nature of the
communication between lawyers and their clients and, accordingly, may impact
upon the information
provided by a client and the quality of advice and/or
representation they receive.
2.85 There were mixed comments on the use of rights terminology with respect
to client legal privilege. For example, the Law Council
considered that:
the difference between defining [client legal privilege] as a fundamental human,
right (applicable to corporations) and defining [client
legal privilege] as a fundamental
right is largely a semantic
one, and is evidence of the convergence of common law and international law
concepts and terminology.
The Law Council considers that there is a strong line
of authority for [client legal privilege] as a fundamental common law right
it is to this authority that the ALRC should have
2.86 However, the Council also commented that:
to view [client legal privilege] as a ‘private right’ is to mistake
the nature and purpose of the privilege. The chief
purpose of [client legal
privilege] is not to confer a right for the benefit of the client, but to
facilitate the administration
2.87 NSW Young Lawyers submitted that ‘while it is accepted that client
legal privilege is a common law and statutory right,
the extent to which it is a
basic human right would appear to be taking it much further than
2.88 The NSW Bar Association commented that the ‘orthodoxy in the
jurisprudence of the High Court’ was that client legal
privilege is
‘a fundamental citizen’s right vested in the client’:
As such, it is a crucial predicate of openness and honesty in the
practitioner-client relationship; and hence throughout the entire
2.89 HREOC endorsed a ‘human rights’ approach to client legal
privilege, arguing that:
Recognition of [client legal privilege] is important for the protection of the
following human rights:
• the right to a fair hearing; and
• the right to defend oneself through legal assistance of one’s own
choosing in the determination of criminal charges.
In protecting these rights, it is also relevant to refer to the following
principles:
• the need to protect confidentiality in all communications between a
lawyer and their client; and
• the need to ensure effective access to legal
2.90 The Office of the Privacy Commissioner emphasised the privacy aspect of
the privilege:
The doctrine of legal professional privilege serves a broad public interest in
protecting the privacy of the client against intrusion
and should only be
modified or abrogated in exceptional circumstances.
2.91 Thompson made a connection between a rights analysis and perceptions of
My sense is that Lord Brougham [in
Greenough v
prefiguring a modern human rights rationale for [client legal privilege] when he
said [it] was necessary in the interests
of justice. Human rights are of course
premised in the notion that all human beings are or ought to be equal before the
law. It has
always been considered difficult for an impecunious or unknown
litigant to succeed before a judicial tribunal. That was true in the
days of the
ordeal; in trial by battle; under the alternative medieval compurgation system;
and under the jury trial system both
before and after jurors became independent.
Courts ever since have necessarily kept an eye on their own credibility. The law
has no majesty if it is not credible. The public
perception of the fairness of a
judicial system makes a marked contribution to its success. Thus where Lord
Brougham spoke of ‘the
interests of justice’, he was pointing at a
generalised need for a public perception of fairness from the judicial system.
In essence the most important question is—will the legal system be
perceived as less fair if [client legal privilege] is abrogated
completely or
adjusted in certain proposed
2.92 Two submissions recommended the abolition of advice privilege, on the
basis that the rationale was the proper functioning of
the adversarial
2.93 Another submission suggested that, while the concept ‘remains
important to the criminal law arena’, ‘its use-by-date
reached in respect of its wholesale application to commercial
transactions’:
The ethical legitimacy of the concept, allied as it is to confidence is too
important to the privacy of communication. Nevertheless,
it seems to me that one
reform possibility involves
of the concept: privilege could be
retained for the purpose of advice and for ‘general’ criminal,
quasi-criminal, family
and administrative law representation, but this might be
balanced by its
prima facie
abrogation for commercial litigation and for
prosecutions by nominated Federal agencies, subject to a right of
‘re-instatement’
upon application to a judge.
The onus could shift to the corporation seeking to justify privilege rather than
the Federal agency seeking to dislodge it. If such
a change were affected, it
would affirm a communal view of justice over liberal rights-based ethics, that
is, of some responsibilities
to disclose over every conceivable right to keep
2.94 Some federal agencies argued for abolition of privilege in relation to
their activities. This will be considered in Chapter 6.
2.95 Many submissions also acknowledged that Royal Commissions may require
different consideration from the everyday operation of
information-gathering powers in other federal investigatory bodies. This is
considered in Chapter 6.
Identifying the real
2.96 A common thread in many submissions was that the problem did not lie
directly with the doctrine itself, but rather, for example,
in the arena of
practice and procedure. It was also commented that the ‘high
profile’ cases, like the AWB Royal Commission,
were not illustrative of
the overall workings of the doctrine.
2.97 In their submission, the National Australia Bank Limited and others
commented that examples like the AWB Royal Commission and
the James Hardie
matter, where specific legislation concerning client legal privilege was
extreme cases and do not justify the view that the public interest in the due
enforcement of federal laws is being detrimentally
affected in a material manner
by the misuse of [client legal privilege]. Whilst they do raise matters that
cannot be easily discounted,
they are extreme cases. [We] suggest that the more
appropriate approach is to find a mechanism to deal with what are in essence
unwarranted,
unprincipled and mischievous uses of claims of [client legal
privilege].
2.98 The NSW Bar Association commented similarly that:
The concerns identified by Commissioner Cole [in the AWB Royal Commission] do
not reflect either a problem conceptually intrinsic
to the privilege
or a pervasive practical misuse of the privilege sufficient to justify
its substantial curtailment or abolition. Rather, the issues
arise from isolated
overambitious claims, which are more effectively addressed through education and
procedural amendment to the
manner in which claims are
2.99 It is the ALRC’s view that the doctrine of client legal privilege
is a fundamental principle of the common law providing
an essential protection
to clients, enabling them to communicate fully and frankly with their lawyers
and those who may lawfully
provide legal advice. The protection of the
confidentiality of such communications facilitates compliance with the law and
to a fair hearing in curial and non-curial contexts, thereby serving the
broad public interest in the effective administration of
2.100 In terms of analysing
client legal privilege in ‘rights’ terms, the ALRC considers that
client legal privilege may
be seen as part of the right of access to a fair
hearing. Its ‘rights’ character may be considered, therefore, not so
much as a right in and of itself, but rather as a right more generally
described, of access to a fair hearing or trial—and,
as a corollary,
access to legal advice. In this character, the doctrine serves the
administration of justice in a broad sense and
protects the rights of citizens
against the state. Client legal privilege then may be seen to be facilitative of
2.101 The two limbs of the privilege doctrine have different origins—or
raisons d’être
, in the sense of something justifying their
existence—which have led to different expressions of the requisite
elements. In
the ALRC’s view, however, the two limbs can be seen to share
a broad rationale in common—in the sense of the fundamental
logical basis for the doctrine. While the two limbs have
rationales, both can be seen today as sub-sets of a broader, overarching
rationale expressive of the administration of justice.
2.102 Insofar as issues of competing public interests (the pursuit of truth
and the protection of client confidences) may be seen
to arise, client legal
privilege may be considered—to a large extent—as already
encompassing a balancing of public interests,
although occasions may arise where
client legal privilege may be abrogated on the basis of some higher public
interest. The ALRC
considers in later chapters when such abrogation may be
2.103 The ALRC agrees with submissions that where perceived problems have
occurred in relation to claims of client legal privilege,
the problem is not
with the rationale of the doctrine, but in the arena of practice and procedure
in general, and arguably ‘mis’-practice
with respect to individuals.
The ALRC puts forward specific proposals in relation to such matters in later
chapters of the Discussion
S McNicol, ‘Implications of the
Human Right Rationale for Legal Professional Privilege—The Demise of
Implied Statutory
Abrogation?’ in P Mirfield and R Smith (eds),
for Colin Tapper
(2003) 48, 65.
Law of Privilege
Grant v Downs
[1976] HCA 63
135 CLR 674
‘Implications of the Human Right Rationale for Legal Professional
Privilege—The Demise of Implied Statutory
Abrogation?’ in P Mirfield
and R Smith (eds),
Essays for Colin Tapper
A Paizes, ‘Towards a Broader
Balancing of Interests: Exploring the Theoretical Foundations of the Legal
Professional Privilege’
South African Law Journal
Australian Law Reform Commission,
, ALRC 26 (1985), p.
Legal Professional Privilege: Law and Theory
(2000), 1; S
McNicol, ‘Implications of the Human Right Rationale for Legal Professional
Privilege—The Demise of Implied
Statutory Abrogation?’ in P Mirfield
and R Smith (eds),
Essays for Colin Tapper
(2003) 48, 48.
Grant v Downs
[1976] HCA 63
(1976) 135 CLR 674
Greenough v Gaskell
[1833] EngR 333
Attorney-General
for the Northern Territory v Maurice
[1986] HCA 80
(1986) 161 CLR 475
S McNicol, ‘Implications of
the Human Right Rationale for Legal Professional Privilege—The Demise of
Implied Statutory
Abrogation?’ in P Mirfield and R Smith (eds),
for Colin Tapper
(2003) 48, 48; J Wigmore,
A Treatise on the
Anglo-American System of Evidence in Trials at Common Law
(3rd ed, 1940),
Baker v Campbell
[1983] HCA 39
(1983) 153 CLR 52
, 95. See also
Carter v Northmore Hale Davey & Leake
(1995) 183 CLR 121, 127–128.
Legal Professional Privilege: Law and Theory
(2000), 13–14
(notes omitted). Reinforcing responsible corporate practice through a culture of
compliance has also been identified
by Professor R Baxt in the context of
an assessment of penalties for breach of continuous disclosure obligations:
R Baxt, ‘Compliance Will
Reduce Penalties for Non-Disclosure’ (2006) 2(5)
Baxt Report
Australian Securities and Investments Commission; Re Chemeq Ltd v Chemeq
[2006] FCA 936.
‘The Privilege of Confidential Communication Between Lawyer and
Client’ (1927–
California Law Review
, 491. Radin
maintains that this is Wigmore’s
Baker v Campbell
[1983] HCA 39
J Hunter, C Cameron
and T Henning,
Litigation I—Civil Procedure
(7th ed, 2005),
McNicol links client legal
privilege with the privilege against self-incrimination and without prejudice
privilege as fundamentally
connected with the accusatorial system itself, hence
being described at times as ‘litigation-based’ privileges: S
Law of Privilege
(1992), 2, also citing M Aronson, J Hunter and
M Weinberg,
Litigation: Evidence and Procedure
(4th ed, 1988), 281. See
Australian Law Reform Commission,
, ALRC 26 (1985),
Mann Egerton (Johnsons) Ltd
[1974] 1 All ER 453
, 460. See also S McNicol,
Law of Privilege
Woods (t/as Turner Freeman) v Hanoldt
(1995) 11 NSW CCR
N Williams,
‘Discovery of Civil Litigation Trial Preparation in Canada’
The Canadian Bar Review
, 44; J Wigmore,
A Treatise on the
Anglo-American System of Evidence in Trials at Common Law
(3rd ed, 1940),
Wheeler v Le Marchant
(1881) 17 Ch D 675
(1887) 12 PD 167
Carter v Northmore Hale Davey & Leake
(1995) 183 CLR 121,
(1992), 48–49; and S McNicol, ‘Implications of the
Human Right Rationale for Legal Professional Privilege—The Demise
Implied Statutory Abrogation?’ in P Mirfield and R Smith (eds),
for Colin Tapper
Pratt Holdings Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Taxation
[2004] FCAFC 122
(2004) 207 ALR 217
[87]. See Ch 3.
Commonwealth Development Bank of Australia
(1989) 91 ALR 239
Public Transport Authority of
Western Australia v Leighton Contractors Pty Ltd
[2007] WASCA
Southern Equities Corporation
Ltd v West Australian Government Holdings Ltd
(1993) 10 WAR
Ibid, [22].
Public Transport Authority of
Western Australia v Leighton Contractors Pty Ltd
[2007] WASCA 151
referring to
Southern Equities Corporation Ltd v West Australian Government
Holdings Ltd
(1993) 10 WAR 1.
particular,
Solosky v The Queen
(1979) 105 DLR (3d) 745
Descôteaux v Mierzwinski
(1982) 141 DLR (3d) 590:
Transport Authority of Western Australia v Leighton Contractors Pty Ltd
[2007] WASCA 151
, [16]; and citing R Sharpe, ‘Claiming Privilege in the
Discovery Process’ in
Law in Transition: Evidence
, LSUC Special
Lectures (1984), 164–165.
Public Transport Authority of Western Australia v Leighton Contractors Pty
[2007] WASCA 151
Baker v Campbell
[1983] HCA 39
(1983) 153 CLR 52
Ibid, 95. See Australian Law
Reform Commission,
, ALRC 26 (1985), [877] and Australian Law
Reform Commission, New South Wales Law Reform Commission and Victorian Law
Reform Commission,
Uniform Evidence Law
, ALRC 102 (2005),
Baker v Campbell
[1983] HCA 39
(1983) 153 CLR 52
Woods (t/as
Turner Freeman) v Hanoldt
(1995) 11 NSW CCR 161.
Hickman v Taylor
[1947] USSC 5
(1946) 329 US
, 510. The decision was described as ‘the seminal decision’ of
the Supreme Court in its development of the work product
doctrine: C Tapper,
‘Discovery of Documents’
Law Quarterly Review
Woods (t/as Turner Freeman) v
(1995) 11 NSW CCR 161
Baker v Campbell
[1983] HCA 39
(1983) 153 CLR
Carter v Northmore Hale Davey
(1995) 183 CLR 121, 132. Auburn criticises the use of
‘evidence’ here, saying that the rule
a rule of evidence,
‘albeit a strong one with a broad reach beyond the doors of the
courtroom’: J Auburn,
Legal Professional Privilege: Law and Theory
(2000), 31–32.
[1983] HCA 39
(1983) 153 CLR 52
Carter v Northmore Hale Davey & Leake
(1995) 183 CLR
Report of the Inquiry
into Certain Australian Companies in relation to the UN Oil-for-Food
(2006), [7.66].
& S Europe Ltd v Commission of the European Communities
[1983] 1 QB 878,
For example,
Northmore Hale Davey & Leake
(1995) 183 CLR 121, 161 (McHugh J);
Goldberg v Ng
[1995] HCA 39
(1995) 185 CLR 83
, 121 (Gummow J);
The Daniels
Corporation International Pty Ltd v Australian Competition and Consumer
[2002] HCA 49
(2002) 213 CLR 543
, [84] (Kirby
General Mediterranean Holdings
[1999] EWHC 832
[1999] 3 All ER 673.
McHugh J drew upon,
, Canadian cases such as
Solosky v The Queen
(1979) 105 DLR (3d)
Descôteaux v Mierzwinski
(1982) 141 DLR (3d) 590.
argues that
has been misread and that it does not support a
rights-based rationale, rather merely shifting the time at which the privilege
be asserted: J Auburn,
Legal Professional Privilege: Law and Theory
(2000), 20.
Carter v Northmore Hale
Davey & Leake
(1995) 183 CLR 121, 161.
The Daniels Corporation
International Pty Ltd v Australian Competition and Consumer Commission
[2002] HCA 49
(2002) 213 CLR 543
, [11] (Gleeson CJ, Gaudron, Gummow and Hayne JJ) [11]; [44]
(Toohey J).
Ibid, [11] (Gleeson CJ,
Gaudron, Gummow and Hayne JJ).
[44] (Toohey J).
AM & S Europe
Ltd v Commission of the European Communities
[1983] 1 QB 878; see above,
The Daniels Corporation
International Pty Ltd v Australian Competition and Consumer Commission
[2002] HCA 49
(2002) 213 CLR 543
, [85]–[86] (Kirby
R (Morgan Grenfell) v Special
Commissioner of Income Tax
[2003] 1 AC 563
See the discussion of these
articles in, eg, J Auburn,
Legal Professional Privilege: Law and Theory
(2000), ch 3, ‘Privilege under the European Convention on Human
Canadian Charter of Rights
and Freedoms
, ss 7, 8, 10(b), 11(c) and 11(d) protect the right to full
answer and defence, the right to counsel, the right against self-incrimination,
the presumption of innocence and the right not to be subject to unreasonable
Jones v Smith
(1999) 169 DLR (4th) 385.
Law of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region
, art 35. See the
consideration of this article in J Chan, ‘Legal Privilege: Is It
Hong Kong Law Journal
Charter of Human Rights
and Responsibilities Act 2006
Baker v Campbell
[1983] HCA 39
(1983) 153 CLR 52.
The Daniels
Corporation International Pty Ltd v Australian Competition and Consumer
[2002] HCA 49
(2002) 213 CLR 543.
McNicol, ‘Implications of the Human Right Rationale for Legal Professional
Privilege—The Demise of Implied Statutory
Abrogation?’ in P Mirfield
and R Smith (eds),
Essays for Colin Tapper
S McNicol, ‘Implications of
the Human Right Rationale for Legal Professional Privilege—The Demise of
Implied Statutory
Abrogation?’ in P Mirfield and R Smith (eds),
for Colin Tapper
(2003) 48, 61.
Ibid, 63. The application
of client legal privilege to corporations is considered in Ch
Carter v Northmore Hale Davey
(1995) 183 CLR 121,
Legal Professional
Privilege: Law and Theory
General Mediterranean Holdings
[1999] EWHC 832
[1999] 3 All ER 673.
Legal Professional Privilege: Law and Theory
(2000), 17.
S McNicol, ‘Implications of the
Human Right Rationale for Legal Professional Privilege—The Demise of
Implied Statutory
Abrogation?’ in P Mirfield and R Smith (eds),
for Colin Tapper
example, Australian Government Office of the Privacy Commissioner,
29 June 2007; QBE Insurance Group,
18 June 2007; K Kendall,
31 May 2007; Victoria Legal Aid,
14 June 2007; National Legal Aid,
13 June 2007;
Taxation Institute of Australia,
15 June 2007;
Australian Government Solicitor,
13 June 2007;
NSW Young Lawyers,
12 June 2007; Australian
Institute of Company Directors,
8 June 2007;
New South Wales Bar Association,
5 June 2007;
Law Society of New South Wales,
1 June 2007;
Federation of Community Legal Centres (Vic) Inc,
5 June 2007; Corporate Tax Association,
4 June 2007; Fitzroy Legal Service,
2007; Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission,
4 June 2007; Law Council of Australia,
4 June 2007; Institute of Chartered Accountants in Australia,
4 June 2007; R Desiatnik,
2007; Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security,
1 June 2007; Sussex Street Community Law Services Inc,
30 May 2007; A Evans,
Victoria Legal Aid,
National Legal Aid,
Victoria Legal Aid,
Sussex Street Community Law
Services Inc,
New South Wales Bar Association,
K Thompson,
7 September 2007.
Council of Australia,
QBE Insurance Group,
18 June 2007. The potential impact of
abrogation in Australia on international business dealings was also noted in a
consultation:
Regulatory lawyers
of Clayton Utz,
Consultation
, Sydney, 15 May
National Australia Bank Limited
and others,
Australian Institute of Company
Sussex Street Community Law
Services Inc,
Fitzroy Legal Service,
New South Wales Bar Association,
Corporate Tax Association,
4 June 2007. See also Taxation Institute of
Law Council of Australia,
4 June 2007. See also National Australia Bank
Limited and others,
Inspector-General of
Intelligence and Security,
Australian Securities and
Investments Commission,
Human Rights and Equal
Opportunity Commission,
Law Council of Australia,
NSW Young Lawyers,
New South Wales Bar
Association,
Human Rights and Equal
Opportunity Commission,
Greenough v Gaskell
[1833] EngR 333
(1833) 39 ER 618.
See above, [2.10].
K Thompson,
7 September
I Turnbull,
3 June 2007; M Wyles,
27 March 2007.
James Hardie
(Investigations and Proceedings) Act 2004
National Australia Bank
Limited and others,
4 June 2007. See also
Australian Institute of Company Directors,
June 2007—the
James Hardie (Investigations and Proceedings) Act
(Cth) ‘was a response to a unique set of circumstances and should
be considered atypical’.
South Wales Bar Association,
5 June 2007.
3. Overview of Client Legal
Introduction
The development of client legal privilege
What is client legal privilege?
Historical background
Client legal privilege today
The common law limbs of privilege
When client legal privilege can be claimed
When client legal privilege can be lost
When client legal privilege is abrogated
The comparative dimension
The law of the professional secret in civil law
Civil law compared with common law
3. Overview of Client Legal
Introduction
3.1 A privilege is essentially a right to resist disclosing information that
would otherwise be required to be
There are several
privileges available at common law and under evidence legislation in Australia,
client legal privilege;
the privilege against self-incrimination;
public interest immunity; and
privileges protecting other confidential
relationships.
3.2 Privileges are not only available as part of the rules of
evidence, but also can apply outside court proceedings as a substantive
wherever disclosure of information may be compelled, including by administrative
Therefore, privilege may
be claimed in the production of documents before a trial (including with respect
to an application for discovery
or the issue of a subpoena), the answering of
interrogatories, the giving of testimony or in the course of an administrative
investigation.
3.3 Client legal privilege is perhaps the most frequently discussed and
claimed privilege. As outlined below, it developed as a common
law protection
and also has been recognised under the uniform Evidence
Key modifications to the
doctrine over time have included the extension of privilege from curial
proceedings to investigative and
administrative
proceedings,
and the shift from a
‘sole purpose’ test
a ‘dominant purpose’ test in relation to the purpose for which the
document was created.
3.4 The operation of the privilege under both the common law and the uniform
Evidence Acts is substantially the
In 2005, the ALRC, the New
South Wales Law Reform Commission and the Victorian Law Reform Commission
conducted a review of the uniform
Evidence Acts, which included a discussion of
client legal privilege, and noted some developments in which the common law
had moved away from the legislative provisions. The final report
Uniform Evidence Law
(ALRC 102), made a number of recommendations
designed to bring the Acts into line with the common
In July 2007, the Standing
Committee of Attorneys-General (SCAG) endorsed a Model Uniform Evidence Bill,
which is based on the
Evidence Act 1995
Evidence Act 1995
with amendments as recommended in ALRC 102. At the time of
writing, the Australian Government had indicated its intention to introduce
relevant amendments to the
Evidence Act 1995
3.5 The privilege provisions of the
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth) apply only
to the adducing of evidence at
In all other situations
the common law rules persist, unless a statute abrogates the privilege in a
particular context.
3.6 This Inquiry is concerned with the interaction between client legal
privilege and the investigatory functions of federal bodies
that have coercive
information-gathering powers.
the common law presently governs the matters being considered in this Inquiry,
this chapter will focus on the common law doctrine,
with more limited mention
made of the
Evidence Act
provisions.
3.7 In ALRC 102, the three commissions recommended that the privilege
provisions of the
Evidence Act
be extended to apply to any compulsory
process for disclosure, such as pre-trial discovery and the production of
documents in response
to a subpoena; and in non-curial contexts including search
warrants and notices to produce documents, as well as court
proceedings.
This recommendation
does not form part of the Uniform Model Evidence Bill, but the ALRC understands
it will be considered by the
SCAG Officers Working Group in the future.
3.8 Although this present Inquiry must consider the law as it currently
stands, if the recommendations in ALRC 102 are adopted then
Evidence Act
provisions will cover some of the types of investigations under
consideration. As noted above, there are not many substantive differences
between the Act and the common law, and the commissions’ recommendations
in ALRC 102 will further harmonise these regimes.
3.9 As such, recommendations made by the ALRC in this Inquiry that are based
on the operation of the common law will apply equally
Evidence Act
should it be extended to operate in federal investigations in the future. The
recommendations in ALRC 102 would not apply the
Evidence Act
to Royal Commissions, which are not bound by the rules of evidence and
The development of
client legal privilege
What is client legal
3.10 Client legal privilege in Australia today is both a doctrine of the
common law and a matter of statute. Deane J in
Baker v Campbell
it as ‘a fundamental and general principle of the common
As noted above, it
has also has been given effect in statutory form in the uniform Evidence
3.11 A concise statement of the contemporary doctrine is provided by Dr Sue
It provides that, in civil and criminal cases, confidential communications
passing between a lawyer and her or his client, which
have been made for the
dominant purpose of seeking or being furnished with legal advice or for the
dominant purpose of preparing
for actual or contemplated litigation, need not be
disclosed in evidence or otherwise revealed. This rule also extends to
communications
passing between a lawyer or client and third parties if made for
the purpose of actual or contemplated
litigation.
3.12 Before further consideration of the contemporary doctrine, a brief
review of the historical background is given.
3.13 While it has been said that ‘it will never be possible to come to
a conclusive answer to the origin of and early rationale
privilege’,
described by the leading American evidence scholar, Professor John Henry
Wigmore, as ‘the oldest of the privileges for
confidential
communications’.
3.14 Dr Jonathan Auburn described privilege as ‘one of many rules in
the large mass of law relating to testimonial compulsion’
that developed
in the 16th century.
several threads that can be identified in the history of the emergence of
today’s privilege
3.15 The rule as to non-disclosure of evidence and the concept of
‘discovery’ have their source in chancery. Before the
middle of the
19th century in England, discovery was a process that was mainly limited to the
Chancery Courts. Hence it was in the
chancery context that an evidentiary rule
restricting access to certain evidence was seen.
The premature disclosure of evidence was not a problem which confronted the
common law courts since witnesses at law gave their evidence
for the first time
at trial. Also, at common law the parties could not have discovery of each
other. Discovery for a common law action
could be obtained by a bill of
discovery in chancery but it was the procedure of that court which determined
what information had
to be given. The pre-hearing discovery of the parties and
examination of witnesses was a peculiar characteristic of equity procedure
had been inherited from the Romano-Canonical system, and so only the Court of
Chancery needed to regulate the extent and timing
of disclosure of the evidence.
In addressing the problem the Chancellors were moved by the same fear of perjury
that had shaped the
civil law practice. Like the civil law, equity made a
distinction between the party’s own testimony and the testimony which
party’s witnesses could give. The adversary was allowed to find out the
personal knowledge of the party but because of
the danger of perjury, could not
use discovery to compel the party to disclose the names of witnesses or his
belief as to what their
evidence would
3.16 The fear of tampering with witnesses that might follow the premature
disclosure of evidence also informed the approach to the
discovery of
The production of
documents that were part of a party’s evidence was considered as
‘opening a wide door to
Trial at law
3.17 The trial at common law utilised oral examination and cross-examination
of witnesses in the presence of parties, rather than
the chancery process of
secret depositions. While this was considered superior to the deposition method
of chancery,
the trial at law
was hampered by the prohibition of hearing the testimony of the parties
themselves. As the parties were ‘interested’
in the outcome of the
trial, they were not considered competent—‘they could not be trusted
to tell the truth’.
Chancery in its auxiliary jurisdiction could be enlisted to assist to some
extent, but it was ‘time-consuming, cumbersome and
expensive’.
3.18 The reform of common law procedures in the mid-19th century gave common
law courts power to order discovery, overtaking the former
chancery jurisdiction
in this area. The reforms also made the parties ‘generally competent and
compellable to testify for and
against each other in all courts of
Privilege for documents relating to the
3.19 As Victorian barrister Neil J Williams QC recorded, ‘the privilege
[to withhold documents] that relate exclusively to the
case of the party giving
discovery was brought into existence to shield title deeds from disclosure to
strangers’.
behind this privilege was a concern for security of tenure in days before any
system for registration of land titles.
The rule helped maintain security of tenure by concealing any defects in the
formal chain of descent from persons opposed in claim
or from blackmailers
prepared to exploit the defects. Since a plaintiff in ejectment had to succeed
on the strength of his own title
rather than upon any defects in the
defendant’s, documents that impeached the defendant’s title but
which did not support
the plaintiff’s were not
discoverable.
3.20 By the middle of the 19th century this privilege in relation to title
deeds had expanded to include any documents that formed
the evidence for the
party making discovery,
as ‘the common law equivalent of the protection that had originated in
chancery for documents which formed the party’s
This developed
into the ‘litigation privilege’ limb of client legal privilege of
3.21 The commitment of the common law to litigation as adversarial
proceedings—of which the litigation privilege limb is an
said by Professor Wigmore to reflect its origin ‘in a community of sports
and games’ and, therefore,
to have been permeated by the ‘instincts
of sportsmanship’.
This has had both its higher aspect and its lower aspect. On the one hand, it
has contributed a sense of fairness, of chivalrous
behaviour to a worthy
adversary, or carrying out a contest on equal and honorable terms. The
presumption of innocence, the character
rule, the privilege against
self-crimination, and other specific rules (to name those of Evidence alone),
show the effect of this
instinct against taking undue advantage of an adversary.
The minor rules of professional etiquette … illustrate the same tendency
even more clearly. On the other hand, it has contributed to lower the system of
administering justice, and in particular of ascertaining
truth in litigation, to
the level of a mere game of skill or chance. The right to use a rule of
procedure or evidence as one plays
a trump card, or draws to three aces, or
holds back a good horse till the home stretch, is a distinctive result of the
moral attitude towards parties in
litigation.
3.22 The ‘sportsmanlike’ simile is one found also in the earlier
work of the great 19th century English legal historians,
Sir Frederick Pollock
and Professor Frederick W
In describing the
behaviour expected of judges, ‘in different ages and by different systems
of law’, they said that it
fluctuated ‘between two poles’.
At one of these the model is the conduct of the man of science who is making
researches in his laboratory and will use all appropriate
methods for the
solution of problems and the discovery of truth. At the other stands the umpire
of our English games, who is there,
not in order that he may invent tests for
the powers of the two sides, but merely to see that the rules of the game are
It is towards the second of these ideals that our English medieval
procedure is strongly inclined. We are often reminded of the cricket-match.
judges sit in court, not in order that they may discover the truth, but in order
that they may answer the question, ‘How’s
3.23 Williams summarised this approach as follows:
Litigation was conducted in the spirit of a game. It was governed by rules that
were known to the parties in advance, and that the
rules were observed was no
less important than the actual outcome of the contest. And just as players in a
game were allowed to decide
when to show their hand so was the litigant to be
free to select the most propitious moment to present his evidence. Also the
stressed the virtue of industry and self-reliance, qualities that
reflected the prevailing laissez-faire economic and social philosophy
nineteenth century. … In this climate it would hardly be expected that the
system would aid a party in getting the evidence
in the case from the other
side. Evidence was something that was to be obtained through the exercise of
individual initiative and
3.24 The evidence rule in equity, that discovery could not be had of the
evidence of the adversary’s case, was mirrored at law
in the privilege
which developed to protect the materials prepared for the brief. As Williams
commented, the chancery evidence rule
‘matched the litigation philosophy
of the common law’.
1876 it was ‘well established both at law and in equity’
that documents obtained by a party or his solicitor with a view to and in
contemplation of litigation, either pending or anticipated,
are protected even
though received from persons unconnected with the
litigation.
3.25 The basis of this protection and the connection with the adversarial
system was explained by Williams:
From [the perspective of the adversarial model] the privilege [protecting a
party’s brief] was but a logical consequence of
the principal
characteristics of the system—party responsibility for the collection of
evidence and party autonomy in presenting
the evidence that would best advance
the party’s case or destroy that of the adversary. What rendered the
privilege ‘necessary’
were these characteristics, and the assertion
that the material deserved protection as belonging to the party’s brief
the same idea. The brief represented more than just the actual
documents that constituted or set forth the party’s evidence.
symbolized the party’s investment of time, expense and effort in searching
out the facts. Under an adversary system,
how the yield from that investment was
to be dealt with, whether it was to be withheld or disclosed, was the
prerogative of the party
Emergence of the present
3.26 Dr Ronald Desiatnik provides a useful summary of how the content of
client legal privilege has changed over time:
Initially the privilege could only attach to ‘communications received
since the beginning of the
litigation at bar
and for its purposes
only’. The privilege was then extended to apply to communications between
lawyer and client ‘for
the purpose of any litigation whatsoever’, be
it actual or prospective. Subsequently the privilege was applied to ‘cover
communications relating to advice unrelated to legal
proceedings’.
3.27 Common law privilege emerged in the context of trials and extended to
the pre-trial period of discovery. However, since
it now also
extends to non-curial contexts such as the exercise of coercive powers of
investigatory or regulatory authorities. To
quote Desiatnik further,
[The doctrine] has risen from the ranks of other evidentiary laws to achieve
post-graduate status while retaining its under-graduate
evidentiary
qualifications.
Client legal
privilege today
The common law limbs
of privilege
3.28 The common law doctrine of client legal privilege has two distinct
limbs: ‘advice privilege’ and ‘litigation
privilege’,
although there has been a blurring of the distinction in recent case law.
Advice privilege
3.29 This limb of the common law doctrine protects confidential
communications made between a lawyer and a client from compulsory
production in
the context of court and other proceedings where such communications were made
for the dominant purpose of the lawyer
providing (or the client receiving) legal
AWB Ltd v Cole
, after considering a number of authorities as
to what amounts to ‘legal
Young J concluded
that legal advice is not confined to telling the client ‘the law’
but also includes advice about what
action should be taken in that legal
context. In the context of Royal Commissions, Young J accepted that legal advice
professional advice given by lawyers to a client as to what
evidence and submissions should be placed before a commission of
Litigation privilege
3.31 This limb of the common law doctrine protects confidential
communications made between:
(a) a lawyer and a client, for the dominant purpose of use in, or in relation
to, existing or anticipated legal proceedings; or
(b) a lawyer, client and a third party, for the dominant purpose of use in,
or in relation to, existing or anticipated legal
proceedings.
3.32 Litigation privilege also will cover other documents brought into
existence for the dominant purpose of use in legal proceedings—such
drafts of pleadings and physical evidence, such as surveillance tapes or expert
A blurring of the distinction
3.33 At one time, communications with third parties were not covered by
advice privilege unless the third party was found to be acting
‘agent’ of the client in making the communication. However, in 2004,
Pratt Holdings Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Taxation
Full Federal Court held that a third party’s communication with a client,
even where there was no litigation pending,
potentially could be protected by
client legal
Otherwise, it was
held, it may be difficult for a person seeking legal advice to communicate the
problem in respect of which advice
is sought without input from a third
This was expressed in
terms of the underlying rationale for client legal privilege:
If … the policy implicit in [the rationale] is not to be subverted, the
dominant purpose criterion must be applied recognising
that the situations in
which people need legal advice are increasingly complex and that the client may
need the assistance of third
party experts if he or she is to be able to
instruct the legal adviser
appropriately.
3.34 It has been suggested that the decision in
indicative of a blurring of the distinction between the two limbs of client
legal privilege:
Arguably, the Full Court’s approach represents a significant extension of
the advice privilege, to a point where there is now
little theoretical
distinction between the advice privilege and the litigation
3.35 The High Court’s description of client legal privilege in
Daniels Corporation International Pty Ltd v Australian Competition v Consumer
) provides support for this position.
It is now settled that legal professional privilege is a rule of substantive law
which may be availed of by a person to resist the
giving of information or the
production of documents which would reveal communication between a client and
his or her lawyer made
for the dominant purpose of giving or obtaining legal
advice or the provision of legal services, including representation in legal
proceedings.
3.36 By determining that the case could be decided under the head of legal
advice privilege, the Full Court did not have to resolve
this issue. However, in
Stone J indicated that the High Court’s exposition of the
rationale for client legal privilege in
was consistent with the
appellant’s submission that there was a single rationale in Australia for
client legal privilege. Her
Honour found that the rationale applies both to
litigation privilege and legal advice privilege, although she did not accept
adopting a single rationale should lead to a refusal to distinguish between
the categories.
3.37 The ‘blurring’ discussed in the
decision is
consistent with—and indicative of—the conflation of instrumental
rationales into one broad ‘administration
of justice’ rationale,
underpinning both limbs of the doctrine of client legal privilege, as discussed
in Chapter 2.
Evidence Act
(Cth) also distinguishes between legal advice
and litigation privilege.
Section 118
provides that evidence is not to be
adduced if, on objection by the client, the court finds that adducing the
evidence would result
in disclosure of:
(a) a confidential communication made between the client and a lawyer; or
(b) a confidential communication made between two or more lawyers acting for the
(c) the contents of a confidential document (whether delivered or not) prepared
by the client or the lawyer;
for the dominant purpose of the lawyer, or one or more of the lawyers, providing
legal advice to the client.
Section 119
establishes a ‘litigation privilege’, protecting
confidential communications between a client and another person, or
acting for a client and another person, or the contents of a confidential
document that was prepared for the dominant purpose
of a client being provided
with legal services related to an Australian or overseas proceeding, or
anticipated proceeding, in which
the client is or may be a party.
3.40 It should be noted that under
, advice privilege does not presently
extend to third party communications, in contrast with the common law following
the decision
Under this section a third party must be an agent
of the client for privilege to apply.
Westpac Banking Corporation v 789TEN Pty Ltd
the Court of Appeal of the Supreme Court of New South Wales (NSW) found that
privilege could not be claimed over letters that were
PricewaterhouseCoopers (PWC), regarding an audit being conducted of
In order for auditors
to discharge their obligations under
Corporations Act
(Cth), companies are required to advise the auditors of the likely
amount of their contingent liabilities. This is generally done
through a letter
to an auditor by a company’s lawyer setting out the directors’
estimate of any potential financial settlement,
and the lawyer’s opinion
of that estimate.
3.42 In the
case, the court found that client legal privilege did not attach to the
letter to the auditor under either
Evidence Act
, the court found the dominant purpose of the preparation of
the letters was not to provide ‘legal advice’ to Westpac,
enable PWC as the bank’s auditor to use the information in the audit.
There was also no evidence in the case to suggest
that PWC was acting as an
‘agent’ of the
The court also
considered whether the letters were prepared for the dominant purpose of Westpac
being provided with professional legal
services in relation to a proceeding, and
thus captured by
Again, the court found that the letters were not created
for the dominant purpose of Westpac being provided with advice in relation
legal proceedings, but for the dominant purpose of the auditors being provided
with the lawyer’s opinion in the course of
meeting their obligations under
Corporations Act 2001
3.43 In ALRC 102, the three Commissions recommended that
Evidence Act
be amended to replace the words ‘client or
lawyer’ with the words ‘client, a lawyer or another person’ to
extend advice privilege to information provided by a third party to the client
or lawyer for the dominant purpose of providing legal
This proposal has been
adopted under the Model Uniform Evidence
This amendment could
rectify problems arising from the requirement that a third party be an agent in
order to fall within the scope
of s 118, but will not deal with situations where
such advice is not prepared for the dominant purpose of advising the client.
3.44 There is considerable concern amongst the legal community that the
decision in
means that companies that fully comply with their
obligations under the
Corporations Act
may be required to disclose both
the company’s own view of its prospects in pending litigation and the view
of its lawyers,
if an opponent files a notice of
The NSW Attorney
General’s Department has submitted to this Inquiry that the decision may
have implications for federal and
state government departments which provide
letters of representation to their
Auditors-General.
Tobias J stated:
There is obviously a problem which may require legislative intervention.
However, any such intervention (for instance, by amendment
Corporations Act
) should only be made in a manner which
would not unduly extend the rationale which underpins the privilege in question
essentially, is no different to that which applies under the general
law with respect to litigation privilege where the relevant
confidential
information is directly related to assisting the prosecution, defence or
compromise of pending or contemplated
proceedings.
3.46 The ALRC notes the concerns raised in response to the
case, however the issues are outside the terms of reference established for
this Inquiry.
Sections 297
Corporations Act
examples of the Australian Securities and Investment Commission’s (ASIC)
coercive information-gathering powers; rather,
they require annual reports to
include a true and fair view of the financial position and performance of the
disclosing entity. It
is not ASIC that is seeking the information, it is a
requirement of the auditor to fulfil the auditor’s function under the
3.47 The reasoning in
appears to be correct—the letters
to the auditors are not prepared for the dominant purpose of providing the
client with legal
advice, they are prepared for the purpose of providing
information for an audit. The ALRC would have some concerns if the doctrine
client legal privilege were extended to include this type of advice, as this
would be a distortion of the dominant purpose test,
and could lead to an
undesirable broadening of the privilege. However, it appears uncontroversial
that this specific information
should remain confidential (as noted by Tobias J
above), and that compliance with a requirement under the
Corporations Act
should not lead to a risk that an opponent in litigation could discover that
information.
3.48 The ALRC’s present view is that the confidentiality of the
information should be maintained through amendment to the
Corporations
and associated amendments to state and territory legislation dealing
with unincorporated entities and government bodies. Such amendments
stipulate that an auditor has a duty of confidentiality or secrecy in relation
to the information.
When client legal
privilege can be claimed
3.49 At common law, client legal privilege can be claimed in civil
proceedings at the interlocutory stage, during the course of a
civil or criminal
trial, and in non-judicial
proceedings.
established that the doctrine applies ‘in the absence of some
legislative provision restricting its application … to
all forms of
compulsory disclosure of
3.50 As noted above, the privileges under the
Evidence Act
exception of
, concerning religious confessions) are confined to the
adducing of evidence in relevant
proceedings.
3.51 The privilege is not automatic, either at common law or under statute,
but must be claimed in order to be applied. As noted in
Chapter 1, the privilege
is that of the client, not the lawyer—although in practice a represented
client will normally assert
the claim through his or her
A party making a claim
of privilege must provide the party seeking disclosure with sufficient facts on
which he or she could make
a decision about whether the claim for privilege
could be supported.
Where there
is a dispute about whether the document or communication is privileged, the
court may test the evidence of the purpose
of the document.
A person may succeed by pointing to the nature of the documents or by evidence
describing the circumstances in which they were brought
into existence. But it
should not be thought that the privilege is necessarily or conclusively
established by resort to any verbal
formula or ritual. The court has power to
examine the documents for itself, a power which has perhaps been exercised too
in the past, springing possibly from a misplaced reluctance to go
behind the formal claim of privilege. It should not be forgotten
that in many
instances the character of the documents that are the subject of the claim will
illuminate the purpose for which they
were brought into
3.52 Two recent cases have considered what constitutes
‘litigation’ for the purpose of claiming litigation privilege under
Evidence Act
and the common law.
3.53 Ingot Capital Investments Pty Ltd v Macquarie Equity Capital Markets
concerned a claim for privilege over communications between a firm of solicitors
and an expert the firm had retained to provide
advice in a matter that was the
subject of review by the Commonwealth Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT). The
was not the substance of the AAT appeal, but was an
application by one of the defendants to the proceedings for access to the advice
held by the respondent, for the purpose of use by the defendants in the private
litigation.
3.54 The respondents claimed that litigation privilege applied to the
documents, either under the
Evidence Act
or the common law, because the
communications had been made for the purpose of providing legal advice in
relation to an AAT proceeding.
3.55 Bergin J held that litigation privilege under
did not apply to
proceedings before the AAT. Under
Administrative Appeals Tribunal
(Cth) (AAT Act), the AAT is not bound by the rules of evidence, but
may inform itself in any matter in such manner as it thinks appropriate.
therefore not a ‘federal court’ under the definition in
Evidence Act
, and hence the Act does not apply to its
proceedings.
3.56 Bergin J then considered whether common law litigation privilege applied
to AAT proceedings. Her Honour based her decision on
whether AAT proceedings
were inquisitorial or adversarial in nature. In concluding that the proceedings
were inquisitorial, Bergin
J cited Brennan J in
Bushell v Repatriation
where he stated that while AAT proceeding may appear adversarial,
the onus of proof
which plays so important a part in fact-finding in adversarial proceedings
before judicial tribunals, has no part to play in administrative
proceedings.
3.57 Other matters that Bergin J found indicative of the non-adversarial
nature of AAT proceedings were: the statutory obligation
of the decision maker
to assist the Tribunal in making its
administrative functions of the Tribunal; and the fact that the AAT is not a
court and a decision on its review does not involve
an exercise of judicial
The fact that AAT
proceedings contemplate legal representation was not on its own considered
sufficient to attract litigation
In conclusion, her
Honour found that the dictates of fairness, which are served by the availability
of common law advice and litigation
privilege, did not apply to the processes
of, and proceedings in, the AAT.
followed the reasoning of Young J in
in which Young
J found that litigation privilege did not apply to commissions of inquiry
(although advice privilege did):
the reason why the litigation privilege has been recognised as
a substantive rule of law and as a fundamental right, is that it operates
secure a fair civil or criminal trial within our adversarial
3.59 It has been suggested to the ALRC that it should consider in this
Inquiry whether it is appropriate to amend the
Evidence Act
Act to rectify the decision in
, so that both limbs of the privilege
apply to AAT proceedings.
3.60 There does appear to be an anomaly in the situation that if a party
sought review of an administrative decision in the Federal
Court, then the
material that his or her lawyer prepared for the case would be covered by client
legal privilege, but if the review
was sought in the AAT, the lawyer’s
‘brief’ would not be covered by privilege and the material could be
by other parties.
3.61 This issue is not, however, within the scope of the ALRC’s Terms
of Reference. The issue in
was whether litigation privilege could
protect advice given for the purpose of assisting a client in connection with an
AAT proceeding.
It does not, therefore, concern the particular issues of the
exercise of a coercive information-gathering power by a federal body.
3.62 Nevertheless, the ALRC has some concerns with the limited view of
litigation privilege outlined by Bergin J in
As noted in Chapter
2, while the two limbs of advice and litigation privilege have particular
rationales, both can be seen as sub-sets
of a broader, overarching rationale
expressive of the administration of justice. The administration of justice
rationale relates
not only to fairness in the adversarial context of protecting
the lawyer’s brief, but also facilitates access to a fair hearing
non-curial context.
3.63 In the ALRC’s view, material gathered for the dominant purpose of
providing legal advice or legal services (to use the
words of the
) in an administrative tribunal should be covered by both advice and
litigation privilege.
3.64 The ALRC’s recommendation in ALRC 102 to extend the privilege
provisions of the
Evidence Act
to non-curial
if adopted, would
extend the operation of those sections of the
Evidence Act
proceedings. This extension would require making AAT proceedings a relevant
proceeding for the purpose of
3.65 The Australian Government Solicitor (AGS) has observed that extending
litigation privilege into the realm of proceedings before
tribunals may bring
closer focus on the relationship between advice privilege and litigation
privilege. The AGS argued that while
this could introduce litigation privilege
into a context which is
arguably closer in nature to that of the exercise of coercive powers by
investigatory bodies, the reasoning relied upon by Bergin
J in forming her view
that ‘litigation privilege’ was appropriately confined to the
‘adversarial system of justice’,
and not applied to administrative
processes, would probably be persuasive in precluding any attempt to extend
litigation privilege
further to the exercise of coercive powers.
communications
Confidential
3.66 A key feature of the doctrine of client legal privilege is that, to be
protected, the communications must be
confidential.
It has been noted
that this characteristic serves as a limitation on the application of the
However, the entirety
of a lawyer’s file is not protected, with documents like trust account
ledgers, timesheets, records of
objectively observable facts or notes of public
proceedings falling outside the
Privilege also does
not attach to evidence of transactions such as contracts or conveyances, even
where they are provided to a lawyer
for advice or for use in
litigation.
3.67 Communications made privately between a lawyer and a client are assumed
to be confidential.
As a general
rule, the privilege is lost where the communication is made in the presence of a
third party (who is not an employee
or agent of the lawyer), although there is
some authority for the proposition that this may depend on whether it was
unavoidable
that the third party was
Whether or not the
client intended the communication to be confidential will also be an important
consideration.
Purpose of communication
3.68 A key development in the Australian common law was the shift from a
‘sole purpose’ test to a ‘dominant purpose’
test. Until
1999, for a communication to be protected it had to be made for the sole purpose
of contemplated or pending litigation,
or for obtaining or giving legal advice,
as enunciated in
In 1999, in
Australia Resources Ltd v Commissioner of Taxation
the High Court
Grant v Downs
holding that the common law test for
client legal privilege was the dominant purpose test—in line with the test
Evidence Act
that has been in place since
3.69 The scope of what may be covered by client legal privilege at common law
is potentially expansive. The dominant purpose test
serves as the primary
limitation on its application. The purpose of the creation of the document or
communication is therefore the
vital question in a claim for client legal
‘purpose’ of the document has been defined as ‘the reason why
the document was brought into
existence’.
In determining
the purpose of a communication, courts have looked at the circumstances in which
it was made, including the intention
of the person making it, the nature of any
previous dealings between the parties, and whether it was made in accordance
with an internal
procedure or
3.70 Under the dominant purpose test, there may be more than one reason for
the communication. The High Court has stated that the
purpose’ should be given its ordinary meaning, being that the purpose was
‘the ruling, prevailing or
most influential
This followed
the approach of the United Kingdom courts to the
Dr Ronald Desiatnik notes
that the change from the sole purpose to the dominant purpose test creates the
potential for greater pre-trial
disputes and appeals by requiring the court to
‘rank’ the (potentially) multiple purposes for which a document may
been created.
3.71 At common law, the extent to which copies of documents are covered by
the doctrine of client legal privilege has been a matter
contention.
It is clear that
when a copy is made of an original that attracts privilege (ie, for the purpose
of record keeping or administration)
the copy is also privileged. The position
is more difficult where the original is not privileged but a copy of that
document—which
is communicated for the purpose of seeking or giving advice
or in preparation for litigation—may
3.72 The majority of the High Court in
Australian Federal Police v Propend
found that privilege could exist in copies
of documents made for the purpose of seeking legal advice or pending
litigation.
Where a copy is made
in such circumstances the copy becomes a separate communication in its own right
to which the dominant purpose
This rule therefore
protects copies of unprivileged documents that become part of the lawyer’s
brief for litigation.
3.73 The decision in
was based on the idea of protecting the
lawyer’s file or brief. Where a copy is produced for a ‘privileged
purpose’—for
the purpose of providing legal advice or for
litigation—then it should be accorded the protection of confidentiality,
if the original is unprivileged and could be obtained elsewhere.
If privilege were denied to a copy of an unprivileged document when the copy is
produced solely for the purpose of seeking advice
from a solicitor or counsel or
for the purpose of use in pending, intended or reasonably apprehended litigation
there would be a
risk that the confidentiality of solicitor–client
communications would be breached. The way would be open for the execution
files and counsels’ briefs. That would undermine
the adversary system
under which most litigation is
3.74 It is easier to understand the basis of the
decision in
the context of litigation privilege and the adversarial process rather than
ordinary advice privilege. However, if copies
of documents contained in the
lawyer’s file were not protected, it is possible to imagine a situation
where disclosure of a
group of documents not otherwise privileged would disclose
a legal strategy being adopted, recommended or considered by a party’s
3.75 Where the original document is destroyed, the privileged copy loses its
privilege. In
, Brennan J argued that if client legal privilege
were accorded without qualification to a copy of an unprivileged document where
the copy is brought into existence for a privileged purpose, the privilege might
frustrate the power to search and seize, and thereby
undermine the
administration of justice. A person could make a copy for the purpose of
litigation, and then destroy the unprivileged
3.76 Similar authorities to
have been criticised in the United
Kingdom. In
Ventouris v Mountain
, Bingham LJ suggested that the rule was
‘ripe for authoritative
reconsideration’,
the basis that it was hard to justify why copies of documents should be treated
any differently from the original. In a South
Australian case prior to
, Debelle J stated that ‘generally speaking, it would be
absurd for the copy to be privileged while the original was
3.77 The ATO has submitted to this Inquiry that the
has a potentially significant effect on its operations. As documents that are
not privileged may become privileged if they
are copied and meet the dominant
purpose test, the ATO could be ‘prevented from obtaining even basic and
antecedent documents’.
The ATO also pointed to difficulties of the application of
the response to a notice was that the original of the document could not be
found, as distinct from being destroyed, hence arguably
the copy was still
within the protection of
We consider that the law should be clarified so that [client legal privilege]
does not apply to a copy of a document where privilege
would not have attached
to the original document. In our view, this may help prevent warehousing of
documents, will provide certainty
to copies, and will provide the Tax Office with greater access to transactional
antecedent documents.
3.78 It has been suggested that the rule in
should be narrowed
to circumstances where it can be established that the copied documents indicated
the direction of the legal advice
The ALRC is not in a
position in this Inquiry to recommend substantive changes to the doctrine of
client legal privilege. However,
the Commission notes the comments of Dawson J
(in the minority) in
legal professional privilege … exists in order to preserve the
confidential relationship between client and legal adviser,
a relationship which
is to be fostered and preserved for the better working of the legal system.
However, that relationship is not
impaired and the interests of justice are best
served if the client or his legal adviser on his behalf is compelled to disclose
copy of the document when the original might be compelled without any ground
for objection.
3.79 In keeping with the approach to the rationale for client legal privilege
in Chapter 2, the ALRC is of the view that any protection
of copies of
otherwise unprivileged documents should be limited to situations where the
copies would disclose or lead to discovery
of confidential advice.
Professional capacity
3.80 Client legal privilege does not protect all communications between a
lawyer and a client; rather, it protects only those communications
lawyer is acting in his or her professional capacity. Under the common law, part
of the test of whether a lawyer is acting
in a professional capacity is the
lawyer’s ‘independence’ from the client. In
Waterford v
Commonwealth
, Brennan J argued that the law required that a lawyer be
independent from a client
in order that the personal loyalties, duties or interests of the adviser should
not influence the legal advice which he gives or
the fairness of his conduct of
litigation on behalf of his
In-house counsel
3.81 The fact that a lawyer is employed as ‘in-house’ counsel
does not in itself preclude a claim to client legal privilege
in relation to
communications between the lawyer and the
However, such
claims may be more closely scrutinised by the court to ensure that the lawyer
was acting in the role of independent
legal adviser and not with a focus on
other commercial aspects of the
Seven Network
Ltd v News Ltd
, Tamberlin J noted that the fact that in-house counsel also
may advise on other matters does not rule them out of claiming privilege
behalf of their employer.
Commercial reality requires recognition by the courts of the fact that employed
legal advisers not practising on their own account
may often be involved to some
extent in giving advice of a commercial nature related to the giving of legal
advice. Such involvement
does not necessarily disqualify the documents relating
to that role from privilege. The matter is necessarily one of fact and degree
and involves a weighing of the relative importance of the identified
3.82 It has been suggested that where an in-house lawyer is actually ‘a
player in the transaction’, their legal advice
will not be
privileged.
However, where an
in-house lawyer provides independent advice and is not an active participant in
the transaction, then the in-house
lawyer’s advice may clearly be
privileged. In-house lawyers are discussed further in Chapters 8 and 9.
Practising certificate
3.83 Related to the issue of independence is whether a lawyer must hold a
current practising certificate for the purpose of the
In the Australian
Capital Territory Supreme Court case of
Vance v McCormack
, Crispin J
found that privilege only attached where the lawyer concerned held a current
practising certificate or had a statutory
Crispin J based
this finding on what he considered to be the rationale for client legal
being the public
interest in proper representation of clients. Where a legal adviser has no right
to represent a client, no privilege
His Honour noted
that, in Australian jurisdictions, the statutory right to
generally depends on the holding of a current practising
certificate.
In August 2005,
the ACT Court of Appeal overturned this decision, finding that Crispin J
had erred by applying the common law rather
Evidence Act
when considering if the documents were covered by client legal
3.84 In considering the definition of a lawyer under
Evidence Act
, the Court of Appeal found that, while holding a practising
certificate is an important indicator, it is not conclusive on the issue
whether the legal advice was sufficiently independent to constitute legal
Admission to practice of itself carries with it an obligation to conform to the
powers of the Court to remove or suspend a legal
practitioner for conduct that
the Court considers justifies such a determination. … The person remains
bound to uphold the
standards of conduct and to observe the duties undertaken
upon admission to the roll of practitioners. The holding of a practising
certificate reinforces that regime and makes it more immediately applicable but
the underlying obligations subsist even if a current
practising certificate is
3.85 The Court of Appeal cited
Australian Hospital Care v Duggan (No
in support of this
That case concerned
advice given by an in-house company lawyer who had been admitted to practice and
held a practising certificate
in the past, but did not hold a current Victorian
practising certificate. In that case, Gillard J extensively outlined the
establishing independence as a crucial element of the features that
must be present for client legal privilege to apply in respect
of a confidential
communication between a private sector employer and its own employee
In my opinion there [are] sufficient dicta to support the proposition that the
employee legal adviser when performing his role in
a communication concerning a
legal matter must act independently of any pressure from his employer and if it
is established that
he was not acting independently at the particular time then
the privilege would not apply or if there was any doubt the court should
those circumstances look at the
Application to corporations
3.86 Unlike the privilege against self-incrimination, client legal privilege
is available for corporations as well as natural persons.
This was most recently
confirmed by the decision of the High Court in
3.87 However, there has been debate regarding the correctness of this
proposition in view of the move by some members of the High
Court to describe
client legal privilege in human rights
If such a rationale
were accepted as a key basis for continuation of the privilege, then it becomes
an important question whether
corporations should remain able to claim
Dr Sue McNicol has argued
If ‘human’ in the phrase ‘human right’ is defined
literally as something that is enjoyed by human beings,
then the privilege rule
will have to be narrowed so that only human clients of lawyers can enjoy the
benefits of it.
3.88 In the case of the privilege against self-incrimination, the inherent
strengths of a corporate entity as opposed to an individual
were seen as part of
the reasoning behind limiting the availability of the
Environment
Protection Authority v Caltex Refining Co Pty Ltd
Mason CJ and
Toohey J took the view that:
In general, a corporation is usually in a stronger position vis-à-vis the
state than is an individual; the resources which companies
possess and the
advantages which they tend to enjoy, many stemming from incorporation, are much
greater than those possessed and
enjoyed by natural persons. The doctrine of the
corporation as a separate legal entity and the complexity of many corporate
and arrangements have made corporate crime and complex fraud one of
the most difficult areas for the state to regulate
effectively.
3.89 This position was applied to client legal privilege by Wilcox J, in the
Full Federal Court decision in
The policy considerations that influenced the High Court in
relation to self-incrimination, are equally apposite to legal professional
privilege. Conduct that involves a contravention of
Trade Practices
often comprises many separate acts, some of which may be effected
through lawyers. Without information about contacts between the
person under
investigation and that person’s lawyer it may be impossible for ACCC to
see the whole picture.
3.90 Alex Bruce has summarised the arguments against corporations having the
right to assert the privilege, including that:
Corporate activity is complex, carried on through layers of
management and principally in documentary form.
Often the best and the only evidence about the conduct of a
corporation can be obtained from that corporation. This is especially
any ‘victim’ of corporate misconduct is an ‘amorphous entity
such as a market’.
Corporations are often large and powerful and better placed to
initiate and defend investigation and litigation. They can do this
better able to conceal evidence of wrongdoing and to deploy resources to
frustrate investigation and litigation.
If corporations can employ common law privileges to resist the
production of documents concerning the truth of alleged misconduct,
interest in detecting and punishing crime, as expressed in statutes like the
Trade Practices Act 1974
is likely to be
diminished.
, Kirby J noted the argument that the right to the privilege as a
‘fundamental human right’ should only apply to humans—and
the interests of the public may be well served in some cases by allowing these
documents to be in the public realm. However,
he ultimately drew a distinction
between the privilege against self-incrimination and client legal privilege,
based on their very
different historical origins.
Occasionally, in any case, a fundamental human right is an expression of an even
larger concept, namely a fundamental civil right
belonging also to artificial
persons such as corporations. Protection from self-incrimination rests upon
different historical, legal
and policy considerations almost all related to
individual human beings. The entitlement to sound legal advice, immune from
disclosure to investigating or prosecuting public authorities, is
arguably necessary both for natural and artificial
3.92 Kirby J cited the comments of Advocate-General Sir Gordon Slynn in
& S Europe Ltd v Commission of the European Communities
explaining the principle as applicable to both natural and legal
Whether it is described as the right of the client or the duty of the lawyer,
this principle has nothing to do with the protection
or privilege of the lawyer.
It springs essentially from the basic need of a man in a civilised society to be
able to turn to his
lawyer for advice and help, and if proceedings begin, for
representation; it springs no less from the advantages to a society which
evolves complex law reaching into all the business affairs of persons, real and
legal, that they should be able to know what they
can do under the law, what is
forbidden, where they must tread circumspectly, where they run
3.93 McNicol argues that the issue of whether corporations should be entitled
to the benefit of client legal privilege highlights
the importance of clarifying
the rationale for the
If client legal
privilege is based on the need for full and frank communications in order to
obtain proper legal advice, then there
is no reason that it should not apply to
corporations as strongly as individuals. If corporations were denied the shield
of privilege
it may deter candid, detailed, written advice being given by
lawyers and hamper the development of internal corporate compliance
Submissions and consultations
3.94 In the Issues Paper,
Client Legal Privilege and Federal Investigatory
asked whether client legal privilege should apply to only natural persons and
not corporations.
3.95 No submissions supported this distinction. The NSW Bar Association
argued that the privilege
integral to the rule of law. Citizens, whether corporate
or natural, are
entitled to the benefit of that
relationship.
3.96 This was also the view taken by
and the Law Council of
Australia (Law Council). The Law Council submitted that the rationale for the
privilege applied equally whether
the client was an individual or a corporation
and noted that it was incorrect to view all corporate entities as large and well
3.97 The Law Society of NSW submitted that the complexity of laws governing
corporations meant that they may have an even greater
need for confidential
legal advice.
In general terms, corporations rather than private citizens have a greater need
for obtaining advice from lawyers as to their legal,
general and ongoing
obligations. It would be a strange and inconsistent result if privilege was not
available to corporations in
circumstances where it is recognised that the
primary rationale for the existence of privilege is to enable compliance with
obligations to be more efficiently undertaken and for the administration
of justice to be better and more efficiently carried
3.98 The AGS noted that the case for protection against self-incrimination
has been seen as not as compelling for corporations as
it is for natural
persons, as corporations can only suffer financial detriment, rather than penal
sanction. By contrast, client legal
privilege is just as necessary to protect a
corporation’s effective access to legal advice and (more generally) its
legal interests,
as is the case with a natural
ALRC’s views
3.99 As outlined in Chapter 2, client legal privilege enables full and frank
communication with lawyers and facilitates compliance
with the law. Any
characterisation of the doctrine as a right should be viewed more in terms of a
right to access to a fair hearing
or trial or access to legal advice, rather
than a right that only can be ascribed to humans. The ALRC tends to agree with
submissions that the rationale applies equally to corporations as to
natural persons, but would be interested in hearing contrary
arguments. At this
time, no change to the current law is proposed.
When client legal
privilege can be lost
3.100 Client legal privilege can be lost in a number of circumstances such
when a party has died;
through waiver;
where the communication may be adduced by a criminal defendant
(where there are joint clients); and
where the communication is made in furtherance of the commission of
an offence or fraud.
3.101 The two major examples where client legal privilege may be
lost are discussed here—namely, waiver and the fraud or crime
3.102 Under common law, waiver was traditionally imputed where the
circumstances were such that it was unfair for the client to say
privilege had not been
What is ‘unfair
in the circumstances’ was determined by the conduct of the client. In
1999, the High Court in
Mann v Carnell
focused the common law test on
inconsistency, rather than on fairness alone.
What brings about the waiver is the inconsistency, which the courts, where
necessary informed by the consideration of fairness, perceive
between the
conduct of the client and the maintenance of confidentiality; not some
overriding principle of fairness operating at
DSE (Holdings) Pty Ltd v Interan Inc
, Allsop J noted that by
subordinating the notion of fairness to possible relevance in the assessment of
the inconsistency between
the act and the confidentiality of the communication,
Mann v Carnell
had produced an important change to the existing
3.104 The approach in
Mann v Carnell
was restated by the Federal Court
SQMB v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Ethnic
where it was
found that waiver occurs ‘when a party does something inconsistent with
the confidentiality otherwise contained
communication’.
3.105 One of the most common examples of implied waiver is where a party
raises an issue as to his or her belief or state of mind
(usually in a pleading
or court document or to a third party) that indicates the substance of the
communication.
ways in which waiver can be implied is where the person claiming the privilege
has made his or her ‘state of mind’
an issue in the proceedings, and
the legal advice in question is likely to have contributed to that state of
It is not sufficient to
constitute waiver merely to show that the legal advice might be
relevant—it must be shown that:
The legal advice in question was relevant to the formation of that state of mind
or belief or that the advice itself in some way
becomes an issue in the
3.106 This issue has particular implications for government decision makers
who may be relying on legal advice in making
determinations.
For instance,
Commissioner of Taxation v Rio Tinto
, Rio Tinto alleged that the
Commissioner could not have had a proper basis on which to make his decision
that a transaction was a
dividend stripping
transaction.
The Commissioner
stated that the matters taken into consideration were found in documents over
which he had claimed privilege in
the matter. In considering the question of
when privilege would be waived, the Full Federal Court found that issue waiver
the privilege holder’s conduct is inconsistent with the continued
confidentiality of communication because he or she has put
into issue the
character or contents of the communication in pursuing a right or claim, or has
created a situation where another
party must reasonably do so by way of a
3.107 In such circumstances, the Full Federal Court found that the
Commissioner had gone further than merely saying that the legal
relevant, he had made reference to specifically relying on the contents of the
advice, and thus put the advice in issue,
thereby waiving the
3.108 In the recent case of
Secretary Department of Justice v Osland
the Court of Appeal of the Supreme Court of Victoria affirmed the test as one of
inconsistency and found that the circumstance and
purpose of the disclosure were
relevant. The court specifically rejected the idea that there was a general rule
that disclosure of
the conclusions of legal advice waived privilege. Maxwell P
noted that the test of inconsistency
is well capable of accommodating the notion that, in appropriate circumstances,
the privilege-holder should be able to disclose publicly
that it is acting on
advice and what the substance of that advice is, without being at risk of having
to disclose the confidential
content of the
3.109 Maxwell P stated that the purpose for which the privilege-holder made
the disclosure is highly relevant to determine inconsistency.
The relevant
question in
was whether the purpose for which the conclusion of
the legal advice was disclosed was inconsistent with the maintenance of
confidentiality
in respect of the content of the
Fraud or crime exception
3.110 Client legal privilege does not extend to communications made in
furtherance of a crime or fraud, as the law of client legal
privilege should not
be able to be used as a shield to cover advice that may assist in the commission
of a crime.
Communications
made for an illegal purpose, such as an abuse of statutory power, are also not
covered by the privilege.
fraud need not be known to the lawyer or the client, and may be that of a third
3.111 Over time, the fraud or crime exception has expanded to include other
improper purposes. In
AWB v Cole (No 5)
Young J stated that the
term ‘fraud exception’ does not capture the full reach of this
The principle encompasses a wide species of fraud, criminal activity or actions
taken for illegal or improper purposes and extends
to ‘trickery’ and
‘shams’. As the fraud exception is based on public policy grounds,
it is sufficiently flexible
to capture a range of situations where the
protection of confidential communications between lawyer and client would be
to the public
3.112 Young J defined a ‘sham’ as ‘steps which take the
form of a legally effective transaction but which the parties
intend should not
have the apparent, or any legal
consequences’.
3.113 In order to prove that the exception applies, the party alleging that
the communication is in furtherance of an offence must
present a prima facie
case to support their
allegations.
, Brennan CJ held that the test was one of there being
‘reasonable grounds for believing that the relevant communication was
an improper purpose’.
AWB v Cole (No 5)
Young J found that it was not necessary to
prove an improper purpose on the balance of probabilities; rather, the test was
facie one, in keeping with the fact that issues of client legal
privilege were usually dealt with at the interlocutory stage of
proceedings.
3.114 There has been some question about what evidence can be used to
establish a prima facie case in this regard. A key issue in
whether evidence, that would otherwise be considered hearsay and inadmissible,
could be used to show that client legal privilege
should be lost on the basis of
the fraud exception. The High Court was split on this issue. Whilst a majority
of the court found
that hearsay could be used to displace the
Gaudron and Kirby
JJ placed different caveats on the use of hearsay evidence. Gaudron J found that
it ordinarily could not be used,
although if it were admissible on some other
issue it could be relied on if the witness were available for
cross-examination.
found that hearsay evidence could be relied on, but it was insufficient on its
own to displace the
3.115 Desiatnik highlights the sensitivity for the judge when dealing with
cases in which this exception is raised. When a court has
to decide whether the
fraud exception applies, it is often the case that the fraud allegedly contained
in the documents is central
to the entire proceedings. This means that if the
trial judge expresses the view that the communication was for an improper
there is a real risk that the party against whom the privilege ruling
is made could seek to have that judge removed from the case
on the ground of
apprehended bias.
3.116 In defence of the preservation of client legal privilege, it is often
argued that the fraud exception prevents the privilege
being used for an
improper purpose. However, there are questions about how effectively the fraud
exception operates in practice.
Dawson J noted in
Corporate Affairs
Commission of New South Wales v Yuill
) that in some cases it
will be very hard to determine whether a person has been fraudulent or negligent
without access to the legal
advice they have
Submissions and consultations
3.117 In IP 33, the ALRC asked for views on whether the fraud exception is
effective in stopping improper claims of client legal privilege,
practical difficulties for federal bodies in proving that a communication is not
privileged on this basis.
3.118 ASIC submitted that this exception is of limited utility and
application for two reasons. First, for the exception to apply,
it is not enough
for the privileged communication to provide evidence of the fraud or illegality.
The communication itself must be
made in furtherance of the fraud or illegality.
In ASIC’s view the exception would be more effective if it were sufficient
that the privileged communication relate to, rather than be made in furtherance
of, a fraud or offence.
3.119 ASIC also argued that it is difficult to obtain the requisite prima
facie evidence to support an allegation that the exception
Unless an investigative body has access to privileged communications, it can
only speculate on the substance of those communications.
In those circumstances,
it will, in most cases, be impossible to assess whether the communication falls
within the fraud exception
because the communication itself may constitute the
only evidence that it was made in furtherance of the fraud. So, it is often not
possible for the investigative agency to establish the requisite prima facie
case to ground an allegation that the fraud exception
3.120 The Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) stated that
it remains ‘difficult, if not impossible’
to detect and prove an
improper purpose.
In most cases, the material that is the subject of the claim is likely to be the
best material available to decide this issue, which
creates a vicious
3.121 The ATO submitted that it considers that this exception would be more
properly described as an ‘improper purpose’
exception because it
potentially applies in a range of circumstances that are broader than only those
circumstances where a person
has committed fraud or an offence. The ATO agreed
that, on a practical level, it is extremely difficult to establish that an
applies without having access to those communications. The ATO also
considered that the boundaries of the test are unclear, for example,
tax avoidance scheme would be sufficiently ‘tainted’ to trigger the
fraud or offence exception.
3.122 The Australian Government Solicitor (AGS) outlined a number of
difficulties in making out the fraud/crime exception. These included
that an investigatory body seeking to challenge that privilege claim is often
going to have to adduce evidence from a range
of witnesses, potentially
involving large amounts of documentation and lengthy hearings. In the
AGS’s view, a finding that
the communication in question was made in
furtherance of a fraud or an offence will be dependent on a court being prepared
in some cases, significant inferences from what may be limited proven
3.123 However, a number of submissions argued that the current test of
establishing a prima facie case was appropriate. Desiatnik
disagreed with the
proposition that a prima facie case would be hard to
The Law Society of
NSW argued that in the absence of prima facie evidence the efficacy of the claim
should be accepted.
3.124 The Law Council considered that the problems of identifying whether a
document is subject to a valid claim for privilege are
overstated.
The Law Council notes that if fraud cannot be discerned without reference to
privileged documents, then it may be that there has
been no fraud. The argument
also assumes that the legal advice would display the client’s fraudulent
purpose, and that may
3.125 The AGS noted that in recent years there has been a number of cases in
the federal investigatory context where a prima facie
case has been established,
thus defeating the privilege
3.126 Some members of the NSW Bar considered that the fraud exception was
unfair to the client, as it may require them to establish
‘defence’ before the case had commenced, and may also prejudice the
judge in the matter.
ALRC’s views
3.127 The fraud exception poses a significant hurdle for agencies because of
the evidentiary problems of establishing even a prima
facie case over a document
that the agency has not seen. The ALRC was told in a number of consultations
that ‘you don’t
know what you don’t
3.128 The ALRC notes ASIC’s suggestion that the test be amended to
require that the privileged communication
, rather than
made in furtherance of
, a fraud or offence. However, with the limitations of
the scope of this Inquiry, it is difficult to propose changes to the substantive
rules of client legal privilege. Imposing a different test for the fraud
exception at the investigation stage from that under the
general common law, or
Evidence Act
, could create significant evidentiary problems in
the event that a matter proceeds to trial.
3.129 Many of the difficulties expressed by federal agencies in establishing
the fraud exception relate to the lack of information
available when a claim of
privilege is made, or to the delay in resolving contested claims. The ALRC is of
the view that the procedural
changes proposed in Chapter 8, which require a
person claiming client legal privilege to give an investigatory body greater
as to the nature of his or her claim, will assist bodies to determine
whether a claim is properly made. The proposals for a uniform
process to resolve
contested privilege claims should also assist in this regard.
When client legal
privilege is abrogated
Principled Regulation
(ALRC 95), the ALRC noted that few
federal statutes expressly remove the operation of client legal
Most federal
statutes are silent on the availability of the privilege. Some statutes
expressly state that the privilege does apply,
for example, one statute states
that privilege applies in the same way as it does to a witness in a High Court
proceeding.
This issue is
discussed in more detail in Chapter 5.
3.131 In 2002, the
case clarified when client legal privilege
could be abrogated by necessary implication. In
, the first case to
remove the privilege by implication,
the High Court held that privilege
was not a ‘reasonable excuse’ for a failure to comply with the
investigatory powers
Companies (NSW)
continues to be relied on
by ASIC as authority that client legal
privilege is abrogated under the ASIC Act in relation to its compulsory
, the High Court considered whether client legal
privilege was abrogated by implication under s 155 of the TPA
Court found that client legal privilege was ‘not merely a rule of
substantive law. It is an important common law right
or, perhaps more accurately
an important common law
express words or necessary implication were required to abrogate the
It is now well established that statutory provisions are not to be construed as
abrogating important common law rights, privileges
and immunities in the absence
of clear words or a necessary implication to that
3.133 The decisions of the High Court in
discussed in detail in Chapter 5.
comparative dimension
law of the professional secret in civil law
3.134 While the doctrine of client legal privilege in its litigation arm is
historically connected to the nature of adversarial court
processes of the
common law, a doctrine protecting the confidential communications of clients
with their lawyers is not confined
to the common law.
AM & S Europe v Commission of the European Communities
AM & S Europe)
, the European Court of Justice had to consider
whether the protection of legal confidence was a principle of European Community
It found that, while there were differences between the applicable
principles in the common law as distinct from the civil law countries,
member states afforded some protection to confidential relations between lawyer
and client.
3.136 The Council of the Bars and Law Societies of the European Union
(CCBE)—which participated in the
AM & S Europe
litigation—has had occasion to survey and report upon the relevant
doctrines several times since the
In 1976, DAO Edward
QC, then Treasurer of the Faculty of Advocates in Scotland and
Rapporteur-Général of the
prepared a report on
The Professional Secret, Confidentiality and Legal Professional
Privilege in the Nine Member States of the European Community
(the Edward Report).
CCBE published an update in 2003, entitled ‘
The Professional Secret,
Confidentiality and Legal Professional Privilege in
February 2004, a further report was released, written by John Fish, Former
President of the CCBE and Solicitor, Dublin, entitled
Regulated Legal
Professionals and Professional Privilege within the European Union, the European
Economic Area and Switzerland, and
Certain Other European
’ (the Fish
These reports reveal
the widespread applicability of a protection of information communicated in
confidence by clients to their lawyers.
3.137 In the European Union (EU) the rule is broadly known as one of
‘professional secrecy’ or ‘the law of the professional
secret’. In the 1970s, the source of the protection amongst those states
was the relevant Penal Code, providing that it was
an offence to reveal another
person’s ‘secret’.
This provision of the Penal Code is the source of the lawyer’s duty and,
since breach of that duty is a criminal offence, the
duty is not simply a
professional or contractual duty, but a matter of public order.
The duty of the lawyer carries with it corresponding
particular (i) the right to refuse to give evidence on matters covered by the
professional secret, and (ii) the right to withhold
from seizure by the police
and judicial authorities any document which contains information covered by the
professional secret. These
rights are in some cases expressly conferred by the
Codes of Criminal and/or Civil Procedure.
The secret thus enjoys both positive and negative protection: positive
protection, in that the lawyer is bound to keep the secret
and not to divulge
it; negative protection, in that the courts and other authorities cannot force
him to divulge it.
3.138 In the EU the obligation of professional secrecy was not confined to
lawyers, but extended, for example, to doctors and priests
In some European
also included in the law regulating
profession.
3.139 The law of the professional secret concerns the duties and
corresponding rights of the person to whom a secret has been communicated.
applies to information communicated
by the client
to the lawyer; not
advice or information communicated
by the lawyer
The protection of
communications
by the lawyer
may be protected through different rules and
to different extents in each particular country. For example, in
, Advocate-General Slynn referred to the position in Belgium.
In Belgium it seems that confidential communications between lawyer and client
are protected and cannot be seized or used as evidence.
Although the basis of
the rule may have been that information confided to the lawyer must be
protected, it seems … that it
also covers confidential advice given to the
3.140 In relation to France, the Advocate-General summarised the different
threads in the relevant doctrine:
In France breach of the rule of professional secrecy is a criminal offence and,
although it seems that documents may be seized in
some circumstances even in the
hands of the lawyer, the importance of the rule is stressed in Lemaire
règles de la profession de l’avocat
which has been provided for
the court. This rule appears to be closely linked with the right to a fair trial
(les droits de la défense).
The principle of the ‘droits de la défense’ appears to cover
confidential documents passing in both directions between
lawyer and client
… and includes protection from seizure of legal advice given to the client
before commencement of proceedings
and found in his possession or in the
possession of a person associated with him … There is also a wider
protection for confidential
letters than exists under the common law
law compared with common law
3.141 The common law doctrine of client legal privilege developed from the
law of evidence and protects communications not only by
the client to the
lawyer, but communications in both directions—catching advice given by the
lawyer as well as information
communicated by the client. The nearest common law
equivalent to the civilian law of the professional secret is the law of official
AM & S Europe
, Advocate-General Slynn focused upon
‘the overall picture’:
Thus the question is not whether ‘legal professional privilege’ (a
misnomer and the right of the client) is identical
with ‘le secret
professionnel’ (the duty, inter alia, of the lawyer), which plainly it is
not, but whether from various
sources a concept of the protection of legal
confidence emerges, eg in England from the ‘privilege’ and any rules
to the protection of confidentiality in France from an amalgam of ‘le
secret professionnel’, ‘les droits de la
défense’ and
rules applicable to ‘le secret des lettres
confidentielles’.
3.143 While there are technical differences between the civil and common law
the Edward Report
identified their overall similarity of purpose:
In all the member states of the European Community, the law protects from
disclosure information communicated in confidence to a
lawyer by his client. The
member states differ in the methods by which this protection is achieved. In
some states legal duties are
expressly imposed upon the lawyer and corresponding
rights are expressly conferred. In other states, protection is achieved by the
creation of ‘privileges’ or exemptions from the ordinary rules of
law. The nature and extent of these rights, duties,
privileges and exemptions,
vary from state to state. By whatever means protection is achieved, and whatever
its nature and extent,
is the same in all
3.144 ‘The purpose of the law’, he stated, was ‘not to
protect the individual lawyer or his individual client’:
The purpose is, first, to protect every person who requires the advice and
assistance of a lawyer in order to vindicate his rights
and liberty and, second,
to ensure the fair and proper administration of
3.145 The Edward Report was written in 1976, at the behest of the CCBE, at a
time when the protection of client confidences was considered
to be under
Terrorism, tax evasion and the abuse of monopoly power have added a new
dimension to the age-old problem of preserving a proper balance
between the
interests of the state and the liberty of the individual. Moreover, the conduct
of some lawyers has led (rightly or wrongly)
to the suspicion that they are
abusing their legal privileges and acting as accomplices, rather than advocates
or advisers, of their
3.146 The update to the Edward Report in 2003 noted the continuation of these
It seems generally admitted in most of the jurisdictions consulted that over the
last 25 years there has been a trend towards the
greater limitations in the
protection of professional secrecy. This trend is mainly caused by tougher
statutory developments in order
to overcome corruption, drugs and terrorism.
In particular, there has been a development of legislation increasing the means
of coercion or the investigation methods mainly in
economic, tax and financial
matters such as money laundering or revenue enquiries, investigations by the
competition authorities.
This statutory intrusion is motivated by the search of
a total transparency in the economic and financial transactions and the
that lawyers may be involved in illegal matters or permit themselves
to be used for illegal purposes.
The most clear and significant example of this statutory development would be
the European Directive on money laundering …
Under the Directive, lawyers
may have the obligation to breach confidentiality in an attempt to make
investigations more efficient.
This is clearly done at the cost of
confidentiality.
3.147 The circumstances attracting such comments bear a striking similarity
to those that have led to this Inquiry.
3.148 By drawing attention to the functional similarity of the civilian and
common law doctrines protecting the lawyer-client relationship,
suggestions as to what should be done about perceived abuses, the CBBE, through
the Edward Report, in many ways may be
seen as anticipating some of the very
questions posed in IP 33:
The Community and national authorities should recognise that the rights, duties
and privileges of lawyers are not simply a peculiarity
of the law relating to
lawyers but are specifically designed to protect the liberty and privacy of the
individual, the proper administration
of justice and the right to a fair trial.
The Bars of the member states have a right and duty to protest against any
infringement
or curtailment of that protection. They stand, in this respect,
between the citizen and the state. Abuse of privilege by individual
acting as accomplices of their clients should be punished by professional and,
if appropriate, by penal sanctions directed
against them as individuals, rather
than by withdrawing protection from the innocent. If abuse cannot be proved
against individuals,
it is not to be presumed to
3.149 The concerns of the CCBE were expressed in 2001, and affirmed in
December 2004, as ‘
A Statement of Position on Lawyers’ Secrecy
and Confidentiality and their Importance for a Democratic Society that follows
3.150 The view is commonly expressed that the civil or inquisitorial system
is more directly concerned with discovery of the truth—unlike
adversarial system, which uses the rules of evidence to prevent the court from
considering what would be otherwise relevant
It is therefore interesting to note the direct similarities between the rules
protecting client-lawyer confidentiality in both systems.
This similarity
supports the argument that confidentiality between lawyer and client promotes
the proper administration of justice
and the right to a fair trial, regardless
of the system of justice employed.
J Gans and A Palmer,
Principles of Evidence
(2nd ed, 2004),
Parliamentary privilege, which grants
parliamentarians immunity from any civil or criminal action arising from what
they say in
Parliament, also exists under state, territory and Commonwealth
Acts: see, for example, the
Parliamentary Privileges Act 1987
Pyneboard Pty Ltd v Trade
Practices Commission
[1983] HCA 9
(1983) 152 CLR 328
Sorby v Commonwealth
[1983] HCA 10
152 CLR 281
Comptroller General of Customs v Disciplinary Appeal
[1992] FCA 194
(1992) 35 FCR 466.
time of writing the uniform Evidence Acts are the
Evidence Act 1995
Evidence Act 1995
Evidence Act 2001
Evidence Act 2004
[1983] HCA 39
(1983) 153 CLR 52.
[1976] HCA 63
(1976) 135 CLR 674.
Australia Resources Ltd v Commissioner of Taxation
[1999] HCA 67
(1999) 201 CLR
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Evidence Act 1995
Australian Law Reform
Commission, New South Wales Law Reform Commission and Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Uniform Evidence Law
, ALRC 102 (2005), Recs 14–2,
14–3, 14–4.
The Uniform
Evidence Bill may be viewed at
<www.pco.nsw.gov.au/uniform_legislation.htm> at 31 August
It should be noted that in New
South Wales, the Supreme Court and the District Court have amended their rules
to provide specifically
Evidence Act 1995
(NSW) applies
pre-trial. Since the enactment of the
Civil Procedure Act 2005
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005
(NSW), privileged documents are
defined in the Dictionary of the Rules as information that could not be adduced
Evidence Act 1995
(NSW). The rules apply
Evidence Act 1995
(NSW) to discovery,
interrogatories, subpoenas, notices to produce and oral examinations. These
rules apply the Act
only to civil proceedings and not, for example, to
subpoenas in criminal matters.
nature of those functions is discussed in Ch 4.
Australian Law Reform Commission, New
South Wales Law Reform Commission and Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Uniform Evidence Law
, ALRC 102 (2005), Rec
Royal Commissions
Evidence Act 1995
ALRC 102 did not
recommend that the
Evidence Act
provisions should be extended to apply to
Royal Commissions.
[1983] HCA 39
(1983) 153 CLR 52
‘Implications of the Human Right Rationale for Legal Professional
Privilege—The Demise of Implied Statutory
Abrogation?’ in P Mirfield
and R Smith (eds),
Essays for Colin Tapper
Auburn states that ‘the
decisive pieces of information, the reasoning underlying the first reported
cases and precise knowledge
of pre-Elizabethan Chancery procedure, are simply
not available’: J Auburn,
Legal Professional Privilege: Law and
Treatise on the Anglo-American System of Evidence in Trials at Common Law
(3rd ed, 1940), 547, [2290].
Legal Professional Privilege: Law and Theory
The outline of the historical
development of the doctrine is drawn principally from N Williams,
‘Discovery of Civil Litigation
Trial Preparation in Canada’
The Canadian Bar Review
Bligh v Benson
N Williams,
‘Discovery of Civil Litigation Trial Preparation in Canada’
The Canadian Bar Review
Ibid, 13. The position in chancery
was different. As Williams noted, ‘The practice of requiring a party to
produce evidence
against himself that was in his possession, established
originally in the ecclesiastical courts, rested on the notion that it would
against conscience to allow him to withhold it’:
Ibid, 16 (footnotes
A Treatise on the
Anglo-American System of Evidence in Trials at Common Law
(3rd ed, 1940),
374–375, [1845].
F Pollock and F
The History of English Law Before the Time of Edward I
Ibid, vol 2,
N Williams,
‘Discovery of Civil Litigation Trial Preparation in Canada’
The Canadian Bar Review
M’Corquodale v
(1876) 1 CPD, 481; N Williams, ‘Discovery of Civil Litigation
Trial Preparation in Canada’
(1980) 58(1)
The Canadian Bar Review
, 42. In equity the evidence rule was that discovery did not extend to the
evidence in support of the adversary’s case. The
concern was to avoid
perjury and witness interference. The common law privilege developed
independently: N Williams, ‘Discovery
of Civil Litigation Trial
Preparation in Canada’
(1980) 58(1)
The Canadian Bar Review
N Williams,
‘Discovery of Civil Litigation Trial Preparation in Canada’
The Canadian Bar Review
R Desiatnik,
Legal Professional
Privilege in Australia
(2nd ed, 2005), 12 (footnotes omitted). The
developments are considered more fully in, eg, J Wigmore,
A Treatise on the
Anglo-American System of Evidence in Trials at Common Law
(3rd ed, 1940),
Baker v Campbell
[1983] HCA 39
153 CLR 52.
R Desiatnik,
This included the decision of
the House of Lords in
Three Rivers District Council v Governor and Company of
Bank of England
[2004] UKHL 48
[2005] 1 AC 610.
AWB Ltd v Cole
(2006) 152 FCR 382,
E Kyrou, ‘Under Attack:
Legal Professional Privilege’ (2007) 81(3)
Law Institute Journal
R Desiatnik,
Professional Privilege in Australia
(2nd ed, 2005),
Pratt Holdings Pty Ltd v
Commissioner of Taxation
[2004] FCAFC 122
(2004) 207 ALR 217
Ibid, [42], [104]; see V
Morfuni, ‘Legal Professional Privilege and the Government’s Right to
Access Information and
Documents’ (2004) 33
Australian Taxation Review
Pratt Holdings Pty Ltd
v Commissioner of Taxation
[2004] FCAFC 122
(2004) 207 ALR 217
, [87] (Stone
J O’Neill, ‘Loosening
the Shackles on Advice Privilege’ (2004) 42(8)
Law Society Journal
The Daniels Corporation
International Pty Ltd v Australian Competition and Consumer Commission
[2002] HCA 49
(2002) 213 CLR 543
, 552 (Gleeson CJ, Gaudron, Gummow and Hayne
Pratt Holdings Pty Ltd v
Commissioner of Taxation
[2004] FCAFC 122
(2004) 207 ALR 217
, [86]. In ALRC 102, the
Commissions recommended that the uniform Evidence Acts be amended to follow the
reasoning in
and allow communications with third parties to be
included under the advice privilege: Australian Law Reform Commission, New South
Wales Law Reform Commission and Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Evidence Law
, ALRC 102 (2005), Rec
Westpac Banking
Corporation v 789TEN Pty Ltd
[2005] NSWCA
Australian Law Reform
Commission, New South Wales Law Reform Commission and Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Uniform Evidence Law
, ALRC 102 (2005), Rec
Model Uniform Evidence
Bill, s 118: <www.pco.nsw.gov.au/uniform_legislation.htm> at 31 August
Law Council of Australia,
Correspondence
, 12 July 2007.
Attorney General’s Department of New South Wales,
9 May 2007.
Banking Corporation v 789TEN Pty Ltd
[2005] NSWCA 321
(1992), 52.
[1983] HCA 39
(1983) 153 CLR 52
, 132 (Dawson
Since the commencement of the
Commonwealth and New South Wales legislation in 1995, a number of appellate
cases have applied the
privilege provisions to discovery and inspection of
documents on the basis that the uniform Evidence Acts have a derivative
application
to the common law. However, in
Mann v Carnell
[1999] HCA 66
(1999) 201 CLR
Esso v Commissioner of Taxation
[1999] HCA 67
(1999) 201 CLR 49
, the High Court
rejected this approach. The wording of the religious confessions privilege is
not limited to apply only to a witness
proceeding.
Attorney-General for
the Northern Territory v Maurice
[1986] HCA 80
(1986) 161 CLR 475
National Crime Authority v
[1991] FCA 234
(1991) 29 FCR 203
, 211. The issue of sufficient disclosure is addressed
further in Chapter 8.
[1976] HCA 63
(1976) 135 CLR 674
, 689 (Stephen, Mason and Murphy
Ingot Capital Investments Pty
Ltd v Macquarie Equity Capital Markets Ltd
[2006] NSWSC 530
(2006) 67 NSWLR
Bushell v Repatriation
[1992] HCA 47
(1992) 175 CLR 408
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1975
Ingot Capital Investments
Pty Ltd v Macquarie Equity Capital Markets Ltd
[2006] NSWSC 530
(2006) 67 NSWLR 91
Ibid, [55]. The issue of whether
the material could have been covered by advice privilege, on the basis that the
decision in
may allow some third party communications to be
covered, was not raised in this case.
AWB Ltd v Cole
(2006) 152 FCR
Law Council of Australia,
Australian Law Reform
Commission, New South Wales Law Reform Commission and Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Uniform Evidence Law
, ALRC 102 (2005), Rec
It should be noted,
however, that the ALRC did not recommend that the
Evidence Act
AAT proceedings more generally.
Australian Government Solicitor,
J Hunter, C Cameron and T
Litigation I—Civil Procedure
(7th ed, 2005), [8.35]. This
was most recently confirmed by the Court of Appeal of Western Australia, which
found that confidentiality
was a feature of both advice and litigation
Southern Equities Corporation Ltd v West Australian Government
Holdings Ltd
(1993) 10 WAR 1
R Desiatnik,
Legal Professional Privilege in Australia
(2nd ed, 2005),
Bennett v Chief
Executive Officer of the Australian Customs Service
[2003] FCA 53
(2003) 37 AAR 8
National Crime Authority v S
[1991] FCA 234
(1991) 29 FCR 203
Attorney-General for
the Northern Territory v Maurice
[1986] HCA 80
(1986) 161 CLR
Baker v Campbell
[1983] HCA 39
86; R Desiatnik,
Legal Professional Privilege in
(2nd ed, 2005), 29.
Hunter, C Cameron and T Henning,
Litigation I—Civil Procedure
ed, 2005), [8.34].
R v Braham and
[1976] VicRp 56
[1976] VR 547.
See J Gans and A Palmer,
Australian Principles of
(2nd ed, 2004), 98.
v Braham and Mason
[1976] VicRp 56
[1976] VR 547.
Grant v Downs
[1976] HCA 63
(1976) 135 CLR
Esso Australia Resources Ltd v
Commissioner of Taxation
[1999] HCA 67
(1999) 201 CLR
Australian Competition and
Consumer Commission v Australian Safeway Stores Pty Ltd
(1998) 153 ALR
Waterford v Commonwealth
[1987] HCA 25
(1987) 163 CLR 54
J Gans and A
Australian Principles of Evidence
(2nd ed, 2004),
Federal Commissioner of
Taxation v Spotless Services Ltd
[1996] HCA 34
(1996) 186 CLR 404
, 416. See R Desiatnik,
Legal Professional Privilege in Australia
(2nd ed, 2005), 39.
Waugh v British Airways
[1979] UKHL 2
[1980] AC 521.
R Desiatnik,
Legal Professional Privilege in Australia
(2nd ed, 2005), 40.
A Ligertwood,
(4th ed, 2004), 293.
Australian Federal Police v Propend Finance
(1997) 188 CLR 501, 509.
A Ligertwood,
Australian Evidence
(4th ed, 2004),
Australian Federal Police v
Propend Finance
(1997) 188 CLR 501, 509. The decision in
recently affirmed in
Barnes v Commissioner of Taxation
[2007] FCAFC 88
(22 August 2007).
Ventouris v Mountain
[1991] 1 WLR 607
Holdings Ltd v Bond
[1991] SASC 3069
(1991) 57 SASR 21
Australian Taxation Office,
Australian Taxation Office,
Consultation LPP 35
Australian Taxation Office,
See B Thanki (ed)
of Privilege
(2006), [4.23] citing
Lyall v Kennedy (No 3)
Australian Federal
Police v Propend Finance
(1997) 188 CLR 501,
Waterford v
Commonwealth
[1987] HCA 25
(1987) 163 CLR 54
, 70. It should be noted that Brennan
J’s comments were obiter.
Sydney Airports Corporation Ltd v Singapore Airlines Ltd and Qantas Ltd
[2005] NSWCA 47.
‘Under Attack: Legal Professional Privilege’ (2007) 81(3)
Institute Journal
Seven Network Ltd v News Ltd
[2005] FCA 142
Zemanek v Commonwealth Bank
of Australia
(Unreported, Federal Court of Australia, Hill J, 2 October
1997), [4] cited in E Kyrou, ‘Under Attack: Legal Professional
(2007) 81(3)
Law Institute Journal
S McNicol, ‘Client Legal
Privilege and Legal Professional Privilege: Considered, Compared and
Contrasted’
Australian Bar Review
Vance v McCormack
(2004) 154 ACTR 12. This case concerned advice given by legal and military
officers employed by the Department of
Crispin J determined that
this case concerned an application for an order to produce documents for
inspection pre-trial, so the
common law applied rather than the uniform Evidence
Vance v McCormack
(2004) 154 ACTR 12, [38]–[40].
citing, eg,
Legal Practitioners Act 1970
Legal Profession Act 1987
Legal Practice
(Vic) s 314.
Commonwealth v Vance
[2005] ACTCA 35.
The ACT Court of Appeal found that
Supreme Court Rules 1937
(ACT) O 34, r 3 applied the
Evidence Act
Australian Hospital Care v
Duggan (No 2)
[1999] VSC 131.
Ibid, [35]–[59]. See, eg,
Attorney-General (NT) v Kearney
[1985] HCA 60
158 CLR 500
Waterford v Commonwealth
[1987] HCA 25
(1987) 163 CLR 54.
Australian Hospital Care v
Duggan (No 2)
[1999] VSC 131
, [54]. This view was also espoused in
Australian Securities and Investments Commission v Rich
[2004] NSWSC
See also Brennan J in
Waterford v Commonwealth
[1987] HCA 25
(1987) 163 CLR 54
71: ‘If the purpose of the privilege is to be fulfilled, the legal adviser
must be competent and independent. ... Independent,
in order that the personal
loyalties, duties or interests of the adviser should not influence the legal
advice which he gives or
the fairness of his conduct of litigation on behalf of
his client. If a legal adviser is incompetent to advise or to conduct litigation
or if he is unable to be professionally detached in giving advice or in
conducting litigation, there is an unacceptable risk that
the purpose for which
privilege is granted will be
subverted.’
The Daniels
Corporation International Pty Ltd v Australian Competition and Consumer
[2002] HCA 49
(2002) 213 CLR 543.
See discussion in Ch 2 of the ‘human right’ rationale for client
legal privilege.
‘Implications of the Human Right Rationale for Legal Professional
Privilege—The Demise of Implied Statutory
Abrogation?’ in P Mirfield
and R Smith (eds),
Essays for Colin Tapper
Environment Protection
Authority v Caltex Refining Co Pty Ltd
[1993] HCA 74
(1993) 178 CLR
Australian Competition and
Consumer Commission v Daniels Corporation International Pty Ltd
ALR 114, [57].
A Bruce, ‘The
Trade Practices Act 1974
and the Demise of Legal Professional Privilege’
Federal Law Review
The Daniels Corporation
International Pty Ltd v Australian Competition and Consumer Commission
[2002] HCA 49
(2002) 213 CLR 543
Ibid, 576; citing
AM & S Europe Ltd v Commission of the European
Communities
[1983] QB 878, 913.
S McNicol, ‘Implications of the Human Right Rationale for Legal
Professional Privilege—The Demise of Implied Statutory
Abrogation?’
in P Mirfield and R Smith (eds),
Essays for Colin Tapper
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Client Legal Privilege and Federal Investigatory Bodies
Question 2–3.
Wales Bar Association,
Australian Securities and
Investments Commission,
Law Council of Australia,
Law Society of New South
1 June 2007. A similar view was
expressed in: Australian Corporate Lawyers Association,
22 June 2007; BHP Billiton Mitsubishi Alliance,
1 June 2007; National Australia Bank Limited and others,
Australian Government
See S McNicol,
(1992), Ch 2.
Ligertwood,
Australian Evidence
(4th ed, 2004),
Mann v Carnell
[1999] HCA 66
, 13. See also A Ligertwood,
Australian Evidence
(4th ed, 2004),
DSE (Holdings) Pty Ltd v
Interan Inc
[2003] FCA 384
(2003) 127 FCR 499
SQMB v Minister for
Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs
[2004] FCA 241
(2004) 205 ALR 392.
also M Edelstein, ‘Legal Professional Privilege’
(2004) 78(11)
Law Institute Journal
SQMB v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs
[2004] FCA 241
(2004) 205 ALR 392
‘Under Attack: Legal Professional Privilege’ (2007) 81(3)
Institute Journal
Legal Professional Privilege in Australia
(2nd ed, 2005),
Southern Equities
Corporation Ltd (in liq) v Arthur Anderson and Co
[1997] SASC 6712
(1997) 70 SASR 166
see R Desiatnik,
Legal Professional Privilege in Australia
2005), 168.
Waterford v The
Commonwealth
established the general principle that client legal privilege
could be claimed by public sector decision makers:
Waterford v
Commonwealth
[1987] HCA 25
(1987) 163 CLR 54.
Commissioner of Taxation v Rio Tinto
[2006] FCAFC 86
(2006) 151 FCR
Ibid, [54]. Cited in E Kyrou,
‘Under Attack: Legal Professional Privilege’ (2007) 81(3)
Institute Journal
Commissioner of Taxation v Rio Tinto
[2006] FCAFC 86
(2006) 151 FCR 341
Department of Justice v Osland
[2007] VSCA 96
E Kyrou, ‘Under Attack:
Legal Professional Privilege’ (2007) 81(3)
Law Institute Journal
Attorney-General
(NT) v Kearney
[1985] HCA 60
(1985) 158 CLR
Capar v Police
Commissioner
(1994) 34 NSWLR
AWB v Cole (No 5)
[2006] FCA 1234
[1920] AC 581.
Australian Federal Police v Propend Finance
(1997) 188 CLR 501,
AWB v Cole (No 5)
[2006] FCA 1234
Toohey, Gaudron, and Kirby JJ. McHugh J and Brennan J were in dissent. Gummow J
did not deal with this question: R Desiatnik,
Legal Professional Privilege in
(2nd ed, 2005), 116.
Australian Federal Police v Propend Finance
(1997) 188 CLR 501,
R Desiatnik,
Professional Privilege in Australia
(2nd ed, 2005),
Corporate Affairs Commission
of New South Wales v Yuill
[1991] HCA 28
(1991) 172 CLR 319
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Client Legal Privilege and Federal Investigatory Bodies
33 (2007), Question 2–1.
Australian Securities and Investments Commission,
29 June 2007.
Competition and Consumer Commission,
Australian Taxation Office,
R Desiatnik,
Law Society of New South
Law Council of Australia,
For example, see
AWB v Cole (No 5)
[2006] FCA 1234
Clements, Dunne & Bell Pty
Ltd v Commissioner, Australian Federal Police
[2001] FCA 1858
[1999] FCA 447:
Australian Government Solicitor,
Members of the New South
Consultation
, Sydney, 23 May
For example, Office of the
Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions,
Consultation
Canberra, 31 May 2007.
Law Reform Commission,
Principled Regulation: Federal Civil and
Administrative Penalties in Australia
, ALRC 95 (2002),
Broadcasting Services
Corporate Affairs Commission of New South Wales v Yuill
[1991] HCA 28
(1991) 172 CLR
The Daniels
Corporation International Pty Ltd v Australian Competition and Consumer
[2002] HCA 49
(2002) 213 CLR 543
, 553 (Gleeson CJ, Gaudron, Gummow and Hayne
& S Europe Ltd v Commission of the European Communities
[1983] 1 QB 878,
The Professional
Secret, Confidentiality and Legal Professional Privilege in the Nine Member
States of the European Community
(1976) Council of the Bars and Law
Societies of the European Community (as the Council was then called); Council of
the Bars and
Law Societies of the European Union,
The Professional Secret,
Confidentiality and Legal Professional Privilege in Europe: An Update on the
Report by DAO Edward, QC
(2003); Council of the Bars and Law Societies of
the European Union,
Protection of Confidences between European Lawyer and
(2004); J Fish,
Regulated Legal Professionals and Professional
Privilege within the European Union, the European Economic Area and Switzerland,
Certain Other European Jurisdictions
(2004) Council of the Bars and Law
Societies of the European Union.
Edward subsequently became President of the CCBE and then a Judge.
The member states considered were:
France, Belgium, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Germany, Italy, Denmark, United
Kingdom and Ireland.
Council of the
Bars and Law Societies of the European Union,
The Professional Secret,
Confidentiality and Legal Professional Privilege in Europe: An Update on the
Report by DAO Edward, QC
Regulated Legal Professionals and Professional Privilege within the
European Union, the European Economic Area and Switzerland, and
Certain Other
European Jurisdictions
(2004) Council of the Bars and Law Societies of the
European Union.
Professional Secret, Confidentiality and Legal Professional Privilege in the
Nine Member States of the European Community
(1976) Council of the Bars and
Law Societies of the European Community, 5–6, [2]–[4].
Ibid, 6, [6]. See, eg, art
226–13 of the French Criminal Code which states that the disclosure of
secret information by a
person entrusted with such a secret, either because of
his position or profession, or because of a temporary function or mission,
punished by one year’s imprisonment and a fine of
Bundesrechtsanwaltordnung (BRAO) German Lawyers Act
(‘The lawyer is bound by professional secrecy obligations. This duty
refers to information that the lawyer becomes
aware of in the course of the
exercise of his profession. This does not apply to facts which are public or do
not require secrecy
according to their significance’): set out in Council
of the Bars and Law Societies of the European Union,
The Professional Secret,
Confidentiality and Legal Professional Privilege in Europe: An Update on the
Report by DAO Edward, QC
The Professional
Secret, Confidentiality and Legal Professional Privilege in the Nine Member
States of the European Community
(1976) Council of the Bars and Law
Societies of the European Community, 6, [5].
AM & S Europe Ltd v
Commission of the European Communities
[1983] 1 QB 878,
The Professional
Secret, Confidentiality and Legal Professional Privilege in the Nine Member
States of the European Community
(1976) Council of the Bars and Law
Societies of the European Community, 6, [7].
AM & S Europe Ltd v
Commission of the European Communities
[1983] 1 QB 878,
The Professional
Secret, Confidentiality and Legal Professional Privilege in the Nine Member
States of the European Community
(1976) Council of the Bars and Law
Societies of the European Community,
Ibid (footnote references
Ibid, 4. This is very
much in line with the rationale for the privilege under the common law, as
discussed in Ch 2.
Council of the Bars and Law
Societies of the European Union,
The Professional Secret, Confidentiality and
Legal Professional Privilege in Europe: An Update on the Report by DAO Edward,
(2003), 11.
Professional Secret, Confidentiality and Legal Professional Privilege in the
Nine Member States of the European Community
(1976) Council of the Bars and
Law Societies of the European Community, 25,
Council of the Bars and Law
Societies of the European Union,
Protection of Confidences between European
Lawyer and Client
eg, E Whitton, ‘Justice or Money? How to Save the Law from Contempt’
(1998) 5(4)
E Law — Murdoch University Electronic Journal of Law
<www.murdoch.edu.au/elaw/issues/v5n4/whitton54.html>.
4. Overview of Federal Bodies with
Coercive Information-Gathering Powers
Introduction
Criminal law enforcement
Australian Crime Commission
Australian Federal Police
Australian Commission for Law Enforcement Integrity
Prosecutions
Office of the Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions
Competition laws and consumer protection
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission
Financial markets
Australian Securities and Investments Commission
Australian Prudential Regulation Authority
Australian Transaction Reports and Analysis Centre
Australian Taxation Office
Inspector-General of Taxation
Intelligence and security
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation
Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security
Public administration
Commonwealth Ombudsman
Building and construction
Office of the Australian Building and Construction Commissioner
Social security
Health and aged care
Medicare Australia
Department of Health and Ageing
Gene Technology Regulator
Australian Pesticides and Veterinary Medicines Authority
Human rights
Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission
Office of the Privacy Commissioner
Border control and immigration
Australian Customs Service
Department of Immigration and Citizenship
Australian Quarantine Inspection Service
Australian Fisheries Management Authority
Migration Agents Registration Authority
Communications
Australian Communications and Media Authority
Environment
Department of the Environment and Water Resources
Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority
Australian Maritime Safety Authority
Department of Defence and the Australian Defence Force
Australian Energy Regulator
Office of the Inspector of Transport Security
Civil Aviation Safety Authority
Australian Maritime Safety Authority
Australian Transport Safety Bureau
Workplace Ombudsman
Child Support Agency
Insolvency and Trustee Service Australia
National Offshore Petroleum Safety Authority
Royal Commissions of inquiry
4. Overview of Federal Bodies with
Coercive Information-Gathering Powers
Introduction
4.1 This chapter considers the investigatory and associated functions of
federal bodies that have coercive information-gathering or
related powers, as
well as the nature of those powers. The bodies discussed include those nominated
in the Terms of Reference as
well as a number of other federal agencies and
departments. Where the information is available, the chapter will also address
frequency with which federal bodies use coercive
and their policies in this
regard. Some bodies, for example, have a policy of using their coercive powers
only as a measure of last
4.2 Investigatory functions may involve ascertaining factual circumstances or
whether there has been a breach of the law, or gathering
evidence of breaches of
the law. Associated functions vary, but include functions flowing from the
outcome of investigations, such
as: conducting prosecutions; taking civil or
administrative enforcement action; seizing the proceeds of crime; and making
recommendations
for reform; as well as functions that are not dependent on the
outcome of investigations such as: gathering intelligence; conducting
and monitoring compliance with Commonwealth regulatory laws.
4.3 There are, of course, important differences in the aims and functions of
federal bodies, and the subject matters with which they
deal. Varying coercive
powers support the different functions of federal bodies in a vast array of
areas, including: criminal law
enforcement; border control and immigration;
competition regulation and consumer protection; financial and prudential
regulation;
revenue; social security; communications; health and aged care;
human rights and public
administration.
4.4 For the purpose of performing their investigative and associated
functions, federal bodies may obtain information and documents
on a voluntary
basis. However, they also have the ability to obtain information by using a
range of coercive powers, which are found
in various statutes. Appendix 1 sets
out a list of the statutes containing coercive information-gathering powers
exercisable by particular
federal bodies. These powers include: the power to
compel the production of documents, things or information; the answering of
the interception of communications; and the entering of premises to
to apply for an
order that a witness deliver his or her passport in order to secure compliance
with their coercive powers where there
is reason to suspect that the witness
intends to leave the country.
4.5 There are different statutory prerequisites to the exercise of coercive
powers and different ranks of persons delegated to exercise
those powers.
Failure to comply with the requirements is often an offence, attracting
punishment in the form of fines or imprisonment.
Failure to comply also may
trigger an agency’s powers to make other orders or may lead to a court
order to comply.
4.6 Many information-gathering powers can be exercised against persons who
are not the target of an investigation but happen to have
information or
documents that may be relevant to an investigation concerning the conduct of
other persons.
4.7 Not all coercive powers can be categorised as information
gathering—for example, powers of arrest on their own are not
‘information
gathering’, although arrest can be a precursor to the
exercise of coercive information-gathering powers. Further, the application
client legal privilege will not typically arise in relation to certain coercive
information-gathering powers—such as powers
to search for and record
fingerprints, or to take samples of a person’s handwriting or
DNA—although the exercise of such
powers may involve a consideration of
the application of the privilege against self-incrimination.
Criminal law
enforcement
Australian Crime
4.8 The Australian Crime Commission (ACC) is a federal statutory body
established under the
Australian Crime Commission Act 2002
Act) to reduce the incidence and impact of serious and organised
It commenced operations on 1
January 2003, replacing the National Crime Authority, the Australian Bureau of
Criminal Intelligence
and the Office of Strategic Crime Assessments. The ACC
works in collaboration with other law enforcement agencies, federal and
ACC’s functions
4.9 The ACC has a number of intelligence and investigatory functions,
including: collecting and analysing criminal intelligence; undertaking
intelligence operations; investigating matters relating to ‘federally
relevant criminal activity’ crime when authorised
by the ACC Board; and
providing reports to the ACC Board on the outcomes of intelligence and
investigations, as well as advice on
national criminal intelligence
priorities.
The ACC Board comprises
members from a number of federal bodies including: the Commissioner of the
Australian Federal Police; the
Secretary of the Attorney-General’s
Department; the Chief Executive Officer (CEO) of the Australian Customs Service;
the Chairperson
of the Australian Securities and Investments Commission (ASIC);
the Director-General of the Australian Security Intelligence Organisation
(ASIO); and as the head of the police force of each state and
ACC’s powers
4.10 The ACC has a range of coercive powers, which are used where ordinary
law enforcement methods are considered unlikely to be effective.
The ACC Board
determines the use of these powers.
The powers are exercisable by ACC examiners, who are independent statutory
officers, appointed by the Governor-General, and support
the ACC’s special
intelligence operations and special investigations. A special investigation is
designed to disrupt and deter
identified criminal groups by gathering evidence
of criminal activity that may result in criminal proceedings and the seizure of
illegally obtained assets.
August 2007, a special investigation may also include an investigation into
Indigenous violence or child
4.11 The coercive powers include the ability to summon a person to attend an
examination to give evidence under oath or affirmation
and the power to require
a person to produce documents or things specified in a
Failure to comply is an
indictable offence punishable with a maximum fine of $22,000 and five
years’ imprisonment.
powers are complemented by the ACC’s powers to obtain information from
certain federal, state and territory
and to apply for
warrants for the interception of communications in respect of a
telecommunications service, and for surveillance
device warrants for the
investigation of certain federal or territory offences and certain state
offences with a federal aspect.
The ACC also has the power to apply for the issue of a warrant, including by
telephone in circumstances of urgency, and to apply
for a court order requiring
a person to deliver his or her passport to the
4.12 During 2005–06, the ACC conducted 605 examinations and used its
powers to demand documents under s 29 of the
Australian Crime Commission
(Cth) (ACC Act) on 480
In that period, the
ACC reported the successful disruption of 22 criminal syndicates and 26
organised crime identities.
ACC Board has approved the National Indigenous Violence and Child Abuse
Intelligence Task Force and the Outlaw Motorcycle Gangs
National Intelligence
Task Force, a number of special intelligence operations, and the following
special investigations:
High Risk Crime Groups
—Investigates high risk crime
groups involved in significant serious and organised crime. These groups have a
willingness and
capacity to corrupt public officials, intimidate witnesses and
use knowledge of law enforcement methods to defeat investigations.
Money Laundering and Tax Fraud
—Investigates serious
financial crime such as large-scale money laundering, tax fraud and associated
crimes, with the aim of
detecting and dismantling underlying organised criminal
enterprises.
Wickenby Matters
—Progresses criminal investigations
under Operation Wickenby into nationally significant organised tax fraud and
money laundering activities. The ACC also provides partner agencies
with assistance through the use of its coercive powers to gather
intelligence and support additional criminal investigations resulting from the
wider Project Wickenby.
Established Criminal Networks (Victoria
)—investigates
state offences committed by members of established criminal networks active and
based in Victoria, including
murder, illicit drugs, firearms and
corruption.
Australian Federal
4.13 The Australian Federal Police (AFP) is a statutory authority established
Australian Federal Police Act
(Cth) (AFP Act). It
falls within the portfolio of the Australian Government Attorney-General’s
Department, and answers to the
Minister for Justice and
The AFP is the primary
law enforcement agency responsible for enforcing federal
It also takes a lead role
in the maintenance of national security.
AFP’s functions
4.14 The AFP has a number of functions set out in the AFP Act including the
provision of police services for the purposes of assisting
Australian and
foreign law enforcement agencies; intelligence agencies and government
regulatory agencies; and the provision of police
services in relation to: the
laws of the Commonwealth, the Australian Capital Territory and the Jervis Bay
Territory; the property
of the Commonwealth; and the safeguarding of
Commonwealth interests. It also performs functions conferred by the
Protection Act 1994
(Cth) and the
Proceeds of Crime Act 2002
and provides
protection to Australian High Office Holders, visiting Heads of State and
selected national establishments and
infrastructure.
4.15 The AFP investigates federal crime, including: terrorism; illegal drug
importation; tax and social security fraud; people smuggling;
and the domestic
and international exploitation of women and
It also investigates
state crime that has a federal
4.16 The Minister for Justice and Customs can direct the AFP as to the
general policy to be pursued by it in performing its
The Ministerial
direction, signed on 31 August 2004, directs the AFP to give special emphasis to
a number of strategies, including:
preventing, countering and investigating terrorism under
Commonwealth legislation;
preventing, countering and investigating transnational and
multi-jurisdictional crime, illicit drug trafficking, organised people
smuggling, serious fraud, ‘high tech’ crime involving information
technology and communications, and money laundering;
identifying and confiscating assets involved in or derived from the
above criminal
activities.
2005–06, the AFP reported that it had undertaken high profile
counter-terrorism investigations and airport security;
dismantled major fraud
syndicates; was involved in dismantling what was suspected to be the third
largest clandestine laboratory
discovered in the world; arrested and secured the
conviction of high profile criminal identities; and assisted in the seizure of
millions of dollars of proceeds of crime
4.18 Agencies may request the AFP to undertake or assist them with
investigations. For example, the AFP can provide operational assistance
course of agencies’ criminal investigations, including execution of search
warrants pursuant to
Crimes Act 1914
international liaison and
Interpol requests.
2005–06, the bulk of assistance by the AFP to ASIC, for example, involved
AFP’s powers
4.19 AFP officers have a wide range of coercive powers, including powers to:
arrest persons without warrant
or pursuant to a warrant;
conduct ordinary, frisk and strip searches of
premises under warrant,
without warrant in certain circumstances, including in emergency
situations.
AFP members of
varying ranks of seniority also have powers to:
apply to a magistrate for permission to carry out prescribed
procedures on a suspect in order to determine his or her
stop, question and search persons in relation to terrorist acts, and
to seize terrorism related items found on a
obtain information or documents, for example, about terrorist acts
from operators of aircraft
or documents from any
person that are relevant to the investigation of a serious terrorism offence or
a serious offence;
request specified information and documents from financial
institutions under the
Proceeds of Crime Act 2002
apply to a magistrate for an order requiring a person to produce
‘property-tracking’
use, without warrant, optical surveillance devices and surveillance
devices for listening to or recording
apply for warrants authorising the use of surveillance devices on
specified premises; in or on a specified object or class of object;
respect of the conversations, activities or location of a specified person or a
person whose identity is
intercept communications, without warrant, in certain
circumstances,
and to apply for
warrants to intercept
communications;
take identification material from a person in lawful custody or
cause such material to be taken, including prints of the person’s
fingers, feet or toes, recordings of the person’s voice, samples of the
person’s handwriting or photographs and
video recordings of the
order a person to carry out a non-intimate forensic procedure on a
Commission for Law Enforcement Integrity
4.20 The Australian Commission for Law Enforcement Integrity (ACLEI),
established by the
Law Enforcement Integrity Commissioner Act 2006
(LEIC Act) began operating on 30 December
The function of ACLEI is
to assist the Integrity Commissioner in performing his or her
ACLEI staff provide
investigative, intelligence and administrative support to the Integrity
Commissioner.
Integrity Commissioner’s
4.21 The core function of the Integrity Commissioner is to detect,
investigate and prevent corruption within the AFP and the ACC,
as well as any
other Australian Government agency that has a law enforcement function and is
prescribed in the regulations.
Other functions of the Integrity Commissioner include: referring corruption
issues, where appropriate, to a law enforcement agency
for investigation;
managing or overseeing the investigation of corruption issues by law enforcement
agencies; conducting public inquiries
into corruption issues, at the request of
the Minister; and collecting, analysing and disseminating intelligence in
relation to corruption
in law enforcement
The Integrity
Commissioner is required to give priority to serious or systemic corruption in
carrying out his or her
4.22 The known incidence of corruption in the AFP and the ACC is
infrequent.
However, the
Attorney-General has expressed the view that it is important that safeguards are
in place to preserve integrity in law
enforcement
and to establish a
body that would detect and investigate corruption in the AFP or ACC
‘should it arise’.
In its first six months of operation, ACLEI investigated 18 corruption
allegations against the AFP and
Integrity Commissioner’s
4.23 The Integrity Commissioner may initiate his or her own investigations,
or have information about a corruption issue referred
by the Minister, the head
of an agency or any other person. The Integrity Commissioner has powers similar
to those of Royal Commissions
concerning the conduct of
investigations.
Many of the
provisions in the LEIC Act mirror the provisions of the
Royal Commissions Act
(Cth) and the ACC Act. For the purposes of investigating a corruption
issue the Commissioner has the power to:
request a staff member of a law enforcement agency or a person other
than a staff member, to give specified information or to produce
documents or
summon a person to attend a hearing to give sworn evidence or to
produce documents or things, overriding the privilege against
self-incrimination;
enter places occupied by law enforcement agencies without a search
warrant and inspect and copy any documents relevant to the investigation,
certain circumstances, seize those
Integrity Commissioner also can apply for a court order that a person deliver up
his or her passport if there is reason to
suspect that the person—having
received a summons to attend a hearing or having appeared at a
hearing—intends to leave
Australia and there are reasonable grounds to
believe that the person may be able to give evidence or produce documents or
relevant to an
investigation.
4.25 Authorised officers of ACLEI, including the Integrity Commissioner, also
have the same powers of arrest as a police
and are able to apply
for and execute warrants to search premises and persons for the purposes of
investigating a corruption
The LEIC Act sets out the
scope of the powers to search.
For example, the power to search premises includes the power to take
fingerprints and samples of things found at the premises for
forensic purposes,
as well as the power to take photographs or video recordings of things on the
The power to search
persons extends to searching any aircraft, vehicle or vessel that the person had
operated or occupied within
24 hours before the search began, for things
specified in the warrant.
Authorised officers also have the power to apply for telephone intercept
warrants and warrants authorising the use of surveillance
4.26 The Acting Integrity Commissioner advised the ALRC that during the first
six months of operation he only once used the coercive
information-gathering
powers conferred by the LEIC Act, and summonses were issued to a number of
persons to provide information in
connection with an
investigation.
relation to telephone intercept warrants and surveillance devices were not used.
The Commissioner expressed the opinion
that the various coercive
information-gathering powers are an ‘indispensable investigative tool
available to ACLEI’.
Senate Legal and Constitutional Committee supported the use of coercive powers
to detect corruption,
particularly in light of the fact that ACLEI will be required to investigate
officers in law enforcement agencies who are experienced
in investigative
practices and, by implication, the ways to avoid
4.27 The LEIC Act contains a number of offence provisions relating to the
failure to comply with a request by the Integrity Commissioner,
or a failure to
comply with a confidentiality direction, and conduct in the nature of
4.28 The Integrity Commissioner is required to report his or her findings at
the conclusion of an investigation, subject to provisions
in the LEIC Act, which
ensure the confidentiality of protected information. Where there is a corruption
issue within ACLEI, the Minister
may authorise a special investigator to conduct
an external special investigation into that
Prosecutions
Office of the
Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions
4.29 The Office of the Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions (CDPP) is
an independent prosecuting agency established under
Director of Public
Prosecutions Act 1983
(Cth) (DPP Act), which operates under the control of
the Director. The DPP Act ensures the separation of the investigative and
prosecutorial
functions in the federal criminal justice system. The CDPP does
not have investigatory functions or powers—its main functions
prosecute offences against federal law and to initiate court proceedings in
order to confiscate the proceeds of federal
It relies on other
investigatory agencies to refer briefs of evidence for consideration of
prosecution action.
4.30 The CDPP regularly provides advice and assistance to federal
investigators and works closely with them, often during the investigatory
The decision whether to
investigate a particular matter and refer that matter to the CDPP is a matter
for each investigative agency.
The CDPP considers briefs of evidence referred by a wide range of investigative
agencies and departments and decides whether to pursue
criminal charges, and, if
so, which charges should be laid in light of the available evidence.
4.31 During 2005–06, the CDPP received referrals from 32 Australian
Government agencies—including the Australian Fisheries
Authority, the AFP, ASIC, the ACC, the Australian Taxation Office and
Centrelink—as well as a number of state and
Of any agency,
Centrelink refers the largest number of briefs to the
4.32 The main offences prosecuted by the CDPP involve drug importation and
money laundering, corporations law offences, fraud on the
Commonwealth—including tax and social security fraud—people
smuggling, people trafficking—including sexual servitude
slavery—terrorism, and a range of regulatory
4.33 Decisions to prosecute are made in accordance with the Prosecution
Policy of the Commonwealth, which sets out a two-stage test
that must be
satisfied. This test is that:
there must be sufficient evidence to prosecute the case, which
requires not just that there be a prima facie case but that there
reasonable prospects of conviction; and
it must be evident from the facts of the case, and all the
surrounding circumstances, that the prosecution would be in the public
functions of the CDPP include:
to conduct committal proceedings and summary prosecutions for
offences against state law where a Commonwealth officer is the informant;
to assist a coroner in inquests and inquiries conducted under the
laws of the Commonwealth;
to appear in proceedings under the
Extradition Act 1988
Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters Act 1987
in respect of relevant matters, to take civil remedies on behalf and
in the name of the Commonwealth in connection with the recovery
Competition
laws and consumer protection
Competition and Consumer Commission
4.35 The Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) is an
independent statutory authority, established in 1995 to administer
Practices Act 1974
(Cth) (TPA) and other
Its primary responsibility
is to ensure that individuals and businesses comply with Commonwealth fair
trading, competition and consumer
The ACCC promotes
effective competition and informed markets—for example, by preventing
price fixing; encouraging fair trading;
protecting consumers; and regulating
infrastructure service markets and other markets where competition is
restricted, including
the electricity, gas, telecommunications and transport
4.36 The ACCC’s role in relation to fair trading and consumer
protection is complemented by that of the state and territory
consumer affairs
agencies which administer the mirror legislation of their jurisdictions, and the
Competition and Consumer Policy
Division of the Commonwealth
ACCC’s functions
4.37 The scope and nature of the ACCC’s functions vary significantly
across the various parts of the
However, undertaking
enforcement action has been described as the ‘cornerstone’ of the
The ACCC is responsible
for enforcing certain prohibitions in the TPA, such as: certain anti-competitive
conduct; unconscionable
conduct; unfair consumer practices and price
exploitation conduct. The ACCC detects possible contraventions of the TPA
variety of means including: complaints; observation of marketplace
conduct; information from governments; and proactive market
To enforce the
provisions of the TPA, the ACCC can seek a number of remedies, including:
declarations of contraventions; injunctions;
probation orders; damages;
enforceable undertakings; adverse publicity orders; and pecuniary
4.38 The ACCC has identified the detection and prosecution of cartels as a
major priority,
Significant, difficult or complex matters such as cartels, require a recognition
that enforcement activities will involve complex
investigations and the most
effective application of our investigative and legal
ACCC’s powers
4.39 The ACCC has a number of coercive information-gathering powers
Some of these powers
have not been used or have been used
infrequently.
The ACCC generally
prefers to obtain its information through
cooperation,
because this is
‘more efficient, less time-consuming and more flexible than the
alternative practice of obtaining information
by using its coercive
However, there
are various reasons why the ACCC will choose to use its coercive powers,
including where voluntary disclosure is not
forthcoming, or because the use of
powers will allow sanctions to be imposed for
non-compliance.
Section 155
of the TPA is the ACCC’s most widely used
coercive information-gathering
although the decision to
notice is not taken
The main focus in using
notices is upon corporations. Where a notice
is issued to a corporation, commonly notices are also issued to one or more
of the corporation who are considered to be directly involved in the
conduct in question. Issuing notices to a corporation’s
advisers and
related parties is less
4.41 Prior to issuing a notice, the ACCC will consider whether the
information is otherwise available, including whether it would
be provided
voluntarily.
can be issued in certain specified circumstances, including where the ACCC has
reason to believe that a person is capable
of furnishing information, giving
evidence or producing documents relevant to a contravention of the
gives the ACCC power to require a person to provide information, produce
documents, answer questions, and in some circumstances,
to enter premises and
inspect or copy documents.
4.42 In 2005–06, the ACCC reported that it had issued 347 notices under
its powers under
to compulsorily acquire information; 124 notices to
provide information in writing; 135 notices to provide documents; 88 notices
appear in person; and that no authorities were issued to enter premises and
inspect documents.
has also reported that its compulsory evidence-gathering powers are being used
more widely than just for enforcement purposes,
including in mergers
investigations and adjudication
4.43 In January 2007, the power to enter premises and inspect documents was
repealed from
of the TPA, and enacted in a new form in
The Part enables authorised ACCC officers to enter premises in particular
circumstances, either with consent of the occupier or in
accordance with a
have not as yet been
Securities and Investments Commission
4.44 ASIC is an independent federal body that regulates companies and
financial services and promotes investor, creditor and consumer
protection under
Australian Securities and Investments Act 2001
(Cth) (ASIC Act), the
Corporations Act 2001
(Cth), and various other statutes, including those
relating to superannuation and
ASIC’s functions
4.45 The ASIC Act sets out the objectives and functions of the agency. Its
objectives include: maintaining and improving the performance
of the financial
system; promoting the confident and informed participation of investors and
consumers in the financial sector; and
taking action to enforce and give effect
to the laws that confer it with functions and
Its functions include
investigatory functions conferred on it by the legislation that it administers,
as well as monitoring and promoting
market integrity in relation to the
financial and payments
4.46 ASIC may commence an investigation where it suspects that there may have
been a contravention of the corporations law. It can
also commence an
investigation where it suspects a contravention of a law that concerns the
management or affairs of a body corporate
or managed investment scheme; or
involves fraud or dishonesty and relates to a body corporate, managed investment
scheme or financial
In addition, the Minister may direct ASIC to investigate a matter, where he or
she is of the opinion that an investigation is in
4.47 In 2005–06, ASIC reported that it had concluded enforcement
proceedings against a record 352 people or companies and managed
a number of
high profile and challenging investigations. These included investigations
relating to HIH Insurance, the Westpoint group,
the National Australia Bank
foreign currency traders, James Hardie, and the cross-agency tax-related
investigation, ‘Project
2005–06, the CDPP reported that it dealt with 34 defendants on summary
charges and 30 defendants on indictable charges,
on referral from
ASIC’s powers
4.48 ASIC has a number of coercive information-gathering powers. These
include the power to:
require a person to attend an examination to answer questions on
oath or affirmation and to give all reasonable assistance in connection
investigation;
inspect books;
require the production of books, records or
information;
enter premises and inspect, take extracts from, and copy,
require a person to give all reasonable assistance in connection
with a prosecution—which may involve answering questions,
documents and diligently searching for and producing
of ASIC’s information-gathering powers that require the production of
books and documents can be exercised as part
of a general monitoring of a
company’s affairs. ASIC can issue such notices ‘for the purposes of
ensuring compliance
with the corporations legislation’ as well as in the
course of an investigation with a view to taking enforcement
4.50 A notice to produce documents under s 33 of the ASIC Act requires a
person to produce books in that person’s possession.
Corporations
defines ‘possession’ to include what is in a person’s
custody or control.
held by a person’s solicitor are within that person’s control
because the person has a legal entitlement to
require them to be
Therefore, a notice
issued under this provision can require production of documents held by a
person’s solicitor on behalf
4.51 A failure to comply with a notice requiring attendance at an examination
or the production of books under the ASIC Act carries
a maximum penalty of
$11,000 or imprisonment for two years or
circumstances, ASIC officers can apply for a warrant to seize books not produced
pursuant to a notice.
Further, where ASIC is of the view that information about the affairs of a body
corporate or financial products needs to be found
for the purposes of the
exercise of ASIC’s powers, but that information cannot be found because a
person has failed to comply
with a coercive information-gathering power, ASIC
may make orders in relation to the securities of a body corporate or financial
products generally. For example, ASIC may make orders restraining a specific
person from disposing of, or acquiring, any interest
in specified financial
products or specified securities of a body
4.52 ASIC has the ability to obtain documents voluntarily—but sometimes
organisations and persons prefer to have compulsory
powers exercised against
them. One reason for this is that the ASIC Act specifically provides that a
person who produces documents
in response to a notice issued under Part 3
Division 3 of the ASIC Act is protected against liability for breach of the
duty of confidentiality.
Also, where a person is a friend, associate, employer or work colleague of a
person suspected to be under investigation, he or she
may not wish to be seen to
be volunteering information relevant to that investigation to ASIC.
Prudential Regulation Authority
4.53 The Australian Prudential Regulation Authority (APRA) is the prudential
regulator of the financial services industry. It oversees
credit unions, banks,
building societies, life and general insurance companies, friendly societies and
most members of the superannuation
established in 1998 under the
Australian Prudential Regulation Authority Act
(Cth) (APRA Act) following recommendations from the Wallis Inquiry that
a single prudential regulator be set up for the financial
It brought together
the prudential supervisory responsibilities of 11 separate
APRA’s functions
4.54 The APRA Act provides that the purpose of APRA is to
regulate bodies in accordance with other laws of the Commonwealth that provide
for prudential regulation or for retirement income
standards, and for developing
the administrative practices and procedures to be applied in performing that
regulatory role.
4.55 APRA’s stated mission is
to establish and enforce prudential standards and practices designed to ensure
that, under all reasonable circumstances, financial
promises made by
institutions [it] supervise[s] are met within a stable, efficient and
competitive financial system.
4.56 APRA’s functions are those conferred under the APRA Act
and various other laws such as the
Banking Act 1959
(Cth) and the
Superannuation Industry (Supervision) Act 1993
(Cth) that relate to
specific industry sectors.
Those functions include supervising, monitoring and investigating certain
participants in the financial services industry. In performing
its functions and
exercising its powers, APRA is directed to ‘balance the objectives of
financial safety and efficiency, competition,
contestability and competitive
neutrality’.
4.57 APRA has a number of investigatory functions. For example, it can:
investigate, in certain circumstances, the affairs of an authorised
deposit institution;
appoint a person to investigate and report on prudential matters in
relation to certain body corporates if it is satisfied that such
a report is
investigate designated security trust
and, in certain
circumstances, a body corporate that is a general insurer or an authorised
non-operating holding company, including
where it suspects that the body
corporate has contravened a provision of the
investigate the life insurance business of a life company or an
associated company;
investigate the affairs of a retirement savings account provider if
it appears that there may have been a contravention of the
Retirement Savings
Account Act 1997
investigate the affairs of a superannuation entity if it appears
that there may have been a contravention of the
Superannuation Industry
(Supervision) Act 1993
(Cth) in relation to the superannuation entity or the
financial position of the entity may be
unsatisfactory.
2005–06, APRA reported that seven investigations were in progress,
including some carrying on from previous
Complex investigations typically span two or three financial years, reflecting
the reality that the task of fact finding and evidence
gathering is a slow and
complex process, particularly where enforcement action is a likely consequence
and procedural fairness has
to be scrupulously
4.59 Investigations conducted by APRA in 2005–06 included
investigations into the use of ‘sham’ reinsurance arrangements
designed to disguise the true financial position of a general insurance company;
and an investigation into the marketing and promotion
of complex financial
reinsurance products by General Reinsurance Australia
Approach to enforcement
4.60 APRA takes enforcement action, when required, to protect the interests
of depositors, policyholders and superannuation fund members.
However, such
action is the exception, rather than the rule, with APRA having expressed a
preference ‘to identify weaknesses
in a supervised institution at an early
stage and to work cooperatively with that institution to remedy those
weaknesses’.
of APRA’s staffing resources are devoted to enforcement
APRA’s powers
4.61 APRA has a number of coercive information-gathering powers that it can
use for its investigatory or monitoring functions. These
powers enable it to:
require the production of information, books, accounts and documents; enter
premises to inspect, copy and take
books; and require persons to provide
assistance or answer
Sometimes the
powers can be exercised ‘for the purposes’ of the relevant
Act—which means that they can be exercised
for monitoring purposes in the
absence of an investigation.
APRA uses these powers as part of its general supervisory processes, and does
not record the frequency of use of such
4.62 In other cases, the powers can be exercised only for the purposes of an
investigation.
instances, a power can be exercised by APRA either for the purposes of an
investigation or for monitoring
APRA has indicated
that it utilises its coercive powers ‘fairly
infrequently’.
Transaction Reports and Analysis Centre
4.63 The Australian Transaction Reports and Analysis Centre (AUSTRAC) is
Australia’s anti-money laundering regulator and specialist
intelligence unit. Counter-terrorism financing is also now included in the scope
of AUSTRAC’s work. AUSTRAC was established
Transaction Reports Act 1988
(Cth) (FTR Act) and continues in existence
Anti-Money Laundering and Counter-Terrorism Financing Act 2006
(Cth) (AML/CTF Act).
AUSTRAC’s functions
4.64 AUSTRAC’s mission is to ‘make a valued contribution towards
a financial environment hostile to money laundering,
major crime and tax
regulatory role, AUSTRAC oversees compliance with the reporting requirements
under the FTR Act by a wide range of cash dealers,
financial service providers,
and the gambling industry. Under the FTR Act, cash dealers are required to
report ‘suspect transactions’
and ‘significant cash
transactions’ to
In its intelligence
role, AUSTRAC collects, analyses and disseminates financial intelligence to a
range of Australian law enforcement,
revenue, national security, and social
justice agencies, as well as a number of overseas financial intelligence
functions, although not investigatory, assist its partner agencies in the
investigation and prosecution of criminal
and terrorist
enterprises.
contained in financial transaction reports may indicate illegal activity,
assisting partner agencies to combat major crimes,
including money laundering,
financing of terrorism, tax evasion and drug
trafficking.
4.65 The function of AUSTRAC is to assist its CEO in the performance of his
or her functions,
retain, compile, analyse and disseminate eligible collected
information, including FTR information;
provide advice and assistance, in relation to AUSTRAC information,
to the persons and agencies entitled to access; and
advise and assist reporting entities in relation to their
obligations under the AML/CTF Act, and to promote compliance with that
4.66 Under the FTR Act, authorised officers of AUSTRAC have powers to access
the premises of cash dealers and solicitors; and to inspect,
copy and take
extracts of certain records and systems kept at those
Those powers are
used to address systemic
non-compliance.
comply with a notice under s 27E(3) of the Act is an offence, carrying a
maximum penalty of two years’
imprisonment.
AML/CTF Act, authorised officers of AUSTRAC have powers to apply for a
monitoring warrant
enter premises by consent or under a monitoring
as well as a range
of monitoring powers, including to:
inspect, copy and take extracts of relevant
ask questions of the occupier of the premises or of any person on
the premises, and require those persons to produce
4.67 Where an authorised officer is on premises under a monitoring
warrant a person who breaches a requirement to answer any questions
any documents relating to the operation of the Act commits an offence,
punishable on conviction by six months’ imprisonment
or a fine of $3,300
Authorised officers
of AUSTRAC also have general powers to obtain information and
and to issue
notices to reporting entities to produce
Failure to comply
with these requirements is an
The AUSTRAC CEO may
require a reporting entity to provide further information or produce documents,
and civil penalties may apply
to a failure to comply with the
4.68 AUSTRAC indicated to this Inquiry that it has enhanced its regulatory
capacity and supervision of the industry in recent
Between 1 January 2000
and 31 December 2004, AUSTRAC completed 225 inspection audits and 25 joint
studies visits,
with written
notices to access business premises usually issued under s 27E of the FTR
on these occasions. From 1 October 2005 to 1 June 2007, AUSTRAC
exercised its coercive information-gathering powers under the FTR
undertake 92 audit/inspection visits, and a further 20 visits were planned for
June 2007. As at 1 June 2007, the new monitoring
and information-gathering
powers set out in the AML/CTF Act had not yet been exercised by AUSTRAC. AUSTRAC
noted, however, its enhanced
role as Australia’s AML/CTF regulator and
gave some indication of how its coercive information-gathering powers may be
in the future.
AUSTRAC’s regulatory philosophy of fostering co-operation and voluntary
compliance will continue under the new AML/CTF regime.
However, where necessary
AUSTRAC will exercise its monitoring and information-gathering powers under the
AML/CTF Act, and seek other
available remedies (such as enforceable
undertakings) for non-compliance with breaches of the AML/CTF Act.
AUSTRAC’s enhanced
supervisory role of reporting entities under the new
regime may lead to increased use of its coercive
Australian Taxation
4.69 The Australian Taxation Office (ATO) is the Australian
Government’s principal revenue collection agency and administers
Australia’s tax, superannuation and excise laws. The ATO’s
responsibilities include managing and shaping the administrative
supporting the tax system, collecting revenue (excluding customs duty) and
administering regulatory and expenditure
4.70 The ATO notes that the Australian tax system is based on self
assessment, requiring the ATO to make judgments as to likely risks
revenue and to allocate scarce resources to address those risks.
One way the Tax Office addresses these risks is by engaging in active compliance
work to ensure that taxpayers are paying the correct
amount of tax. Our active
compliance work includes activities to secure certain lodgments, pre-issue
activities to prevent incorrect
refunds or payments being issued, as well as
post-issue activities such as reviews and
4.71 Most of the Acts administered by the ATO give the Commissioner or
delegated officers rights of access to information and documents,
which assist
in undertaking the compliance work. The ATO’s
Access and Information
Gathering Manual
lists 22 Acts that contain powers to enter and remain on
premises and access
The most well
known powers to access documents and obtain evidence are under ss 263 and
Income Tax Assessment Act 1936
4.72 Section 263 gives the Commissioner or an authorised officer power to
have ‘full and free’ access to all buildings,
places, books,
documents and other papers for the purposes of administering the Act. Section
264 is the provision regarding notices.
Under that section, the Commissioner may
give a notice requiring a person:
(a) to furnish him with such information as he may require; and
attend and give evidence before him or before any officer authorised by him in
that behalf concerning his or any other person’s
income or assessment, and
may require him to produce all books, documents and other papers whatever in his
custody or under his control
relating thereto.
(2) The Commissioner may
require the information or evidence to be given on oath or affirmation and
either verbally or in writing,
and for that purpose he or the officers so
authorized by him may administer an oath or
affirmation.
Taxation Administration Act 1953
(Cth) contains penalty
provisions, including an offence of refusing a request to provide information or
answer questions pursuant
to a taxation
4.74 The scope of s 263 is not confined to investigations where there is a
suspicion of wrongdoing. As the section allows access for
‘any of the
purposes under this Act’, it also covers audits to check compliance with
the legislation or general investigations
into certain industries where there is
no suggestion of a particular
Similarly, although s
264 is confined to obtaining information or evidence concerning the income or
assessment of any person, it
may apply equally to innocent situations where the
ATO is reconciling information provided by a person with information obtained
from another source.
Travers notes that s 264 notices are often simply used as a formal mechanism of
communication between the Commissioner and
Access and Information Gathering Manual
contains guidelines on the contents
of notices and covering letters, and the circumstances in which the various
should be used.
4.75 The ATO has significant discretion in relation to the use of its
information-gathering powers. The
sets out the
ATO’s approach to when it will use its powers, providing that:
ATO officers will approach taxpayers and seek information
cooperatively before formal requests are made;
access and information-gathering powers will be used only by
authorised officers, and it will be made clear when information is being
cooperatively and when a formal power is being used;
when asking for information under a formal power, taxpayers will be
told of their rights and obligations under the law;
prior notice and a reasonable time to comply with the notice will be
where information is sought from a third party, the taxpayer will be
told, unless special circumstances apply; and
explanations will be given to the taxpayer as to decisions made
obligation under ss 263 and 264 is expressed in general terms, and not expressly
subject to any qualification.
However, as discussed in Chapter 5, this does not mean that the provisions are
not subject to common law rights.
Inspector-General of
4.77 The Office of the Inspector-General of Taxation was established in 2003,
and is an independent statutory office that reviews
systemic tax administration
issues and makes recommendations to the Australian Government for improving tax
administration. The Inspector-General
does not deal with individual taxpayer
matters but can, in conducting reviews, invite submissions from, or consult
with, the public
or particular groups of taxpayers or tax
professionals.
information obtained from the private sector or government agencies other than
the ATO is given
voluntarily.
Inspector-General of Taxation Act 2003
(Cth) grants the
Inspector-General a power to require the Commissioner of Taxation and tax
officials to provide information or answer
questions relevant to a
It is an offence for
a tax officer to fail to comply with a notice from the
Inspector-General.
the Inspector-General has not used this coercive power, and all information
provided by the ATO has been given voluntarily
in response to requests for
information made under s 14 of the
Inspector-General of Taxation
Intelligence and
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation
4.79 The Australian Security Intelligence Organisation (ASIO) is
Australia’s national security service. Its main role is to
information and produce intelligence that will enable it to warn the government
a risk to Australia’s national
security. ASIO focuses on terrorists, persons who may act violently for
political reasons, and
those who may harm Australia’s interests, including
spies, in order to further their own causes or the interests of foreign
governments.
ASIO’s functions
4.80 ASIO’s functions are set out in the
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
(Cth) (ASIO Act) and include: obtaining
and evaluating intelligence relevant to security; communicating such
intelligence for security
purposes; providing security assessments and
protective security advice; and collecting foreign intelligence in
Australia—but
only on the request of the Minister for Foreign Affairs or
the Minister for
ASIO is not a law
enforcement agency. It does not undertake criminal investigations and ASIO
officers have no power of
ASIO’s powers
4.81 ASIO gathers information in a number of ways, including from publicly
available sources, members of the public, intelligence
services in other
countries, and through
interviews.
ASIO has powers
to require information or documents from operators of aircraft or
ASIO has special
powers to use intrusive methods of investigation when authorised to do so under
a warrant signed by the Attorney-General
of Australia. These powers are to:
use listening
and tracking devices
relating to persons and to
communications;
access computers;
enter and search
examine postal articles and delivery service
4.82 Proposals to use special powers are subject to ‘rigorous
internal consideration and approvals at a senior
special powers under the ASIO
or telecommunications
interception legislation
requires that ‘the subject’s activities are, or are reasonably
suspected to be, or are likely to be, prejudicial to
majority of cases, investigations are resolved through less intrusive
4.83 ASIO also can seek warrants for the questioning of persons for the
purpose of investigating
circumstances, the warrants may authorise the detention of a
ASIO is required to
obtain the consent of the Attorney-General before seeking these warrants from a
federal magistrate or judge.
Any questioning pursuant to a warrant must be
conducted in the presence of a prescribed authority—such as a former or
senior judge—on the conditions determined by that
Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security may be present during any
questioning or detention under a warrant. It is an offence
to disclose
information without authorisation about the existence of a questioning or
questioning and detention warrant, questioning
conducted under the warrant, or
any operational information.
ASIO executed one questioning warrant during 2005–06, and this warrant did
not authorise detention.
Guidelines on performance of
4.84 The Attorney-General has issued guidelines under the ASIO Act on how
ASIO should perform its functions relating to politically
motivated violence and
to obtaining intelligence relevant to
In relation to
politically motivated violence, the Guidelines provide that in deciding whether
or not to conduct an investigation,
and the investigatory methods to be used,
the Director-General shall consider all of the circumstances, including:
(a) the magnitude of the threatened or perceived violence or harm;
(b) the likelihood that it will occur;
(c) the immediacy of the threat; and
(d) the privacy implications of any proposed
investigation.
4.85 The Guidelines also provide that:
The immediate purpose of an ASIO investigation should generally be to obtain
information concerning the nature of any activities
of a person or group which
may be relevant to security. The need for information is not confined to
information about particular
offences that may be committed but extends to
information about persons who may be prepared to engage in or promote activities
security concern, including their plans and
capabilities.
4.86 In relation to ASIO’s function of obtaining intelligence relevant
to security, the Guidelines provide that ASIO’s
investigations shall be of
(a) ‘preliminary investigations’ to assess whether there is
sufficient evidence of activities relevant to security to
justify a more
detailed investigation of a subject; or
(b) ‘general investigations’ to assess whether the activities of a
subject are prejudicial to security, or to monitor
whether there is any change
in the significance of the activities of a subject whose activities have
previously been assessed to
be prejudicial to
4.87 The Guidelines contain provisions regarding the bases for, and
authorisation, conduct and review of, investigations.
4.88 ASIO has stated that subjects of investigations have become more skilled
at hiding their activities and intentions from security
and law enforcement
agencies, and from other members of the
Inspector-General of
Intelligence and Security
4.89 The Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security (IGIS) is an
independent statutory office holder who assists the Prime Minister,
Attorney-General, the Minister for Foreign Affairs and the Minister for Defence,
to oversee the following six agencies which
formally constitute the Australian
Intelligence Community (AIC):
Australian Security Intelligence Service;
Defence Signals Directorate (DSD);
Defence Imagery and Geospatial Organisation;
Defence Intelligence Organisation; and
Office of National
Assessments.
office was established by the
Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security
(Cth) (IGIS Act) following recommendations, made by Justice Robert
Hope in the Royal Commission on Australia’s Security and
Intelligence
Agencies (RCASIA) General Report and the RCASIA Report on the Australian
Security Intelligence Organisation, that such
an office be
4.91 The IGIS’s role fulfils an important public interest in ensuring
that the AIC is kept accountable. The functions of the
IGIS are set out in the
The IGIS can
undertake an inquiry into the activities of an AIC agency on request from the
responsible Minister, in response to a
complaint, on the IGIS’s own
or on request from
the Prime Minister.
also has inspection and monitoring powers in relation to the activities of the
AIC agencies. Inspection activities are the
‘centrepiece’ of IGIS,
taking up about 60% of the office’s
Inspection activities have assumed even sharper importance in recent years
because of the need to monitor and review use of the special
capabilities made available to agencies engaged in counter-terrorism
4.92 IGIS has powers to inquire into the following matters concerning AIC
compliance with the law or with ministerial directions and
guidelines;
the propriety of their particular activities; and
whether any of their acts or practices are inconsistent with human
4.93 Examples
of inquiries that have been conducted under the IGIS Act include:
whether the AIC had prior intelligence warning of the Bali
investigating allegations about DSD’s conduct in respect of
the Tampa affair;
inquiring into ASIO’s issue of an adverse security assessment
against a United States citizen, which led to his removal from
4.94 Approximately
30–40% of IGIS’s resources are dedicated to inquiry
The IGIS must conduct
inquiries in private.
because these inquiries often concern matters that involve highly classified or
sensitive information and the methods by
which it is collected, the public
airing of which could be injurious to the national
4.95 The IGIS has, and uses, Royal Commission type powers when conducting a
full inquiry.
The IGIS can
compel witnesses to appear and answer questions on oath or affirmation where the
IGIS has reason to believe that the
person is able to give information relevant
to a matter the subject of
The IGIS can compel
a person to give him or her information in writing, and to produce documents
relevant to an inquiry.
an offence not to comply with these
requirements.
The IGIS also
has the capacity to enter agencies’ premises for the purposes of an
4.96 Since March 2004, the IGIS has used coercive powers under s 18 of
the IGIS Act in relation to three inquiries, consisting of
19 notices to appear
and answer questions and one notice to produce information in writing. The
current IGIS, Mr Ian Carnell, submitted
to the ALRC that:
Section 18 powers have not been used in all inquiries because, in my view, it
has not been necessary or appropriate to use them.
In most instances inquiries
have proceeded by way of examination of records (access to which has been freely
provided by the relevant
agencies), interviews with relevant staff which have
not involved compulsion and the administration of an oath or affirmation, and
obtaining statutory declarations from staff addressing questions pertinent to
the inquiry.
In the three inquiries where I have issued notices under section 18, this was
done either because I formed a belief based on reasonable
grounds that certain
persons may not have been forthcoming or truthful, or because I took the view
that as it was a matter of significant
public interest, key witnesses should
give their evidence on oath or
affirmation.
administration
Commonwealth
Commonwealth Ombudsman’s
4.97 The office of the Commonwealth Ombudsman exists to ‘safeguard the
community in its dealings with government agencies, and
to ensure that
administrative action taken by Australian Government agencies is fair and
accountable’.
Ombudsman Act 1976
(Cth) provides that the functions of the Ombudsman are
to investigate complaints made under the Act and to perform other functions
conferred by the Act and other
legislation.
confers on the Ombudsman the specialist roles of Defence Force
Ombudsman, Immigration Ombudsman, Postal Industry Ombudsman, and Taxation
The three major
statutory roles of the Ombudsman are to:
investigate and review the administrative action of Australian
Government officials and agencies, upon receipt of
complaints;
investigate, on the initiative or ‘own motion’ of the
Ombudsman, the administrative actions of Australian Government
inspect the records of agencies such as the AFP and the ACC to
ensure compliance with legislative provisions applying to selected
enforcement and regulatory
activities.
conducting investigations, the Ombudsman seeks to determine whether:
the administrative action under investigation is unlawful, unreasonable, unjust,
oppressive, improperly discriminatory, factually
deficient or otherwise wrong.
At the conclusion of the investigation, the Ombudsman can recommend that an
agency take corrective
Ombudsman Act
sets out a number of matters in respect of
which the Ombudsman does not have jurisdiction to investigate, including action
by a minister or by a justice or
The Act also gives the
Ombudsman discretion not to investigate certain complaints, for example, where
an investigation is not warranted
having regard to all the
circumstances.
commencing an investigation into the action of a Department or prescribed
authority, the Ombudsman is required to inform
the principal officer of the
Department or authority that the action is to be investigated. Investigations
under the Act are to be
conducted in
4.100 The bulk of the work of the Ombudsman is conducting complaint based and
own motion investigations.
During 2005–06, the Ombudsman investigated complaints made about 104
Australian Government departments and
In that time, the
Ombudsman received 28,227 approaches and
and, of those,
finalised 16,507.
Ombudsman also completed seven own motion and major investigations, which led to
51 individual agency recommendations—49
of which were accepted by
Commonwealth Ombudsman’s
4.101 The Ombudsman has coercive information-gathering powers under the Act.
He or she may compel the production of information and
documents, and compel a
person to answer questions relevant to an
investigation.
The Ombudsman
also may examine a person on oath or
affirmation.
Where a person
refuses or fails, without reasonable excuse, to comply with a notice to furnish
information or produce documents,
or to attend before the Ombudsman to answer
questions, or to be sworn or affirmed, the person commits an offence and may be
to a maximum penalty of $1,000 or imprisonment for three
In addition, the
Ombudsman may apply to the Federal Court for an order directing the person to
The Ombudsman, Deputy
Ombudsman and persons authorised by the Ombudsman also have the power to enter
certain premises, including
the premises of departments and prescribed
authorities, and to inspect documents relevant to an investigation at those
4.102 The Ombudsman submitted to this Inquiry that the available coercive
powers are used sparingly, not routinely, and the office
relied instead on
voluntary cooperation of
There are some
practical constraints on the use of coercive powers under
Ombudsman Act
including that most investigative officers do not
have the appropriate delegation to exercise
powers, and that the
Minister must be informed of an investigation prior to use of a
an action that is not necessary or practical in relation to every investigation,
given the number of investigations undertaken
each year. On the other hand, the
Ombudsman indicated that the voluntary cooperation of agencies occurs in
substantial part because
of the existence of coercive powers. The Ombudsman also
noted that the existence of coercive powers can also be useful in less
cooperative
investigations, or where an agency wishes to be protected by a clear
distinction between its actions and the decisions of the
Building and
construction
Office of the
Australian Building and Construction Commissioner
4.103 The Office of the Australian Building and Construction Commissioner
(ABCC) was established by the
Building and Construction Industry Improvement
(Cth) (BCII Act) and commenced operations on 1 October 2005. It
absorbed the Building Industry Taskforce which operated from 1 October
purpose is to reform conduct in the building and construction
and it has coercive
information-gathering powers in order to assist it to achieve that purpose.
4.104 The BCII Act sets out the functions of the Commissioner, which
monitoring and promoting appropriate standards of conduct by
building industry participants;
investigating suspected contraventions, by building industry
participants of: the BCII Act; the
Workplace Relations Act 1996
the Building Code; a federal certified collective agreement or award, or an
order of the Australian Industrial Relations Commission;
instituting, or intervening in, proceedings in accordance with the
ABCC’s coercive information-gathering powers are similar to those of other
regulatory agencies, and include the ability
to require a person to provide
information and documents, and to give evidence by way of affirmation or
The ABCC has published
guidelines in relation to the exercise of its powers, stating that the decision
to exercise its powers ‘will
not be taken
The ABCC has
also stated that it only uses these powers as a last
The powers can only
be used for investigation into a contravention by a building industry
participant of a designated building
The Commissioner or
Deputy Commissioner can issue a notice where he or she believes on reasonable
grounds that a person issued with
a notice has information or documents relevant
to an investigation, or is capable of giving evidence relevant to an
investigation.
4.106 The ABCC has stated:
The enforcement of workplace relations law throughout the industry remains a
challenge. The ABCC receives numerous complaints about
unlawful conduct from all
sectors of the industry. The complaints are investigated and if the public
interest is served, proceedings
against contraveners are commenced.
It remains of concern that some industry participants are reluctant to cooperate
with our investigations.
4.107 As at 30 June 2006, the ABCC reported that it had finalised 51
investigations and 74 were continuing. Trade unions were the
subject of the
majority of its investigations, and the major breaches investigated were
industrial action, coercion and agreement/dispute
resolution.
2005–06, the compulsory interview power was exercised on 27
and 29 notices to
attend and answer questions were
commencement of the ABCC, the majority of notices to attend and answer questions
have been served on individual
The power under
s 52(c) of the BCII Act to require the giving of information has not as yet
been used, with the preference being
to require a person to attend an
examination. The power in s 52(d) to require production of documents has
also not been used to date,
with a preference to issue notices for production
under s 59, with the option of using s 52(d) where production is
The ABCC has stated
that ‘the compliance powers have proven to be a particularly effective
method of obtaining information
from reluctant
witnesses’.
Social security
4.108 Centrelink is a government statutory agency, responsible for delivering
a range of social services and income support to the
Australian community. Its
stated purpose is to serve Australia ‘by assisting people to become
self-sufficient and supporting
Centrelink is a
service provider to 6.49 million customers in respect of 9.89 million individual
entitlements.
Its clients
include those looking for work, families, retired persons, sole parents,
students, and young people.
4.109 Centrelink operates under the Department of Human Services (DHS).
Centrelink was established under the
Commonwealth Services Delivery Agency
(Cth), (CSDA Act) which provides that its function is to
assist the CEO in the performance of his or her
functions include providing Commonwealth services in accordance with service
arrangements, and doing anything included
in the arrangements that is incidental
or related to the provision of those
Such arrangements
may include:
• undertaking education, compliance, investigation and enforcement
activities related to the provision of services; or
• recovering overpayments and other amounts due to the Commonwealth in
connection with the provision of services; or
• conducting litigation or proceedings related to the provision of
4.110 In the period 2005–06, Centrelink completed 40,964 fraud
investigations
and undertook
110 field operations, reportedly identifying $34.7 million in savings and
During the same period
the CDPP prosecuted 2,855 Centrelink cases with a conviction rate of
Centrelink takes a ‘whole of government’ approach to fraud detection
and investigation. In accordance with the Australian
Government Investigation
Standards, Centrelink uses a range of measures to detect and investigate fraud.
Activities include traditional
desk based reviews and field reviews. The
measures also include joint field operations involving [other Commonwealth,
state, territory
government departments and
4.111 Centrelink has a number of coercive information-gathering powers, which
are conferred on it by various federal statutes. These
include the power to
require a person to provide information or produce
For example, under
Social Security (Administration) Act 1999
Secretary can require a person to produce information if it is relevant to the
financial situation of a person who owes
a debt to the Commonwealth or may
assist to locate a debtor to the Commonwealth. Other powers require persons to
attend an office
of the DHS or another place for a particular purpose, or to
attend for a medical, psychiatric or psychological
examination.
4.112 Centrelink has indicated that it uses its coercive
information-gathering powers in the majority of its fraud investigations
collect information from other government agencies and third
Health and aged care
Medicare Australia
4.113 Medicare Australia (Medicare) is an Australian government agency within
the DHS. Its objective is to assist in improving health
outcomes in
Medicare works in
collaboration with the Department of Health and Ageing to achieve the health
policy objectives of the Australian
Government.
Medicare is a
service organisation that administers a range of health and payment programs,
including: Medicare; the Pharmaceutical
Benefits Scheme; the Family Assistance
Office; the Australian Organ Donor Register; the Australian Childhood
Immunisation Register;
and Special Assistance Schemes, including Bali 2005
Special Assistance.
Medicare’s functions
4.114 The function of Medicare is to assist the CEO in the performance of his
or her functions.
CEO’s service delivery functions, set out in the
Medicare Australia Act
(Cth), are to provide Commonwealth services in accordance with service
arrangements.
specifies that arrangements for the provision of Commonwealth services may
include making arrangements for:
• undertaking education, compliance, investigation and enforcement
activities related to the provision of services; or
• recovering overpayments and other amounts due to the Commonwealth in
connection with the provision of services; or
• conducting litigation or proceedings related to the provision of the
4.115 The CEO’s functions also include investigating compliance with
Health Insurance Act 1973
(Cth) and with
National Health Act 1953
4.116 Medicare’s ‘program review function is responsible for
preventing, detecting, and investigating fraud and inappropriate
Medicare has
stated that:
Criminal investigation, and subsequent prosecution by the Commonwealth Director
of Public Prosecutions is one of the most powerful
tools that Medicare Australia
has in its effort to reduce fraud in the programs that it
administers.
4.117 In the period 2005–06, Medicare reported that it had 377 new
investigation cases; 124 other cases still under investigation;
and that it had
referred 65 cases to the CDPP. Of its new investigations 186 concerned medical
practitioners,
32 concerned
pharmacists, and 159 concerned members of the
Medicare may
undertake investigations in collaboration with other agencies. In 2005–06
it reported that a multi-jurisdictional
taskforce, including Medicare and
Centrelink, was investigating a case of a family involved in identity
4.118 Depending on the nature and significance of any non-compliance detected
by Medicare, it may opt to recover benefits paid
incorrectly.
2005–06, it identified 5,288 cases for potential recovery action totalling
$4.85 million.
Medicare’s powers
4.119 The CEO of Medicare may authorise an employee to exercise investigative
powers conferred under the
Medicare Australia Act
. The powers can be
exercised in connection with an investigation that the CEO is conducting in the
performance of his or her
The powers include
the ability to require a person to give information or to produce documents in
the person’s custody or control,
if the authorised officer has reasonable
grounds to believe that a relevant offence has been or is being committed, and
the information
or documents are relevant to the
This is the coercive
power most frequently used by Medicare, with 56 notices of this kind issued in
comply with such a notice without reasonable excuse attracts a maximum penalty
of six months’
imprisonment.
4.120 Authorised officers may also conduct searches for the purposes of
monitoring compliance either without warrant where the occupier
of the premises
has consented,
or pursuant to
a search warrant.
has indicated that the extensive powers to conduct searches without a warrant
under s 8V of the
Medicare Australia Act
are infrequently used as
most evidential material is obtained using either voluntary cooperation,
s 8P notices to produce information,
or by obtaining a search
Department of Health
Therapeutic Goods Administration
4.121 The Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA) is a unit of the Australian
Government Department of Health and Ageing. It is responsible
for administering
Therapeutic Goods Act 1989
(Cth) (TG Act),
which provides a national framework for the regulation of therapeutic goods to
ensure the quality, safety and efficacy
of medicines; and the quality, safety
and performance of medical
The TG Act requires
therapeutic goods to be entered on the Australian Register of Therapeutic Goods
before they can be supplied in
Australia, and it stipulates various requirements
for the inclusion of goods on the register, including advertising, labelling,
product appearance guidelines. The TGA undertakes various assessment and
monitoring activities to ensure that therapeutic goods available
in Australia
are of an acceptable
4.122 During 2005–06, the TGA completed 425 investigations concerning
breaches of the TG Act
and the TGA Surveillance Unit issued 126 formal
warnings to persons and companies, and charged 12 persons and companies with
116 criminal
4.123 The Secretary of the Department has a number of coercive
information-gathering powers under the TG Act. For example, the Secretary
require a person who has imported therapeutic goods or supplied them in
Australia to provide information concerning the composition,
indications,
directions for use or labelling of the goods; or concerning advertising material
relating to the goods.
Failure to comply with such a notice carries a maximum penalty of
The Secretary may
also seek information or documents relating to compliance by medical devices
with certain requirements;
and relating to medical devices covered by
exemptions.
Failure to comply
with these requirements carries a maximum penalty of
and $44,000
respectively.
4.124 The Secretary also may require a person—other than the
wrongdoer—to provide information in relation to an application
for a civil
penalty order, where the Secretary suspects that a person may have breached a
civil penalty provision of the TG
If the person fails to
give assistance, the Federal Court may, on the application of the Secretary,
order the person to comply with
the requirement. Failure to comply carries a
maximum penalty of
4.125 The Department of Health and Ageing has wide-ranging responsibilities,
including health and safety matters such as food and
therapeutic goods
regulation—as discussed above—and the provision of aged care
services. The Minister for Health and
Ageing is responsible for administering 69
including the
Aged Care Act 1997
Aged Care Act
confers a number of information-gathering
powers—or ‘monitoring powers’ as they are referred to in the
authorised officers to assist the Department in its function of
monitoring compliance by approved providers of aged care with their
responsibilities under the Act. Monitoring powers in relation to premises
include searching premises; inspecting and taking samples
of substances or
things found at premises; inspecting documents on the premises and taking
extracts of those documents or copying
Some of these powers
can only be exercised with the consent of an
while others can be
exercised without an occupier’s
The Secretary also
has powers to require aged care providers to provide information in relation to
specific matters,
and require
a person to attend before an authorised officer to answer questions and/or
produce documents.
comply with certain requests is considered a breach of responsibility under the
Aged Care Act
, but in a number of cases failure to comply is a criminal
4.127 An authorised officer can apply to a magistrate for a monitoring
warrant, which may be granted if it is reasonably necessary
to assess whether an
approved provider of aged care is complying with its
responsibilities.
monitoring warrant is issued to an authorised officer, in addition to powers of
persons to answer questions, produce
documents and to give reasonable assistance.
4.128 The Department of Health and Ageing has indicated that the extent to
which the powers conferred by the
Aged Care Act
are used depends on the
extent of compliance within the aged care industry from time to time. The
Department notes, however, that
the powers are ‘an important tool to
assist in enforcing the
Aged Care Act
where other less coercive measures
have not been
successful’.
Gene Technology
4.129 The Gene Technology Regulator (GTR) was established by the
Technology Act 2000
(Cth), and the Office of the GTR (OGTR) has been
established within the Australian Government Department of Health and Ageing to
provide administrative support to the GTR in the performance of his or her
functions. The
Gene Technology Act
introduces a national scheme for the
regulation of genetically modified organisms (GMOs) in Australia in order to
protect the health
and safety of individuals and the environment.
4.130 The functions of the OGTR include to: provide information to other
regulatory agencies about GMOs and genetically modified
(GM) products; promote
the harmonisation of risk assessments for GMOs and GM products by regulatory
agencies; and monitor and enforce
legislation.
Gene Technology Act
provides inspectors appointed under the
Act with a variety of monitoring powers—many of which are
information-gathering in
their nature. An inspector is able to enter premises
and exercise certain powers for the purpose of finding out whether the Act or
the regulations have been complied with if: the occupier of the premises has
consented; the entry is made under warrant; or the occupier
is a licence holder
and the entry is at a reasonable
Monitoring powers
conducting tests on samples found at the premises;
taking photographs or making audio or video recordings;
inspecting records on the premises; and
where the entry is under warrant requiring any person on the
premises to answer questions and produce any
4.132 Inspectors also have powers to search and seize goods, and to
taken off a ship
or aircraft.
Further, to deal
with situations which present an imminent risk of damage, serious illness or
injury, or serious damage to the environment,
inspectors have the power to
to require a person to
take steps to comply with the
legislation.
4.133 The OGTR has adopted an operational philosophy that emphasises
assisting accredited organisations and licence holders to comply
legislative obligations.
OGTR has published a compliance and enforcement strategy, which states:
The OGTR investigates all reported or detected contraventions of legislation it
administers … The OGTR investigates serious
contraventions to the point
where enough information is available to determine whether a criminal
prosecution should be pursued,
alternatively options not involving criminal
sanctions may also be considered depending on the facts and circumstances of the
In serious instances the Regulator may refer and assist the Australian
Federal Police or other enforcement
4.134 The OGTR reported that, during 2005–06, it investigated all
suspected breaches of the Act that were detected through OGTR
activities or self-reported. In all instances, risks to human health and safety
were assessed as negligible and commensurate
action was taken, including
increased monitoring and
4.135 The OGTR also reported that it completed two investigations during
2005–06. The investigations centred on the importation
of genetically
modified zebra fish, and GMO dealings being performed by a health
service/hospital.
Pesticides and Veterinary Medicines Authority
4.136 The Australian Pesticides and Veterinary Medicines Authority (APVMA) is
an independent Australian Government statutory authority
within the portfolio of
the Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Management. It was originally known
as the National Registration
Authority for Agricultural and Veterinary
4.137 A number of the functions of the APVMA are set out in the
Agricultural and Veterinary Chemicals (Administration) Act 1992
These include to:
assess the suitability for sale in Australia of active constituents
for proposed or existing chemical products;
evaluate the effects of the use of chemical products in the states
and participating territories; and
collect, interpret, disseminate and publish information relating to
chemical products and their
list of functions does not specifically refer to any investigative function,
although the Act provides that the APVMA has
any functions or powers conferred
on it by relevant
legislation,
and power to do
anything incidental to any of its
4.139 The APVMA is responsible for the registration of
and veterinary
prior to sale and
their regulation up to and including the time of retail
The consequences of
using unregistered chemical products may include: threats to personal and public
health; occupational health
and safety hazards; crop and herd damage; economic
loss; environmental damage; and international trading
Agricultural and Veterinary Chemicals Code Act 1994
provides the APVMA with its full range of powers including: the evaluation,
registration and review of agricultural and veterinary
chemical products; the
issuing of permits; the control of the manufacture of chemical products;
controls regulating the supply of
chemical products; and provisions ensuring
compliance with, and for the enforcement of, the
4.141 An important part of the APVMA’s role is to ensure that
pesticides and veterinary medicines supplied to the marketplace
comply with the
APVMA’s legislation. The APVMA has stated that it applies three compliance
strategies to ensure that the standards
of registration are met; one of which is
surveillance and enforcement. It has also stated that it actively investigates
alleged breaches
and implements risk based enforcement strategies, which can
include prosecution, recall or negotiated
compliance.
4.142 The APVMA’s investigations may relate to unregistered products,
unapproved labels, or the supply of restricted products
to unauthorised
The APVMA may appoint
members of its staff—as well as other appropriate persons—to be
inspectors for the purpose of a
relevant law. Inspectors have coercive
information-gathering powers, including the ability to conduct searches of
premises to monitor
compliance with
legislation.
The power to
the premises and to inspect documents
kept at the premises. An inspector who has
entered premises also has power to require a person to give information and
produce documents.
Failure to comply with such a requirement carries a maximum
penalty of $3,300.
Human rights
Human Rights and
Equal Opportunity Commission
4.143 The Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission (HREOC) is an
independent statutory body that was established in 1986 by the
Human Rights
and Equal Opportunity Commission Act 1986
(Cth) (HREOC Act). Human rights
are strictly defined, and relate only to the seven international instruments
scheduled to, or declared
In addition to the HREOC
Act, HREOC administers a suite of anti-discrimination legislation, namely: the
Age Discrimination Act 2004
Disability Discrimination Act
Sex Discrimination Act 1984
(Cth) and the
Discrimination Act 1975
(Cth). HREOC’s inquiry functions include:
to inquire into, and attempt to conciliate, complaints of unlawful
discrimination;
to inquire into any act or practice, including any systemic practice
that may constitute discrimination, or may be inconsistent with,
or contrary to,
any human right.
4.144 In respect of the latter type of inquiry, HREOC is required,
where appropriate, to endeavour to settle the matters that gave
rise to the
inquiry by way of conciliation, or to report to the Minister in relation to the
inquiry where conciliation is either
inappropriate or
unsuccessful.
The inquiry
functions of HREOC do not include inquiring into any act or practice of an
intelligence agency that may constitute discrimination
or a breach of human
rights. Complaints in relation to these matters are to be referred to the
4.145 HREOC has a number of non-inquiry functions including: promoting an
understanding and acceptance of human rights and equality
of opportunity and
treatment in employment in Australia; reporting to the Minister as to laws that
should be made by the Commonwealth
on matters relating to human rights and
equality of opportunity and treatment in employment; and where it considers
appropriate to
do so, intervening in court proceedings that involve human rights
and discrimination
4.146 For the purpose of performing its functions, HREOC can hold an
examination or inquiry in such manner as it thinks
It has powers under the
HREOC Act to require a person or body corporate to give information in writing
or to produce documents;
to examine persons on oath or
affirmation.
comply with these requirements carries a maximum penalty of $1,000 for natural
persons, and $5,000 for bodies
4.147 The President of HREOC also has specific powers to obtain information
and documents and to require persons to attend a compulsory
conference in
relation to inquiries concerning unlawful
discrimination.
comply with these requirements carries a maximum penalty of
4.148 HREOC reported that during the period 2005–06, it finalised:
196 complaints under the
Racial Discrimination Act
314 complaints under the
Sex Discrimination Act
512 complaints under the
Disability Discrimination Act
80 complaints under the
Age Discrimination
4.149 HREOC
has indicated that it uses its coercive powers
infrequently.
For example,
the power under s 21 of the HREOC Act to require that information be given
in writing, or that documents be produced,
was used four times in 2006. HREOC
does, however, make mention of the existence of its coercive powers in written
communications
of information, thus encouraging voluntary compliance without recourse
formally exercising the coercive powers. HREOC also notes that it must sometimes
use coercive powers to obtain information, which
it would not be able to obtain
through voluntary production, such as where there are privacy or patient
confidentiality issues.
Office of the
4.150 The Office of the Privacy Commissioner (OPC) is an independent
statutory organisation that reports to the Attorney-General of
Its purpose is to
promote an Australian culture that respects
This is done by
supporting individuals with privacy concerns, and working with organisations and
agencies to improve their practices
in the handling of personal
information.
4.151 The OPC, and more particularly the Privacy Commissioner, has
legislative responsibilities under the
Data-matching Program (Assistance and Tax) Act 1990
Telecommunications Act 1997
Crimes Act 1914
Health Act 1953
4.152 When the
was enacted, it was mainly limited to
public sector agencies. Its scope was extended to cover private sector
organisations with effect
from 21 December 2001. The
protection to individuals by establishing Information Privacy Principles and
National Privacy Principles which set out strict
safeguards for the collection,
use and retention of personal information. The Act also provides protection for
individuals’
tax file numbers and consumer credit information held by
credit reporting agencies and credit providers.
4.153 Under the
Data-matching Program (Assistance and Tax) Act
the Privacy Commissioner regulates the comparison of personal information
held by the ATO and welfare assistance agencies and issues
guidelines for the
conduct of data-matching. The
Telecommunications Act
sets out rules for
telecommunications carriers, carriage service providers and others in their use
and disclosure of personal information.
The OPC has the role of monitoring
compliance with those provisions. The
National Health Act
requires the
information collected from claims on
the Medicare and Pharmaceutical Benefits
programs. The Commonwealth ‘Spent Conviction Scheme’, under
gives individuals the right not to
disclose spent, quashed or pardoned Federal or territory convictions. The OPC
deals with complaints
under this scheme and also assesses applications from
organisations seeking to be excluded from the operation of this
4.154 The OPC provides information and advice to the public, and works with
organisations and agencies that have obligations to protect
complaints and conducts audits of the procedures for handling personal
information, provides policy advice and
training on the
works to inform and educate the community about privacy
4.155 Most complaints received by the OPC regarding alleged contraventions of
are resolved through negotiation and conciliation. In
most cases, where the Privacy Commissioner has formed the view that the
has contravened the
, the respondent agrees to take
appropriate action. This may include a written apology, retraining of staff,
changing procedures or
amending or deleting personal information. The Privacy
Commissioner only has powers to negotiate or order compensation for an
for damages directly arising from an interference with privacy, but
monetary compensation cannot be used as a fine to punish the
respondent.
4.156 While the Privacy Commissioner has formal complaint determination
powers under the
, these are rarely
If the Commissioner
finds a complaint substantiated, he or she may make a declaration that: the
conduct should not be repeated or
continued; the respondent should redress any
loss or damage suffered by the complainant; the complainant be entitled to
compensation;
or it is inappropriate for any further action to be
provides for investigations to be conducted by
the Commissioner. An investigation may be undertaken because a person has
that his or her privacy rights under the
infringed. In that case, before commencing an investigation, the Commissioner
has power to conduct preliminary
The power is
limited by its purpose, which is to determine whether the Commissioner has power
to investigate the matter to which
the complaint relates or whether the
Commissioner may, in his or her discretion, decide not to investigate the
4.158 As a general rule, an investigation is to be ‘conducted in
private but otherwise in such manner as the Commissioner thinks
The Commissioner
has power to obtain information and documents from persons, and make inquiries
of persons or examine witnesses on
affirmation.
The Commissioner
also has the power to enter premises with consent or a search warrant and may
inspect any documents that are kept
at those premises, with some
exceptions.
4.159 In 2005–06, the OPC received a total of 1,183 complaints across
all areas of its
Eleven per cent
of matters were closed following a formal investigation and, where appropriate,
a conciliated response. Around 30%
of cases were closed following preliminary
inquiries. In other cases the Privacy Commissioner declined the matter—for
because of a lack of jurisdiction or where the matter involved a body
not covered by the
4.160 The OPC has indicated that it does not routinely exercise its coercive
powers, but does use them from time to
Examples of when
coercive powers are likely to be used include where protected personal
information is required from third parties,
or where a person has failed to
respond to the OPC’s routine requests to provide information. The OPC has
not to date obtained
a warrant to enter
Border control and
immigration
Australian Customs
4.161 The principal roles of the Australian Customs Service (ACS) are to
facilitate trade and the movement of people into Australia
while maintaining
compliance with Australian law, collecting customs revenue, and administering
specific industry schemes and trade
measures. The ACS also has a role in border
control and safety.
4.162 The ACS administers the
Customs Act 1901
Customs Tariff Act 1995
(Cth) and related legislation. It also
administers legislation on behalf of other government agencies, principally in
relation to
the movement of goods and people across the Australian
The ACS provides air-
and sea-based surveillance and response services to a number of government
4.163 The ACS prioritises protecting the Australian community by intercepting
illegal goods and weapons, and employs surveillance
techniques to identify and
intercept vessels and persons to detect border incursions. The ACS also has
inspection powers under a
range of anti-terrorism provisions.
4.164 Much of the work of the ACS operates in a self-assessment environment.
It can conduct audits and impose sanctions such as: warning
letters; removal of
ACS agents from the self-assessment scheme; revocation of deferred duty
arrangements or the imposition of additional
conditions; refusal of permission
for movements under bond or imposition of conditions on the permission holder;
imposition of administrative
penalties of up to twice the customs duty;
cancellation, suspension or imposition of a conditional licence for warehouse
holders; and prosecution
4.165 The ACS makes use of a number of ‘monitoring’ powers,
including entry to premises and obtaining
information.
The monitoring
powers can be exercised under consent or under a warrant. The ACS has noted,
however, that there has been no requirement
to seek a warrant to enter premises
for the purposes of exercising monitoring powers since the commencement of the
monitoring powers
Any matters arising that suggest an offence has been committed are referred to
the Investigations Branch of the ACS.
4.166 ACS officers play a role, alongside the AFP, in the investigation and
prosecution of breaches of border control laws. To fulfil
this function, ACS
officers have wide powers to execute search and seizure warrants and seize
evidentiary material.
Customs Act
includes a wide range of coercive powers including powers
board and search ships, collect documents and question
passengers;
make copies of, and take extracts from, documents in certain
circumstances;
question passengers of
question persons claiming
apply for search warrants in respect of things believed to be
evidential material;
detain and search persons for purposes of law enforcement
cooperation;
require production of commercial documents and records verifying the
content of communications made to the
2005–06, the ACS reported that it had increased the number of illegal
foreign fishers detained, commenced the progressive
arming of ACS officers
undertaking waterfront patrol and response work, ship boarding and certain
investigatory operations; and enhanced
investigatory capability through
improvements in policy, procedures and
legislation.
In that period
56 revenue fraud cases and 461 other fraud cases were
investigated.
The ACS has
indicated that its Regional Investigations Branch officers seek the issue and
execution of search warrants under
and seizure warrants under
Customs Act
on a weekly
Department of
Immigration and Citizenship
4.168 The core activities of the Department of Immigration and Citizenship
(DIAC) are the managed entry of people into Australia,
the settlement of
migrants and refugees, and the promotion of citizenship and cultural diversity.
DIAC implements the
Migration Act 1958
(Cth), which regulates the entry
of non-citizens into Australia. The Act contains powers of detention and removal
of unlawful non-citizens,
as well as a number of character-related powers, which
include criminal deportation and visa cancellation on character grounds.
4.169 Following the Palmer Report into the detention of Cornelia
DIAC committed to making
a number of improvements to the operational culture of the department based
around the three themes of making
the department more open and accountable,
ensuring fair and reasonable dealings with clients, and providing the
organisation with
well-trained and supported
Migration Act
contains a number of coercive
information-gathering powers used frequently by DIAC. These
A general power to obtain information and documents about unlawful
non-citizens.
This power is
used many times each working day. Prior to establishment of electronic links to
the ATO, up to 5,000 notices were issued
each year to the ATO alone.
Powers that enable authorised officers to issue a production notice
or attendance notice in relation to a visa monitoring
In 2005–06,
some 27 production notices were issued to education providers in the course of
investigations into student non-compliance,
compared with 60 notices issued in
2004–05. Authorised officers also have powers to enter premises under a
monitoring warrant,
and require a person to answer questions relevant to visa
monitoring purposes.
Powers of entry and search pursuant to a search
DIAC notes that the
warrants is generally to locate individuals rather than
documents, although documents can be searched pursuant to the
Section 251
are issued across Australia on every working day. At present, somewhere below
500 are issued each year, although up to 1,500
a year have been issued in the
Persons in immigration detention under the Act may be required to
answer such questions as an officer considers necessary to determine
number of other coercive powers provided by the
Migration Act
generally exercised by ACS officers or the Australian Navy, including powers to
board and search ships, examine documents and
goods on board, and require those
on board to answer questions;
and powers to muster crews and require production of identity
Quarantine Inspection Service
4.172 The Australian Quarantine Inspection Service (AQIS) operates within the
Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry. AQIS
provides quarantine
inspection services for the arrival of international passengers, cargo, mail,
animals and plants or their products
into Australia, and inspection and
certification for a range of animal and plant products exported from Australia.
4.173 AQIS is responsible for the administration of the
Quarantine Act
(Cth) and its related legislation. AQIS provides screening services for
goods and passengers at airports, seaports and mail
administers the
Imported Food Control Act 1992
(Cth) and related
legislation, which ensures that imported food complies with public health and
food standards; and the
Export Control Act 1982
(Cth), which controls the
process of government certification, which is a prerequisite to gaining entry to
most overseas markets for
most food and agricultural products. AQIS also
administers the
Australian Meat and Livestock Industry Act 1997
which provides for the licensing of meat and livestock exporters.
4.174 AQIS embraces co-regulation as a basic regulatory strategy whereby
requirements are set in consultation with industry. AQIS
administers the
requirements set out in law, while industry implements management systems to
achieve compliance. The AQIS website
states that AQIS systems verify compliance
and, where there is non-compliance, AQIS takes action by prosecution or by
administrative
4.175 AQIS has submitted that its coercive information-gathering powers fall
into two broad categories.
The first relates to the collection of information that enables AQIS to decide
whether regulatory standards under the legislation
AQIS administers have been
met, for example, requirements to provide notices of proposed importation goods
or give a report and information
departures.
4.176 The second category of information-gathering powers relates to the
collection of information that enables AQIS to decide whether
an offence has
been committed under the legislation it administers. Quarantine officers have,
or have delegated to them, wide powers
to search, seize and treat goods
suspected of being a quarantine risk, and a number of information-gathering
powers requiring the
provision of information, production of documents, and
answering of questions.
powers can only be exercised with consent or pursuant to a
Fisheries Management Authority
4.177 The Australian Fisheries Management Authority (AFMA) is a statutory
body that administers the day-to-day management of
responsible for enforcing the
Fisheries Management Act 1991
(Cth) and the
Torres Strait Fisheries Act 1984
(Cth) through the detection and
investigation of illegal activities by both domestic and foreign fishing boats
in the Australian
fishing zone and Commonwealth-managed fisheries.
4.178 AFMA undertakes these functions in conjunction with other relevant
federal agencies, with specific compliance functions being
undertaken by state
fisheries authorities on an agency basis. While state agencies provide the
personnel and expertise, AFMA provides
overall co-ordination, policy direction,
technical advice and funding.
AFMA also has responsibilities in relation to protection of the marine
environment by maintaining sustainable fishery levels.
4.179 AFMA has surveillance and enforcement powers under
Fisheries Management Act
Under this part, AFMA officers have a number of
powers including to:
board and search a boat for equipment that has been used, is being
used, is intended to be used or is capable of being used for fishing
document or record relating to the fishing operations of the
make copies of, any documents relating to the receiving of
require a person found on any land or premises entered to produce
any documents in the person’s possession or under the person’s
control relating to any fish found on the land or in the premises, vehicle or
achieves compliance through a combination of measures, including continued
education and stakeholder participation in the
development of management rules,
law enforcement deterrents such as targeted operations and inspections,
intelligence gathering,
risk assessments and mitigation
Migration Agents
Registration Authority
4.181 The Migration Agents Registration Authority (MARA) is a statutory
industry self-regulation authority for migration agents in
established under the
Migration Act 1958
(Cth). MARA is a division of the
Migration Institute of Australia Limited, the professional association of
migration agents in
4.182 The function of MARA is to assist consumers of migration
and maintain
standards of ethics and professionalism in the delivery of migration advice.
MARA maintains a Register of Migration
monitors the conduct
of registered agents, and investigates consumer complaints about potential
breaches of the Migration Agents Code
4.183 When investigating a registered migration agent’s continued
registration, MARA may require agents to make a statutory
declaration in answer
to questions in writing,
appear before individuals specified by MARA to answer
or provide MARA
with specified documents or
MARA exercises its
powers under s 308
4.184 In circumstances where MARA is considering refusing a registration
application or making a decision to cancel or suspend an
registration or caution a registered agent, it has power to serve notice on an
agent requiring him or her to provide
specified information or
Failure to respond
to the notice is a strict liability
MARA also has
information-gathering powers in circumstances where it is considering barring a
former registered migration agent from
being a registered migration agent for a
period of time.
under ss 305C and 311EA are rarely
Communications
Communications and Media Authority
4.185 The Australian Communications and Media Authority (ACMA) is responsible
for the regulation of broadcasting, the internet, radiocommunications
telecommunications. ACMA was formed in 2005 following the merging of the
Australian Communications Authority and the Australian
Broadcasting Authority.
ACMA’s responsibilities include: promoting self-regulation and competition
in the communications industry,
while protecting consumers and other users;
fostering an environment in which electronic media respect community standards
and respond
to audience and user needs; managing access to the radiofrequency
spectrum; and representing Australia’s communications interests
internationally.
administers the Do Not Call Register, which commenced operation in May
4.186 ACMA has powers under the
Broadcasting Services Act 1992
Telecommunications Act 1997
Telecommunications
(Consumer Protection and Service Standards) Act 1999
Radiocommunications Act 1992
(Cth) and the
Interactive Gambling Act
(Cth). ACMA works primarily under a self-regulatory approach with the
broadcasting and communications industries, while also undertaking
investigations and enforcement action to ensure compliance with licence
conditions, codes and
4.187 Under the
Broadcasting Services Act
, ACMA’s role in
complaints is to establish whether the code of practice has been implemented or
whether there has been compliance
with licence conditions. ACMA has a range of
information-gathering powers under the Act, including powers to conduct
investigations,
undertake examinations and hearings and seek the production of
In 2005–06,
142 investigations were completed into radio and television licensees’
compliance with codes of practice,
licence conditions or the Act, with 34
resulting in breach
4.188 ACMA also has powers to obtain information and make inquiries under the
Interactive Gambling Act
in investigating complaints under the Act, or on
its own initiative.
powers are subject to ACMA’s information-gathering powers set out in the
Broadcasting Act
4.189 ACMA also has extensive information-gathering powers under
Telecommunications Act
. Under this part, ACMA may, by written
notice, obtain information and documents from carriers and service providers or
has a number of search powers in relation to technical offences under
Part 21 of the Act or for breaches of the
Spam Act 2003
ACMA inspectors may
exercise these powers under the authority of a search warrant, with consent or
in an emergency.
An inspector
may require the giving of certain information, and the production of certain
documents, relevant to compliance with
Telecommunications
4.190 Under the
Radiocommunications Act
, ACMA has powers to search and
seize, and require production of relevant documents, in undertaking an
investigation into an offence
against the
The powers can be
exercised with consent, pursuant to a warrant, or in an emergency. In
2005–06, ACMA reported that it conducted
663 radiocommunications
investigations, resulting in 57 advice notices and 158 warning notices being
issued. ACMA initiated 463 investigations
into suspected non-compliance with the
radiocommunications standards regulatory
arrangements.
Telecommunications (Consumer Protection and Service Standards)
includes a power for the responsible minister to require a carrier or
provider, by written notice, to provide information relevant
minister’s functions under the Universal Service Regime established by the
ACMA has noted that this
power is exercised by the responsible minister, not by
A written notice issued
under this section is a disallowable instrument.
Environment
Department of the
Environment and Water Resources
4.192 The Department of the Environment and Water Resources advises on and
implements policies and programs for the protection and
conservation of the
environment. The Department administers the
Environment Protection and
Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999
(Cth) (EPBC
The EPBC Act regulates
actions that will, or are likely to, have a significant impact on any matter of
national environmental
significance.
4.193 The EPBC Act contains several compliance and enforcement mechanisms,
including injunctions, environmental audits, civil and
criminal penalties,
orders to remedy environmental damage, personal liability of executive officers,
and publicising of contraventions.
In 2005–06, the Department dealt with
350 reports of incidents or activities potentially in breach of the provisions
to activities that may have a significant impact on matters of national
environmental significance, and 210 of these warranted further
4.194 The Department states that, in order to ensure that the referral,
assessment and approval regulatory system established under
the EPBC Act is
applied rigorously and is enforceable, it has adopted a structured,
compliance-based approach. The Department has
established a compliance auditing
programme to monitor adherence to approval
conditions.
4.195 The Department operates in a tri-agency model of environmental
investigations in conjunction with the AFP and ACS, and hosts
outposted officers
from these agencies.
June 2006, 44 investigations had been carried out since 2000 for EPBC
Act-related matters and a further eight investigations
relating to other
portfolio legislation. The EPBC Act investigations related to matters of
national environmental significance, incursions
into protected areas, threatened
species and ecological communities, and wildlife matters. Of these cases, five
have been referred
to the CDPP and two to the Australian Government
4.196 Division 7 of the EPBC Act
provides for the Minister to appoint
commissions to carry out inquiries into the impacts of actions. Under this
division, Commissioners
have powers to call witnesses, obtain documents and
inspect places for the purposes of their
Failure to comply
with such a requirement carries a maximum penalty of
Commissioners may
also inspect premises either by consent or with a
Great Barrier Reef
Marine Park Authority
4.197 The Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority provides for the
protection, use, understanding and enjoyment of the Great Barrier
perpetuity through the care and development of the Great Barrier Reef Marine
4.198 The Authority manages the Marine Park and makes any recommendations to
the Minister as to its care and development. As part
of the management of the
Marine Park, the Authority may set charges for its use by visitors. Under
Division 6 of the
Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Act 1975
inspectors have the authority to search aircraft, vessels or premises and
inspect documents that are relevant to ascertaining
a person’s liability
to charge or to pay a collected amount due to the Authority under the
While Authority
inspectors regularly exercise powers to search and enter premises under
ss 39S and 39T, the Authority does not generally
obtain or execute warrants
under s 39U. Where a warrant is necessary, this is generally obtained under
and executed by police
Maritime Safety Authority
4.199 Commonwealth legislation has been enacted to protect the marine
environment and to adopt international conventions governing
marine pollution. A
package of ‘protection of the sea’ legislation was enacted in 1981
to implement international conventions
and provide funding for a national plan
to deal with oil and chemical spills by imposing levies. This legislation is
enforced by
the Australian Maritime Safety Authority (AMSA). AMSA also has
regulatory functions in relation to transport, and is discussed below.
Department of
Defence and the Australian Defence Force
4.200 The Department of Defence is responsible for Australia’s
international defence relations and defence cooperation, defence
research and development, defence procurement and purchasing, and defence
industry development and co-operation.
4.201 Section 51SO of the
Defence Act 1903
(Cth) provides that a
member of the Australian Defence Force, as directed by the Chief of the Defence
may require a person
to answer a question or to produce a particular document. This power is only
available if the member of the
Defence Force believes on reasonable grounds that
it is necessary for the purpose of preserving the life or safety of other
or to protect Commonwealth interests. Failure to comply with such a
direction is a criminal offence.
4.202 Under the
Defence Force Discipline Act 1982
(Cth), there is a
uniform system of military justice for the three armed services in Australia.
There are three types of service
tribunals that may hear defence force
disciplinary matters: summary authorities, court martial and defence force
magistrates.
Section 138 of
the Act grants powers to appropriate authorities to require defence personnel to
give evidence or to provide documents
as required by the rules of procedure of
the service tribunals.
Australian Energy
4.203 Since July 1995, the Australian Energy Regulator (AER) has had
responsibility for compliance monitoring, reporting and enforcement
National Electricity Market. The AER is part of the ACCC, although it operates
as a separate legal entity. In addition to
its economic regulation powers, the
AER has a range of compliance monitoring and enforcement functions under
s 15 of the National
Electricity
The AER is required to
monitor compliance with the National Electricity Law, the National Electricity
Regulations and the National
Electricity Rules. The AER may investigate breaches
or possible breaches, and may enforce the law, the regulations and the
National Electricity (South Australia) Act 1996
establishes the laws of the National Electricity Market. Under
of that Act, the AER is granted a broad series of investigation powers to obtain
inspect documents and equipment where the
AER has a reasonable belief that there has been a breach of a provision of the
Under s 28 of the
Act, the AER may serve a notice requiring a person to furnish to the AER any
information the AER requires for the
performance or exercise of a function or
power conferred on it under the Act. To date, these powers have not been used by
although it was submitted that they are an important part of the
economic regulatory and enforcement
Rather than using
its coercive powers, the AER relies on routine information that must be provided
to it by regulated businesses
in accordance with the National Electricity
Office of the
Inspector of Transport Security
4.205 The Office of the Inspector of Transport Security (ITS) was established
in December 2005 within the Department of Transport
and Regional Services. The
ITS undertakes independent inquiries, as required by the Minister for Transport
and Regional Services,
into major transport security incidents or incidents that
suggest systemic weaknesses in aviation or maritime security regulatory
The ITS also inquires into surface transport security matters, subject to the
agreement of the relevant state or territory
government.
4.206 The functions of the ITS were incorporated into legislation in the
Inspector of Transport Security Act 2006
(Cth), which commenced operation
on 7 June 2007. Under
Inspector of Transport Security Act
the Inspector has powers to request information that he or she believes is
relevant to an inquiry from other government agencies
Special procedures
apply for requests for on-board recording
information.
4.207 The ITS may also enter and search premises and board and search
transport vehicles, with the consent of the controller of the
premises or
The Inspector may
also exercise his or her powers to ask questions while conducting the
4.208 None of the powers of the ITS are ‘coercive’ in nature as
they can only be exercised with consent from the relevant
person or government
agency, and that consent can be revoked at any
Civil Aviation
Safety Authority
4.209 The Civil Aviation Safety Authority (CASA) is an independent statutory
authority established under the
Civil Aviation Act 1988
(Cth). CASA is
responsible for the regulation of aviation safety in Australia and the safety of
Australian aircraft overseas, and
falls within the portfolio of the Department
of Transport and Regional Services.
4.210 CASA administers the
Civil Aviation Act
, which prescribes the
drafting of Civil Aviation Regulations, safety education, surveillance and
enforcement processes. CASA is also
governed by the
Civil Aviation
Regulations 1988
(Cth) and the
Civil Aviation Safety Regulations 1998
Civil Aviation Act
and Regulations give effect to the
Chicago Convention, an international convention that regulates international
civil aviation.
4.211 To undertake its functions, CASA aims to develop effective enforcement
strategies to secure compliance with aviation safety
enforcement action when it detects non-compliance with obligations imposed by
the Act, the Regulations and other instruments
made under the Act and
Regulations. Non-compliance in this context may involve contravention of the Act
or the Regulations, but it
also may involve a breach of a condition attaching to
a licence or certificate, or acts or omissions that indicate that a person
longer meets the standards required by the legislation for the holding of a
licence or certificate.
4.212 The penalties under the
Civil Aviation Act
and Regulations are
directed at aircraft manufacturers, aircraft owners, aircraft hirers, pilots,
maintenance personnel, handlers
of dangerous goods, and any person who
interferes with crew or aircraft.
4.213 CASA has a range of enforcement tools available which are set out in
detail in its enforcement
These include a
demerits point scheme, enforceable undertakings, and protection for
self-reporting of inadvertent mistakes. CASA
states that its system of
enforcement is based on protecting those who make innocent mistakes and
encouraging them to report, measured
responses to minor breaches and
concentration of enforcement action on cases where there are serious safety
4.214 There are 23 provisions under the Act and the Regulations that allow
CASA access to aircraft, aerodromes, premises or documents.
For example, under
s 53 of the Act, CASA is empowered to require the production of documents
and other things required in the investigation
of defects. Regulation 305 is a
general access provision authorising access to premises and documents for
regulatory purposes. Access
powers are only available to authorised inspectors
under the Regulations.
reg 305(1A), it is an offence for a person to prevent or hinder access by
an inspector to any place.
Maritime Safety Authority
4.215 AMSA is a regulatory safety agency established under the
Maritime Safety Authority Act 1990
(Cth) (AMSA Act). It is largely
self-funded through levies on the commercial shipping industry. AMSA reports to
the Minister for
Transport and Regional Services.
4.216 AMSA’s goal, as set out in the AMSA Act, is to achieve
world’s best practice in providing services to Australia
in maritime
safety, aviation and marine search and rescue, and protection of the marine
environment from ship-sourced pollution.
As discussed above, AMSA is also
responsible for enforcing federal legislation that has been enacted to protect
the marine environment
and to adopt international conventions governing marine
Navigation Act 1912
(Cth) is the main piece of federal
legislation that regulates matters such as ship safety, coastal trade,
employment of seafarers
and shipboard aspects of the protection of the marine
environment, and provides a national search and rescue service.
4.218 Under the
Navigation Act,
a person authorised by the Minister or
by AMSA may search a ship in a port where the person has reasonable grounds for
believing the
person also may enter and inspect any premises; summon persons
before him or her
and require them to answer questions; and require and enforce the production of
documents by any person.
Refusal to comply with such a direction is an offence under the Act, with a
maximum penalty of
4.219 AMSA also provides inspectorate services under the
Occupational
Health and Safety (Maritime Industry) Act 1993
Under the Act,
inspectors appointed by AMSA have powers to enter, search and inspect ships, and
require persons to answer questions
or produce documents in relation to an
investigation into health and safety on the
It is an offence to not
comply with such requests made by inspectors.
Australian Transport
Safety Bureau
4.220 The Australian Transport Safety Bureau (ATSB) is an operationally
independent body within the Department of Transport and Regional
Services and is
Australia’s prime agency for transport safety
investigations.
4.221 The ATSB’s stated objective is safe transport. Its mission is to
maintain and improve transport safety and public confidence
through excellence
in: independent investigation of transport accidents and other safety
occurrences; safety data recording, analysis
and research; and raising safety
awareness and knowledge.
4.222 The ATSB’s functions and powers are governed by the
Safety Investigation Act 2003
(Cth). The object of the Act is to improve
transport safety through, among other things, independent investigations of
transport accidents
and incidents and the making of safety action statements and
recommendations that draw on the results of those
investigations.
investigations avoid apportioning blame or determining
In 2005–06,
the ATSB released 117 final investigation
4.223 The ATSB has powers to investigate under
Transport Safety Investigation Act
Those powers are only able to be
exercised in the context of an
investigation.
s 32 of the Act, the Executive Director of ATSB has powers to require a
person to answer questions or produce documents relevant
to an investigation. A
person who refuses to attend or answer questions when required is guilty of an
4.224 In a submission to this Inquiry, the ATSB indicated that it generally
uses its powers under s 32 to require production of documents
or appear to
answer questions in most investigations, with multiple notices likely to be
issued in major
investigations.
protections attach to documents produced under s 32, the ATSB regularly
considers it ‘necessary’ to use the
power to facilitate the
appropriate confidentiality requirements. The ATSB considers this fits with the
objectives of the Act in
not apportioning blame or determing liability as part
of its investigations.
4.225 Other coercive information-gathering powers under the Act include
powers to: enter premises with consent, under a warrant or
in emergencies;
the subject of an investigation
The ATSB indicated
that it has not had cause to use the powers with respect to warrants, as parties
generally comply with notices
issued under s 32 to produce evidential
4.226 The ATSB website contains a number of publications regarding its
investigation powers, outlining what steps are taken when a
major transport
accident occurs, and detailing the rights and obligations of parties who
participate in
investigations.
4.227 The Workplace Ombudsman was established under recent amendments to the
Workplace Relations Act 1996
(Cth) (WRA), commencing operation on 1 July
The role of the
Workplace Ombudsman is to:
educate employers and workers to understand their rights and
obligations under the WRA;
promote and monitor compliance with the WRA, including inquiring
into any potentially non-compliant practices and investigating suspected
contraventions of the WRA;
institute proceedings to enforce the WRA;
represent employees who are or might become a party to proceedings
under the WRA; and
appoint and direct workplace
inspectors.
4.228 Under
of the WRA, workplace inspectors have
coercive information-gathering powers to determine whether an employer’s
obligations
under the Act are being met. Inspectors under the Act may enter
premises, interview any person, require documents to be produced
for inspection
and inspect, and make copies from or extract any document
Inspectors may
also, by notice in writing, require a person to produce a
It is an offence to
contravene a requirement of an inspector to produce a
4.229 Building on the previous work of the Office of Workplace Services,
which conducted similar functions to the Workplace Ombudsman
between March 2006
and June 2006, the Workplace Ombudsman has been involved in a number of
successful prosecutions and recovery of
unpaid worker
entitlements.
At the end of
August 2007, 23 court cases have been finalised, and a further 43 cases were
before the courts.
Workplace Ombudsman has produced a fact sheet providing information on the
powers of workplace inspectors, including their coercive
information-gathering
4.230 Comcare is a federal statutory authority established under the
Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1988
(Cth) (SRC Act). Comcare
administers the Commonwealth’s workers’ compensation scheme under
the SRC Act and also the
Occupational
Health and Safety Act 1991
Comcare also
administers the
Asbestos-Related Claims (Management of Commonwealth
Liabilities) Act 2005
(Cth) (ARC Act).
4.231 Comcare states that its priorities are: to promote safe and healthy
workplaces; provide accessible and affordable compensation
services; and
encourage and support the early and safe return to work of injured
4.232 Comcare conducts investigations to determine compliance with the OHS
Act and may do so on its own initiative, or in response
to a direction from the
Safety, Rehabilitation and Compensation
Commission.
Investigations
may be reactive (undertaken in response to an incident) or proactive, where an
investigation is generally scheduled
in advance as part of a targeted compliance
program. During 2005–06, Comcare commenced a total of 189 investigations,
up of 76 reactive investigations, 64 proactive investigations and 49 review
investigations.
4.233 Under the OHS Act, investigators have powers to enter and inspect
premises and require persons: to give to the investigator
reasonable assistance;
to answer any questions put by the investigator; and to give to the investigator
any documents requested by
the investigator or copies of such
Failure to comply
with an investigator’s request is an
After receiving an
investigation report, the Safety, Rehabilitation and Compensation Commission
also has the power to obtain information
and documents relevant to the matters
of the investigation.
Commission may conduct public or private inquiries under s 55 of the Act,
and has the power to summon witnesses and require the
production of documents
for that purpose.
4.234 Comcare has indicated that it frequently uses its coercive
information-gathering powers under the OHS Act, in particular ss
Comcare also notes that it is currently moving away from the practice of
informally obtaining documents and information
from employers by consent, and is
instead issuing statutory notices whenever
4.235 To assist the functions of assessing claims, Comcare has powers under
the SRC Act and the ARC Act to request information in
relation to compensation
It is not an offence
to fail to comply with such requests, but Comcare can refuse to deal further
with the claim if the request is
not met. Comcare has indicated that it uses the
powers of request under the SRC Act on a regular basis, but generally obtains
information
in relation to asbestos claims through a simple written request
rather than using s 11 of the ARC
Child Support
4.236 The Child Support Agency (CSA) was established under the
Support (Registration and Collection) Act 1988
(Cth) to administer the
Commonwealth Government’s Child Support Scheme. Since 2004, the CSA has
been part of the Australian
Government Department of Human Services. The
function of the CSA is to ensure separated parents share in the cost of
supporting their
children. The CSA has a Child Support
who maintains a
register of child support
and manages their
collection and regular and timely distribution to families. Under the
Support (Assessment) Act 1989
(Cth), the Child Support Registrar can make
administrative determinations of the level of child support required to be paid
by individuals.
4.237 Under both Acts, the Child Support Registrar has the power to serve
notice on a person requiring them to provide the Registrar
with relevant
information or documents.
Registrar also has the power to require a person to attend for questioning by
the Registrar.
failure to comply with requests issued under the
Child Support (Registration
and Collection) Act
is an offence punishable by a fine not exceeding
Refusal or failure to
comply with notices issued under the
Child Support (Assessment) Act
offence punishable by imprisonment not exceeding 6
4.238 Similar powers are available to the Registrar under the
Support (Registration and Collection) Act
for obtaining information from a
person who is, or was, a resident of an overseas jurisdiction prescribed under
the regulations as
reciprocating on child support matters. Failure to comply is
not, however, an offence under the
4.239 The CSA has comprehensive compliance strategies in place to ensure that
the right amount of child support is paid on
In 2005–06, the
CSA referred over 14,000 customers to the ATO for lodgement-enforcement action,
and it is expected this figure
will rise to over 125,000 referrals in
proactively seeks out customers who avoid and minimise their child support and
in 2005–06 reviewed a total of 702 cases.
As a last resort, the CSA takes
legal action for enforcement, with 786 cases finalised in
The CSA has
indicated that proactive investigation of avoiders and income-minimisers will be
significantly increased from
Insolvency and
Trustee Service Australia
4.240 The Insolvency and Trustee Service Australia (ITSA) is responsible for
the administration and regulation of the personal insolvency
Australia. ITSA’s purpose is to ‘provide a personal insolvency
system that produces equitable outcomes for
debtors and creditors, enjoys public
confidence and minimises the impact of financial failure on the
community’.
4.241 The coercive information-gathering powers relevant to ITSA can be
grouped in three categories:
Powers available to an official receiver to assist a trustee in the
administration of a particular matter, or to assist in the administration
Act itself. Official receivers are appointed in each bankruptcy district, and
provide Australia’s bankruptcy registry
Powers available to the Official Trustee to obtain information to
assist in the administration of a particular matter. The Official
Trustee is a
body corporate established under the
Bankruptcy Act
which can act as a trustee of bankrupt estates and the administrator of other
Powers exercised by the Inspector-General in Bankruptcy in the
regulation of principally registered trustees and debt agreement administrators
and in the investigation of offences under the
4.242 Under
Bankruptcy Act
, official receivers are able, at all
reasonable times, to have full and free access to all premises and books for any
the Act, and remove from premises any books that the receiver or
officer reasonably considers may be relevant to the examinable affairs
debtor or bankrupt under that part of the Act. Official receivers also have the
power under s 77C to require a person, by written
notice, to produce
information or books, or appear to give
It is an offence to
fail to comply with notices issued under ss 77AA and 77C. In 2005–06,
official receivers issued 504 notices
under ss 77AA and
ITSA has recently
published a best practice statement on the exercise of the powers of official
4.243 Under the
Bankruptcy Act
, trustees have a number of
information-gathering powers to assist in the administration of a bankruptcy.
These can be exercised by
the Official Trustee or any registered private
trustee. The powers include requiring: production by a bankrupt of information
the statement of his or her financial
production of books
of an ‘associated entity’ of a
and provision of
additional information concerning a person’s
Failure to comply
with notices issued under these provisions is an offence.
Section 130
trustee to apply for a warrant to enter premises and seize property or books
relevant to a bankrupt’s affairs. ITSA
does not record the number of
warrants obtained, or the exercise of coercive information-gathering powers by
the Official Trustee
or any other
4.244 The Inspector-General in Bankruptcy has two broad functions: regulation
of trustees and administrators, and investigation of
offences under the
Bankruptcy Act
. Regulatory work is undertaken by ITSA’s Bankruptcy
Regulation branch, and investigations are undertaken by the Bankruptcy
Investigation unit. To assist with its regulatory activities, the
Inspector-General is empowered to make a broad range of inquiries
investigations into a range of different matters under the
4.245 The Inspector-General also has a number of general investigation powers
under the Act, including the power to require trustees,
administrators and
former administrators to produce books or answer an inquiry made to him or her,
and the power to investigate the
books of a trustee, administrator or former
administrator at any time.
ITSA reported that during 2005–06 the Fraud Investigation unit received
and assessed 840 alleged offence referrals; commenced
657 investigations;
completed 589 investigations; achieved compliance in 175 matters; referred four
matters to state and federal
police agencies for investigation; and forwarded
271 briefs of evidence to the
4.246 Over the same period, ITSA also issued warning letters to 92 first-time
alleged offenders regarding less serious breaches of
Bankruptcy Act
ITSA states that warning letters save investigative time and resources and are
issued to those alleged offenders it considers to
have committed minor
infringements of the offence provisions of the
Bankruptcy Act
warning letter is issued, follow-up interviews are conducted to educate alleged
offenders about their rights and responsibilities,
and the potential
consequences of any future non-compliance. Where a recipient of a warning letter
elects not to participate in this
interview process, ITSA withdraws the warning
letter and initiates prosecution
National Offshore
Petroleum Safety Authority
4.247 The National Offshore Petroleum Safety Authority (NOPSA) is a statutory
authority which administers offshore petroleum safety
legislation.
It commenced
operations in January 2005. The organisation’s primary objectives include:
• improving health and safety outcomes across the offshore petroleum
• ensuring health and safety regulation of the offshore petroleum
industry is provided to standards that are equal to the best
in the world
• reducing the regulatory burden on the offshore petroleum industry,
which operates across multiple jurisdictions, by delivering
a consistent and
comprehensive health and safety
4.248 Schedule 7 of the
Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Act 1967
establishes an occupational health and safety regime for petroleum activities in
Commonwealth waters. Under the Act, NOPSA’s
occupational health and safety
inspectors are granted powers to enter and search premises of facilities and
regulated business premises,
require a person to answer questions in person or
in writing, and produce documents or
Failure to comply
with these requirements is an offence. Powers to enter and search other premises
can exercised with consent or
pursuant to a warrant.
4.249 NOPSA’s
Compliance and Enforcement Policy
indicates that
the agency has a graduated enforcement system that allows an inspector to
escalate the compliance and enforcement
action according to the response of the
responsible party and the significance of the
non-compliance.
The options
commence with a verbal warning, and progress through written notices,
improvement notices and prohibition notices, to
recommendations for prosecution.
In 2005–06, NOPSA undertook 62 inspections of facilities, issued 18
improvement notices and
three prohibition notices, and prepared two prosecution
briefs for the CDPP.
Royal Commissions
4.250 Royal Commissions of inquiry have been described as
‘unquestionably the most ancient and the most dignified’ of
various bodies of inquiry.
The origins of Royal Commissions can be traced back to the 12th
In spite of the decline of this type of inquiry between the late 17th and the
end of the 18th century, the practice was revived under
Queen Victoria. It is
naturally of special interest to Australia that the quasi-political device of
using Royal Commissions of inquiry
was revived at the time when British
settlement created a new society in
4.251 Royal Commissions ‘owe their foundation to an exercise of the
royal prerogative to appoint appropriate citizens of the
realm to perform duties
on behalf of the
Commissions Act 1902
(Cth) allows the Governor-General, by Letters Patent,
issue such commissions, directed to such person or persons, as he thinks fit,
requiring or authorising [those persons] to make inquiry
into and report upon
any matter specified in the Letters Patent, and which relates to or is connected
with the peace, order and good
government of the Commonwealth, or any public
purpose or any power of the
Commonwealth.
4.252 Royal Commissions are normally established only where a matter of
public interest so requires. Their ad hoc nature distinguishes
permanent standing federal agencies and bodies. Their purpose is usually to
ascertain factual circumstances and make
recommendations.
discovery of the truth has been described as a prime function of a Royal
Commission.
The findings of a
Royal Commission do not have any legally binding status, although they may
assist in the formulation of government
policy and the enactment of new
legislation.
[Royal Commissions] can provide policy advice to governments or they can
investigate and report on major disasters or events that
become a matter of
public concern as a result for example of some alleged maladministration in the
workings of government.
4.253 Justice Neville Owen, the Royal Commissioner in the HIH inquiry,
Royal commissions have a particular ability to delve beneath the surface and
explore and expose matters that otherwise might not
readily come to light. They
also have the capacity to marshal evidence and other material in such a way as
to assist those whose
responsibility it is to consider future action. There is
thus a continuing public benefit from the work royal commissions
4.254 Royal Commissions are a common feature of Australian public
There have been a
number of high profile federal Royal Commissions, including those into the
Australian Wheat Board; HIH Insurance;
the building and construction industry;
and Aboriginal deaths in
In addition, since
the late 1980s, each Australian state has had a high profile commission into
crime or corruption.
4.255 In the Second Reading of the Royal Commissions Bill 1902, Senator
O’Connor stated:
It is quite evident that the power to appoint Royal commissions is of no value
whatever unless you can give power to examine witnesses
on oath, and to compel
the attendance of witnesses, and the production of
4.256 A federal Royal Commission has the power to summon a person to appear
before it to give evidence or to produce the documents
or things specified in
the summons;
and to require a
person appearing at the hearing of evidence to take an oath or
affirmation.
practitioners appointed or authorised to assist a Royal Commission may, so far
as the Royal Commission thinks proper, examine
or cross-examine any witness on
any matter which the commission deems relevant to the
A person who fails
to attend a hearing or to produce the requested documents or things, without
reasonable excuse, commits an offence,
punishable by a maximum penalty of $1,000
or imprisonment for six
The same maximum
penalty applies to a person who refuses to be sworn, make an affirmation or to
answer any relevant question asked
by the Royal
Commission.
witness cannot be compelled to disclose to a Royal Commission ‘any secret
manufacture’.
Royal Commission may also authorise a member of the commission or a member of
the AFP or of the police force of a state
or territory to apply for search
warrants in relation to matters into which it is
To supplement the limited information
available in annual reports of federal bodies, the ALRC wrote directly to
federal bodies with
investigatory functions to ask for further input on the use
of their coercive powers. Where non-confidential information was provided
ALRC, this has been included in relevant chapters of this Discussion
For the purposes of this chapter,
the ALRC has adopted broad categories of federal responsibility, under which it
describes the
functions of federal bodies. The functions performed by some
federal bodies may be broader than the boundaries of a particular
categorisation—or
even fall within more than one
Australian Crime
Commission Act 2002
for definition of ‘serious and
organised crime’.
for definition of ‘federally relevant criminal
Australian Crime Commission,
Annual Report 2005–06
Australian Crime Commission Act
Crime Commission,
Annual Report 2005–06
Amendments to the
Australian Crime
Commission Act 2002
(Cth) were made by the
Families, Community Services
and Indigenous Affairs and Other Legislation Amendment (Northern Territory
National Emergency Response
and Other Measures) Act 2007
Australian Crime
Commission Act 2002
. The power to obtain information from a ‘State
agency’—which includes an agency of the Northern Territory or
inserted by the
Families, Community Services and Indigenous
Affairs and Other Legislation Amendment (Northern Territory National Emergency
and Other Measures) Act 2007
(Cth). This power only operates in
relation to state and territory agencies where an arrangement between the
federal minister and
the appropriate state or territory minister is in force
Australian Crime Commission Act 2002
Australian Crime
Commission,
Annual Report 2005–06
, 10, 139. The application of the
ACC’s powers to territory offences was inserted by the
Community Services and Indigenous Affairs and Other Legislation Amendment
(Northern Territory National Emergency Response
and Other Measures) Act 2007
(Cth) sch 2.
Australian Crime
Commission,
Annual Report 2005–06
, 139. See also
Crime Commission Act 2002
Telecommunications
(Interception and Access) Act 1979
Australian Crime
Commission,
Annual Report 2005–06
, 41, app B.
Australian Crime Commission,
Australian Crime Commission Profile ‘Dismantling Serious and Organised
Criminal Activity’
(2007) <www.crimecommission.gov.au> at 20
August 2007.
Australian Federal
Annual Report 2005–06
Of 499 indictable matters referred
to the Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions in 2005–06, 253 of
these were referred
by the AFP, representing the most indictable matters
referred by any agency: Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions,
Report 2005–06
, Table 11.
Australian Federal Police Act 1979
Australian Federal Police,
Annual Report 2005–06
Australian Federal
Police Act 1979
s 8(1)(baa).
Australian Federal
Annual Report 2005–06
Crimes Act 1914
sets out what a search warrant authorises: for example, it authorises
the executing officer, or a constable assisting, to search
for and record
fingerprints and to take samples of things found at the premises for forensic
See Australian Federal
Australian Federal Police Investigation Services
<www.afp.gov.au/
services/investigation> at 20 August
Australian Federal Police,
Annual Report 2005–06
Crimes Act 1914
Environment
Protections (Sea Dumping) Act 1981
(Cth) s 32;
Financial Transaction
Reports Act 1988
Crime Commission Act 2002
Service and Execution of
Process Act 1992
Crimes Act 1914
(search of arrested
(ordinary or frisk search where authorised by search
warrant). See also
Financial Transaction Reports Act 1988
Anti-Money Laundering and Counter-Terrorism Financing Act
Crimes Act 1914
Radiocommunications
Superannuation Industry
(Supervision) Act 1993
Royal Commissions Act 1902
Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act 2001
(Cth) s 36;
Environment Protections (Sea Dumping) Act 1981
Therapeutic Goods Act 1989
Crimes Act 1914
Proceeds of Crime Act
Proceeds of Crime Act
During 2005–06, 1,028 notices to financial
institutions were served. See Australian Federal Police,
Annual Report
Proceeds of
Crime Act 2002
Surveillance Devices Act 2004
in relation to emergency
authorisations.
Telecommunications
(Interception and Access) Act 1979
Crimes Act 1914
Australian Government Attorney-General’s Department, ‘Acting
Integrity Commissioner Appointed’ (Press Release,
22 December
Law Enforcement Integrity
Commissioner Act 2006
Revised Explanatory Memorandum,
Enforcement Integrity Commissioner Bill 2006
No other agencies have been
prescribed in the regulations to date.
Law Enforcement Integrity Commissioner Act 2006
Parliament of
Australia—Senate Legal and Constitutional Legislation Committee,
Provisions of:
Law Enforcement Integrity Commissioner Bill 2006
Enforcement Integrity Commissioner (Consequential Amendments) Bill 2006
Enforcement (AFP Professional Standards and Related Measures) Bill 2006
(2006), [3.2]; P Ruddock (Attorney-General) and C Ellison (Minister for Justice
and Customs), ‘Commonwealth to Set Up Independent
National Anti-Corruption
Body’ (Press Release, 16 June
Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department, ‘Acting Integrity Commissioner
Appointed’ (Press Release,
22 December 2006). In Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Integrity: But Not By Trust Alone—AFP & NCA Complaints
and Disciplinary Systems
, ALRC 82 (1996), Rec 6, the ALRC recommended
that a new agency to be known as the National Integrity and Investigations
should be established to investigate, or supervise the investigation
of, complaints against the AFP and the (then) National Crime
Parliament of
Australia—Senate Legal and Constitutional Legislation Committee,
Provisions of:
Law Enforcement Integrity Commissioner Bill 2006
Enforcement Integrity Commissioner (Consequential Amendments) Bill 2006
Enforcement (AFP Professional Standards and Related Measures) Bill 2006
(2006), [3.2]; P Ruddock (Attorney-General) and C Ellison (Minister for Justice
and Customs), ‘Commonwealth to Set Up Independent
National Anti-Corruption
Body’ (Press Release, 16 June
C Stewart, ‘More Bite for
Police Watchdog’,
The Australian
(online), 13 July 2007, <www.
theaustralian.com.au>.
Explanatory Memorandum,
Law Enforcement Integrity Commissioner Bill 2006
Law Enforcement Integrity
Commissioner Act 2006
(warrants by telephone, fax, email).
See, eg, Ibid
Telecommunications
(Interception and Access) Act 1979
Surveillance Devices
. For discussion of these powers, see Parliament
of Australia—Senate Legal and Constitutional Legislation Committee,
Provisions of:
Law Enforcement Integrity Commissioner Bill 2006
Enforcement Integrity Commissioner (Consequential Amendments) Bill 2006
Enforcement (AFP Professional Standards and Related Measures) Bill 2006
(2006), [3.54].
Australian Commission
for Law Enforcement Integrity,
Parliament of
Australia—Senate Legal and Constitutional Legislation Committee,
Provisions of:
Law Enforcement Integrity Commissioner Bill 2006
Enforcement Integrity Commissioner (Consequential Amendments) Bill 2006
Enforcement (AFP Professional Standards and Related Measures) Bill 2006
(2006), [3.60].
Enforcement Integrity Commissioner Act 2006
However, the CDPP has some
information-gathering powers under the
Proceeds of Crime Act 2002
ch 3, being able to ask questions during an examination undertaken by an
approved examiner. There were 49 compulsory examinations
under the Act during
2005–06: Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions,
Annual Report
Commonwealth
Director of Public Prosecutions,
Ibid; Commonwealth Director of
Public Prosecutions,
Annual Report 2005–06
See Commonwealth Director of Public
Prosecutions,
The Office of the Commonwealth Director of Public
Prosecutions
<www.cdpp.gov.au/AboutUs/TheOffice/> at 20 August
Commonwealth Director of Public
Prosecutions,
Annual Report 2005–06
Ibid, 10, Table
Commonwealth Director of Public
Prosecutions,
Prosecution Policy of the Commonwealth
<www.cdpp.gov.au/Prosecutions/Policy/> at 20 August
Director of Public
Prosecutions Act 1983
for a full list of functions. See also
Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions,
The Office of the Commonwealth
Director of Public Prosecutions
<www.cdpp.gov.au/AboutUs/TheOffice/>
at 20 August 2007.
The predecessors of
the ACCC were the Trade Practices Commission and the Prices Surveillance
Australian Competition and
Consumer Commission,
Annual Report 2005–06
Ibid, 14–16,
Australian Competition and
Consumer Commission,
<www.accc.gov.au/content
/index.phtml/itemId/54137/fromItemId/3744> at 20 August
Australian Competition and
Consumer Commission,
Collection and Use of Information
Australian Competition and Consumer
Commission,
Annual Report 2005–06
Australian Competition and Consumer
Commission,
Enforcement Priorities
<www.accc.gov.au/content
/index.phtml/itemId/344494> at 20 August 2007.
Australian Competition and Consumer
Commission,
Annual Report 2005–06
Australian Competition and
Consumer Commission,
Annual Report 2005–06
Trade Practices Act
(Cth) ss 65Q(1), 95S, 95ZK, 151BK(5),
. The ACCC also has
information-gathering powers relating to the telecommunications access regime
Trade Practices Act 1974
(Cth): see ss 151BU, 152BT,
The powers under
ss 65Q(1), 95S and 151BK(5) do not appear to have been used. Section 95K
was inserted in 2003 and since then has
been used by the ACCC only once, at the
end of 2006, to obtain information for monitoring purposes. In 2006, two
requests for information
were issued under s 152BT and three requests under
s 152CBB: Australian Competition and Consumer Commission,
13 June 2007; Australian Competition and Consumer Commission,
Australian Competition and
Consumer Commission,
Section 155
Trade Practices Act
Information-Gathering Powers of the Australian Competition and Consumer
Commission in Relation to its Enforcement Function
, 1 October 2000,
Australian Competition and Consumer
Commission,
Collection and Use of Information
Australian Competition and Consumer
Commission,
Section 155
Trade Practices Act
: Information-Gathering
Powers of the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission in Relation to its
Enforcement Function
, 1 October 2000,
Australian Competition and Consumer
Commission,
Australian Competition and
Consumer Commission,
Section 155
Trade Practices Act
Information-Gathering Powers of the Australian Competition and Consumer
Commission in Relation to its Enforcement Function
, 1 October 2000,
Trade Practices Act 1974
Competition and Consumer Commission,
Annual Report 2005–06
Australian Competition and
Consumer Commission,
Insurance Contracts
Superannuation (Resolution of Complaints) Act 1993
Life Insurance Act 1995
Retirement Savings Account Act
Superannuation Industry (Supervision) Act 1993
Medical Indemnity (Prudential Supervision and Product Standards) Act 2003
Australian Securities and
Investments Commission Act 2001
Enforcement action can be
in the nature of criminal, civil or administrative proceedings.
may also commence an investigation where it has reason to suspect unacceptable
circumstances or a contravention as referred
respectively.
Australian Securities
and Investments Commission,
Annual Report 2005–06
Commonwealth Director of Public
Prosecutions,
Annual Report 2005–06
Australian Securities and
Investments Commission Act 2001
During the financial year
2005–2006, ASIC issued 596 notices under
see Australian
Securities and Investments Commission,
Australian Securities and
Investments Commission Act 2001
See, eg, Ibid
Superannuation Industry (Supervision) Act
Life Insurance Act 1995
. During the financial year 2005–06, ASIC served 1950
notices under
and 1327 notices under s 33 of the ASIC Act:
Australian Securities and Investments Commission,
29 March 2007.
Retirement Savings Account Act 1997
(Cth) ss 94, 99;
Superannuation Industry (Supervision) Act 1993
Australian Securities and
Investments Commission Act 2001
Re ABM Pastoral Co Pty
(1978) 3 ACLR 239.
Corporations Act 2001
(requirement to give reasonable assistance concerning a declaration
of contravention, pecuniary penalty order or criminal
proceedings).
Securities and Investments Commission Act 2001
Corporations Act
Federal Commissioner of Taxation v Australia and New Zealand Banking Group
(1979) 143 CLR 499;
Australian Securities Commission v Dalleagles Pty
(1992) 36 FCR 350.
‘Representation of Clients in Investigations by the Australian Securities
& Investments Commission’ (2005)
(June–August)
Commercial Law
Securities and Investments Commission Act 2001
Australian Prudential
Regulation Authority,
<www.apra.gov.au/aboutApra/>
at 23 August 2007.
System Inquiry Committee,
Financial System Inquiry Final Report
Parliament of
Australia—House of Representatives Standing Committee on Economics Finance
and Public Administration,
Review of the Australian Prudential Regulation
Authority: Who Will Guard the Guardians?
Australian Prudential
Regulation Authority Act 1998
Australian Prudential
Regulation Authority,
Annual Report 2006
Australian Prudential
Regulation Authority Act 1998
Banking Act
Insurance Act
Life Insurance Act
Retirement Savings Account Act 1997
Superannuation
Industry (Supervision) Act 1993
Australian Prudential
Regulation Authority,
Annual Report 2006
Banking Act
Insurance Act 1973
Life Insurance Act 1995
Superannuation Industry (Supervision)
Additional powers to enter premises under warrant and to require production of
information in relation to an investigation of unauthorised
insurance are
proposed by the
Financial Sector Legislation Amendment (Discretionary Mutual
Funds and Direct Offshore Foreign Insurers) Bill 2007
(Cth) sch 2, item 12,
which, if passed, would add a new
Insurance Act 1973
Superannuation
Industry (Supervision) Act 1993
Australian Prudential
Regulation Authority,
Superannuation
Industry (Supervision) Act 1993
See, eg, Ibid
Australian Prudential
Regulation Authority,
Financial Transaction
Reports Act 1988
, definition of ‘AUSTRAC’;
Anti-Money Laundering and Counter-Terrorism Financing Act 2006
Australian Transaction
Reports and Analysis Centre,
Annual Report 2005–06
Financial Transaction
Reports Act 1988
Australian Transaction Reports and
Analysis Centre,
Annual Report 2005–06
Anti-Money Laundering and
Counter-Terrorism Financing Act 2006
also functions under
Financial Transaction Reports Act 1988
Financial Transaction
Reports Act 1988
Transaction Reports and Analysis Centre,
Annual Report 2005–06
Financial Transaction
Reports Act 1988
Anti-Money Laundering
and Counter-Terrorism Financing Act 2006
Other bodies
are also given powers under this section to make requests of reporting entities
to provide further information of produce
documents, including the AFP, the ACC,
the Commissioner of Taxation, the CEO of Customs, and the Integrity
Commissioner.
Transaction Reports and Analysis Centre,
Joint studies are a
cooperative program that look at all aspects of a cash dealer’s broader
anti-money laundering procedures,
including staff training and reporting
processes, and includes a rectification period to address any non-compliance
detected. AUSTRAC
no longer conducts joint studies as part of its regulatory
program: Ibid.
Australian Taxation Office,
Annual Report 2005–06
Australian Taxation Office,
Australian Taxation Office,
Access and Information Gathering Manual
<www.ato.gov.au> at 23
August 2007, [1.1.7]. These include the
Fringe Benefits Tax Assessment Act
ss 127–128;
Income Tax Assessment Act
(Cth) ss 263–264;
Product Grants and Benefits
Administration Act 2000
Petroleum Resource Rent
Tax Assessment Act 1987
(Cth) s 108;
Superannuation Contributions
Tax (Assessment and Collection) Act 1997
(Cth) s 38;
Superannuation
Contributions Tax (Members of Constitutionally Protected Superannuation Funds)
Assessment and Collection Act 1997
(Cth) ss 32–33;
Superannuation Guarantee (Administration) Act 1992
(Cth) s 76;
Taxation Administration Act 1953
Termination Payments Tax (Assessment and Collection) Act 1997
Administration Act 1953
‘Confidentiality of Legal Advice after Australian Competition and Consumer
Commission v Daniels Corporation’
Competition and Consumer Law
Australian Taxation Office,
Taxpayers’ Charter: Fair Use of Our Access and Information Gathering
(2007) <www.ato.gov.au/content/downloads/N2559book9web.pdf> at
23 August 2007.
‘Confidentiality of Legal Advice after Australian Competition and Consumer
Commission v Daniels Corporation’
Competition and Consumer Law
Government Inspector-General of Taxation,
<www.igt.gov.au>
at 27 August 2007.
Inspector-General of Taxation,
Inspector-General of
Taxation Act 2003
Inspector-General of
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation,
<www.asio.gov.au/About/Content/what.aspx> at 27 August
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation,
Annual Report 2005–06
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation,
<www.asio.gov.au/About/Content/Faq.aspx> at 27 August
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
Telecommunications
(Interception and Access) Act 1979
Security Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
See also Australian Security Intelligence Organisation,
Frequently Asked Questions About ASIO
<www.asio.gov.au/About/Content/Faq.aspx> at 27 August
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation,
Annual Report 2005–06
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
Telecommunications
(Interception and Access) Act 1979
Security Intelligence Organisation,
Attorney-General’s Guidelines in
Relation to the Performance by the Australian Security Intelligence Organisation
of its Function
of Obtaining Intelligence Relevant to Security
<www.asio.gov.au/About/Content/what.aspx> at 27 August 2007,
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation,
Annual Report 2005–06
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation,
<www.asio.gov.au/About/Content/Faq.aspx> at 27 August
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
Set time periods apply
under the section to particular types of information. ASIO may authorise
disclosure in certain circumstances,
including to obtain legal advice in
relation the warrant: Australian Security Intelligence Operation, Disclosures of
Information
disclosure.aspx> at 23 August
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation,
Annual Report 2005–06
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation,
Attorney-General’s Guidelines in Relation to
the Performance by the Australian Security Intelligence Organisation of its
Relating to Politically Motivated Violence
<www.asio.gov.au/About/Content/what.aspx> at 27 August 2007; Australian
Security Intelligence Organisation,
Attorney-General’s Guidelines in
Relation to the Performance by the Australian Security Intelligence Organisation
of its Function
of Obtaining Intelligence Relevant to Security
<www.asio.gov.au/About/Content/what.aspx> at 27 August
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation,
Attorney-General’s Guidelines in Relation to
the Performance by the Australian Security Intelligence Organisation of its
Relating to Politically Motivated Violence
<www.asio.gov.au/About/Content/what.aspx> at 27 August 2007,
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation,
Attorney-General’s Guidelines in Relation to
the Performance by the Australian Security Intelligence Organisation of its
of Obtaining Intelligence Relevant to Security
<www.asio.gov.au/About/Content/what.aspx> at 27 August 2007,
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation,
Annual Report 2005–06
Inspector-General of
Intelligence and Security,
Annual Report 2005–06
I Carnell and N Bryan,
Watching the Watchers: How the Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security
(2005) Inspector-General of Intelligence and
http://igis.gov.au /statements.cfm
at 14 February 2007,
Inspector-General
of Intelligence and Security Act 1986
Inspector-General of
Intelligence and Security,
Annual Report 2005–06
Inspector-General of
Intelligence and Security Act 1986
I Carnell and N Bryan,
Watching the Watchers: How the Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security
(2005) Inspector-General of Intelligence and
http://igis.gov.au/ statements.cfm
at 14 February 2007,
Inspector-General of
Intelligence and Security,
Annual Report 2005–06
I Carnell and N Bryan,
Watching the Watchers: How the Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security
(2005) Inspector-General of Intelligence and
Security <http://igis.gov.au/
statements.cfm> at 14 February 2007, 13. See also Inspector-General of
Intelligence and Security,
Annual Report 2005–06
Inspector-General of
Intelligence and Security Act 1986
Inspector-General of
Intelligence and Security,
Annual Report 2005–06
I Carnell and N Bryan,
Watching the Watchers: How the Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security
(2005) Inspector-General of Intelligence and
Security <http://igis.gov.au/
statements.cfm> at 14 February 2007,
Inspector-General of
Intelligence and Security Act 1986
Inspector-General of
Intelligence and Security,
1 June 2007. The
IGIS indicated that he thought that his predecessor had taken a similar approach
to the use of coercive powers.
Commonwealth Ombudsman,
Annual Report 2005–06
Ombudsman Act 1976
The Commonwealth
Ombudsman is also the Law Enforcement Ombudsman. See
Law Enforcement (AFP
Professional Standards and Related Measures) Act 2006
(Cth); Commonwealth
Annual Report 2005–06
Ombudsman Act 1976
The Ombudsman can also investigate complaints about government
contractors providing goods and services to the public under a contract
government agency.
Own motion investigations often arise from insights gained from
handling individual complaints. See Commonwealth Ombudsman,
Annual Report
Commonwealth
Annual Report 2005–06
, 11. For example, the Ombudsman is
responsible for monitoring the integrity of the records of the
telecommunications interceptions
and use of surveillance devices by the AFP and
Ibid, 11–12. See
Ombudsman Act 1976
div 2 in relation to the
reporting powers of the Ombudsman.
Ombudsman Act 1976
Commonwealth Ombudsman,
Annual Report 2005–06
Ibid, 4. The majority of the
complaints concerned five Australian Government agencies, namely: Centrelink,
the Child Support Agency,
the ATO, Australia Post and the Department of
Immigration and Multicultural Affairs. See Commonwealth Ombudsman,
Report 2005–06
Commonwealth Ombudsman,
Annual Report 2005–06
Ombudsman Act 1976
The Attorney-General can declare that the Ombudsman is not to enter certain
premises if the carrying on of an investigation at that
place might prejudice
the security or defence of the
Commonwealth.
Commonwealth
Office of the Australian
Building and Construction Commissioner,
Annual Report 2005–06
See Office of the Australian
Building and Construction Commissioner,
Report on the Exercise of Compliance
Powers by the ABCC for the Period 1 October 2005 to 31 December 2006
Building and
Construction Industry Improvement Act 2005
See Australian
Government Office of the Australian Building and Construction Commissioner,
Building and Construction Industry Improvement Act 2005
: Guidelines in
Relation to the Exercise of Compliance Powers in the Building and Construction
(2005), [3].
the Australian Building and Construction Commissioner,
4 June 2007; Office of the Australian Building and Construction
Commissioner,
Report on the Exercise of Compliance Powers by the ABCC for the
Period 1 October 2005 to 31 December 2006
Australian Government Office of
the Australian Building and Construction Commissioner,
Building and
Construction Industry Improvement Act 2005
: Guidelines in Relation to the
Exercise of Compliance Powers in the Building and Construction Industry
(2005), [8].
Building and
Construction Industry Improvement Act 2005
Office of the
Australian Building and Construction Commissioner,
Annual Report
Office of the Australian
Building and Construction Commissioner,
Report on the Exercise of Compliance
Powers by the ABCC for the Period 1 October 2005 to 31 December 2006
Office of the Australian
Building and Construction Commissioner,
Office of the Australian
Building and Construction Commissioner,
Annual Report 2005–06
Office of the Australian Building and Construction Commissioner,
the Exercise of Compliance Powers by the ABCC for the Period 1 October 2005 to
31 December 2006
(2006), [22].
Centrelink,
<www.centrelink.gov.au/internet/internet.nsf/about_us/index.htm> at
23 August 2007; Centrelink,
Annual Report 2005–06
CSDA Act was amended by the
Human Services Legislation Amendment Act 2005
(Cth), which commenced on 1 October
Centrelink,
Annual Report
, table 1, 9.
Commonwealth Services Delivery Agency Act 1997
(Cth) s 6A.
functions are similar to those conferred on Medicare
Centrelink,
Centrelink,
Annual Report
A New Tax System
(Family Assistance) (Administration) Act 1999
, 57A, 57F,
Farm Household Support Act 1992
Social Security (Administration) Act 1999
Social Security Act 1991
Student Assistance Act 1973
Security (Administration) Act 1999
Centrelink,
Medicare Australia,
<www.medicareaustralia.gov.au/about/about_us/index.shtml> at 23
August 2007.
Medicare Australia Act
(Cth) s 4A.
s 7. See also s 6 concerning the CEO’s Medicare
s 7(e)–(g).
Ibid s 8ZQ.
Annual Report 2005–06
Medical practitioners can be
investigated, for example, where they make claims for services not rendered. See
Medicare Australia Act
(Cth) s 8L.
Medicare Australia,
Medicare Australia Act
(Cth) s 8R.
pt IID div 5.
10 April 2007. The s 8V power
was used once in 2005–06.
Australian Government Therapeutic Goods Administration,
Regulation of
Therapeutic Goods in Australia
<www.tga.gov.au/docs/html/tga/tgaginfo.htm> at 26 February
Australian Government
Department of Health and Ageing,
Annual Report 2005–06
Therapeutic Goods Act
See Australian
Government Department of Health and Ageing,
Legislation Administered by the
Minister for Health and Ageing
<www.health.gov.au/internet/wcms/publishing.nsf/Content/health-eta2.htm>
at 30 August 2007.
Care Act 1997
ss 9–2, 9–3,
Criminal offences for
failure to comply apply in relation to powers excercised under Ibid
ss 9–2, 9–3A;
Government Department of Health and Ageing,
Gene Technology Act
The Office of the Gene Technology Regulator,
Operations of the
Gene Technology Regulator Annual Report 2005–06
(2006), 41–48
provides statistical information about the number and breakdown of inspections
carried out. For example, the
OGTR reported that it had conducted 74 inspections
during 2005–06 of containment facilities—including laboratories and
animal and plant containments.
Gene Technology Act 2000
Office of the Gene
Technology Regulator,
Operations of the Gene Technology Regulator Annual
Report 2005–06
(2006), 17.
Australian Government Department of Health and Ageing,
Office of the Gene
Technology Regulator: Compliance and Enforcement Policy
Office of the Gene Technology
Operations of the Gene Technology Regulator Annual Report
(2006), 25, 49.
Agricultural and
Veterinary Chemicals (Administration) Act 1992
Pesticides include
herbicides, insecticides, fungicides and pest traps. See Australian Pesticides
and Veterinary Medicines Authority,
Introducing the Australian Pesticides and
Veterinary Medicines Authority
<www.apvma.gov.au/publications/downloads/introdoc.pdf> at 27 August 2007,
Veterinary medicines include
vaccines, antibiotics, worming products and anaesthetics: see Ibid,
Australian Pesticides and
Veterinary Medicines Authority,
Information Sheet: Compliance with the
See Australian
Pesticides and Veterinary Medicines Authority,
Legislation Governing the
<www.apvma.gov.au/about_us/legislat.shtml> at 27 August
Australian Pesticides and
Veterinary Medicines Authority,
Introducing the Australian Pesticides and
Veterinary Medicines Authority
<www.apvma.gov.au/publications/downloads/introdoc.pdf> at 27 August 2007,
9. The other strategies are prevention and quality
facilitation.
Australian Pesticides
and Veterinary Medicines Authority,
Information Sheet: Compliance with the
Agricultural
and Veterinary Chemicals Code Act 1994
(Cth) s 131;
Agricultural and
Veterinary Chemicals (Administration) Act 1992
Agricultural
and Veterinary Chemicals Code Act 1994
(Cth) s 144;
Agricultural and
Veterinary Chemicals (Administration) Act 1992
Human Rights and Equal
Opportunity Commission,
Annual Report 2005–06
Human Rights
and Equal Opportunity Commission Act 1986
Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission Act 1986
Ibid ss 46PI,
Ibid ss 46PL,
See Human Rights and Equal
Opportunity Commission,
Annual Report 2005–06
, 56, 59, 61,
Human Rights and Equal
Opportunity Commission,
Office of the Privacy
Commissioner,
<www.privacy. gov.au/about/index.html> at 27 August
Ibid. The ALRC is currently undertaking a major review of the
. At the time of writing, two issues papers have been released for
Review of Privacy
(IP 31) and
Review of Privacy: Credit
Reporting Provisions
(IP 32). A discussion paper with proposals for
reform will be released in September
Under the Spent Convictions
Crimes Act 1914
Office of the Privacy
Commissioner,
The Operation of the
: Annual Report
Office of the
<www.privacy .gov.au/about/index.html> at 27 August
Office of the Privacy
Commissioner,
<www.privacy.gov.au/privacy
complaints/index.html> at 27 August
Office of the Privacy
Commissioner,
Complaint Case Notes, Summaries and Determinations
Similarly, see
Ombudsman Act 1976
. The power to
obtain information and documents is subject to ss 69–
offence not to comply with the Commissioner’s directions:
(1)–(2). The role and powers of the Office of
the Privacy Commissioner are considered in detail in Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of Privacy
Office of the Privacy
Commissioner,
The Operation of the
: Annual Report
Australian Government
Office of the Privacy Commissioner,
Australian Customs Service,
Annual Report 2005–06
Australian Customs Service,
Protecting Our Borders
Australian Customs Service,
Customs Regulatory Philosophy
(2005) <www.customs.gov.au
/site/page.cfm?u=4839> at 28 August
Customs Act 1901
div 1 subdiv J.
Australian Customs Service,
Australian Customs Service,
Protecting Our Borders
Customs Act 1901
div 1 subdiv
Australian Customs Service,
Annual Report
Australian Customs
Inquiry into the
Circumstances of the Immigration Detention of Cornelia Rau Report
Australian Government
Department of Immigration and Citizenship,
On the Move to
Improve—DIMA’s Progress on Palmer
<www.immi.gov.au/about/department/perf-progress/dima-improvements/index.htm>
at 28 August 2007.
Information
below on the frequency of use of these powers was provided to the ALRC by DIAC:
see Australian Government Department
of Immigration and Citizenship,
Migration Act 1958
Government Department of Immigration and Citizenship,
12 June 2007.
Australian Government
Department of Agriculture Fisheries and Forestry,
AQIS at a Glance
<www.daff. gov.au/aqis/about/reports-pubs/at-a-glance> at 27 August 2007.
Australian Government Department
of Agriculture Fisheries and Forestry,
Quarantine Laws and the Role of
<www.daff.gov.au/aqis/about/compliance-investigations/laws-role>
at 27 August 2007.
Quarantine and Inspection Service,
Quarantine Act 1908
(Cth) ss 16AC, 27A, 27B.
eg, Ibid ss 16AD, 66AB, 66AD, 66AI, 70B;
Export Control Act 1982
Australian Meat and
Livestock Industry Act 1997
Quarantine Act 1908
(Cth) ss 66AF, 74BC;
Imported Food Control Act 1992
Australian Fisheries
Management Authority,
Annual Report 2005–06
, 5. Broader fisheries
policy, international negotiations and strategic policy issues are administered
by another group within the
Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and
This compliance
arrangement is under review: Australian Fisheries Management Authority,
<www.afma.gov.au/management/compliance/default.htm> at
27 August 2007.
Management Act 1991
s 84(1)(a)(i).
s 84(1)(h)(ii).
s 84(1)(s)(ii).
Similar powers exist under the
Torres Strait Fisheries
Australian Fisheries Management Authority,
<www.afma.gov.au/management/ compliance
/default.htm> at 27 August 2007.
Ibid s 315.
Migration assistance
is defined for the purposes of MARA: Ibid
Ibid s 286,
Ibid ss 284(1),
s 308(1)(a).
s 308(1)(b).
s 308(1)(c).
Government Department of Immigration and Citizenship,
12 June 2007.
Australian Government
Department of Immigration and Citizenship,
Communications and Media Authority,
<www.acma.gov.au /WEB/
STANDARD//pc=ACMA_ROLE_OVIEW> at 28 August
Do Not Call Register
(Cth) does not contain information-gathering powers. In
administering compliance with the Register, ACMA must rely on the powers
Telecommunications Act 1997
, discussed
Australian Communications
and Media Authority,
Annual Report 2005–06
Broadcasting Services Act
Australian Communications and Media Authority,
Annual Report
Interactive Gambling Act 2001
Telecommunications
Radiocommunications Act
Australian Communications and Media Authority,
Annual Report
Telecommunications (Consumer Protection and Service Standards) Act 1999
(Cth) s 22C.
Communications and Media Authority,
The EPBC Act replaced the
National Parks and Wildlife Conservation Act 1974
Protection Act 1980
Endangered Species Protection Act 1992
World Heritage Properties Conservation Act 1983
(Cth) and the
Environment Protection (Impact of Proposals) Act 1974
The Act identifies six
matters of national environmental significance: Ramsar wetlands, listed
threatened species and ecological
communities, World Heritage properties, listed
migratory species, the Commonwealth marine environment, and nuclear actions
uranium mining).
Australian Government Department of the Environment and Heritage,
Legislation Annual Reports 2005–06
Environment Protection and
Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999
Great Barrier Reef Marine Park
Goals & Aims
<www.gbrmpa.gov.au/corp_site/
Great Barrier Reef Marine
Park Act 1975
Great Barrier Reef Marine Park
Defence Act 1903
This power can arise in connection with the exercise of powers in
the Australian offshore area: div
Defence Force Discipline Act
Appropriate authorities are defined to mean the Registrar of
Military Justice, President of court martial or Defence Force
magistrate.
The National
Electricity Law is contained in the
National Electricity (South Australia)
Energy Regulator,
Monitoring and Enforcement Functions under the National
Electricity Law
<www.aer.gov.au/content/index.phtml/itemId/685897> at
27 August 2007.
Electricity (South Australia) Act 1996
Australian Competition and
Consumer Commission,
Inspector of Transport
Security Act 2006
Australian Government
Inspector of Transport Security,
The Convention on
International Civil Aviation (usually called the Chicago Convention) was entered
into in 1944. The Chicago Convention
and several Protocols amending it are set
out as schedules to the
Air Navigation Act 1920
(Cth): Civil Aviation
Safety Authority,
Guide—How to Use the Civil Aviation Safety
Regulations 1988
<www.casa.gov.au/rules/1998casr/index.htm> at 27
August 2007.
Civil Aviation Safety
Enforcement Action: Introduction
<www.casa.gov.au/rules/action
/index.htm> at 27 August 2007.
Civil Aviation Safety Authority,
Enforcement Manual
Navigation Act 1912
ss 412, 413.
The general
administration of this Act is overseen by the Seacare Authority, but the
investigative and information-gathering powers
are vested in and exercised by
Occupational Health and
Safety (Maritime Industry) Act 1993
Australian Transport Safety
Australian Transport Safety Bureau
<www.atsb.gov.au> at
29 August 2007.
Transport Safety Bureau,
<www.atsb.gov.au/about_atsb/about.aspx> at 29 August
Transport Safety
Investigation Act 2003
This approach is set out in Ibid
s 7, and is consistent with the Convention on International Civil Aviation
(Chicago Convention):
Australian Transport Safety Bureau,
28 May 2007.
Australian Transport Safety Bureau,
Annual Review 2006
Transport Safety
Investigation Act 2003
Australian Transport Safety
Transport Safety
Investigation Act 2003
Australian Transport
Safety Bureau,
28 May 2007. The ATSB noted that
it applied a number of times for a warrant under the
Navigation (Marine
Casualty) Regulations 1990
(Cth), which were repealed in 2003, but that it
was never necessary for the ATSB to execute the
See Australian Transport
Safety Bureau,
Publications
<www.atsb.gov.au/publications/> at 30
August 2007.
Workplace Relations
Amendment (A Stronger Safety Net) Act 2007
(Cth) sch 3. The Office of
Workplace Services, which was established in March 2006 and exercised the powers
discussed below, was
replaced by the Workplace
Workplace Relations
s 169(2)(a)
Australian Government
Workplace Ombudsman, ‘More Protection for Australian Workers from New
Workplace Watchdog from 1 July
2007’ (Press Release, 1 July
Australian Government
Workplace Ombudsman,
Legal Action
(2007) <www.wo.gov.au/asp
asp?sid=7407&page=legal-action> at 29 August
Australian Government
Workplace Ombudsman,
Fact Sheet: What are the Powers of Workplace
March 2007, this Act was known as the
Occupational Health and Safety
(Commonwealth Employment) Act 1991
(Cth). The change of title was made by
OHS and SRC Legislation Amendment Act 1996
Report 2005–06
Occupational Health and
Safety Act 1991
(Cth) ss 42, 43.
Ibid s 43(2).
14 June 2007.
Safety, Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1988
Asbestos-Related Claims (Management of Commonwealth Liabilities) Act 2005
Child Support
(Registration and Collection) Act 1988
s 120(1)(a)
Support (Assessment) Act 1989
s 161(1)(a)
Child Support (Registration
and Collection) Act 1988
s 120(1)(b)
Child Support (Assessment)
s 161(1)(b).
Child Support (Registration and Collection) Act 1988
Child Support (Assessment) Act
Support (Registration and Collection) Act 1988
Australian Government
Department of Human Services,
Annual Report 2005–06
Insolvency and Trustee Service
Structure: Role and Functions
<www.itsa.gov.au
/dir228/itsaweb.nsf/docindex/about+us->structure->structure> at 29
August 2007.
Insolvency and Trustee
Service Australia,
Bankruptcy Act 1966
An additional power to require a person outside Australia to
give information or evidence is contained in
, although the notice can
be contained in a notice issued under
Insolvency and Trustee
Service Australia,
Insolvency and Trustee
Service Australia,
Official Receiver Best Practice Statement—Exercise
of Official Receiver’s Powers to Assist Trustees
Bankruptcy Act 1966
Insolvency and Trustee
Service Australia,
Bankruptcy Act 1966
Bankruptcy Act
Insolvency and Trustee Service Australia,
Annual Report 2005–06
Petroleum (Submerged Lands)
(Cth) pt IIIC. This Act gives NOPSA functions and powers in
relation to Commonwealth waters. Agreements are in place to introduce
legislation in the states and Northern Territory to recognise NOPSA and give it
similar functions and powers in relation to
state and territory waters. Such
legislation is operational in Victoria, Queensland, South Australia, Western
Australian and the
National Offshore
Petroleum Safety Authority,
Welcome to NOPSA!
<www.nopsa.gov.au/index.asp> at 30 August 2007. The regulatory activities
of NOPSA are operated in a full cost recovery
Petroleum (Submerged
Lands) Act 1967
(Cth) sch 7, cls 31, 31A,
Ibid sch 7, cls 31B,
National Offshore Petroleum
Safety Authority,
Compliance and Enforcement Policy
National Offshore
Petroleum Safety Authority,
Annual Report 2005–06
S Donaghue,
Commissions and Permanent Commissions of Inquiry
(2001), 5. See also H
Clokie and J Robinson,
Royal Commissions of Inquiry: The Significance of
Investigations in British Politics
D Borchardt,
Commissions of Inquiry in Australia: A Brief Survey
Royal Commissions Act
Report of the Inquiry into Certain Australian Companies in relation to the UN
Oil-for-Food Programme
Tribunals of
Inquiry and Royal Commissions: Law and Policy Paper 22
(2002) Federation
Press and Centre for International and Public Law, Australian National
University, 1.
Report of the HIH
Royal Commission
(2003), [1.1].
S Donaghue,
Royal Commissions and Permanent Commissions of Inquiry
See T Cole,
the Inquiry into Certain Australian Companies in relation to the UN Oil-for-Food
(2006); N Owen,
Report of the HIH Royal Commission
Royal Commission into the Building and Construction Industry
(2003); E Johnstone,
Royal Commission into Aboriginal Deaths in Custody
For example, the Fitzgerald
Inquiry in Queensland; the Royal Commission into the New South Wales Police
Service in New South Wales
(the Wood Royal Commission); and the WA Inc Royal
Commission in Western Australia.
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates
, Senate, 26 August 1902, 15659 (R
O’Connor), 15659.
Commissions Act 1902
provides for the separate offence of contempt of a Royal Commission: see
5. Client Legal Privilege in Federal
Investigations
Introduction
Legislative provisions
Abrogation of privilege
Preservation of privilege
Modification or partial abrogation
Provisions relating to lawyers
Provisions relating to procedure
Need for clarification
Decision in Yuill
Decision in Daniels
Implications of Daniels
Approaches to necessary implication
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s views
Achieving clarity
Options for reform
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s views
A uniform approach?
Practical considerations
Varying investigatory contexts
Royal Commissions
Submissions and consultations
Harmonisation across federal investigatory bodies
Distinguishing Royal Commissions
Achieving harmonisation
ALRC’s views
Achieving uniformity
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s views
5. Client Legal Privilege in Federal
Investigations
Introduction
5.1 This chapter considers the law on client legal privilege in the specific
context of federal investigations. Legislative provisions
and significant cases
dealing with the application of the privilege are discussed. This chapter
contains proposals aimed at achieving
greater clarity in the law on the
application of privilege to federal coercive information-gathering powers. It
also considers whether
there needs to be greater consistency in the law on the
application of client legal privilege to those powers.
Legislative
5.2 Federal legislative provisions conferring coercive information-gathering
powers on federal bodies take a number of different approaches
in dealing with
the issue of the application of client legal privilege. In broad terms,
legislation variously:
is silent on the issue;
expressly abrogates the privilege;
expressly preserves the privilege;
modifies or partially abrogates the privilege;
makes specific provision for the application of the privilege to
lawyers—whether or not it otherwise remains silent on the
application of
the privilege to the client; or
makes provision for procedural aspects in determining the
application of the privilege to specific communications, or in protecting
communications.
5.3 For the most part, federal laws contain no express provision in relation
to client legal privilege.
5.4 A subset of the provisions that are silent on privilege provide that it
is not an offence for a person to intentionally or recklessly
fail to comply
with a coercive information-gathering power if there is a reasonable excuse,
without specifying whether or not a claim
of client legal privilege amounts to a
reasonable excuse.
Abrogation of
James Hardie (Investigations and Proceedings)
Act 2004 (Cth)
5.5 Only a few federal statutes expressly abrogate client legal privilege.
One example is the
James Hardie (Investigations and Proceedings) Act 2004
(Cth), which abrogates client legal privilege in relation to certain material,
allowing its use in investigations of the James Hardie
Group and any related
proceedings.
The Act also makes it
clear that a lawyer cannot refuse to produce ‘James Hardie material’
on the ground that it would
involve disclosing a privileged
communication.
5.6 In introducing the
James Hardie (Investigations and Proceedings) Bill
into Parliament, the Treasurer, the Hon Peter Costello MP, noted that there
are situations in which the abrogation of the privilege
is justified in order to
serve a higher public policy interest. He identified the ‘effective
enforcement of corporate regulation’
as one such
In the Second Reading
Speech for the Bill, the Treasurer stated:
There is considerable community concern about the conduct of James Hardie
… and particularly in relation to the separation
of subsidiary companies
with liabilities via a group restructure, the transfer of key assets offshore in
that restructure and the
subsequent underfunding of obligations to compensate
those victims who have a legitimate claim against James Hardie for
asbestos-related
These obligations have recently been estimated at approximately $1.5 billion.
However, the figure could be as high as $2 billion
as the number of victims
identified increases. …
A thorough investigation of the conduct of James Hardie, with proceedings
brought where misconduct is found, is essential to maintaining
confidence in the Australian corporate regulatory regime. …
The government shares the community’s concern about the difficulties faced
by the victims of asbestos disease and their families
and wishes to ensure that
they are treated fairly. We also place great store on ethical behaviour by
corporations. We do not condone
or support companies that restructure their
affairs to avoid their legal liabilities to those people whose suffering is very
and whose lives are shattered by horrible
Crimes Act 1914 (Cth)
5.7 Client legal privilege is also abrogated in certain situations under the
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth). A person is not excused from providing documents
the Australian Federal Police (AFP), pursuant to a notice under
requiring the production of certain
documents relating to the investigation of a serious terrorism offence; or
to a magistrate, pursuant to a notice under
requiring the production of certain documents relating to the
investigation of a serious offence;
on the ground that production of
the documents would disclose material that is protected against disclosure by
client legal privilege
or any other duty of
confidence.
Other statutory provisions
5.8 Similarly, a person is not excused from providing:
certain property tracking records pursuant to an order made by a
magistrate under
Proceeds of Crime Act 2002
information or documents, or answering questions under the
Inspector-General of Taxation Act 2003
on the ground
that it would disclose information the subject of client legal
Preservation of
Trade Practices Act 1974
(Cth) (the TPA) expressly preserves
the application of client legal privilege in the context of the Australian
Competition and Consumer
Commission’s main coercive information-gathering
power under
This section provides that the exercise of that power
does not require a person to produce a document that would disclose information
the subject of a privilege claim.
This provision was inserted in the TPA by the
Trade Practices Amendment Act
(No 1) 2006
(Cth), implementing a recommendation made by the
Trade Practices
Review Committee—following the decision in
The Daniels Corporation
International Pty Limited v Australian Competition and Consumer
— that the TPA should provide explicitly that
does not require the production of documents to which privilege
5.10 Some federal legislation expressly provides that the law concerning
client legal privilege is not affected, which also has the
effect of preserving
the common law concerning privilege. Examples of this type of provision can be
found in the
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
(ASIO Act);
Enforcement Integrity Commissioner Act 2006
Laundering and Counter-Terrorism Financing Act 2006
Consistent with the
approach of the High Court in
expressly preserves the application of privilege in the course of search
and seizure.
Modification or
partial abrogation
5.11 As discussed in Chapter 3, there are two limbs to client legal
privilege—the ‘advice’ limb and the ‘litigation’
limb. Some federal legislative provisions modify the application of the
privilege, by narrowing the circumstances in which the privilege
can be claimed.
For example, the
Inspector-General of Security and Intelligence Act
(Cth) does not excuse a person from giving information or producing
a document on the ground that it would disclose legal advice given
Minister, an agency, or an authority of the
Commonwealth.
However, it seems
that a claim for client legal privilege would excuse a person from giving
information or producing a document if
doing so would involve disclosing legal
advice given to someone other than a Minister, an agency, or an authority of the
Commonwealth,
or if it fell within the litigation limb of the privilege and the
document did not fall within the category of ‘legal advice’
of the specified entities. So, for example, draft pleadings and affidavits would
be excused from production.
Provisions relating
5.12 A number of federal statutes give lawyers express statutory protection
from complying with a coercive power, where to do so would
involve disclosing a
privileged communication unless:
the client to whom the privilege belongs consents to the lawyer
complying with the requirement; or
the liquidator consents where the privilege belongs to a body
corporate under administration.
5.13 If a lawyer refuses to comply,
he or she must reveal the name and address of the relevant client—where
they are known—and
provide sufficient particulars to identify the
documents containing the privileged
communications.
legislation states that such a provision does not affect the law relating to
client legal privilege,
often the legislation is silent on this
Provisions relating
to procedure
5.14 Given that most federal legislation conferring coercive powers is silent
on the issue of privilege, it is rare for such legislation
to make provision for
the procedures to be adopted in resolving claims for
5.15 An example of a federal provision that relates to the procedures to be
adopted in protecting privileged information is
Enforcement Integrity Commissioner Act
It provides that a person must give
evidence in private if the evidence is likely to disclose specified types of
legal advice or communications
that attract client legal privilege.
5.16 Another notable exception is the
Royal Commissions Act 1902
as amended by the
Royal Commission Amendment Act 2006
Commissions Act
provides that the power of a Royal Commission to require or
summon a person to produce a document includes the power to require or
the person to produce a document that is subject to client legal
It also provides that
it is not a reasonable excuse to fail to produce a document to a Royal
Commission on the basis that it is the
subject of a claim for privilege
a court has found the document to be privileged; or
the claim is made to the member of the Commission who required
production of the document within the time required for production
a claim for privilege is made to a Royal Commission, the Commission may serve a
notice requiring the production of the
document the subject of the claim for the
purpose of inspecting it to decide whether to accept or reject the
Where the claim is
accepted, the Royal Commission must return the document and disregard the
privileged material for the purposes
of any report or decision it
Where the claim is
rejected, the Royal Commission may use the document for the purposes of its
The Act also sets out
offences in relation to the non-production of documents the subject of a claim
for client legal privilege.
5.18 The amendments to the
Royal Commissions Act
in 2006 were designed
put beyond doubt that a Commissioner may require the production of a document in
respect of which [client legal privilege] is claimed,
for the limited purpose of
making a finding about that claim, that is deciding to accept or reject it, for
the purposes of the Commission.
5.19 The amendments were requested by Commissioner Terence Cole, who headed
the inquiry into AWB and the Oil-for-Food Programme (the
Commission),
following the
decision in
AWB Limited v
5.20 During the AWB Royal Commission, AWB Limited challenged Commissioner
Cole’s decision to reject a claim of client legal
privilege over a
particular document and his capacity to determine privilege claims. In the
Federal Court, Young J held that the
document in question was not subject
to privilege. He also held that Commissioner Cole had power in the circumstances
of that case—as
the document had been inadvertently provided to the Royal
Commission and without any accompanying claim for privilege at that
form an opinion as to whether the document was subject to
However, Young
J’s decision cast doubt on the ability of a Royal Commissioner to inspect
a document in respect of which client
legal privilege has been claimed to
determine whether the claim is made out—although he stated that it was
inappropriate for
him to grant declaratory relief on this
5.21 In the Second Reading of the
Royal Commissions Amendment Bill 2006
Hon Malcolm Turnbull MP, the then Parliamentary Secretary to the Prime Minister,
in referring to the decision of Young J, stated:
It puts royal commissions in a very difficult practical situation, because it
means that, if an order or direction is made that a
document … be produced
and a claim of legal professional privilege is made, the commission then must
either abandon its efforts
to obtain access to the document or go to a court
itself to seek a declaration that legal professional privilege does not apply or
indeed to seek a mandatory injunction that the document be produced. This is, in
practical terms, an impossible obligation, because
the commissioner has not seen
the document and does not know how strong the claim of privilege is. It would
make the conduct of inquiries
of this kind open to considerable delay and,
indeed, possibly tactical claims for legal professional
clarification
5.22 Where statutes conferring coercive information-gathering powers are
silent on client legal privilege—or address the obligations
of lawyers,
but not their clients, concerning the provision of privileged information in
response to a coercive power—there
may be confusion about whether the
exercise of a particular power overrides the privilege by implication. Confusion
may arise because:
(a) the common law has not considered whether the exercise of a particular
power abrogates privilege by necessary implication;
(b) where the common law has decided whether the exercise of a particular
power abrogates privilege by implication, there may be differing
interpretations
specifically by the court; or
(c) it is not readily apparent whether particular federal bodies take the
view that their powers abrogate privilege by necessary implication,
where such powers have never been
5.23 In addition, where privilege is abrogated by express words, or where a
federal body takes the position that its powers abrogate
privilege by necessary
implication, there may be uncertainty about whether the abrogation extends to
advice given in relation to
an investigation or communications concerning the
representation of a client in an
investigation.
5.24 In some instances, clarification about the application of the privilege
to particular powers has been provided by the common
law. For example, in
Carmody v Mackellar
the Federal Court held that the power to listen to
and record communications under s 45 of the then
Telecommunications
(Interception) Act 1979
(Cth) overrode client legal privilege. The Court
stated that the telecommunications interception legislation would be unworkable
if it were not to be construed as authorising the recording or overhearing of
privileged communications.
5.25 Conversely, the cases mentioned below have held that the following
powers do not abrogate client legal privilege:
Commissioner of Taxation v Citibank Ltd
in relation to the
powers of access of the Commissioner of Taxation under s 263 of the
Income Tax Assessment Act 1936
Joel v Migration Agents Registration Authority
in relation to
Migration Act
Re Steele; Ex parte Official Trustee in Bankruptcy v Clayton
in relation to
Bankruptcy Act 1966
Re Compass Airlines Pty Ltd
in relation to the right of a
liquidator to obtain information under s 597 of the
Corporations
High Court’s decision in
The Daniels Corporation International Pty Ltd
v Australian Competition and Consumer Commission
) clarified
that privilege does apply to the coercive information-gathering power under
s 155 of the TPA.
the decision in
has wider implications for the application of
privilege to other coercive information-gathering powers, as the discussion
below bears
out, there remain areas of uncertainty. There are significant
questions about the interrelationship between
and the earlier
Corporate Affairs Commission of New South Wales v Yuill
), which dealt with the implied abrogation of privilege by the
now repealed
Companies (New South Wales) Code
5.27 Not all coercive information-gathering powers replicate the wording of
s 155 of the TPA, nor do they all share the same investigatory
Each federal body with coercive information-gathering powers, and the persons
and entities subject to those powers, may
be forced to litigate to resolve
conclusively the question of whether the privilege is available in response to
the exercise of their
particular investigatory powers.
5.28 In 2003—prior to the amendments to the
Royal Commission
—Justice Neville Owen, the Royal Commissioner in the HIH Royal
Commission, expressed a desire for clarity in the law. In the
Report of the HIH
Royal Commission, Justice Owen stated:
As a consequence of the doubt over whether legal professional privilege is
available in the context of a royal commission, large
amounts of time were
devoted to dealing with the associated questions that arose. Accordingly, if it
is the legislature’s intention
that legal professional privilege should
not be available as a reasonable excuse against the production of documents in
royal commission processes, it is desirable that the Act be amended to
make this explicit.
Decision in
5.29 A majority of the High Court in
held that a claim of client
legal privilege was not a ‘reasonable excuse’ for refusing to comply
with a requirement under
s 295(1) of the
Section 295(1)
empowered an inspector to require an officer of a corporation, the subject of an
investigation, to produce such books
of the corporation that were in his or her
custody or control and to appear before the inspector for examination.
Companies Code
—which was enacted prior to the decision
contain a provision abrogating the privilege expressly. The law, as understood
at that time, and declared in
O’Reilly v State Bank of Victoria
Commissioners
client legal privilege was limited to judicial and quasi-judicial proceedings.
Brennan J stated that the
Companies Code
was to be construed in light of
the law as it stood when it came into
He also stated that even
if ss 295 and 296(2) were to be construed in the light of
Companies Code
evinced an intention that client legal
privilege should not be a reasonable excuse for failure to comply with a
requirement under
In the absence of language which expressly excludes the privilege, indicia of
legislative intention can be found in the nature of
the statutory power, the
prescribed manner of its exercise and the purpose which its exercise is designed
to achieve.
5.31 The High Court relied on a number of reasons for implying that the
privilege was abrogated. The first was that s 308 of the
entitled a lawyer to refuse to comply with a notice where it would
involve a breach of client legal privilege, as long as the lawyer
provided the
client’s name and address. Brennan J stated:
The enactment of s 308 would be otiose and the specifying of a condition
governing the solicitor’s excuse for non-compliance
would be futile if the
observance of legal professional privilege were a reasonable excuse for
non-compliance, for a solicitor who
is bound to observe legal professional
privilege would be entitled to refuse to comply with a notice issued under
s 295 without satisfying
such a condition … The apparent purpose of
the statutory condition is to ensure that a client can be located and required
disclose communications protected by … privilege although the solicitor
may be excused from disclosing
5.32 Secondly, s 299(2)(d) of the
Companies Code
provided that a
statement made in an examination which disclosed matter, in respect of which a
claim for client legal privilege could
be made, was not admissible in evidence
against the person in any civil or criminal proceedings. This was said to imply
that an assertion
of client legal privilege was not a reasonable excuse to
refuse to comply with a requirement to answer questions and that it would
a curious asymmetry to treat an assertion of the privilege as a
‘reasonable excuse’ for non-compliance with a requirement
books, for the contents of the books could be ascertained in any event by
compelling oral disclosure by any person who
has knowledge of
5.33 Dawson J expressed the view that ‘reasonable excuse’ more
aptly referred to any ‘physical or practical difficulties’
complying with a requirement under
To construe it as embracing legal professional privilege would be to render
ss 299(2)(d) and 308 superfluous and to produce an incongruity
denial of self-incrimination as a reasonable
5.34 Emphasis was also placed on the purpose of instituting a special
investigation under Part VII of the
Companies Code.
provided for investigations into the affairs of corporations when investigation
was, in the opinion of the relevant Minister,
warranted in the public or
national interest, or when the Ministerial Council decided that an investigation
should take place.
The view was
expressed that an inspector’s ability to satisfy the public or national
interest would be significantly diminished
if he or she could not compel the
disclosure of privileged communications passing between persons whose conduct
was material to an
investigation, and their legal
Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act
(Cth) (ASIC Act) does not contain a provision that expressly abrogates
client legal privilege. However, it contains provisions similar
to those in the
Companies Code
that were the subject of the decision in
ASIC relies on
to support its position that the ASIC Act impliedly abrogates
Decision in
5.36 Prior to 2006, the TPA was silent on the application of client legal
privilege to the coercive information-gathering powers under
s 155 of the
TPA. In an important decision on whether or not privilege was abrogated by
necessary implication, the High Court in
overturned the decision
of the Full Court of the Federal
and determined that
s 155 does not entitle the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission
(ACCC) to obtain or access documents
subject to a valid claim for client legal
5.37 Fundamental to the High Court’s decision was the finding that
client legal privilege ‘is not merely a rule of substantive
law. It is an
important common law right, or, perhaps, more accurately, an important common
law immunity’.
Court stated that statutory provisions were not to be construed as abrogating
important common law rights in the absence
of express unambiguous words or a
necessary implication to that
5.38 The High Court rejected the ACCC’s argument that the purpose of
investigating contraventions of the TPA would be impaired
or frustrated if
client legal privilege could be availed of to resist compliance with a notice
under s 155, and stressed that a communication
that was made to seek
assistance to evade the law by illegal conduct was not
privileged.
5.39 McHugh J rejected the argument that the TPA impliedly abrogated the
privilege. He noted:
Section 155 would neither become inoperative nor be rendered practically
useless if a person to whom a s 155 notice was addressed
could refuse to
produce documents because they were protected by legal professional privilege.
Documents protected by the privilege
must be a small percentage of the documents
whose production can be required by such notices. Only in recent times has the
or its predecessor claimed that legal professional privilege does not
apply to documents that are the subject of a s 155 notice.
Commission’s long acceptance of its earlier position supports the view
that the section’s object would not be frustrated
by holding that it does
not abolish the right to claim immunity for documents protected by …
5.40 Where the ACCC has reason to believe that a person has contravened the
TPA, s 155(2) gives it power to enter premises and to
inspect, copy or take
extracts of documents on those premises. The High Court in
that this power was similar to the power under the
the Court’s decisions in
Federal Police v Propend
held and confirmed
that the power of search and seizure under the
authorise the seizure of material to which client legal privilege
5.41 The ACCC argued that the statutory proviso that a person ‘must not
refuse or fail to comply with a notice [under s 155]
to the extent that the
person is capable of complying with it’ permitted non-compliance only
where the person was physically
incapable of complying with the notice. The High
Court rejected this argument.
5.42 The High Court distinguished its earlier decisions in
Pyneboard Pty
Ltd v Trade Practices Commission
was distinguished on the basis that it dealt with
the privilege against self-exposure to a penalty. The High Court stated that the
decision in
—that s 155(1) of the TPA impliedly
abrogated the privilege against self-exposure to a penalty—could partly be
by reference to the ‘absurdity that would result if that
privilege could be claimed, and pursuant to s 155(7), the privilege
self-incrimination could
was distinguished on the basis that s 295 of the
ompanies Code
was very different in context, history, purpose and
wording from s 155 of the TPA.
was decided in the context of
statutory provisions that were enacted before the decision in
, at a time when it was thought that client legal privilege could
only apply in judicial and quasi-judicial
proceedings.
The High Court
stated that it may be that
would now be decided
differently,
and Kirby J
expressed the view that
may have been ‘wrongly
Implications of
General implications
5.44 It has been suggested that
is important not merely
because it establishes authoritatively that the TPA does not abrogate privilege,
but because
it reveals that the Court is applying established principles in a new way. It
seems likely that a stricter approach will be taken
in the future to the implied
abrogation of … legal professional
5.45 As Kirby J noted, the implications of the decision in
transcend the TPA and the circumstances of the parties to that
Similar statutory language
to that in s 155 of the TPA appears in other federal legislation affecting
powers of investigation with
respect to taxation and the environment, for
5.46 In 2003, the House of Lords in
R (Morgan Grenfell) v Special
Commissioner of Income Tax
reached a similar conclusion to the High
that s 20(1) of the
Taxes Management Act 1970
contained a power for a tax inspector to seek the production of documents on
compulsion—did not abrogate client
legal privilege either expressly or by
necessary implication. Significantly, the House of Lords construed a provision
in that Act
which protected a lawyer from disclosing privileged information
without the client’s consent, as consistent with the preservation
client legal privilege.
Why should Parliament want to preserve [privilege] for documents in the hands of
the lawyer but not for documents … in the
hands of the taxpayer? …
[Client legal privilege] is, after all, a single privilege, for the benefit of
the client, whether the documents are in his hands
or that of his
5.47 While the
Building and Construction Industry Improvement Act 2005
(Cth) is silent on client legal privilege, the Guidelines issued by the Office
of the Australian Building and Construction Commissioner
state that, applying
the reasoning in
, the Commissioner ‘expects that the
… investigative power [under the Act] does not abolish the right to claim
legal professional
privilege when responding to a
5.48 The Australian Prudential Regulation Authority (APRA) has informed the
ALRC that, since the High Court’s decision in
has not pressed the view that its coercive information-gathering powers abrogate
privilege. Prior to the decision in
, APRA did take the
view—particularly in the exercise of its investigation powers under the
Superannuation Industry (Supervision) Act 1993
(Cth)—that client
legal privilege was not a reasonable excuse for a person (other than a
person’s lawyer) not to produce
documents or provide
information.
5.49 However, it emerged in the ALRC’s consultations that persons or
entities the subject of APRA’s coercive information-gathering
powers have,
on occasion, been requested by APRA to provide privileged
information.
Implications concerning
5.50 Despite the decision in
, a federal body with coercive
information-gathering powers may maintain that its specific investigatory powers
abrogate client legal
privilege. ASIC, for example, maintains its reliance on
the decision in
to support its position that certain powers in the
ASIC Act abrogate client legal
5.51 However, stakeholders in this Inquiry, and commentators generally, have
questioned ASIC’s position on privilege, and its
reliance on
The Law Council of Australia (Law Council) submitted that ASIC’s position
is ‘unsustainable’,
and the National Australia Bank, together with a number of other banks and
corporations, submitted that ASIC’s position is,
in their view,
‘erroneous’.
Kyrou and Gillian Wong state:
Applying the rationale in
to ASIC, it is submitted that
ASIC’s powers to issue notices to obtain documents under the ASIC Act do
not satisfy the abrogation
test because they do not expressly abrogate legal
professional privilege and the retention of privilege would not significantly
ASIC’s functions under the ASIC Act. Consequently, contrary to
ASIC’s stated position, respondents to ASIC notices may
resist production
of documents on the basis that they are subject to legal professional
5.52 Geoff Healy and Andrew Eastwood express the view that the decision in
is problematic; that it should no longer be followed; and that the
better view is that ASIC’s investigative powers do not abrogate
legal privilege.
Companies Code
, at the time the ASIC Act was
enacted in 2001, it was well established that client legal privilege was a
fundamental immunity, which
was not confined to judicial or quasi-judicial
proceedings;
provisions giving lawyers statutory protection from divulging
privileged communications in response to a coercive power—such
under s 308 of the
Companies Code
and s 69 of the ASIC
Act—are explicable as preserving the duty of confidence owed by a lawyer
to a client;
provisions preserving client legal privilege in subsequent
litigation in respect of a statement made at an examination—such
s 299(2)(d) of the
Companies Code
and s 76(1)(d) of the ASIC
Act—should be interpreted to mean that even if a person discloses a
privileged communication during
an examination, this does not amount to a waiver
of privilege in subsequent
litigation;
the ‘special investigations’ regime considered in
has since been repealed and had no equivalent in the ASIC
the fact that the Australian Government has considered it necessary
to introduce a new piece of legislation to abrogate client legal
expressly with respect to ASIC’s investigation into James Hardie,
emphasises the uncertainty that exists concerning
ASIC’s ability to access
privileged material in other
investigations.
5.53 Ashley
Black also notes that ASIC’s stance sits oddly with the
James Hardie
(Investigations and Proceedings) Act 2004
, which expressly abrogates
This raises the question why that legislation was necessary, unless ASIC’s
view that a person (other than a lawyer) does not
have reasonable excuse to
refuse to produce privileged documents under an ASIC notice is incorrect or at
least open to serious question.
5.54 The uncertainty concerning ASIC’s position on privilege was
referred to by the Treasurer in his Second Reading Speech on
James Hardie
(Investigations and Proceedings) Bill 2004
The bill will confirm a longstanding interpretation of ASIC’s
investigative and enforcement powers which was cast into doubt
by the decision
of the High Court in 2002 in the Daniels case. That case created some
uncertainty as to whether the 1991 decision
of the High Court in the Yuill case
would be followed today if a request by ASIC to produce material subject to
legal professional
privilege were to be
challenged.
5.55 Dr Stephen Donaghue, however, is more supportive of the decision in
. He expresses the view that
was a case in which the
statutory text was more amenable to an interpretation that preserved client
legal privilege than s 155 of
the TPA and that, despite its having been
treated as an aberration in
was consistent with a
line of authority that placed great emphasis on the purpose of an investigatory
scheme in deciding whether a
common law privilege had been
5.56 In the absence of statutory clarification, resolution of whether or not
the ASIC Act abrogates client legal privilege is dependent
on the initiation of
litigation that would test ASIC’s position—most likely prompted by a
party the subject of a coercive
information-gathering power refusing to produce
privileged information in circumstances where ASIC insists that it do so.
the publicity associated with, and the time and resources that would be
expended in, such test litigation may make many persons and
companies subject to
ASIC’s powers reluctant to pursue such a course.
5.57 Submissions and
consultations revealed that inconsistent legal advice is being given to clients
privileged information to ASIC. Some lawyers
advise their clients that they are under no obligation to produce privileged
information
to ASIC, in light of the decision in
; while others
give qualified advice in this
The Law Council
submitted that it
is informed that advice is provided to clients under investigation by ASIC that
they do not have to produce privileged material to
ASIC. However, such advice is
routinely qualified by noting that there is some uncertainty in this area due to
decision and the position asserted by ASIC. …
In short, the uncertainty creates a significant risk to entities under
investigation which may make them the test case. This uncertainty
is undesirable
and places those entities in a difficult
5.58 Submissions and consultations also suggested the existence of
inconsistent practices within ASIC concerning its pressing for
production of
privileged information.
Council submitted:
It has been the experience of practitioners that investigators of ASIC have
conceded that there is a difference of opinion as to
whether compliance with [a]
notice requires privileged material to be
5.59 Further, there appears to be some uncertainty about whether ASIC’s
position—that its coercive powers under s 19 and
of the ASIC Act abrogate privilege by necessary implication—extends to
other coercive powers under the ASIC
Act. Black notes that it is not clear
whether the obligation to provide reasonable assistance to ASIC under s 49
of the ASIC Act
would prevent a person asserting a claim to client legal
privilege in relation to a
communication.
Notices issued
under s 49(3) of the ASIC Act do not include any express reference to
client legal privilege unless the notice is
issued to a
Approaches to
necessary implication
5.60 Where statutes conferring powers on federal bodies are silent on the
application of privilege, it is not always possible to ascertain
whether they
take the stance that their particular powers override privilege. This
information is often not available on the websites
of federal bodies.
5.61 An exception to this is the Australian Taxation Office (ATO). Its
Access and Information Gathering Manual
, which is available on its
website, proceeds on the basis that client legal privilege applies to its access
and information-gathering
powers, and makes express reference to the High
Court’s decision in
5.62 The ALRC wrote to
federal bodies with coercive information-gathering powers and asked whether they
take the view that any of
their powers abrogate privilege by necessary
implication. Many federal bodies are of the opinion that their powers do not
APRA, as noted above, stated that since
, it has not
pressed its previously held view that certain of its powers abrogate
the Department of Immigration and Citizenship, following the
decision in
Minister for Immigration & Multicultural & Indigenous
Affairs v Hamdam
position that information subject to client legal privilege cannot be required
to be given in response to a notice issued
the Office of the Privacy Commissioner (OPC) takes the view that a
claim for client legal privilege falls within the ‘reasonable
excuse’ defence for not complying with a coercive information-gathering
power under the
the Department of Health and Ageing stated that, given that
privileged information is not likely to be relevant to the information-gathering
powers under the
Aged Care Act 1997
(Cth), it would be difficult to argue
that any of the provisions of that Act abrogate the privilege by necessary
implication.
federal bodies stated that they have never had to consider the issue of whether
their powers abrogate privilege by necessary
implication;
or that they
would be seeking advice in this regard or otherwise taking steps to reassess
their position.
5.64 The Insolvency and Trustee Service Australia (ITSA) stated that it was
unaware of any authoritative statement on whether the
exercise of the express
power under
Bankruptcy Act 1966
(Cth) abrogates
It also expressed
the view that, while it was not aware of any authoritative statement on whether
a trustee’s powers under
would abrogate
a claim for client legal privilege, it would be difficult to argue that the
privilege was not abrogated. In expressing
this view, ITSA relies, by analogy,
on the decision of the Full Federal Court in
Griffin v Pantzer
abrogates the privilege against
self-incrimination.
Submissions and
consultations
5.65 There was strong support in submissions and consultations for the need
to clarify the application of client legal privilege to
the coercive
information-gathering powers of federal
For example, the
Australian Financial Markets Association submitted:
We believe the current uncertainty surrounding the coercive
information-gathering powers of Commonwealth bodies with particular reference
ASIC, and the status of client legal privilege within the context of these
powers needs to be clarified.
5.66 The Law Society of New South Wales (NSW) submitted that ‘the time
for statutory intervention has probably arrived to clarify
the extent of the
powers agencies have to override client legal
privilege’.
Federation of Community Legal Centres (Vic) Inc expressed particular concern
Security and Intelligence
Organisation (ASIO) approaches the issue of client legal
5.67 Some submissions expressed the need for clarification of the law of
privilege in specific contexts. For example, ITSA submitted
that there were
several uncertainties in the application of the privilege in the bankruptcy
context, which require clarification,
including whether a trustee can obtain
privileged material that relates to a right of action that vests in the trustee,
to a bankrupt about whether or not he or she is ‘the owner of
property that would
5.68 A minority of submissions expressed the view that there was no need to
clarify the application of privilege to the coercive information-gathering
powers of one or more federal bodies. The OPC submitted that there was no need
to clarify the application of the privilege to its
powers under the
, because the OPC does not seek or compel the production of legal advice
obtained by a party to a complaint and, in any event, takes
the view that the
‘reasonable excuse’ exception in
includes a claim for client legal
5.69 BHP Billiton Mitsubishi Alliance submitted that the decision in
We do not feel that statutory clarification … would be of any benefit. The
advantage of relying on case law is that it is readily
able to evolve to meet
particular factual situations that were not envisaged by legislators.
Introduction of statutory clarification
would impede this
flexibility.
5.70 The Law Council also submitted that the common law concerning the
application of privilege to the coercive powers of federal
bodies is clear in
light of the decisions in
. It suggested that most regulatory agencies act in a manner
consistent with
. However, it submitted that there was potential
for confusion for unrepresented persons, who would not understand the
application
of the principles in
and, therefore, providing
clarification would be
beneficial.
5.71 The ALRC considers that there is a need for legislative clarification of
the application of client legal privilege to the coercive
information-gathering
powers of federal bodies. This need is particularly evident in relation to the
application of the privilege
to ASIC’s powers, but submissions and
consultations have suggested that there is a similar need for clarification in
to the powers of other federal bodies, including APRA, ASIO and ITSA.
5.72 To expect the common law to achieve clarity in respect of the
application of the privilege to the wide range of coercive information-gathering
powers is problematic.
common law is dependent on the institution of particular legal proceedings and
its outcomes may be confined to specific fact
situations. Given the nature of
the common law, there may be a considerable passage of time before clarity is
achieved in respect
of the application of the privilege to the wide range of
coercive information-gathering powers contained in legislation that is silent
5.73 While the decision in
is arguably clear, confusion may
arise where the common law has not considered whether the exercise of a
particular power abrogates
privilege by necessary implication. In addition,
where the common law has decided whether the exercise of a particular power
privilege by necessary implication, there may be differing
interpretations about the extent to which that decision applies to other
not specifically considered by the court.
5.74 Whether or not persons produce privileged information in response to the
exercise of a particular coercive power should not be
dependent on whether those
persons receive legal advice; from whom the advice is sought; or which federal
officer within a federal
body is exercising a power. It is unsatisfactory that
the uncertainty surrounding ASIC’s position on privilege has led to
inconsistent
legal advice being given to clients about their obligations to
produce privileged information to ASIC. Moreover, it is undesirable
unrepresented persons may be at a particular disadvantage in this regard.
5.75 As discussed above, it is not readily apparent whether particular
federal bodies take the view that their powers abrogate client
legal privilege
by necessary implication, especially where such powers have never been used. In
some instances, federal bodies have
never considered whether their powers
abrogate privilege. Clarifying the law will not only address present
uncertainties but will
have the advantage of addressing potential uncertainties
that may arise in the future when there is cause to consider the application
privilege to a particular power.
Options for
Client Legal Privilege and Federal Investigatory Bodies
(IP 33), the ALRC identified two methods of achieving statutory
clarification.
One way would
be to amend each federal Act that contains a coercive power to make it clear
whether or not the exercise of that power
preserves, modifies or abrogates
client legal privilege.
5.77 This approach received some support in other inquiries. The
Administrative Review Council (ARC), in a draft report on the coercive
information-gathering powers of federal bodies, recommended that the legislation
of each agency should clearly indicate whether or
not privilege is
The Victorian
Parliament Law Reform Committee, in considering the need for clarity in the
context of state powers conferring coercive
powers, recommended that, as a
general principle, the application of client legal privilege—whether it
applies or is abrogated—should
be clarified in statutes containing
inspectors’ powers.
5.78 Another method would be to enact a specific new federal statute,
providing that, in the absence of any clear express statutory
statement to the
contrary, client legal privilege is preserved in relation to a coercive
information-gathering power of a federal
Specific statutory
regimes that sought to abrogate or modify the privilege would need to be amended
individually in order to achieve
Submissions and
consultations
5.79 There was strong support in submissions and consultations for clarity to
be achieved by the enactment of a single specific federal
Some stakeholders
expressly supported such a statute to contain a default provision that client
legal privilege applies to federal
coercive powers in the absence of express
words to the contrary.
enactment of a statute of general application containing a default provision
that client legal privilege applies would be consistent
with the recommendations
the ALRC made in
Principled Regulation
Federal Civil and
Administrative Penalties in Australia
5.80 Dr Ronald Desiatnik submitted that:
Clarification is best achieved by enacting one piece of legislation which need
only contain a few provisions and which would have
three appendices containing,
respectively Acts which abrogate, modify or respect the doctrine. This Act could
be amended from time
to time to add or delete existing or future relevant
legislation to the
appendices.
5.81 However, some stakeholders expressed concern about the enactment of
legislation of general
application.
example, submitted that:
Enacting a single statute to cover all Commonwealth bodies may appear to reduce
the complexity and extent of the task to be performed.
That reduction may not be
realised because:
(1) the statute would be required, in relation to each body whose powers
included an abrogation, to include specific provisions that
relate solely to
that body’s legislation because of its unique requirements; and
(2) the legislation setting out the powers of those bodies would likely
require amendment in any event, to ensure that any existing
provisions relating
to client legal privilege would not be inconsistent with any newly enacted
provisions.
Enactment of statute of general
application
5.82 There is some overlap between the ALRC’s views on achieving
clarity and the exposition of its views on whether achieving
uniformity is
desirable—an issue that is considered separately below. Accordingly,
certain proposals in this chapter serve
a dual function insofar as they
simultaneously address the issues of clarity and uniformity.
5.83 The ALRC’s preliminary view is that there is a strong case for the
enactment of a statute of general application to clarify
the application of
privilege to the coercive information-gathering powers of federal
bodies—as well as other aspects of the
law and procedure governing client
legal privilege claims in federal
investigations.
The enactment
of a statute of general application would also achieve a degree of harmonisation
of approach.
5.84 Such a statute would serve as the foundation of a scheme designed to
inject greater certainty and consistency into client legal
privilege law and
procedure as it applies to federal investigations. Its purpose would be to
provide a convenient and central location
for various provisions relating to
client legal privilege claims in such contexts. This would avoid the need to
repeat those provisions
in each federal statute containing coercive
information-gathering powers.
5.85 The provisions that would be accommodated in such a statute would be
intended to clarify the law, or to establish uniform procedures
in relation to
the making and resolving of client legal privilege claims, or to establish
certain fundamental or default provisions
that would have general application
over all federal bodies exercising coercive information-gathering
powers—including Royal
Commissions—in the absence of express words
to the contrary.
establishment of default provisions has a precedent in the Commonwealth
Criminal Code
5.86 The ALRC does not suggest a name for the proposed statute of general
application. The Act could be part of a general statute
on federal regulation or
federal investigations—such as the Regulatory Contraventions Statute
proposed in
could be part of a federal Act that also deals with other privileges in federal
investigations, such as the privilege
against self-incrimination. For the
purposes of this Discussion Paper, the ALRC will refer to the proposed
legislation, as ‘federal
client legal privilege legislation’.
Default provision preserving application of
5.87 Federal client legal privilege legislation should provide that, in the
absence of any clear, express statutory statement to the
contrary, client legal
privilege applies to the coercive information-gathering powers of federal
5.88 This default provision dispenses with the uncertainty created by
attempting to ascertain whether any particular power abrogates
privilege by
necessary implication. It also achieves a degree of harmonisation of
Where legislation
is silent on privilege—which is in the majority of cases—the default
provision will operate in the
absence of any express amendment to the contrary.
5.89 Similarly, where legislation addresses the obligations of
lawyers—but not their clients—in relation to producing
information, the default provision will make it clear that privilege is not
abrogated in respect of the client, without
affecting any legislative
obligations of lawyers to provide the names and contact details of their clients
when information in their
possession is the subject of a claim for client legal
privilege. The inclusion of a default provision would avoid the need to amend
large number of individual statutes to include a provision that the legislation
preserves the privilege.
5.90 The default provision is intended to apply to Royal Commissions. In the
absence of an express statutory statement abrogating
privilege in a particular
Royal Commission, privilege is taken to be
The ALRC envisages
that the default provision would co-exist with provisions in the
Commissions Act
relating to the procedure concerning client legal privilege
5.91 The enactment of this default provision will necessitate amendment of
telecommunications interception legislation insofar as
such legislation has been
held to abrogate privilege by necessary implication.
It also will render
the privilege unavailable in ASIC investigations, in the absence of an express
amendment to the contrary in the
Any abrogation to be with specific reference
to particular powers
5.92 Under the ALRC’s proposal, if a federal statute seeks to abrogate
or modify client legal privilege it would have to do
so by express reference to
particular sections or divisions within it, which confer coercive
information-gathering powers.
5.93 It should not be assumed that abrogation or modification of the
privilege would apply to each of the coercive powers of a federal
body under a
particular piece of legislation, unless that is expressly stated to be the case.
This approach aims to avoid potential
uncertainty about the extent of any
abrogation.
Interaction between federal client legal
privilege legislation and other statutes
5.94 The proposed federal client legal privilege legislation is not intended
to be a comprehensive code containing an all-encompassing
statement of the law
on client legal privilege in the context of federal investigations. As mentioned
above, there is a limited number
of federal statutes that expressly abrogate or
modify the privilege. The proposed federal client legal privilege legislation
need to contain a ‘grandfather’ clause to address pre-existing
provisions. However, the mere fact that pre-existing federal
legislation
abrogates or modifies the privilege expressly will not be inconsistent with the
proposed privilege legislation because
the default provision envisages
abrogation or modification by express words.
5.95 Ideally, where federal legislation, enacted after the commencement of
the proposed federal client legal privilege legislation,
seeks to depart from
it, it should do so with express reference to the exclusion of federal client
legal privilege legislation. That
would have the salutary effect, in the
ALRC’s view, of making that departure a matter of affirmative statement
and one that
would require legislative expression and, therefore, parliamentary
scrutiny and debate.
5.96 Legislative provisions
cannot countenance a derogation of the competency of Parliament to pass
inconsistent legislation after
the passage of earlier
legislation.
Therefore it may
be problematic if federal client legal privilege legislation were to contain a
provision that any later Act inconsistent
with it was inoperative unless it
expressly excluded federal client legal privilege legislation. However, the ALRC
would hope that
if federal client legal privilege legislation were enacted,
future Parliaments would heed its underlying principles and only depart
after a considered decision that it was necessary and appropriate in the
circumstances to do so.
Proposal 5–1
The Australian Parliament should enact legislation
of general application to cover various aspects of the law and procedure
client legal privilege claims in federal investigations (hereafter
referred to as federal client legal privilege legislation) in
accordance with
the proposals in this Discussion Paper.
Proposal 5–2
Federal client legal privilege legislation should
provide that, in the absence of any clear, express statutory statement to the
client legal privilege applies to the coercive information-gathering
powers of federal bodies.
Proposal 5–3
Any legislative scheme which seeks to abrogate or
modify client legal privilege must do so by express reference to the particular
sections or divisions within that scheme that confer coercive
information-gathering powers which abrogate or modify the privilege.
5.97 The Terms of Reference require the ALRC to consider whether it would be
desirable to clarify
provisions for the modification or
abrogation of privilege, with a view to harmonising them across the Commonwealth
statute book.
A wider and related issue that arises is whether it is desirable
to harmonise
provisions relating to the application of client legal
privilege to the coercive information-gathering powers of federal
5.98 Federal legislation containing coercive information-gathering powers
does not reveal a principled, coherent policy towards client
legal privilege. As
discussed above, the majority of federal statutes are silent on the issue; while
other statutes adopt varying
approaches to its application.
5.99 ALRC 95 recommended that the Attorney-General order a review of
federal investigatory powers with a view to providing greater
consistency among
regulators in relation to their ability to compel the disclosure of information
and the operation of client legal
5.100 Dr Ben Saul has expressed the view that:
Confusion about the scope of legal professional privilege stems largely from the
inconsistent approaches to expressly or impliedly
removing privilege evident in
federal statutes. The inconsistent nature of statutory provisions potentially
undermines the public
confidence in equal treatment before the law, makes it
difficult for individuals to comply with their legal obligations, and ultimately
confuses and confounds the rule of
Practical considerations
5.101 The ARC has stated that consistency on matters relating to
privilege—including whether or not it is abrogated—in
legislation
affecting a single industry or sector or a single agency would be likely to lead
to efficiencies.
5.102 On one view, consistency of approach would arguably make it easier for
persons subject to coercive powers to comply with their
obligations,
particularly in the context of multiple parallel investigations, or cross-agency
investigations, where persons may be
required to produce a privileged document
to one federal body but not to another. It is not uncommon for more than one
federal body
with coercive powers to undertake an investigation concerning
offences arising from the same transactions.
5.103 An example of a cross-agency investigation is the Project Wickenby
taskforce, set up in 2004 to investigate internationally
promoted tax
arrangements that allegedly involve tax avoidance or tax evasion, and money
laundering. The taskforce comprises the
ATO, the Australian Crime Commission
(ACC), the AFP, ASIC and the Commonwealth Director of Public
Prosecutions.
5.104 Examples of separate parallel investigations are those conducted by
provisional liquidators, ASIC, APRA, and a Royal Commission
into the affairs of
HIH. The categories of documents sought by ASIC and APRA ‘overlapped to a
significant extent’.
Justice Neville Owen, the HIH Royal Commissioner, noted that:
The overlap in these processes and in the documents required led to evidentiary
difficulties for the agencies and for those who were
required to produce
documents to them. …
The difficulties arising from the parallel investigations by the inspector
[appointed by APRA] and ASIC in turn gave rise to difficulties
Commission. …
… Several parties expressed concern about ASIC’s production of
documents, in answer to a Commission summons, before those
parties had the
opportunity to review documents they had earlier produced to ASIC and that were
likely to be produced by ASIC in
answer to the Commission’s summons. The
specific concern related to the possible production by ASIC of documents over
a party might wish to assert legal professional privilege. A similar
difficulty arose in respect of the Commission’s summons
to the inspector
appointed by APRA. Resolution of this matter took considerable time … The
need to manage questions of privilege
and confidentiality continued throughout
the term of the Commission.
5.105 From a practical perspective, it is arguable that a consistent approach
to privilege—embracing a consistent approach to
the issue of appropriate
safeguards, if privilege were to be abrogated or
alleviate some of the difficulties faced by federal bodies where parallel
investigations are on foot, or where multi-agency
taskforces work on the same
investigation.
Varying investigatory contexts
5.106 An assessment of whether complete consistency of approach on client
legal privilege is desirable or necessary across the range
of federal bodies
with coercive information-gathering powers also must entail a consideration of
the investigatory contexts in which
those bodies operate.
5.107 As the discussion in Chapter 4 reveals, there is a wide range of
relevant federal bodies operating in vastly divergent areas
including: criminal
law enforcement; financial and prudential regulation; revenue; border control;
health; social security; transport;
and public administration. There are
important differences in the aims, functions, operations and powers of these
5.108 Investigation is a core function for some federal bodies—such as
the AFP and the ACC—whereas bodies such as Centrelink
and Medicare,
despite having investigatory powers, are primarily service providers.
5.109 Different functions performed by federal bodies include: conducting
prosecutions; gathering intelligence; and conducting audits.
While some federal
bodies with investigatory powers have enforcement functions—such as the
ACCC and ASIC—others—such
as the Australian Transaction Reports and
Analysis Centre—do not. Further, of those bodies possessing enforcement
there are significant differences in their policies and practices
concerning resort to enforcement activity. For example, while the
ACCC regards
taking enforcement action as the ‘cornerstone’ of the
enforcement action as the exception rather than the rule, having expressed a
preference for ‘working cooperatively’
with institutions to remedy
weaknesses.
5.110 There is potentially more at stake for persons the subject of
investigations carried out by federal investigatory bodies the
core function of
which is enforcement, compared with persons the subject of investigations
carried out by federal bodies the core
focus of which is monitoring compliance.
5.111 IP 33 asked whether harmonisation is desirable and, if so, whether
there should be distinctions drawn in the application of
client legal privilege
to federal coercive-information gathering powers depending on the functions
performed by federal bodies, or
the subject matter with which they
If distinctions were to
be drawn depending on the subject matter with which federal bodies deal, a
consistent approach to privilege
could be taken, for example, in respect of all
federal bodies concerned with financial markets.
5.112 However, if distinctions were to be drawn according to whether the core
function or focus of a federal body is investigation
or enforcement, there would
be different approaches to the application of privilege to investigations
conducted by the ACCC and APRA—despite
the fact that both those bodies
deal, at least to some extent, in areas regulating financial markets. Another
possible basis for
a distinction raised in IP 33 is whether the
body’s enforcement focus is primarily criminal, civil or
administrative.
Royal Commissions
5.113 There is also a question whether distinctions should be drawn between
the approach to be taken to the application of privilege
in the context of Royal
Commissions, and its application to other federal investigatory
As discussed in
Chapter 4, Royal Commissions only are established in special circumstances,
where a particular public interest has
been identified.
5.114 The discovery of the truth has been described as a prime function of a
Royal Commission.
Unlike many
other federal investigations, Royal Commissions are conducted in
public—although evidence can be taken in private
situations.
Their function is
to ascertain factual circumstances, report on matters specified in the Letters
Patent, and make recommendations.
If there are issues of major public interest
at stake, then a failed Royal Commission can arguably do enormous damage.
Conversely,
a successful Royal Commission can benefit the public. As stated by
Justice Owen in the HIH Inquiry:
[Royal Commissions] … have the capacity to marshal evidence and other
material in such a way as to assist those whose responsibility
it is to consider
future action. There is thus a continuing public benefit from the work royal
commissions do.
5.115 The ad hoc nature of Royal Commissions distinguishes them from
permanent standing federal agencies and bodies. However, some
inquiries that
historically may have been the subject of a Royal Commission, may now fall
within the jurisdiction of new federal
bodies—such as the Australian
Commission for Law Enforcement Integrity or the ACC. In addition, the subject
matter of some
inquiries conducted by Royal Commissions—such as the HIH
Inquiry—also may fall squarely within the investigatory jurisdictions
federal regulatory bodies, such as ASIC and APRA. Therefore, there is an issue
be treated differently in
relation to their ability to assert client legal privilege depending
on the basis of whether or not an inquiry is the subject of a
Royal Commission.
5.116 In the AWB Royal Commission, Commissioner Cole recommended that
consideration be given to amending the
Royal Commission Act
to permit the
Governor-General in Council by Letters Patent to determine that, in relation to
the whole or a particular aspect of
the matters the subject of inquiry, client
legal privilege should not
This approach did not
advocate the outright abolition of privilege in all Royal Commissions. Rather,
it put forward a mechanism through
which privilege could be abrogated in Royal
Commissions, depending on the subject matter of inquiry.
Submissions and
consultations
Harmonisation across federal investigatory
5.117 Submissions and consultations were divided on the issue of whether
legislative harmonisation of provisions relating to the application
of privilege
to federal powers is desirable—that is whether there should be a
harmonised approach to either preserving, abrogating
or modifying client legal
privilege across the board or based on particular categorisations.
5.118 The Law Council expressed opposition to legislative harmonisation. The
more pressing need, in its view, is for harmonisation
of the approaches taken by
federal bodies in dealing with privilege
5.119 The Commonwealth Ombudsman submitted that:
This office would be reluctant to be subject to a uniform approach of a lower
stringency than our current legislative provisions
because of the practical
problems that this would cause for us in attempting to fulfil our statutory
5.120 Other stakeholders expressed ‘in principle’ support for
legislative harmonisation of
provisions.
Reasons included
that it would allow for consistency in legal advice and, therefore, lead to a
reduction in legal costs.
Law Society of NSW, for example, submitted that there was ‘a strong case
for a harmonised approach across all agencies,
without exception’.
However, it noted that a ‘cover the field approach’ might be thought
too onerous in some cases
and insufficiently protective in
5.121 There were different views about the approach to harmonisation and, in
particular, whether distinctions should be drawn depending
on the functions
performed by federal bodies or the subject matter with which they deal. In light
of the vastly diverse purposes
and functions of federal bodies, there was
support for each federal body to be analysed ‘individually’—on
a ‘case-by-case’
basis—to ascertain whether its particular
circumstances warrant an abrogation or modification of the
Consideration of a
federal body’s functions and the subject matter with which it deals, were
generally considered to be relevant
to the issue of whether abrogation of the
privilege on an individual basis is warranted—rather than forming the
basis for wholesale
harmonisation in particular
5.122 Concerns were expressed about drawing distinctions based on whether or
not the core function of a body is investigation or
enforcement.
BHP Billiton
Mistubishi Alliance, for example, submitted that ‘the fact that a
particular body does not have enforcement powers
does not reduce its ability to
affect individuals’.
The difficulties of classifying federal investigatory bodies according to the
subject matter with which they deal and their primary
focus was also
One stakeholder
submitted that any attempted classification would suffer from the fact that a
federal body’s focus on investigation
or enforcement could fluctuate over
5.123 However, others expressed the view that the core focus of a federal
body is a relevant matter in considering
harmonisation.
In particular,
support was expressed for distinctions to be made where a federal body’s
function is to oversee the activities
of government agencies, on the basis that
accountability of government is
5.124 Considerable support was expressed for legislative harmonisation to the
extent of adopting a default provision that client legal
privilege applies to
the information-gathering powers of federal investigatory
For example, NSW
Young Lawyers submitted:
Establishing a uniform default provision that client legal privilege should
apply in the context of regulatory investigations by
Commonwealth agencies
promotes clarity and consistency across regulation and places due weight on the
policy rationales for recognition
of client legal
Distinguishing Royal Commissions
5.125 Submissions and consultations were divided on the issue of whether
distinctions should be drawn between federal investigatory
bodies and Royal
Commissions. Some stakeholders expressed ‘in principle’ opposition
to a distinction being drawn based
on the particular form of a federal body, or
the forum in which a federal investigation takes
5.126 Other stakeholders expressed the view that such a distinction is valid,
and that the case for abrogation of the privilege in
the context of Royal
Commissions—particularly those that are inquisitorial rather than
policy-focused—is
Achieving harmonisation
5.127 There was strong support in submissions and consultations for
harmonisation to be achieved by the enactment of a new federal
statute, rather
than through the amendment of each federal statute containing coercive
information-gathering powers.
Such an approach was said to be more practical. However, some stakeholders
expressed concern about the complexity of enacting a statute
application if that statute were to attempt to accommodate different
qualifications and
exceptions.
5.128 There is a less compelling case to strive for uniformity in the
application of client legal privilege to federal investigatory
powers than there
is to achieve clarity about whether or not the privilege applies to particular
5.129 There are difficulties in prescribing a ‘one-size fits all’
rule to be applied inflexibly to all federal bodies
Commissions)—regardless of their particular exigencies or indeed the
exigencies of particular inquiries or investigations.
5.130 Equally, attempting to establish a taxonomy of federal investigatory
bodies according to their objectives, functions, approach
to enforcement, and
subject matter of regulation—as a basis for creating harmonisation of
approach to client legal privilege
within certain spheres or sectors—is
fraught with difficulty. The ALRC does not, therefore, propose harmonisation
to particular classifications of federal bodies.
5.131 However, factors such as a federal body’s functions and subject
matter of regulation are relevant considerations to be
taken into account in
assessing whether or not abrogation or modification of the privilege is
warranted in particular cases. Further,
the assessment of whether or not
abrogation or modification of the privilege is warranted in a particular case
should be with reference
to consistent criteria, regardless of whether the
investigation or inquiry is being undertaken by a federal investigatory body or
a Royal Commission.
5.132 As foreshadowed earlier in this chapter, there is some overlap in the
ALRC’s views on the issues of harmonisation and
clarity. The ALRC’s
proposal to enact legislation of general application, containing a default
provision that client legal
privilege applies to the coercive powers of federal
bodies—including Royal Commissions—in the absence of express words
to the contrary,
achieves, in
the ALRC’s view, not only clarity, but an appropriate and desirable degree
of legislative harmonisation, without
impeding flexibility of approach where
5.133 Moreover, proposals in Chapter 8 aim to address the
need—identified in submissions and consultations—for harmonisation
of approach to making and resolving claims for client legal privilege. Arguably,
many efficiencies to be gained from uniformity will
arise from model uniform
procedures as distinct from uniform legislative provisions concerning the
application of privilege.
5.134 IP 33 noted that, if it were desirable to aim for uniformity, one
way would be by creating a specific new federal statute, containing
on privilege, consistent with the approach taken in
5.135 Another way of achieving uniformity would be to amend each federal
statute that contains a coercive information-gathering power.
As shown in
Appendix 1, there are many federal Acts that contain such powers, so if
harmonisation were to be achieved via this method,
it would entail numerous
separate amendments.
Submissions and
consultations
5.136 There was strong support in submissions and consultations for
harmonisation to be achieved by the enactment of a new federal
statute, rather
than through the amendment of each federal statute containing coercive
information-gathering powers.
Such an approach was said to be more practical. However, some stakeholders,
expressed concern that enacting a statute of general
application that attempts
to accommodate different qualifications or exceptions may produce
complexity.
5.137 As mentioned above, the ALRC’s preliminary view is that there is
a strong case for the enactment of legislation of general
application,
containing various provisions relating to client legal privilege claims in
federal investigations; avoiding the need
to enact those provisions in each
federal statute containing coercive information-gathering powers. Such a statute
would serve as
the foundation of a scheme—to be supplemented by policies
and guidelines—designed to inject greater consistency into
client legal
privilege law and procedure as it applies to federal
investigations.
5.138 It is proposed that the statute will contain a limited number of
default provisions that would have general application over
all federal bodies
exercising coercive information-gathering powers—including Royal
Commissions—in the absence of express
words to the contrary. As discussed
above, this includes a default provision preserving privilege in federal
investigations.
5.139 Given that the ALRC is not proposing harmonisation of approach based on
particular classifications of federal bodies, the proposed
legislation need not
broach the complex task of attempting to accommodate the unique or special
circumstances of certain federal
bodies. In circumstances where Parliament sees
fit to depart from the default provisions, express amendment to particular
legislation containing coercive information-gathering powers will be
5.140 If the proposed scheme favoured by the ALRC as a means of achieving
clarity and a degree of harmonisation is considered desirable,
it may follow
that national harmonisation is an equally desirable option. If that were so, it
would be open to the Australian Government
to lead a process through the
Standing Committee of Attorneys-General to have the states and territories adopt
the Commonwealth model.
Proposal 5–4
To promote national harmonisation, the
Attorney-General of Australia should lead a process through the Standing
Committee of Attorneys-General
to encourage the states and territories to adopt
the Commonwealth model proposed in Proposals 5–1 to 5–3 above.
Building and Construction
Industry Improvement Act 2005
Gene Technology Act 2000
Social Security Act 1991
Medicare Australia Act 1973
Insurance Act 1973
Banking Act 1959
Administration Act 1953
A New Tax System (Family Assistance) (Administration) Act 1999
Social Security (Administration) Act 1999
Insurance Contracts Act 1984
James Hardie
(Investigations and Proceedings) Act 2004
‘James Hardie material’ is defined in
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary
, House of Representatives, 2 December 2004, 1 (P
Costello—Treasurer), 2.
Crimes Act 1914
Proceeds of Crime Act
Inspector-General of Taxation Act 2003
Trade Practices Act
Australian Government
Trade Practices Act
Review Committee,
Review of the
Competition Provisions of the
Trade Practices Act
(2003), rec 13.5. The
High Court’s decision in
The Daniels Corporation International Pty Ltd
v Australian Competition and Consumer Commission
[2002] HCA 49
(2002) 213 CLR 543
to the application of the privilege to
Trade Practices Act 1974
is discussed below.
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
which relates to the exercise of ASIO’s special powers under div 3
relating to terrorism offences. However, the ASIO Act is
silent on privilege in
so far as it applies to ASIO’s exercise of special powers under div 2
of the Act.
Law Enforcement
Integrity Commissioner Act 2006
, provides that
div 4 (concerning search warrants) does not affect the law relating to
client legal privilege.
Laundering and Counter-Terrorism Financing Act 2006
also Exposure Draft
Human Services (Enhanced Service Delivery) Bill 2007
[1983] HCA 39
(1983) 153 CLR 52.
This case is discussed in Ch 3.
Crimes Act 1914
, provides that
(concerning
powers of search, information gathering, arrest and related powers) does not
affect the law relating to client legal
Inspector-General of
Intelligence and Security Act 1986
s 18(6)(b).
Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission Act 1986
is in similar terms, although it also applies to information or documents that
would disclose legal advice given to a person
or body that acts on behalf of the
Commonwealth);
Ombudsman Act 1976
(which applies
only to certain types of legal advice and communications) and
Law Enforcement
Integrity Commissioner Act 2006
s 80(5)(c).
Enforcement Integrity Commissioner Act 2006
Australian Crime Commission Act 2002
Securities and Investments Commission Act 2001
Retirement Savings Account Act 1997
(Cth) s 118;
Superannuation
Industry (Supervision) Act 1993
Enforcement Integrity Commissioner Act 2006
Australian Crime Commission Act 2002
Securities and Investments Commission Act 2001
Practical and procedural issues
associated with resolving claims for privilege are discussed in
Royal Commissions Act
However, this section contains a note that under
client legal privilege might still be a reasonable excuse for
refusing to produce the document.
Explanatory Memorandum,
Royal Commissions Amendment Bill 2006
See T Cole,
Report of the
Inquiry into Certain Australian Companies in relation to the UN Oil-for-Food
(2006) 152 FCR 382. See also Explanatory Memorandum,
Royal Commissions
Amendment Bill 2006
AWB Ltd v Cole
(2006) 152 FCR 382, in particular [189]. See also
Explanatory Memorandum,
Royal Commissions Amendment Bill 2006
AWB Ltd v Cole
152 FCR 382, [184]–[194]. See also Commonwealth,
Parliamentary
, House of Representatives, 26 May 2006, 18 (M
Turnbull—Parliamentary Secretary to the Prime Minister),
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary
, House of Representatives, 26 May 2006, 18 (M
Turnbull—Parliamentary Secretary to the Prime Minister),
The lack of transparency of
approach of particular federal bodies is addressed separately
This issue is discussed in
Carmody v Mackellar
(1997) 76 FCR 115.
Commissioner of
Taxation v Citibank Ltd
(1989) 20 FCR 403.
Allen Allen &
Hemsley v Deputy Federal Commissioner of Taxation
[1989] FCA 125
(1989) 20 FCR 576.
Joel v Migration Agents
Registration Authority
[2000] FCA 1919
, [32]. Section 308 empowers the
Migration Agents Registration Authority to require a registered migration agent
to answer questions
(either by statutory declaration or in person) and to
produce specified documents and
Re Steele; Ex parte
Official Trustee in Bankruptcy v Clayton Utz
[1994] FCA 905
(1994) 119 ALR 716.
Boensch v Pascoe
[2007] FCA 532
Lombe v Pollak
Re Compass Airlines Pty
(1992) 35 FCR 447.
Daniels Corporation International Pty Ltd v Australian Competition and Consumer
[2002] HCA 49
(2002) 213 CLR 543.
This case is discussed
Corporate Affairs Commission
of New South Wales v Yuill
[1991] HCA 28
(1991) 172 CLR 319.
This case is discussed
Report of the HIH
Royal Commission
(2003), [2.9].
Corporate Affairs Commission of New South Wales v Yuill
[1991] HCA 28
(1991) 172 CLR
Baker v Campbell
[1983] HCA 39
153 CLR 52.
O’Reilly v State
Bank of Victoria Commissioners
[1983] HCA 47
(1983) 153 CLR
Corporate Affairs Commission of
New South Wales v Yuill
[1991] HCA 28
(1991) 172 CLR 319
Ibid, 324. See also 334 (Dawson
Ibid, 325. See also
Ibid, 336. Gaudron J, in dissent,
expressed the view that ‘reasonable excuse’ was wide enough to cover
any answer, defence,
justification or excuse acknowledged by the law at the time
of the refusal to comply, including client legal privilege: see
Affairs Commission of New South Wales v Yuill
[1991] HCA 28
(1991) 172 CLR 319
Corporate Affairs
Commission of New South Wales v Yuill
[1991] HCA 28
(1991) 172 CLR 319
Australian Securities and
Investments Commission Act 2001
Australian Securities and
Investments Commission,
Australian Competition
and Consumer Commission v Daniels Corporation International Pty Ltd
[2001] FCA 244
108 FCR 123
, where the Court held that client legal privilege was abrogated
under s 155 of the TPA.
Daniels Corporation International Pty Ltd v Australian Competition and Consumer
[2002] HCA 49
(2002) 213 CLR 543.
Ibid, [11].
Ibid, [11],
Baker v Campbell
[1983] HCA 39
153 CLR 52.
Australian Federal
Police v Propend Finance
(1997) 188 CLR
The Daniels Corporation
International Pty Ltd v Australian Competition and Consumer Commission
[2002] HCA 49
(2002) 213 CLR 543
Pyneboard Pty Ltd
v Trade Practices Commission
[1983] HCA 9
(1983) 152 CLR
The Daniels Corporation
International Pty Ltd v Australian Competition and Consumer Commission
[2002] HCA 49
(2002) 213 CLR 543
, [30]–[31],
Ibid, [58]. See also
Commissioner of Taxation v Clark
[2003] NSWCA 91
(2003) 57 NSWLR 113
‘Considerable doubt has now been cast on the result in
Affairs Commission v Yuill’
S Donaghue, ‘Coercive
Investigations and Legal Professional Privilege’ (2003) 77(11)
Institute Journal
Daniels Corporation International Pty Ltd v Australian Competition and Consumer
[2002] HCA 49
(2002) 213 CLR 543
R (Morgan Grenfell) v Special
Commissioner of Income Tax
[2003] 1 AC 563
, [18], [22],
Ibid, [22], [25].
Australian Government Office of the
Australian Building and Construction Commissioner,
Building and Construction
Industry Improvement Act 2005
: Guidelines in Relation to the Exercise of
Compliance Powers in the Building and Construction Industry
Australian Prudential
Regulation Authority,
For example, G Healy and A
Eastwood—Freehills,
Consultation
, Sydney, 12 June
2007. A financial services industry association made a similar
observation.
Australian Securities
Commission v Dalleagles Pty Ltd
(1992) 36 FCR 350 applied
Affairs Commission of New South Wales v Yuill
[1991] HCA 28
(1991) 172 CLR 319
investigations by ASIC under the
Australian Securities and Investments
Commission Act 2001
Law Council of Australia,
National Australia Bank Limited
and others,
E Kyrou and G Wong, ‘Is
ASIC Entitled To Your Privileged Documents? Yuill, Daniels and the James Hardie
Acts’ (2005)
Inhouse Counsel
See G Healy and A Eastwood,
‘Legal Professional Privilege and the Investigative Powers of the
Australian Securities and Investments
Commission’
Company and
Securities Law Journal
380. See also Ch 3 on when privilege can be
Ibid, 382. This was the
approach adopted by the House of Lords in
R (Morgan Grenfell) v Special
Commissioner of Income Tax
[2003] 1 AC 563
, 609–610 (Hoffman
G Healy and A Eastwood,
‘Legal Professional Privilege and the Investigative Powers of the
Australian Securities and Investments
Commission’
Company and
Securities Law Journal
A Black, ‘Representation of
Clients in Investigations by the Australian Securities & Investments
Commission’ (2005)
(June–August)
Commercial Law Quarterly
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary
, House of Representatives, 2 December 2004, 1 (P
Costello—Treasurer), 1–2.
S Donaghue, ‘Coercive Investigations and Legal Professional
Privilege’ (2003) 77(11)
Law Institute Journal
40, 42. See also
R v McLaughlin
[2004] SADC 86
, [20], where Judge David expressed the view
that ‘the relevant sections of the ASIC Act make it clear that legal
professional
privilege is abrogated to the extent of the relevant documents
being handed over to ASIC for the purposes of further
investigation’.
Law Council of
4 June 2007;
lawyers of Clayton Utz,
Consultation
, Sydney, 15 May
Law Council of Australia,
Ibid. A financial services
industry association made a similar
observation.
A Black, ‘Representation
of Clients in Investigations by the Australian Securities & Investments
Commission’ (2005)
(June–August)
Commercial Law Quarterly
23. The nature of the power under
Australian Securities and Investments
Commission Act 2001
is outlined in
Australian Securities and
Investments Commission,
See Australian Taxation Office,
Access and Information Gathering Manual
<www.ato.gov.au> at
23 August 2007, [6.14], [6.15].
See Australian Prudential Regulation Authority,
6 July 2007; Australian Government Office of the Privacy Commissioner,
29 June 2007; Australian Customs Service,
13 June 2007; Australian Government Department
of Health and Ageing,
17 July 2007; Australian
Government Department of Immigration and Citizenship,
12 June 2007; Office of the Australian Building and Construction
Commissioner,
4 June 2007; Australian
Transaction Reports and Analysis Centre,
June 2007; Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission,
4 June 2007; Australian Communications and Media Authority,
Australian Prudential Regulation
Minister for Immigration
& Multicultural & Indigenous Affairs v Hamdan
[2005] FCAFC 113.
The Minister conceded in this case that the
Migration Act 1958
does not abrogate client legal privilege: see Ibid,
Australian Government
Department of Immigration and Citizenship,
Australian Government
Office of the Privacy Commissioner,
Government Department of Health and Ageing,
Australian Transport
Safety Bureau,
28 May 2007; Australian
Communications and Media Authority,
2007; Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority,
1 June 2007.
14 June 2007; Australian Transport Safety
28 May 2007.
Insolvency and Trustee Service
20 June 2007.
Section 6A(3)
allows a trustee to give written notice to a bankrupt to produce certain
information concerning the statement of his or her financial
affairs presented
to the Official Receiver.
trustee’s powers under
include requiring a bankrupt to deliver
up books or provide information about the bankrupt’s conduct and
examinable affairs.
[2004] FCAFC 113
(2004) 137 FCR 209.
See, eg, I Temby,
19 July 2007; Australian
Commission for Law Enforcement Integrity,
July 2007; Australian Securities and Investments Commission,
29 June 2007; Australian Financial Markets Association,
22 June 2007; Australian Corporate Lawyers
Association,
22 June 2007; Insolvency and
Trustee Service Australia,
20 June 2007; NSW
Young Lawyers,
12 June 2007; Australian
Pesticides and Veterinary Medicines Authority,
6 June 2007; Australian Institute of Company Directors,
8 June 2007; Law Society of New South Wales,
1 June 2007; Federation of Community Legal Centres (Vic) Inc,
5 June 2007; National Australia Bank Limited
and others,
4 June 2007; Fitzroy Legal
4 June 2007; R Desiatnik,
Australian Financial Markets
Association,
Law Society of New South
Federation of Community Legal
Centres (Vic) Inc,
Insolvency and Trustee
Service Australia,
Australian Government Office
of the Privacy Commissioner,
BHP Billiton Mitsubishi
Baker v Campbell
[1983] HCA 39
(1983) 153 CLR 52.
Law Council of
The ALRC has identified 42
different federal bodies with statutory coercive information-gathering powers
(including Royal Commissions
of inquiry): see
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Client Legal Privilege and Federal Investigatory Bodies
33 (2007), [4.60].
Appendix 1 sets
out federal legislation containing coercive information-gathering powers.
Administrative Review Council,
Government Agency Coercive Information-Gathering Powers [Draft Report]
Principle 16.
See Victorian Parliament Law Reform Committee,
The Powers of Entry, Search,
Seizure and Questioning by Authorised Persons
(2002), rec 35,
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Principled Regulation: Federal Civil and Administrative Penalties
in Australia
, ALRC 95 (2002), Rec 19–1 recommended the inclusion
of a provision to similar effect in the proposed Regulatory Contraventions
This is consistent with
Ibid, Rec 19–2.
Young Lawyers,
12 June 2007; Australian
Institute of Company Directors,
8 June 2007;
Law Society of New South Wales,
1 June 2007
Fitzroy Legal Service,
4 June 2007; Law Council
of Australia,
4 June 2007, R Desiatnik,
For example, NSW Young
12 June 2007; Fitzroy Legal Service,
4 June 2007; Law Council of Australia,
4 June 2007. See also National Legal Aid,
See Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Principled Regulation: Federal Civil and Administrative Penalties
in Australia
, ALRC 95 (2002),
R Desiatnik,
Australian Securities and
Investments Commission,
29 June 2007;
Australian Government Solicitor,
Australian Securities and
Investments Commission,
The case for clarity and
harmonisation of other aspects of the law and procedure concerning client legal
privilege claims is made
out in other parts of this Discussion Paper, including
Chs 7 and 8.
However, certain
provisions in the proposed legislation should be excluded from operating with
respect to Royal Commissions. See,
eg, Proposal 8–11 (alternative
dispute resolution).
Criminal Code
(Cth) ss 3.1, 5.1; M Goode, ‘Constructing
Criminal Law Reform and the Model Criminal Code’
Criminal Law
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Principled Regulation: Federal Civil and
Administrative Penalties in Australia
, ALRC 95 (2002),
Harmonisation
is discussed separately below.
Abrogation of privilege in Royal Commissions is discussed in Ch 6.
Whether or not privilege should be
abrogated or modified in ASIC investigations is discussed in
See D Pearce and R
Statutory Interpretation in Australia
(6th ed, 2006), [7.14].
See Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Client Legal Privilege and Federal Investigatory Bodies
33 (2007), Question 4–2.
See Australian Law Reform Commission,
Principled Regulation: Federal Civil
and Administrative Penalties in Australia
, ALRC 95 (2002),
‘Is Removing Legal Professional Privilege a Policy Imperative?’
(2001) 39(9)
Law Society Journal
See Administrative Review
Government Agency Coercive Information-Gathering Powers [Draft
Principle 16.
(Treasurer), ‘Project Wickenby Arrests’ (Press Release, 20 July
Report of the HIH
Royal Commission
(2003), [2.5].
Ibid, [2.5]–[2.6].
Safeguards are discussed in
Australian Competition
and Consumer Commission,
Annual Report 2005–06
Australian Prudential Regulation
Annual Report 2006
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Client Legal Privilege and Federal Investigatory Bodies
Question 4–2(b).
Question 4–2(a).
Report of the Inquiry into Certain Australian Companies in relation to the UN
Oil-for-Food Programme
(2006), vol 1,
Royal Commissions
Report of the HIH
Royal Commission
(2003), [1.1].
Ibid, rec 4.
Law Council of
4 June 2007. However, as noted
below, the Law Council supported the introduction of a default provision
preserving client legal privilege.
Commonwealth Ombudsman,
Australian Commission for Law
Enforcement Integrity,
20 July 2007; Australian
Corporate Lawyers Association,
22 June 2007;
Australian Pesticides and Veterinary Medicines Authority,
6 June 2007; Australian Institute of Company Directors,
8 June 2007; Law Society of New South Wales,
1 June 2007; R Desiatnik,
1 June 2007. The Australian Corporate Lawyers
Association also expressed support for legislative harmonisation of the
information-gathering
powers of federal bodies—an issue that goes beyond
the ALRC’s Terms of Reference.
Australian Institute of Company
Law Society of New South
National Legal Aid,
13 June 2007; Law Council of Australia,
4 June 2007; Sussex Street Community Law
Services Inc,
Australian Securities and
Investments Commission,
Fitzroy Legal Service,
4 June 2007; Law Council of Australia,
4 June 2007; BHP Billiton Mitsubishi
BHP Billiton Mitsubishi
See, eg, NSW Young Lawyers,
12 June 2007.
Australian Pesticides and
Veterinary Medicines Authority,
Commonwealth Ombudsman,
12 June 2007; Inspector-General of Intelligence
and Security,
1 June 2007. The approach to be
taken to oversight bodies is discussed further in
Taxation Institute of
15 June 2007; National Legal Aid,
13 June 2007; NSW Young Lawyers,
12 June 2007; Fitzroy Legal Service,
4 June 2007; Law Council of Australia,
4 June 2007.
NSW Young Lawyers,
Australian Securities and
Investments Commission,
29 June 2007; New South
Wales Bar Association,
5 June 2007. See also
BHP Billiton Mitsubishi Alliance,
1 June 2007.
R Desiatnik,
1 June 2007; Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security,
1 June 2007; Sussex Street Community Law
Services Inc,
30 May 2007.
Australian Institute of Company
8 June 2007; Law Society of New
South Wales,
1 June 2007; Fitzroy Legal
4 June 2007; R Desiatnik,
1 June 2007; BHP Billiton Mitsubishi Alliance,
Australian Securities and
Investments Commission,
29 June 2007;
Australian Government Solicitor,
This is discussed in
Proposals 5–1 and 5–2
See Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Client Legal Privilege and Federal Investigatory Bodies
33 (2007), [4.80]–[4.82]; Australian Law Reform Commission,
Regulation: Federal Civil and Administrative Penalties in Australia
(2002), Rec 19–1. Rec 19–3 recommended the enactment of a
default use immunity provision, in the absence of
express words to the contrary.
Use immunity is discussed in
Australian Institute of
Company Directors,
8 June 2007; Law Society of
New South Wales,
1 June 2007; Fitzroy Legal
4 June 2007; R Desiatnik,
1 June 2007; BHP Billiton Mitsubishi Alliance,
Australian Securities and
Investments Commission,
29 June 2007;
Australian Government Solicitor,
See Proposal 5–1.
A number of proposals in this Discussion Paper aim to achieve consistent
policies and procedures in the
approach by federal bodies to client legal
Proposal 5–2.
6. Modification or Abrogation of
Introduction
Should client legal privilege be abrogated?
Arguments for abrogation
Arguments against abrogation
Client legal privilege and the privilege against self-incrimination
Trends in the United States
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s views
Possible models of modification
Documents not related to representation
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s views
Qualified privilege
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s views
Extension to other professionals
‘Legal’ privilege
Comparative examples
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s views
6. Modification or Abrogation of
Introduction
6.1 In Chapter 2, the ALRC considers, and supports, the underlying rationale
for client legal privilege—that the protection
of the confidentiality of
communications between a lawyer and a client facilitates compliance with the law
and access to a fair hearing
in curial and non-curial contexts, thereby serving
the broad public interest in the effective administration of justice.
6.2 However, client legal privilege clearly conflicts with other important
legal principles, including that all relevant material
which reveals the truth
should be available to a court—and presumably, investigations conducted by
government agencies.
client legal privilege undoubtedly present some difficulties for investigators,
since they would prefer access to all of
the evidence concerning the role played
by parties to an alleged contravention of the law. Litigating claims of client
legal privilege
is also time-consuming and expensive, and may delay and
frustrate investigations.
6.3 The New Zealand Law Commission has noted that:
The judicial response to the tension between the competing public policy
interests has been to uphold the absolute nature of the
privilege, while at the
same time expanding its qualifications and exceptions and the doctrine of
waiver, whereby privilege is lost.
6.4 This chapter discusses some of the problems that arise from the
application of client legal privilege, both in a general sense
application to federal investigations. The chapter then considers whether
modification or abrogation of the privilege
is necessary or desirable as a means
of addressing these problems.
6.5 As an underlying rationale of the privilege is to encourage clients to
seek professional advice on their legal rights and responsibilities—this
chapter looks at whether the doctrine should be extended to other professionals
who, while not lawyers, provide what amounts essentially
to legal advice.
Should client legal
privilege be abrogated?
6.6 Client legal privilege may be modified or abrogated by
legislation.
Despite the importance
given to common law rights by the courts, it is clear that privileges can be
abrogated by statute if the legislature
chooses to give higher priority to the
interests of investigatory agencies in accessing information than to the
interests served
by maintaining
In relation to the
privilege against self-incrimination it has been said that:
If the legislature thinks that … the public interest overcomes some of the
common law’s traditional consideration for
the individual, then effect
must be given to the statute which embodies this
6.7 As outlined in Chapter 5, modification or abrogation of privilege must be
express, as common law rights cannot be overridden in
the absence of express
unambiguous words or a necessary implication to that
There are various ways that
client legal privilege could be abrogated or modified in relation to federal
investigatory bodies. One
option would be to abrogate the privilege for all the
coercive powers of federal
Another option would
be to assess when it is appropriate to abrogate the privilege, based on the
nature of each piece of legislation
and the particular role and functions of the
federal body concerned.
6.8 In the Issues Paper in this Inquiry,
Client Legal Privilege and
Federal Investigatory Bodies
(IP 33), the ALRC discussed possible ways in
which the privilege could be
For example, the
fundamental principles of client legal privilege could be maintained, but
modified to limit its application to a
narrower set of circumstances. One way in
which the privilege could be modified would be to limit the availability of
privilege to
certain types of confidential communications, such as advice on
representation in an investigation but not pre-existing documents.
Client legal
privilege also could be modified to adopt a ‘balancing test’
approach, whereby privilege is not absolute,
but can be determined to apply
based on a set of public interest criteria.
6.9 There are essentially two streams of argument in favour of abrogation of
the privilege. The first relates to the alignment with
the underlying rationale.
As noted in Chapter 2, if client legal privilege is viewed as a private right,
then there are many occasions—particularly
relating to the administration
of the law by federal bodies—when it could be argued that the public
interest should override
those rights. The second stream is based more on
practical considerations—that the availability of the privilege allows it
to frustrate and delay investigations, and it may be used cynically to prevent
or hinder the discovery of the truth.
Arguments for
Suppression of relevant evidence
6.10 As noted in Chapter 2, all privileges operate to allow people to resist
providing information that they would otherwise need
to disclose. This
information may be highly relevant to the matters under investigation. Jeremy
Bentham, the 18th century radical
reformer and proponent of utilitarianism, was
a staunch critic of client legal
6.11 For Bentham, the happiness of society (the object of utilitarianism) was
increased by conviction and punishment, not by the suppression
of evidence.
Disclosure of all legally-operative facts, facts investitive or divestitive of
right, of all facts on which right depends, such,
without any exception, ought
to be, such, with a few inconsistent exceptions, actually is, the object of the
law. … If falsehood
is not favoured by the law, why should concealment?
… Expect the lawyer to be serious in his endeavours to extirpate the breed
of dishonest litigants! expect the fox-hunter first to be serious in his wishes
to extirpate the breed of foxes.
Commissioner of Australian Federal Police v Propend
expressed the view that:
a brake on the application of legal professional privilege is needed to prevent
its operation bringing the law into ‘disrepute’,
principally because
it frustrates access to communications which would otherwise help courts to
determine, with accuracy and efficiency,
where the truth lies in disputed
6.13 In the report in the inquiry concerning the AWB and the Oil-for-Food
Programme (the AWB Royal Commission), Commissioner Cole
singled out the
significant ‘public interest’ that lies behind the establishment of
Royal Commissions and the conflict
of that public interest with ‘the
fundamental right of persons to obtain legal advice under conditions of
confidentiality’.
Commissioner identified a clash between ‘the public interest in
discovering the truth’ and ‘the private interest
of companies or
individuals in maintaining claims for legal professional
privilege’.
He indicated
that in some cases, depending on ‘the issues the subject of the Royal
Commission’, the public interest should
prevail over the
6.14 A clash also can be identified between competing public interests, as
opposed to a conflict between a public and a private interest.
That is, there
may be times ‘when the public interest in the conduct of investigations
overrides the public interest in client
privilege’.
, Wilson J commented along these lines, in saying that:
It must be recognized that competing public interests may be involved. New forms
of criminal activity pose a clear threat to the
public welfare and may call for
new measures of criminal investigation and law enforcement. The dictates of good
administration of
complex social and commercial legislation may require
increasing resort to compulsory
procedures.
Hampering the effectiveness of
investigations
6.15 It is argued that if client legal privilege were modified or abrogated,
investigations could be more efficient or effective,
and compliance improved.
Dawson J has commented that ‘a claim of legal professional privilege
might well hamper an investigation
as much as, if not more than, a claim of
privilege against
self-incrimination’.
6.16 There is a pragmatic view regarding the ability of regulators to perform
their functions effectively while the privilege is in
place. As noted by the New
Zealand Law Commission ‘on the face of it, removal of an obstruction to
the power to require information
must enable the power to work more
6.17 A number of federal investigatory agencies have argued that their powers
to obtain information are vital to performing their
statutory functions. In
The Daniels Corporation International Pty Ltd v Australian Competition v
Consumer Commission
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) argued that the purpose of
investigating contraventions of the
Trades Practices Act 1974
(TPA) would
be impaired or frustrated if client legal privilege could be used to resist
compliance with a notice under s 155. The
ACCC’s view was that, since
the expansion of client legal privilege in
Esso Australia Resources Ltd v
Commissioner of Taxation
which adopted
the dominant purpose
there was a significant chance that more legal advice would become unavailable
due to the privilege.
Corporate Affairs Commission of NSW v Yuill
which preceded
, a key factor in the decision was that to allow
client legal privilege as a reason for failing to comply with a notice to
documents would impair (or even destroy) the effectiveness of the
mechanism created to enforce the laws governing
corporations.
6.19 The decision of the Full Federal Court in
overturned by the High Court) was influenced by a view that unlawful conduct
often comprises many separate acts, some of which may be effected through
lawyers. Without information about contacts between the
person under
investigation and that person’s lawyer, it may be impossible for [the
regulator] to see the whole
6.20 The complexity of modern business arrangements arguably may tilt the
balance towards the removal of privilege to facilitate monitoring
of compliance
with the law, particularly given the new compliance functions of lawyers, and
the potential for the dominant purpose
test to shield many revealing documents
from inspection. As noted by Wilson J in
Baker v Campbell
, new forms of
criminal activity may call for new measures of criminal investigation, law
enforcement and an increasing resort to
compulsory procedures in the interest of
‘the dictates of good administration’.
6.21 The Australian Securities and Investments Commission (ASIC) has told the
ALRC that there are particular difficulties investigating
misconduct in the
financial sector and that:
The type of matters that ASIC considers usually involve transactions that have
many technical aspects in the legal, business, financial
products or accounting
areas. These areas are regulated and often legal advice is obtained in relation
to the transactions. In some
cases, lawyers are involved at every stage. Access
to the correspondence flowing to and from lawyers is sometimes key to fully
understanding
how a transaction or series of transactions developed. The
contents of correspondence created for the purposes of legal advice can
details of the information known by persons of interest, or details of what
those persons were seeking to
6.22 In relation to taxation law, the Privy Council has observed:
The whole rationale of taxation would break down and the whole burden of
taxation would fall only on diligent and honest taxpayers
if the Commission has
no power to obtain confidential information about taxpayers who may be negligent
or dishonest.
6.23 In a submission to the ALRC’s inquiry into the use of civil and
administrative penalties in federal
the Australian Taxation
Office (ATO) stated that, while
Baker v Campbell
expressed the view that
client legal privilege ensures ‘some protection of the
citizen—particularly the weak, the unintelligent
and ill-informed
citizen—against the leviathan of the modern
experience is that it is rare for a privilege claim to be made by, or on behalf
of, a citizen who would fit that
description. Often it is claimed by large
corporations or promoters of tax avoidance
6.24 The New Zealand Law Commission also has downplayed fears that abrogation
would deliver regulators unfettered power in such matters.
Taxation obligations are imposed by an elected Parliament. Performance of those
obligations by each taxpayer is as much in the interests
of other taxpayers as
of the state. Because the taxpayer has the comprehensive knowledge of his
financial position that the Commissioner
does not, it is the taxpayer who is in
the position of strength.
6.25 In another submission to the ALRC’s inquiry into the use of civil
and administrative penalties in federal
the ACCC expressed the view
that various species of privilege have been employed in the past to diminish
significantly its ability
to undertake investigations efficiently and thoroughly
into alleged contraventions of the TPA. This was particularly the case in
circumstances where legal advisers may be commercial partners in a transaction
alleged to raise implications in terms of the
McHugh J did not accept this argument in relation to
the ACCC, noting that documents that are subject to client legal privilege must
be a very small percentage of the documents requested in a s 155 notice. McHugh
J also expressed the view that:
Only in recent times has the Commission or its predecessor claimed that legal
privilege does not apply to documents that are subject
to a s 155 notice.
The Commission’s long acceptance of its earlier position supports the view
that the section’s object
would not be frustrated by holding that it does
not abolish the right to claim immunity for documents protected by legal
professional
6.27 This view was shared by the majority in
, who noted that a
communication made between a client and a lawyer for the purpose of contravening
the TPA would not be protected
by privilege:
it is difficult to see that the availability of legal professional privilege to
resist compliance with a notice under s 155(1) of
the Act would result in any
significant impairment of the investigation of contraventions of the Act, much
less in the frustration
of such investigations. At least, that conclusion is far
less obvious than in the case of the privilege against self-exposure to
6.28 In its submission to this Inquiry, the ACCC provided an example where
material that has been claimed as privileged would have
been of assistance in an
investigation.
CASE STUDY ONE
The ACCC issued s 155 notices as part of an investigation into a resale price
maintenance allegation. Documents were provided by the
company which included
advice from a lawyer commenting on the documentation prepared by the company for
distribution to retailers.
The company later claimed that the legal advice was
privileged and had been supplied inadvertently. Accordingly, the ACCC agreed
return the privileged document and make no further use of it. In the assessment
of an ACCC investigator who read the relevant
documents, the material supplied
and then returned had the potential to open up lines of inquiry which could have
established additional
breaches of the TPA.
Delay and frustration
6.29 Claims of client legal privilege—even where asserted in good
faith—may frustrate or delay investigations. At present,
there is no
forum, other than a court, where the proper basis for a claim can be
determined.
6.30 The submission of the Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions
(CDPP) identified a number of cases where privilege claims
led to significant
delays and hampered the progress of
investigations.
CASE STUDY TWO
Kennedy v Wallace
ASIC and the Australian Federal Police (AFP) executed a search warrant on 13
November 2003, at which time the relevant documents
over which privilege was
claimed were seized from Mr Kennedy. The final ruling of the Full Federal Court
(that the documents were
not privileged) was handed down on 23 December
The practical impact of
the delay was that ASIC was not able to consider any evidence in those documents
for just over thirteen months.
CASE STUDY THREE
R v Pearce and Ors
concerned a mass–marketed tax scheme, where accountants had received
advice from a Queen’s Counsel about the legitimacy
of a scheme in order to
induce people to enter into the scheme. The relevant evidence in this matter
included letters and faxed
communications from accountants who organised the
scheme to the Queen’s Counsel, in which they had sought changes to the
to tailor it to suit their design and maximise its marketing potential.
privilege were made
over these documents. The documents were held at the Federal Court Registry on
the basis that the applicants
had to commence action concerning legal
professional privilege within a certain period of time. No action in relation
to the privilege
claim was commenced and the documents remained in the Federal
Court Registry for a number of years, until the investigators sought
the documents. The applicants made no attempt to enforce their claim of
privilege. The documents were used in the trial
of three persons accused for
conspiracy to defraud the Commonwealth.
CASE STUDY FOUR
In the investigation into the affairs of Harts Australia Ltd, a tax and
accounting adviser,
warrants were issued on 6 September 1996, and executed on 9 and 10
September 1996. On 11 September 1996, Hart began a Federal
Court challenge to
the execution of the search warrants and claimed privileged material had been
seized. The litigation was not
resolved until 5 December 2002, over 6 years
after the search warrants were executed.
6.31 In relation to the investigation in the Hart matter, the CDPP submitted
The effect of the privilege claim was to paralyse the investigation, divert
considerable investigative resources (both human and
financial) and delay the
investigation and eventual prosecution for over six years. At one stage the
investigative agency was required
to meticulously catalogue each of the
thousands of documents it had seized under the search warrants so that the
litigation could
6.32 The ATO also submitted that blanket claims of client legal privilege can
delay audit activities by significant periods of time.
Claims can also operate to limit our ability to access information that is not
privileged because claims are made over communications
that are not privileged.
Sometimes through negotiation or litigation we might gain access to these
documents, but in other instances
we may never receive the relevant
information.
6.33 The duration of disputes was a significant reason for the minority
decision of Kirby J in
Kirby J suggested
that the sole purpose test should remain in order to avoid the application of a
test (the dominant purpose test)
susceptible to more protracted pre-trial disputation and contentious evaluation
with interlocutory applications and the appeals to
which they give rise. If
there is any doubt about this, consider how long it would take to sort out, in
the case of almost 600 documents,
the disputed question whether the dominant
purpose of each communication was to seek or receive legal
Kirby J noted that in some areas of the
ACCC’s responsibility, such as the administration of mergers, ‘speed
on the part
of the Commission and its officers is essential to the proper
discharge of the functions imposed by
Parliament’.
Abuse of client legal privilege
6.35 Allegations of abuse of client legal privilege have been made in
Australia and overseas. One court in the United States, for
example, has said of
the tobacco industry that it
seems to believe and argues that when an attorney is somehow referenced within a
document or generates a document, attorney-client
privilege or work-product
immunity must protect disclosure of the subject
6.36 In 2000, the Australian National Audit Office, in conducting a review of
tax penalties, reported that it was informed that:
legal professional privilege is being used as a tactical tool to impede and
frustrate both the progress and ultimate outcomes of
taxation audits (in terms
of restricting the auditor’s ability to access factual information about
transactions and arrangements).
6.37 Commissioner Cole’s report in the AWB Royal Commission expressed
concerns about AWB’s claims of client legal privilege.
He stated that AWB
had not produced a list of which documents formed the basis of the privilege
He also noted that many
documents for which privilege had been claimed initially were no longer claimed
to be privileged.
Commissioner Cole’s view, AWB’s lawyers had failed to produce
documents that would have been required to be produced
to the Commission at some
stage, and thus had greatly increased the time and expense of the
Commission.
6.38 The ACCC submitted that, in the context of responding to s 155
there is scope to claim
client legal privilege without a proper basis, and that from time to time, the
ACCC considered that such
improper claims have been
6.39 The ACCC provided an example of how improper claims might only be
discovered in a ‘random’ way. In a matter where
a company had
claimed privilege over certain documents sought pursuant to a s 155 notice,
when those documents were obtained from
another company which did not claim
privilege, it revealed that the claims made by the first company were not
soundly based.
6.40 However, in consultations, a number of groups of lawyers argued that it
was important to draw a distinction between over-cautious
or incorrect claiming
of the privilege and actual
Issues concerning alleged
abuse of client legal privilege claims are considered further in Chapter 9.
Difficulties in Royal
Commissions
6.41 The report of the AWB Royal Commission discussed in detail the
difficulties caused by claims to client legal privilege that were
made by the
AWB during that Royal Commission. AWB raised up to 40 claims of client legal
privilege concerning more than 1,400
6.42 AWB challenged Commissioner Cole’s decision to reject a claim for
client legal privilege over a particular document as
well as his capacity to
determine privilege claims at all. In the Federal Court, Justice Young held that
the document in question
was not subject to privilege. Young J’s decision
also cast doubt on the ability of a Royal Commissioner to inspect a document
respect of which client legal privilege has been claimed, to determine whether
the claim is sustained. Amendments were then made
Royal Commissions
(Cth) designed to put beyond doubt that a Royal Commissioner may
require the production of a document in respect of which client
legal privilege
is claimed, for the purpose of making a finding about that
6.43 Following these amendments to the
Royal Commissions Act
continued action in the Federal Court contending, amongst other arguments, that
the amendments were unconstitutional. In the
course of the hearings on this
issue, AWB dropped the privilege claim over 15 volumes of documents it had
previously said would be
unavailable to the inquiry. Ultimately, around 900
documents remained in issue in the Federal
Commissioner Cole
reported that client legal privilege was frequently claimed in respect of a
portion of a document but, after discussion
in the hearing room or between
counsel, a review of the claim resulted in the claim not being
maintained.
A number of the
claims for privilege were rejected by the Federal Court. However, the claims had
delayed the progress of the inquiry
6.44 Commissioner Cole concluded that circumstances may arise where it is
appropriate that client legal privilege be
In his view, however,
there should not be a blanket abrogation of client legal privilege in all Royal
Commissions, as it is not possible
to predict generally the circumstances where
it could be said that the public interest in discovering the truth should
prevail over
the private interest in maintaining client legal privilege. In
Commissioner Cole’s view, that decision would depend upon the
issues that
are the subject of the particular Royal
Commission.
On this basis, he
recommended that there should be capacity in the
Royal Commissions Act
permit the Governor-General in Council, by Letters Patent, to determine that, in
relation to the whole or a particular aspect
of matters the subject of inquiry,
client legal privilege should not
6.45 Client legal privilege is abrogated for Royal Commissions established in
New South Wales (NSW) and Victoria.
Section 17(1)
Royal Commissions
(NSW) states that a ‘witness summoned to attend or appear
before the commission shall not be excused from answering any question
producing any document or other thing on the ground…of privilege or on any
other ground’. This has been held to apply
to client legal privilege as
well as to the privilege against
self-incrimination.
6.46 Under the
Evidence Act 1958
(Vic), if a person is required by a
Royal Commission to answer a question or produce a document, the person is not
excused from complying
with the requirement on the ground that their answer or
document would disclose matters in respect of which the person could claim
client legal privilege.
legal privilege was abrogated in the
Evidence Act
(Vic) for the Longford
Royal Commission into the accident at the Esso Gas Plant in Longford in
6.47 As noted in Chapter 5, the
James Hardie (Investigations and
Proceedings) Act 2004
(Cth) abrogated client legal privilege in relation to
certain material, allowing its use in investigations of the James Hardie Group
and any related proceedings.
This was done because, in the Federal Government’s view, there are
situations in which the abrogation of the privilege is justified
in order to
serve a higher public policy
Whilst the James
Hardie investigation was a New South Wales Special Commission of Inquiry, the
operation and rules of Special Commissions
of Inquiry are effectively the same
as that of a Royal
Commission.
Arguments against
6.48 The main arguments against abrogation are based on the underlying
rationale for the privilege, as outlined in Chapter 2. The
benefit of fostering
a candid client-lawyer relationship is one of the main reasons stated for
opposing the abrogation of client
legal privilege. In recent cases, judges have
shown a broad acceptance of the proposition that an assurance of confidentiality
necessary to allow full and frank communications between clients and their
lawyers. Deane J has commented that:
Ultimately much depends on one’s assessment of the extent of the detriment
to the efficacy of legal professional privilege
which would be likely to result
from the proposed curtailment of the protection which it affords. In my view,
that detriment could
significant.
6.49 In contrast, Dr Jonathan Auburn argues that lawyers are reluctant to
question what he terms the ‘abstract principles’
Lawyers are confident that their experience in dealing with clients shows that
the abstract principle behind the privilege holds
true in practice. Thus it may
be partly because the privilege is, on one level, counter-intuitive, and so
demands justification from
those who use it, that it has drawn such stern
defence from the legal
profession.
6.50 Auburn states that:
If the benefits to confidentiality resulting from the privilege are unknown,
there is no reason to assume they are slight. At the
same time, there is no
reason to assume that such benefits would be completely destroyed by further
incursions into the over-stated
sanctity of the
6.51 Empirical studies on privilege and confidentiality in the United States
have proven to be inconclusive, although some have suggested
that laypersons may
have little understanding of the
6.52 It is also argued that removal of the privilege may actually damage,
rather than enhance, compliance. Fear of compulsory disclosure
may deter candid,
careful, detailed, written advice being given by lawyers to their clients and
increase the amount of oral advice
Removing privilege also
might deter complex advice testing the limits of the law.
The majority decision in
did not acknowledge the important part
that professional legal advice can play in encouraging compliance with the law
the reasoning of the majority was confined to analysing
linguistic, textual and historical considerations without reference to the
underlying policy debate.
6.53 As noted above, in
, both McHugh J and Kirby J rejected
the ACCC’s view that it could not conduct investigations without access to
privileged documents.
Kirby J, in particular, noted that the ACCC has
acknowledged in the past that legally privileged documents were unlikely to
an investigation.
Healy and Andrew Eastwood suggest that legal advice about a client’s past
conduct, while it may refer to relevant facts
and circumstances,
will rarely be, of itself, a relevant fact. Accordingly the effect of the
expansion of the doctrine’s ambit on the ability
of regulators to probe
and monitor corporate activity is, it is suggested, likely to be
manageable.
6.54 The 2003
Review of the Competition Provisions of the
Trade Practices
(Dawson Review)
recommended that client legal privilege be specifically preserved under the
TPA, on the basis of its role in compliance.
The privilege is in the public interest because it facilitates the obtaining of
legal advice and promotes the observance of the law.
This is particularly
desirable in the area of competition law, which is often complex. Corporations
and individuals should not be
discouraged from seeking legal advice for fear
that their communications might subsequently be used against them by the ACCC.
should clients be inhibited in giving instructions to their lawyer in order
to obtain legal advice or be confined to oral communications.
The Committee
believes that legal professional privilege should be preserved under the
6.55 Healy and Eastwood also suggest that the limits placed on client legal
privilege ensure that it does not unduly frustrate regulatory
investigations.
They cite the discussion in
Pratt Holdings v Commissioner of
as demonstrating
the difficulty of establishing the dominant purpose in cases of complex business
transactions where advice is obtained
from a number of
professionals.
This limitation also acts as a natural barrier to any attempt by large
corporations to take advantage of the increased scope of legal
professional
privilege. The mere provision of a document to an internal or external lawyer
will not render a document subject to
legal professional privilege if the
document was brought into existence for commercial
6.56 Occasional abuse of the privilege also is not necessarily a reason for
outright removal of the protection. The American Bar Association
established a task force on attorney-client privilege in 2004 to inform the
public and legal profession on the importance of
the doctrine. The ABA argues
While it may be true that in some limited instances attorneys abuse the
privilege as a tactic to delay and hinder the discovery of
discoverable material, such instances do not justify encroaching upon the
protections afforded by the
6.57 In the United States (US), rules are already in place to address
concerns about abuse of privilege. For example, Rule 3.4 of
Model Rules
of Professional Conduct
provides that ‘a lawyer shall not unlawfully
obstruct another party’s access to evidence or conceal a document having
potentially evidentiary value’.
6.58 If client legal privilege is sometimes being abused, there is a question
abrogation, to prevent or
redress such abuse. Possible measures are discussed in detail in Chapter 9,
including guidance in professional
rules of conduct about the making and
maintaining of privilege claims, professional disciplinary action and
Client legal
privilege and the privilege against self-incrimination
6.59 The common law privilege against self-incrimination entitles a person to
refuse to answer any question, or produce any document,
if that answer or the
production would tend to incriminate that
The privilege also
provides protection against self-exposure to a civil or administrative
In relation to the
investigatory powers of federal regulators, a common approach has been to
abrogate or modify the privilege against
self-incrimination expressly by statute
so that individuals are not entitled to refuse to produce documents, but are
permitted to
assert the privilege subsequently in civil or criminal proceedings
commenced after the
investigation.
6.60 Given that both the privilege against self-incrimination and client
legal privilege have the potential to ‘defeat or stultify
the purpose for
which a coercive and investigative power is
conferred’,
it is worth
considering whether there are fundamental differences between the two which
would justify the abrogation of one and not
6.61 Prior to the High Court’s decision in
question of whether client legal privilege should be accorded differential
treatment from the privilege against self-incrimination
was directly examined in
Re Compass Airlines Pty
In that case it was
argued by counsel for the liquidators that express abrogation of the privilege
against self-incrimination in
s 597(12) of the
Corporations Law
the abrogation of client legal privilege. Lockhart J held that the privilege
against self-incrimination and client legal
privilege rest upon different
foundations and are expressions of different public policy principles.
Consequently, there was no necessary
implication that client legal privilege had
been abrogated.
In the same
case, Beaumont and Gummow JJ reached the conclusion that it was one thing to
construe the provision as taking away by
implication the right of silence; but
it was a different thing entirely to read into such a provision ‘an
intention to eliminate
the very different privilege inherent in a proper legal
professional
relationship’.
6.62 The decision in
Re Compass Airlines Pty Ltd
was largely based on
an earlier decision
Re Transequity Ltd (in
There it was
held that client legal privilege
is to be found in an underlying principle of common law, where a person should
be entitled to seek and obtain legal advice in the
conduct of his own affairs
and legal assistance in and for the purpose of the conduct of actual or
anticipated litigation without
the apprehension of being thereby
prejudiced.
6.63 Hence, it attracts an entirely different theoretical and policy
foundation than the privilege against self-incrimination.
, however, the Full Federal Court based its decision of
whether to treat legal professional privilege on an equal footing with the
privilege against self-incrimination by answering the question whether the TPA
would be hobbled or thwarted if privilege were applied.
Wilcox J held that the
policy considerations in relation to the privilege against self-incrimination
are equally apposite to client
Moore J noted,
however, that there was a difference between the two privileges based on the
Different considerations arise in relation to communications for which a claim
of legal professional privilege might be made. Privileged
documents, for
example, may be sought by a notice under s 155 in circumstances where the
documents could ultimately prove to have
a limited bearing on whether or not
there had been a contravention of the TPA
Documents or information
resisted on the grounds of the privilege against self-incrimination may be
thought, in the ordinary course,
to be likely to have a greater bearing on
whether there had been a
contravention.
6.65 Wilcox J’s view was later rejected by the High
The decision of the Full
Federal Court also has been criticised for making only passing reference to
Re Compass Airlines Pty Ltd
, and for not considering the conceptual
differences between the privilege against self-incrimination and client legal
Trends in the United
6.66 In the wake of such corporate scandals as the collapse of Enron and
WorldCom in the past decade, US federal bodies such as the
Department of Justice
(DOJ), the Securities and Exchanges Commission (SEC), the Commodities and
Futures Trading Commission (CFTC)
and the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) began
routinely to demand corporations and their employees or agents to cooperate
government investigations. As part of these investigations,
enforcement bodies have asked corporations to waive attorney-client privilege
and work-product protections, to make available to authorities, amongst other
things, documents and reports of internal
investigations.
6.67 In January 2003, US Deputy Attorney General Larry Thompson issued a
Principles of Federal Prosecution of Business Organizations
(Thompson Memorandum), in which federal prosecutors are advised that a
corporation should not be given credit for cooperating with
the government if it
refused to waive its attorney-client privilege, or if it advanced legal fees to
employees facing investigations.
6.68 Following the release of the Thompson Memorandum, concerns were
expressed by members of Congress, former US Attorneys General
Attorneys General, civil libertarians, as well as academics and practitioners,
right to counsel. On 15 September
2006, the Senate Judiciary Committee held hearings on the Thompson
Memorandum’s effect on
the right to counsel in corporate investigations.
From the public hearing, two particular strands of criticism of the memorandum
the policy has contributed to a coercive ‘culture of
waiver’, where government agencies believe it is reasonable and
appropriate for them to expect a company under investigation to waive broadly
its attorney-client privilege. The fear of indictment
further exacerbates the
corporation’s concern that it might be seen or labelled as
‘uncooperative’ if it decides
the emphasis on waiver of attorney-client privilege and work-product
protection threatens to create a counter-productive climate
of distrust between
corporations and their employees, it further dissuades clients from being
forthcoming with their attorneys, and
inhibits any motivation to comply with
regulations.
6.69 On 8 December 2006, Senator Arlen Specter introduced the
Attorney-Client Privilege Protection Act
. In the proposed legislation,
federal enforcement agents and attorneys would be barred from:
demanding, requesting or conditioning treatment on the
‘disclosure by an organisation, or persons affiliated with that
organisation
of any communication protected by the attorney-client privilege or
any attorney work-product’; and
conditioning a decision on whether to use a civil or criminal charge
relating to an organisation or person, or use as a factor in
determining whether
an organisation or person is cooperating with the Government on any valid
assertion of the attorney-client
the proposed legislation, a corporation is not prohibited from making, or a
federal enforcement agent or attorney is not
precluded from accepting, a
voluntary or unsolicited offer to share the internal investigation materials of
such organisation.
6.71 On 12 December 2006, less than a week after Senator Specter introduced
the proposed legislation, Deputy Attorney General McNulty
issued revised
charging guidelines for federal prosecutors
Principles of Federal Prosecution
of Business Organizations
(the McNulty Memorandum).
6.72 The McNulty Memorandum notes the concerns expressed by those associated
with the corporate legal community that the practices
of federal bodies may be
discouraging to full and candid communication between corporate employees and
counsel. The Memorandum sets
forth a balancing test by which prosecutors can
determine whether they have a ‘legitimate need’ for materials
by the attorney-client privilege or the work-product protection.
6.73 To determine whether a legitimate need exists, the following factors are
the likelihood and degree to which the privileged information will
benefit the federal body’s investigation;
whether the information sought can be obtained in a timely and
complete fashion by using alternative means that do not require waiver;
the completeness of the voluntary disclosure already provided;
the collateral consequences to a corporation of a
6.74 If a prosecutor determines that there is a legitimate
need, the prosecutor must seek the least intrusive waiver necessary to
complete and thorough investigation, and should follow a step-by-step approach
to requesting information. The memorandum
divides information sought into two
categories:
includes purely factual information such as
witness statements, factual interviews, memoranda, organisation charts, factual
chronologies
and factual summaries. It also includes contemporaneous legal
advice when an organisation is asserting the ‘advice of counsel’
defence and legal advice falling under the crime-fraud exception to the
Category II
includes other privileged attorney-client
communication, such as legal advice given to the corporation before, during or
underlying misconduct. It extends to attorney notes, memoranda or
reports containing counsel’s mental impression and conclusions,
determinations as a result of internal investigation or legal advice given to
the corporation.
6.75 Before obtaining Category I information, the
prosecutor must get written authorisation from the US Attorney who must consult
with the Assistant Attorney General of the Criminal Division. Category II
information only can be obtained in ‘rare circumstances’
when purely
factual information provides an incomplete basis to conduct a thorough
investigation, and approval from the Deputy Attorney
6.76 The ABA regards the McNulty Memorandum as a ‘modest
improvement’ on the previous policy, but remains concerned that
changes have not gone far enough. According to ABA President Karen Mathis:
the new guidelines fall far short of what is needed to prevent further erosion
of attorney-client privilege … instead of eliminating
the improper
department practice of requiring companies to waive privileges in return for
cooperation credit, the new policy merely
requires high-level department
approval before waiver requests can be
6.77 It is important to note that these matters in the US deal with
information obtained voluntarily as part of a regulator’s
policies and not pursuant to the coercive information-gathering powers that are
being considered as part of this Inquiry.
Nonetheless, the distinctions drawn as
to when there is a legitimate need for privileged material in an investigation
are instructive
for the purposes of this Inquiry.
Submissions and
consultations
6.78 In IP 33, the ALRC posed a number of questions about whether abrogation
or modification of client legal privilege was necessary
or desirable:
Would modification or abrogation of the client legal privilege rules
achieve greater efficiency or effectiveness in the work of federal
investigatory
agencies, including Royal Commissions?
Where the rules regarding privilege have been subject to change,
such as with respect to the ACCC, has there been a practical impact
that can be
seen in providing advice under the legislation, both when privilege was in force
and when it was removed? Conversely,
when agencies and Royal Commissions have
had access to what would otherwise be privileged material, has the availability
material facilitated better fact finding and enforcement by those
What consequences might flow from abrogation or modification of the
Where client legal privilege has already been abrogated, what has
been the effect of the abrogation on lawyer-client
6.79 The comments in submissions and consultations
clustered around the following concerns: that greater efficiency or
effectiveness
are not principled reasons for abrogation of the privilege; and
that abrogation of the privilege would have an undesirable effect
on the legal
advice provided by lawyers and, therefore, on compliance. However, a number of
submissions expressed the view that there
was a limited set of special
circumstances in which there was an overriding public interest in the
availability of otherwise privileged
Would abrogation or modification achieve
greater efficiency or effectiveness?
6.80 ASIC submitted that an abrogation or modification of the client legal
privilege rules would achieve greater efficiency or effectiveness
in the work of
some federal investigatory agencies, including Royal Commissions, because it
would assist agencies and Royal Commissions
to understand ‘a transaction
that is not obvious on its face, and ultimately assist in quicker resolution of
investigations’.
6.81 In relation to both investigations and enforcement actions, abrogation
would eliminate the delays and costs that, in ASIC’s
experience, can be
incurred in testing or assessing claims of client legal
ASIC argued that,
while it does not routinely obtain documents that may be the subject of a client
legal privilege claim, there are
cases in which this category of information is
of central relevance to an ASIC investigation.
In some cases the legal advice that was obtained has been central to determining
whether there has been misconduct. For example,
there have been a number of
cases where it has been important to know, for the purpose of assessing the
merits of any possible defence,
whether all the facts were provided to a legal
advisor before advice was obtained. This is relevant to determining whether
was obtained on the basis of full, flawed or untrue instructions and
therefore, whether the advice could reasonably have been relied
upon. In other
cases where advice has been obtained before an illegal transaction was entered
into, it has been relevant to know
what the advice
6.82 The CDPP submitted that it is particularly concerned about the impact
that claims for client legal privilege can have on investigatory
powers of investigation under search warrants and the prosecution process in
It has become apparent to this office that the making of claims for legal
professional privilege over documents during the execution
of search warrants
can be used as a tool to impede and delay the criminal investigation. Once a
claim for legal professional privilege
is made over the document, the document
is essentially removed from consideration in the investigation until the claim
professional privilege is resolved. This can have the effect of
denying the investigator access to crucial evidence in the investigation
criminal offences for substantial periods of
6.83 The Australian Crime Commission (ACC) made a submission in similar
There are cases where claims of the privilege have delayed, undermined and
frustrated ongoing criminal ACC investigations and operations.
parties cooperate, a claim of privilege over documents which the ACC wishes to
see has the effect of putting those documents
out of the agency’s reach
for significant periods. Where the ACC becomes tied up in protracted litigation,
there may be a need
to reassess and redirect its investigations. This can be
exploited by others and used as a delaying
6.84 The ACCC submitted that its ability to obtain evidence relevant to
establishing contraventions of the TPA
is clearly hampered by the fact
that client legal privilege is not abrogated in relation to its use of coercive
information-gathering
powers. It argued that the privilege should be abrogated
in its entirety for s 155 notices.
Abrogation of the privilege would enable investigations to be most effectively
and efficiently carried out in the interests of promoting
the objects of the
Trade Practices Act
, which, in turn, serves the public
6.85 However, a significant number of submissions did not agree that
modification or abrogation of the privilege would achieve greater
efficiency or
effectiveness in the work of federal investigatory agencies. Dr Ronald Desiatnik
argued that:
The doctrine has been a central part of our legal system for over 400 years
despite the timeless wish of government investigatory
agencies to know as much
as they can … for example, the ‘crime/fraud’ exception has
expanded so much in recent
years as to accommodate the aspirations of even the
most zealous investigatory bodies, by simply prohibiting the use of the
in the growing situations where the privilege
6.86 The Law Council of Australia (Law Council) stated that while there may
be some cases where there has been delay and frustration,
this is a minority of
cases, and greater evidence should be required before modification or abrogation
of a fundamental right was
It did not accept
the proposition that the effectiveness of federal investigations is hampered or
diminished by client legal privilege.
The Law Council wishes to emphasise, in responding to this question, that
greater efficiency and effectiveness of investigation are
not the only interests
to be weighed in the balance. Nor are they the most important. Other interests
to be weighed are the proper
administration of justice and individual civil
rights. A proper balancing of these interests must be achieved in each
category of investigation in
6.87 One submission argued that the proposition that client legal privilege
frustrates investigations as a general rule ‘would
seem difficult to
sustain’. In his view, the limits of the privilege (as outlined in Chapter
3) effectively confine the ambit
over which the privilege
6.88 Keith Kendall strongly argued against efficiency as a justification for
abrogation of the privilege.
Just because the privilege prevents the investigatory body from obtaining the
information from the person’s legal adviser does
not prevent them from
obtaining that information from other sources … In this situation,
claiming that client legal privilege
should be modified or abrogated to improve
the efficiency of official investigations is tantamount to arguing for such a
due to mere inconvenience. Such a position is as specious as
proposing to lower the standard of proof (or even switching the burden)
criminal trial on the basis of making the prosecution’s function more
efficient and thereby securing more
convictions.
6.89 Some questions were raised about what would be achieved by abrogation of
the privilege. For example, one submission argued that
regulators want to see
legal advice because it makes their job easier in setting out the chronology of
In most cases, the legal advice/communications is only of interest to
regulators/revenue collection bodies because it contains a
of the relevant transaction, ie an explanation of the transaction that is able
to be followed and gives meaning
to the mass of documents which otherwise have
to be pieced together as part of a large
6.90 A number of submissions agreed that efficient resolution of claims was
more likely to be of assistance to agencies than modification
or abrogation of
the privilege doctrine.
If the Commonwealth is concerned about inefficiencies arising from claims of
privilege then it should focus its efforts on developing
a fast track method for
adjudicating those claims rather than stripping people of fundamental
6.91 The Law Council stated that:
delays caused by client legal privilege claims may affect the
of some investigations. However, the best way to deal with concerns about
efficiency is to implement guidelines for managing such
What would be the other effects of
abrogation?
6.92 The Law Council argued that the most likely consequence of abrogation of
privilege would be a major change in the manner in which
legal work is carried
out, with possible negative consequences for the documentation of certain
activities, particularly in commercial
Even with the protection of privilege, clients are often reluctant to tell their
lawyers the whole story. Without the assurance that
communications will remain
confidential, clients will become even more reluctant to speak openly. Such a
fear about speaking openly
is counter-productive to the provision of legal
6.93 Others agreed that if a client were concerned about the consequences of
legal advice, they would brief their lawyer orally (rather
than in writing) and
ask that advice be given verbally as
The Australian
Institute of Company Directors (AICD) considered that removal of the privilege
may damage, rather than enhance compliance,
as it would increase the amount of
oral advice given by lawyers.
6.94 The Law Council submitted that this was the experience of several
practitioners during the period between the Full Federal Court
decision and the
High Court decision in
while appeals in relation to
were underway, the ACCC was urging
corporations to adopt compliance programs that included systems of internal
reporting of potential
contraventions of the
Trade Practices Act 1974
subsequent consultation with legal advisers. During that period
corporations and individual employees were reluctant to implement such
reporting systems due to concerns that documents created with
the intention of
securing compliance, but with a dominant purpose of obtaining legal advice,
would be used by the ACCC against the
corporation. Accordingly, clients were
reluctant to seek legal advice (or at least written advice) during that
6.95 In contrast, ASIC observed that, having accessed and reviewed legally
privileged material following the decision in
, there was no
discernible decrease after
in the extent to which legal advice was
sought and obtained by the entities that ASIC regulates. It noted, however, that
this impression
is not based upon any empirical
6.96 Community legal
centres shared a concern about the impact that modification could have on their
One centre submitted
Abrogation of client legal privilege could result in communications between
lawyer and client no longer being confidential. This
would have a huge impact on
the way clients seek legal advice, and could result in a lower standard of
access to justice.
6.97 Fitzroy Legal Service stated that the
Anti-Terrorism Act (No 2) 2005
(Cth), which removes client legal privilege in relation to AFP
investigations into serious terrorist
has left lawyers
uncertain about what kind of advice to provide to clients facing AFP
investigations and reluctant to commit to written
instructions.
In some cases which have come to our attention, lawyers are hesitant to provide
even telephone advice for fear that lines are tapped.
This development is
particularly worrying given that most of these individuals are recent migrants,
have poor English language skills
and face extremely serious criminal charges
and possible deportation as a result of these
investigations.
6.98 The Law Council also noted that abrogation could discourage overseas
companies from doing business in
Is abrogation appropriate for some
6.99 The weight of submissions was that no different rationale for client
legal privilege was evident in relation to federal investigatory
bodies as a
whole, nor should particular ‘categories’ of body be
The AICD submitted
that ‘the fundamental basis for client legal privilege does not change
merely because of the function undertaken
by particular agencies at any point in
6.100 Another submission stated that arguments based on the seriousness of
the function of an agency—for example, enforcement
functions compared with
auditing functions, are not convincing.
Arguably, the more serious the function, the more important the function to the
general public, but also the more significant are
the consequences of the
investigation to the person or corporation being
investigated.
6.101 ASIC, however, took the view that any abrogation or modification of
client legal privilege in relation to a body’s information-gathering
enforcement powers should be made based upon specific consideration of those
powers, the persons and entities subject to them,
and the areas and markets that
are being regulated.
The decision to abrogate must reflect a balancing of the public interest that
underpins client legal privilege as against other public
interests, such as in
having all relevant evidence available during an investigation and/or hearing of
a proceeding. Where this balance
lies depends on many factors, including the
role and function of the Commonwealth body, the subject matter of its
outcomes that are expected from that body and the role of the
body within our economic and social structure. In ASIC’s view
this should
be considered on a body-by-body
6.102 With respect to ‘watchdog’ bodies, such as the
Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security (IGIS) and the Commonwealth
Ombudsman, where client legal privilege had already been expressly abrogated,
submissions noted that the focus of such bodies on
the public accountability of
government provides an appropriate logic for abrogation of privilege.
6.103 For example, the IGIS submitted, in support of the powers currently
given to his office under the
Inspector-General of
Intelligence and Security Act 1986
(Cth) (IGIS Act), that adequate
accountability of government entities is vital for several reasons.
These are neatly encapsulated in a quotation from the publication
Accountability in the Commonwealth Public Sector
by the Management
Advisory Board and its Management Improvement Advisory Committee, No 11, June
Accountability is fundamental to good governance in modern, open societies.
Australians rightly see a high level of accountability
of public officials as
one of the essential guarantees and underpinnings, not just of the kinds of
civic freedoms they enjoy, but
of efficient, impartial and ethical public
administration. Indeed, public acceptance of government and the roles of
officials depends
upon trust and confidence founded upon the administration
being held accountable for its actions.
Given the importance of ensuring the proper accountability of public bodies, a
strong argument can be made out to limit or remove
the possibility of entities
claiming client legal privilege when being lawfully reviewed by other parts of
the executive arm of government.
6.104 The IGIS also submitted that, in relation to intelligence and security
agencies, there is an additional consideration because
of the covert nature of
those agencies’ activities.
Other processes which might restrain the conduct of public entities, such as the
capacity of citizens to be fully aware of what is
being done in respect of them,
or for representatives of the entity to be questioned about operational details
in public sessions
of parliamentary committees, are not applicable to the
intelligence and security agencies.
In these circumstances the special review mechanism of the Inspector-General of
Intelligence and Security has been developed. Consistent
with the need for the
Inspector-General to be something of a substitute for other accountability
mechanisms and hence very incisive,
there should be no restrictions on what the
Inspector-General can view within the
6.105 The Commonwealth Ombudsman agreed that the ability to access an
agency’s legal advice is of significant practical importance
and necessary
for the Ombudsman’s statutory role to be satisfactorily fulfilled. For
example, the legal advice given to an
agency about the interpretation of its
legislation may form part of the ordinary documentary background needed to
understand fully
the issues in a
6.106 The issue of a higher level public interest was raised in the
ALRC’s report on
Uniform Evidence Law
in relation to claims
of privilege by government agencies, where the argument was identified that
‘the rationale for client
legal privilege must be balanced against the
clear public interest in open and accountable
government’.
Ombudsman had queried whether client legal privilege should operate to prevent
access to documents by a ‘watchdog body’
and stated that:
It is open to question whether in fact client professional privilege is either
necessary or effective in achieving its objective
of ensuring frank and candid
communication where public sector agencies and public officials are
Royal Commissions
6.107 There were various submissions about whether client legal privilege
should be abrogated in the context of Royal Commissions.
Overall, there was
support for abrogation of privilege in the case of public inquiries of public
importance, such as Royal
Commissions.
As was noted in
the submission of the Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission (HREOC),
‘there are some circumstances
where the public interest in abrogating
client legal privilege may be greater than the individual’s interest in
maintaining
the privilege’, citing as specific examples:
where a publicly listed company (or the directors of a company) has
acted dishonestly or fraudulently, with the result that members
of the public
suffer significant detriment; or
public emergency or national security—for example, if a client
disclosed to his or her lawyer that an imminent terrorist attack
was about to
contrast, the NSW Bar Association argued strongly against abrogation of client
legal privilege in a ‘forum-specific’
manner, namely for Royal
Commissions or other public
Against the
proposition that the establishment of a Royal Commission presupposed a
‘countervailing public interest in the pursuit
of truth’, the NSW
Bar Association submitted that:
This assumption, however, would be deeply flawed. Royal Commissions and Special
Commissions of Inquiry are discretionary creatures
of executive government, not
triggered by, or subject to, independent constitutional or legislative
requirements. As Scott Prasser
the executive government origin of public enquiries and their ad hoc quality
poses special problems in explaining why, and predicting
when, an inquiry will
be appointed. A significant difficulty is that full access to all of the reasons
for appointing a particular
inquiry is not available to the public. Further,
public inquiries are usually appointed under a range of motivations, including
political expediency entwined with the obtaining of more expert
advice or expediting and even promoting community
participation.
6.109 The NSW Bar Association argued that any abrogation should be considered
using ‘principles of universal application’
and not simply the type
of forum. It cited the observation of the Queensland Law Reform Commission
(QLRC) when considering the abrogation
of the privilege against
self-incrimination:
The relevant issue is not the type of forum where a person is to be required to
give information but, rather, whether the criteria
that the Commission believes
must be met in order to justify abrogation have in fact been satisfied. This
would involve, for example,
a consideration of the importance of the public
interest to which the information in question relates and whether abrogation
reasonably be expected to advance or protect that public interest. Other
factors, such as alternative sources of information, the
provision of an
immunity and the existence of procedural safeguards, would also be
6.110 The ACCC disagreed that there was a stronger rationale for the
abrogation of the privilege in relation to Royal Commissions.
In its view
‘the public interest in effective investigation and enforcement of the law
is equally in the public
6.111 The IGIS drew a distinction between Royal Commissions that were
‘inquisitorial/investigatory’ and those of a ‘policy
respect to the former, he commented that:
Such Royal Commissions will have been established because there is a matter of
substantial public interest/concern. A great deal
of public monies is usually
expended. Ascertaining the truth is the fundamental purpose of having the Royal
Commission. Such Royal
Commissions are relatively unusual and abrogation of
privilege would not impact to any significant degree on the instrumental
for client legal privilege—it would be most surprising if the
possibility of a Royal Commission was on people’s ‘mental
horizon’ when conducting their affairs and obtaining legal advice. In any
case, the public interest in Royal Commissions ascertaining
the truth should be
6.112 The IGIS expressed the view that Royal Commissions concerned mainly
with policy issues, in contrast, ‘should not, in practice,
need to access
material of the sort which might raise issues of client legal
privilege’.
6.113 The Law Council noted that there are fundamental differences between
ordinary federal investigatory bodies and Royal Commissions.
These include that
Royal Commissions are:
established under the executive arm of government, and derive their
functions from their terms of reference which are issued by the
Government, whereas the powers and functions of bodies such as ASIC, ACCC and
the ATO are established by an Act of Parliament
with a standing brief;
often established in response to political pressures and therefore
may have a greater sense of urgency;
not directed at building evidence for the purpose of prosecution. In
some cases, prosecution or investigation may follow their recommendations,
prosecutions are not a direct consequence of the
6.114 While
the Law Council agreed that this might place Royal Commissions in a separate
category from other federal investigatory
bodies, it did not follow that
abrogating client legal privilege will necessarily assist the work of the Royal
Commission. In addition:
abrogation of client legal privilege in the context of Royal Commissions may
also result in more Royal Commissions being called and
may ultimately bring
great pressure to bear on governments to further erode client legal privilege by
abrogating it in other non-curial
contexts. If the privilege is abrogated in
Royal Commissions, it is likely that any documents produced to that inquiry
would subsequently
lose their privilege status due to waiver. Accordingly, any
parties implicated during a Royal Commission would be subject to significant
prejudice during subsequent inquiries by other government agencies charged with
building a brief for
prosecution.
6.115 Where client legal privilege is abrogated for Royal
Commissions—such as in Victoria—Victoria Legal Aid submitted
safeguards are needed ‘to protect information that would be otherwise
covered by client legal
privilege’.
6.116 As discussed in Chapter 2, and seen above, the majority of submissions
and consultations in this Inquiry endorsed the retention
of the doctrine of
client legal privilege in the context of federal investigations.
6.117 In IP 33, the ALRC asked questions to try to gauge the possible effect
of abrogation of client legal privilege on the provision
of legal services and
on compliance. It was strongly contended in submissions and consultations that
abrogation would have negative
consequences in terms of clients not seeking
legal advice or seeking only oral or undocumented advice.
6.118 It is hard to assess accurately the extent to which these claims are
correct. In
Carter v Northmore Hale Davy & Leake
, Toohey J argued
that the effect on openness of any inroad into client legal privilege is not
something capable of assessment—although
it must be taken into
The availability of
client legal privilege has been so
that there are few
examples that would allow the ALRC to predict confidently the effects of
abrogation. ASIC has asserted that, despite
privilege arguably being abrogated
by implication under the ASIC Act, corporations still seek legal advice on the
corporations law.
The ALRC was told, however, that many lawyers practising in
the corporations law area dispute ASIC’s claim that privilege is
and advise their clients not to produce privileged
6.119 Auburn suggests that the scope of the privilege has changed a number of
times over the centuries with little apparent effect
on lawyer-client relations,
citing the changes in Australian law before and after
however, be an overstatement of the effect of
Baker v Campbell
there is argument about whether it was a major shift in the law or simply a
recognition of what many assumed was the common law
6.120 Kendall has suggested that most arguments in favour of abrogation
presume that the communication would take place regardless
of whether privilege
exists. In his view, in the absence of compelling empirical evidence that the
existence of client legal privilege
has no effect on client disclosures, it is
unjustified to assume that there would be no
The ALRC has been
unable to locate any significant Australian or British empirical studies on
client legal privilege. As noted above,
empirical studies on privilege and
confidentiality in the US have proven to be inconclusive.
Principled Regulation: Federal Civil and Administrative Penalties
in Australia
(ALRC 95), the ALRC recommended that, as a default position and
in the absence of any clear, express statutory statement to the contrary,
legal privilege should exist in relation to all forms of enquiry by any
In ALRC 102, the
ALRC affirmed this approach, and argued that abrogation only should occur where
Parliament had considered and debated
the circumstances where client legal
privilege should not be
6.122 These views have been confirmed again by the findings of this Inquiry
to date. As outlined in Chapter 2, the ALRC supports the
doctrine of client
legal privilege as a fundamental principle of common law that facilitates
compliance with the law. The ALRC agrees
with the findings of the Dawson
Review—that, in the course of ordinary enforcement and investigatory
activities, the importance
of the privilege in encouraging compliance overrides
the benefits of abrogation to the
As such, any
wholesale abrogation of the privilege in relation to federal investigations is
not supported.
6.123 While a case can be made that client legal privilege claims do
frustrate and delay investigations, the ALRC agrees with the
views expressed in
submissions that efficiency and effectiveness of investigations are not in
themselves sufficiently good reasons
for abrogation of the privilege. The
frustrations evident in the examples given to this Inquiry by the CDPP may be
seen to be due
largely to a lack of clear processes for resolution of claims
rather than a fundamental problem with the doctrine itself.
6.124 The ALRC’s preliminary view is that federal bodies could achieve
greater efficiency and effectiveness in relation to claims
of client legal
privilege by addressing the significant issues and problems associated with the
practices and procedures for making
and resolving claims in federal
investigations. These matters are addressed in Chapter 8.
6.125 Given the general support for the operation of the privilege, the ALRC
has considered whether there may be any particular circumstances
abrogation is appropriate.
6.126 In ALRC 95, the ALRC noted that:
In the field of regulation, one crucial public interest is securing effective
compliance or prosecutions. The policy question for
the legislature is to decide
in what circumstances public interest considerations should overrule human
rights protection, and whether
the regulation of particular activities mandates
different considerations.
6.127 As noted in Chapter 2, client legal privilege is not best described as
an individual human right; rather it is facilitative
of a broader, general right
of access to justice. In this sense, client legal privilege is not a balancing
of a private right against
the public interest, but rather the balancing of two
public interests. Therefore, the ALRC agrees with the view expressed by Brennan
Baker v Campbell
that client legal privilege already largely
encompasses a balancing of the competing public
6.128 However, many submissions argued that the abrogation of client legal
privilege was appropriate in very limited circumstances,
where a higher public
interest may exist. A number of commentators have expressed the view that
‘invoking a language of rights
does not per se … make out a case for
absolutism’.
6.129 The ALRC acknowledges the need to provide certainty within the
doctrine. In
Attorney-General v Kearney
, Dawson J stated that:
The policy which lies behind the doctrine views unrestricted communication
between a lawyer and client upon professional matters
as being necessary for the
proper functioning of our legal system. If inroads could be made upon the
privilege in individual cases
by involving a ‘higher public
interest’ its application would become uncertain and the policy behind it
would be effectively
undermined.
6.130 There is, however, already some level of uncertainty in the operation
of the privilege, because of the exclusionary
When clients seek
legal advice, they cannot know that, later, their privilege may be waived
because of their actions, or that confidentiality
may be breached in some other
Therefore, the fact that
the privilege may not apply in some particular examples of federal
investigations is unlikely to result
in the ‘chilling effect’ feared
by lawyers. It is the broader, overall application of the privilege that will
client candour.
6.131 The ALRC is of the preliminary view that abrogation only should be
legislated in circumstances in which there is a higher competing
public interest
in the availability of otherwise privileged information. This must be something
considerably greater than the ordinary
investigatory interests of a federal
6.132 The ALRC has identified three examples where a higher public interest
may warrant abrogation of the privilege: Royal Commissions,
other major
investigations, and the oversight of public sector agencies.
Royal Commissions
6.133 The ALRC’s preliminary view is that a strong case can be made to
abrogate client legal privilege in some Royal Commissions.
The discovery of the
truth has been described as a prime function of a Royal
Commission.
Royal Commissions
are established only where a particular area of public concern has been
identified and their purpose is to determine
factual circumstances, report on
the matters specified in the Letters Patent and make recommendations.
6.134 Client legal privilege is presently abrogated for Royal Commissions in
New South Wales and Victoria. The ALRC received no evidence
suggesting that this
abrogation of the privilege in those jurisdictions had led to any problems.
6.135 The ALRC agrees, however, with the submission of the IGIS and the
comments of Commissioner Cole in the AWB Royal Commission,
that the subject
matter of every Royal Commission will not require abrogation of the privilege.
Consistent with the importance of
the privilege, abrogation should be minimised
and limited to circumstances where it is both necessary and beneficial to a
outcome for a particular Royal Commission.
6.136 Rather than a blanket abrogation of the privilege for Royal
Commissions, the ALRC accepts the submission of the NSW Bar Association
consideration should be given to the importance of the public interest to which
the information in question relates and whether
abrogation reasonably could be
expected to advance or protect that public interest.
6.137 The ALRC has considered whether abrogation should be contemplated as
part of the establishment of the Royal Commission through
the Letters Patent (as
recommended by Commissioner Cole), or through an individual act of Parliament
that abrogates the privilege
in relation to a particular Royal Commission (a
similar approach to the James Hardie inquiry).
6.138 The ALRC’s preliminary view is that, given the importance of the
privilege, any circumstances where client legal privilege
is not be available
should be considered and debated by Parliament. The parliamentary process is
transparent and would allow for
debate and comment to occur on the issues
6.139 Consequently, the ALRC proposes that where a Royal Commission has been
established to investigate a matter of public concern,
Parliament should have
the ability to determine whether client legal privilege should be abolished.
This is based on the public interest
in arriving at the truth in these special
circumstances and would allow for the interests of justice in particular matters
considered on a case-by-case basis.
6.140 It is the ALRC’s preliminary view that consideration of whether
or not it is appropriate to abrogate client legal privilege
should be based on a
specific set of public interest criteria. Those criteria are outlined below.
Other major inquiries
6.141 In this Inquiry, the ALRC has identified 42 federal bodies that have
coercive information-gathering or related powers. As a
general proposition, it
is clear that most of those agencies do not require access to privileged
material in order to perform their
investigatory or enforcement functions.
Amongst the agencies which responded to the ALRC’s request for information
their coercive information-gathering powers, the ACCC, ASIC, and the
ATO argued that abrogation of the privilege was necessary in
order for them to
perform their functions.
6.142 While stating that it has not experienced significant problems to date
with parties claiming client legal privilege, the Australian
Transport Safety
Bureau, argued that abrogation of privilege would be appropriate under its
legislation as its investigations are
not focused on apportioning blame or
determining liability.
Australian Pesticides Veterinary Medicines Authority argued that, as a regulator
responsible for public health and safety, there
are circumstances in which it
would consider that the privilege should be abrogated, as the public harm that
would be suffered by
denial of access to the information could outweigh the
prejudice to the individual whose claim for privilege is
6.143 In Chapter 5, the ALRC expresses the view that the assessment of
whether or not abrogation or modification of the privilege
is warranted in a
particular case should be undertaken with reference to consistent criteria,
regardless of whether the investigation
or inquiry is being undertaken by a
federal investigatory body or a Royal Commission.
6.144 It is not only Royal Commissions or special inquiries that undertake
investigations of public importance and significance. Complex
investigations
with important social and economic ramifications are also undertaken by federal
agencies such as the ACCC, ACC, ASIC
and the Australian Prudential Regulation
Authority (APRA). As noted above, while not routinely dealing with matters where
legal advice
is central to the issues under consideration, other agencies may
nonetheless conduct investigations into matters of public importance
issues of access to privileged material may arise.
6.145 The ALRC does not, however, believe that a case has been made out for a
need to abrogate privilege on a body-by-body basis.
In many cases, given the
complexity of legislation which is administered by these agencies, the
compliance rationale would tip the
balance in favour of protection of the
privilege rather than against it. The balance should depend on the issue under
investigation,
including whether the issue is one of major public importance
that has a significant impact on the community. For example, in the
the James Hardie
inquiry, it was argued that:
a thorough investigation of the conduct of James Hardie, with proceedings
brought where misconduct is found, is essential to maintaining
confidence in the Australian corporate regulatory
6.146 A further important criterion is whether the material which would be
covered by client legal privilege goes to the very heart
of the issues under
consideration. For example, it recently was reported that the Victorian Director
of Public Prosecutions has asked
the ACC to investigate potential criminal
conduct by lawyers in the British American Tobacco
litigation.
In this case,
claims of client legal privilege could affect severely the ability of the ACC to
investigate these allegations—although
it should be noted that the
privilege belongs to British American Tobacco and not its lawyers. This is
consistent with the views
expressed by ASIC and the ACCC in submissions to this
Inquiry, that legal advice may be central to determining whether there has
misconduct.
6.147 The ALRC has particularly noted the effect of client legal privilege on
the major criminal investigations undertaken by the
ACC. As noted in Chapter 4,
the ACC has a range of coercive powers, including covert powers, which are used
where ordinary law enforcement
methods are considered unlikely to be effective.
The ACC Board determines the use of these
Chapter 8 discusses
the complex issues that arise where a federal body is undertaking a covert
investigation and notifying the target
to allow an opportunity to claim
privilege would be likely to prejudice the very investigation. The ALRC is of
the preliminary view
that reforms to practice and procedure cannot adequately or
completely address such circumstances, and that particular difficulties
covert investigations should be one of the relevant factors considered by the
Australian Parliament in deciding whether to abrogate
client legal privilege in
a particular case. With respect to the ACC, these powers are available when the
Board determines that the
relevant criminal activity warrants a special
investigation.
circumstances, these types of crimes will fall under the matters of public
significance discussed below as warranting abrogation.
6.148 As is discussed above in relation to Royal Commissions, abrogation
should never be wholesale across an agency, but rather should
be enacted by
Parliament as special legislation on the basis of a particular investigation. By
giving a statutory articulation of
the specific circumstances in which privilege
may be abrogated, the ALRC is emphasising the level of public importance
required to
abrogate the privilege.
6.149 In determining how the interests of justice should be balanced, the
ALRC has been influenced by the recommendations contained
in the QLRC’s
Abrogation of the Privilege Against
Self-Incrimination
and the approach taken in the McNulty Memorandum in the US.
6.150 The ALRC supports the view of the QLRC that:
If it cannot be demonstrated that information obtained as a result of the
exercise of coercive powers is likely to significantly
protect or advance the
relevant public interest, it is unlikely that the abrogation would be justified.
Conversely, if it is clear
that the abrogation is likely to substantially
promote the public interest, it is more likely that the abrogation can be
Factors for determining
6.151 The factors to be considered in determining whether abrogation can be
justified are:
the nature and gravity of the matters under consideration, including
whether the issue is one of major public importance that has
a significant
impact on the community in general or on a section of the community. Without
limiting the matters that might be considered
of major public importance, this
could include investigations, including covert investigations, into allegations
of major criminal
activity, organised crime or official corruption; serious
misconduct by a public official; or matters of national security. Abrogation
might also be appropriate where issues involve dangers to human life or human
health; very serious damage to property or the environment;
or significant
economic detriment;
whether the information sought can be obtained in a timely and
complete way by using alternative means that do not require abrogation
legal privilege; and especially
the likelihood and degree to which the privileged information will
benefit the Royal Commission or investigation, particularly where
advice itself is central to the issues being considered. This should involve
consideration of whether the information obtained
as a result of abrogation of
the privilege will advance the relevant public interest in the
‘truth’ being established.
6.152 If client legal
privilege is abrogated, there is a question about whether restrictions should be
placed on the use of privileged
communications obtained by compulsion. The issue
of whether, and to what extent, use immunities should apply is discussed in
Proposal 6–1
Federal client legal privilege legislation should
provide that, in special circumstances, the Australian Parliament may legislate
to abrogate client legal privilege in relation to a particular Royal Commission
of inquiry or investigation undertaken by a federal
investigatory body.
The factors to be considered in determining whether such legislation should
be enacted are:
(a) the subject of the Royal Commission of inquiry or investigation,
including whether the inquiry or investigation concerns a matter
(or matters) of
major public importance that has (or have) a significant impact on the community
in general or on a section of the
community or is a covert investigation;
(b) whether the information sought can be obtained in a timely and complete
way by using alternative means that do not require abrogation
of client legal
privilege; and especially
(c) the likelihood and degree to which the privileged information will
benefit the Royal Commission or investigation, particularly
where the legal
advice itself is central to the issues being considered by the Commission or
federal body.
Government accountability
6.153 The ALRC agrees with the current policy of abrogation of client legal
privilege for bodies which focus on the public accountability
of government. As
noted above submissions to this Inquiry argued that adequate accountability of
government entities is vital to
ensure the proper functioning of democratic
institutions. The rationales for the privilege
of protecting the citizen
against the incursions of the state and promoting compliance are not
justifications for protecting advice
received by a government body from
investigation by an agency charged with ensuring its accountability.
6.154 Under the
IGIS Act, a person is not excused from giving
information or producing a document on the ground that it would disclose legal
given to a Minister, an agency, or an authority of the
Commonwealth.
provision exists under
Ombudsman Act 1976
Law Enforcement Integrity Commissioner Act 2006
6.155 In IP 33, the ALRC expressed the view that these provisions only appear
to cover the advice arm of the privilege, and that a
claim for client legal
privilege would seem to excuse a person from giving information or producing a
document if the document fell
within the litigation limb of the privilege.
6.156 In submissions, both the IGIS and the Commonwealth Ombudsman expressed
concern about this limitation. The IGIS submitted that
privilege in respect of
the litigation arm also should be abrogated expressly.
There could well be occasions when the Inspector-General should, to properly
achieve the stated objectives of the IGIS Act, examine
the compliance of
agencies with the
Legal Services Directions
issued by the
Attorney-General pursuant to
section 55ZF
Judiciary Act 1903
There has been significant growth in the number of litigation actions to which
ASIO is a party or otherwise
6.157 The Commonwealth Ombudsman also agreed that this limitation would have
the capacity to constrain an Ombudsman investigation
as it may excuse an agency
from explaining to the Ombudsman how it planned and conducted litigation, even
if the litigation is or
would have been connected to a matter subject to
investigation.
6.158 The ALRC agrees that there is no reason why a distinction should be
drawn between litigation and advice privilege for the purpose
of abrogation in
these circumstances. The ALRC considers that both the IGIS Act and the
Ombudsman Act 1976
should be amended to indicate that both arms of the
privilege are covered by the abrogation.
6.159 The Australian Commission for Law Enforcement Integrity has not
indicated to the ALRC whether it perceives a similar problem
legislation. The ALRC would be interested in hearing views in this regard.
Proposal 6–2
The Australian Parliament should amend the
Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security Act
Ombudsman Act 1976
(Cth) to state that where client legal privilege
cannot be claimed over legal advice given to a Minister, an agency or an
of the Commonwealth, this abrogation applies to litigation privilege
as well as advice privilege.
Possible models of
modification
Documents not
related to representation
6.160 At common law, unless abrogated expressly or by necessary implication,
the privilege against self-incrimination applies to any
documents that an
individual is required to
However, some case
law recognises that some documents can be considered to be ‘real
evidence’, which is not protected
by the privilege. For example, in
Environment Protection Authority v Caltex Refining Co Pty Ltd
Mason CJ and Toohey J observed that there
was a difference between requiring a person to testify as to their guilt, and
the production of documents already in existence that constitute
evidence of guilt.
cited Lord Templeman in
to the effect
it was difficult to see why in civil proceedings the privilege against
self-incrimination should be exercisable so as to enable a
litigant to refuse
relevant and even vital documents that are in his possession or power and which
speak for themselves.
6.162 In its report on
Abrogation of the Privilege against
Self-Incrimination
the QLRC found that one of the justifications for
abrogation could be, in the case of information in documentary form, whether the
document was in existence at the time the requirement to provide the information
was imposed.
6.163 In the US, pre-existing documents that must be kept as part of a
requirement of a regulatory scheme, are not protected by the
privilege against
self-incrimination.
considering the US case law, the New Zealand Law Commission similarly
recommended that the privilege should not apply to pre-existing
documents or
real evidence. The fact that there is no compulsion at the time of creation
minimises any likelihood of compulsion causing
the evidence to be unreliable, or
for the information to be created from an abuse of
6.164 In IP 33, the ALRC asked whether a distinction should be drawn in the
application of client legal privilege between documents
or communications that
relate to the representation of a client once investigation processes commence,
and pre-existing documents.
In particular, the ALRC was interested in hearing
views about whether arguments supporting such a distinction in the context of
privilege against self-incrimination are applicable to client legal
Submissions and
consultations
6.165 In general, submissions and consultations were not supportive of
drawing a distinction between communications that relate to
the representation
of a client once investigation processes commence, and pre-existing
6.166 The Law Council argued that the underlying justifications for the
privilege against self-incrimination are substantially different
which underpin client legal privilege.
The characterisation of the privilege against self-incrimination as a human
right which is effectively designed to prevent a witness
or party from causing
prejudice to him or herself while assisting with enquiries on an unrelated
matter makes it appropriate that
the privilege should be limited to interviews
and information given in the course of investigations. By contrast, client legal
as a human right, exists in recognition of an individual’s need
for, and right to, obtain legal advice and
representation.
6.167 ASIC agreed with the premise that the privilege against
self-incrimination is different from that of client legal privilege—and
those principles that form the basis of the application of self-incrimination
privilege should not be applied to any modification
of client legal privilege.
In ASIC’s view, the principles underlying client legal privilege do not
provide a basis for distinguishing
between its application to:
pre-existing documents that are produced during an inquiry or
investigation; and
oral information concerning pre-existing oral or documentary
communications that is given during the course of an
examination.
6.168 The CDPP submitted that although this model was worth
considering, a concern was how such a model would apply to offences that
continue after the investigation commences. In such cases, documents and
communications could fall within both categories, raising
the possibility that
the claim of client legal privilege in those cases may have to be
6.169 Desiatnik argued that such a distinction of this kind would be
unworkable, since privileged advice after the commencement of
an investigation
would often relate to pre-existing documents. He also argued that such a
distinction would
only serve to ensure the early commencement of the investigations, a myriad of
questions of what constitutes the start of an investigation
process, and
unnecessary complexities (eg is the person to be dependent on the advice of the
investigatory body as to when it commenced
its investigation, in making a claim
for privilege?
6.170 ASIC and the ACCC agreed, however, that were client legal privilege to
be abrogated, this should not include privileged documents
and communications
that arise in the course of an investigation related to a person’s
representation in that
investigation.
6.171 The ALRC agrees that a number of practical difficulties arise with this
approach to modification of client legal privilege.
In the case of ongoing
unlawful behaviour, such as behaviour constituting a breach of a continuous
disclosure rule, there may be
difficulty in determining what is prior conduct or
communications for the purpose of this rule.
6.172 The ALRC also agrees that this distinction does not fit with the
rationale for client legal privilege. If an aim of client legal
privilege is to
encourage compliance, rather than something closer to protecting against
self-incrimination, then there is no meaningful
distinction to be drawn between
pre-existing documents and those created following the commencement of the
investigation.
6.173 In cases where client legal privilege is to be abrogated, however, on
the basis of a higher public interest as outlined above
in Proposal 6–1,
then this should not extend to documents and communications related to a
person’s representation in
that investigation. This issue is discussed
further in Chapter 7.
6.174 Under the common law, the lawyer-client relationship is the only one in
which the communications are completely protected from
disclosure in court.
However, the
Evidence Act 1995
(NSW) provides for a
‘qualified’ professional confidential relationship
In ALRC 102,
the ALRC, New South Wales Law Reform Commission (NSWLRC) and the Victorian Law
Reform Commission (VLRC) recommended
that the Commonwealth
Evidence Act
adopt the professional confidential relationships privilege, following the model
of the New South Wales
6.175 Under s 126A of the
Evidence Act 1995
‘protected confidence’ for the purpose of the section means a
communication made by a person in confidence to
another person (the
confidant):
(a) in the course of a relationship in which the confidant was acting in a
professional capacity, and
(b) when the confidant was under an express or implied obligation not to
disclose its contents, whether or not the obligation arises
under law or can be
inferred from the nature of the relationship between the person and the
6.176 Section 126B provides that:
(1) The court may direct that evidence not be adduced in a proceeding if the
court finds that adducing it would disclose:
(a) a protected confidence, or
(b) the contents of a document recording a protected confidence, or
(c) protected identity information.
(2) The court may give such a direction:
(a) on its own initiative, or
(b) on the application of the protected confider or confidant concerned
(whether or not either is a party).
(3) The court must give such a direction if it is satisfied that:
(a) it is likely that harm would or might be caused (whether directly or
indirectly) to a protected confider if the evidence is adduced,
(b) the nature and extent of the harm outweighs the desirability of the
evidence being given.
(4) Without limiting the matters that the court may take into account for the
purposes of this section, it is to take into account
the following matters:
(a) the probative value of the evidence in the proceeding,
(b) the importance of the evidence in the proceeding,
(c) the nature and gravity of the relevant offence, cause of action or defence and the nature of the subject
matter of the proceeding,
(d) the availability of any other evidence concerning the matters to which the protected confidence or protected identity
information
(e) the likely effect of adducing evidence of the
protected confidence or protected identity information, including the likelihood
of harm, and the nature and extent of harm that would be caused to the protected
(f) the means (including any ancillary orders that may be made
under section 126E) available to the court to limit the harm or extent
harm that is likely to be caused if evidence of the protected confidence or the
protected identity information is disclosed,
(g) if the proceeding is a
criminal proceeding—whether the party seeking to adduce evidence of the
protected confidence or
protected identity information is a defendant or the
prosecutor,
(h) whether the substance of the protected confidence or the
protected identity information has already been disclosed by the protected
confider or any other person.
6.177 Division 1A does not create a true privilege, but allows the court a
discretion to direct that evidence not be adduced where
it would involve the
disclosure of a protected
confidence.
The court must
balance the matters set out in s 126B(4), including the probative value of
the evidence in the proceeding and the
nature of the offence, with the
likelihood of harm to the protected confider in adducing the evidence, and then
decide if it is appropriate
to give a direction under the section.
The evidence must be excluded if there is a likelihood that harm would be or
might be caused, whether directly or indirectly, to
the person who imparted the
confidence and the nature and extent of that harm outweighs the desirability of
having the evidence given
or the documents
6.178 A qualified privilege acknowledges that it may be in the interests of
justice to protect the confidentiality of a particular
relationship in the
context of that matter. The fact that the privilege is qualified, and that
parties are able to make an argument
allows a judge to exercise discretion and assess the interests of justice in the
circumstances
of each particular case.
6.179 A qualified privilege could address the need to avoid a ‘one size
fits all’ approach to the difficulties raised
by privilege claims, and may
allow for interests of justice in particular matters to be considered. In a case
like a James Hardie
matter or a Royal Commission on an issue of public
importance, a qualified privilege could allow the case to be made for access and
those interests to be balanced against the rights of the individuals in those
matters. A qualified privilege would be in line with
the recommendation of the
AWB Inquiry discussed above, where Commissioner Cole indicated that in some
cases, depending on ‘the
issues the subject of the Royal
Commission’, the public interest should prevail over the
6.180 Arguments against the adoption of a qualified privilege include that
the ‘balancing test’ could be difficult to
assess in some cases and
that such a provision cannot guarantee confidentiality. A qualified privilege
also creates uncertainty because
whether or not the privilege applies cannot be
known in advance of the court’s ruling in each case. Client legal
affords an absolute protection because it always has been considered
to be in the interests of justice that a client knows that certain
disclosures
to a lawyer will remain confidential.
Submissions and
consultations
6.181 There was little support for a qualified privilege in
submissions.
submitted that the problem with statutorily modifying client legal privilege in
this fashion is that it is ‘likely
to represent the thin end of the
6.182 The Law Society of NSW argued that there were many practical
difficulties with the concept. It suggested that there is a difference
the absolute nature of client legal privilege (which requires certainty to
operate) and other confidential relationships.
The Law Society also argued that
there was a very practical problem that such a claim cannot be determined at the
investigation stage,
and a court would be required to rule as to whether the
privilege applied or not.
6.183 This view was shared by the ACCC, which submitted that a qualified
privilege at the investigation stage is not a practical option,
as it would
require a court to rule on the question of public interest, resulting in
potentially significant delays. The ACCC also
argued that a qualified privilege
would not be appropriate once the matter has proceeded beyond the investigation
A situation where privilege applies in an unqualified way at the non-curial
stage, and in a qualified way at the curial stage would
investigations, as the ACCC would be unlikely to obtain the evidence required
for use in subsequent proceedings in the
6.184 There are several practical difficulties with adoption of a qualified
privilege in the context of investigations. Whether a
document is privileged or
not could not be determined at the investigation stage, as it would require a
court to rule on the question
of public interest. This could serve to increase
delay and uncertainty in investigations for both the agency and the party
6.185 If lawyers were bound to tell a client that the court may conduct a
balancing test on the admissibility of the communications
at the time of
providing legal advice, this could create the ‘chilling effect’ by
discouraging candour on the part of
6.186 In addition, the undertaking of a ‘balancing test’ in the
context of a federal investigation is substantially different
undertaken by a court. The balancing exercise undertaken under Division 1A of
Evidence Act
is between the public interest in having all material
available to the court for determination and the private harm to the
relationship
between the confider and his or her adviser. In the context of
client legal privilege, the balancing test would be between the public
in facilitating the provision of confidential legal advice, and the public
interest facilitating the investigation of wrongdoing.
This balancing test
should occur on a principled basis, as outlined in Proposal 6–1.
6.187 Therefore, the ALRC’s preliminary view is that a qualified
privilege is not an appropriate model for dealing with client
legal privilege in
the context of federal investigations.
to other professionals
6.188 Chapter 2 considers the various rationales which are said to underlie
the operation of client legal privilege. In IP 33, the
ALRC asked whether, if a
key rationale of the privilege is to encourage clients to seek professional
advice on their legal rights
and responsibilities, the doctrine should be
extended to other professionals who, while not lawyers, provide what amounts
essentially
6.189 All of the submissions received by the ALRC in response to this issue
concentrated on the issue of taxation advice and accounting
advisers (although
some submissions that were critical of any extension at times mentioned other
professions). At present in Australia
there is no other area where a non-lawyer
may give legal advice that is not already covered by the privilege. As discussed
patent attorneys are allowed the privilege under the
Patents Act 1990
Migration Act 1958
(Cth) distinguishes between immigration assistance and
immigration
assistance for the purpose of marking out the limits of
permissible conduct for migration agents who are not qualified
6.190 In this Inquiry, the ALRC has not considered the more general issue of
extending privilege to all other professional communications.
In the report on
Uniform Evidence Law
, the ALRC, the NSWLRC and the VLRC supported
adoption of a general qualified confidential relationships privilege that would
other categories of confidential
communications.
The present
Inquiry is focused on the operation of client legal privilege in relation to
federal investigatory bodies. While the
ALRC will not be making broader
recommendations on the extension of the privilege in other areas, it is within
the Terms of Reference
to look at client legal privilege in the particular
context of federal investigations, and appropriate to consider whether privilege
logically should be extended to clients who receive legal advice from other
professionals that may fall within the ambit of federal
information-gathering powers.
Why lawyers?
6.191 Whenever the question of client privilege arises for consideration, a
natural question is to consider why the ‘privilege’
should apply
only to the confidential relationship of lawyer and client and not to other
confidential relationships. As early as
1597 Francis Bacon provided the
following explanation for why the privilege should be one in relation to
lawyers, not others:
The greatest trust between Man and Man is the trust of Giving Counsel: For in
other confidences Men commit the parts of Life; their
Lands, their Goods, their
Children, their Credit, some particular Affair: but to such, as they make their
Counsellors, they commit
the whole, by how much the more they are obliged to all
faith and integrity.
6.192 The Law Reform Committee of England and Wales, in considering privilege
in civil proceedings in 1967, offered the following
reasoning for protecting
lawyer-client relationships, rather than other relationships:
What distinguishes legal advice from other kinds of professional advice is that
it is concerned exclusively with rights and liabilities
enforceable in law, ie
in the ultimate resort by litigation in the courts or in some administrative
tribunal. It is, of course, true
that on many matters on which a client consults
his solicitor he does not expect litigation and certainly hopes that it will not
occur; but there would be no need for him to consult his solicitor to obtain
advice unless there were
risk of litigation in the
future in connection with the matter upon which advice is sought. As Lord
Brougham pointed out, it is to
minimise that risk by ensuring that he so
conducts his affairs as to make it reasonably certain that he would succeed in
any litigation
which might be brought in connection with them, that the client
consults his solicitor at
Baker v Campbell
the High Court endorsed this
The restriction of the privilege to the legal profession serves to emphasise
that the relationship between a client and his legal
adviser has a special
significance because it is part of the function of the law itself.
Communications which establish and arise
out of that relationship are of their
very nature of legal significance, something which would be coincidental in the
case of other
confidential
relationships.
Beyond lawyers?
6.194 State and territory legislation traditionally has restricted
‘legal work’ or ‘legal practice’ to qualified
holding a current practising
certificate.
unauthorised legal practice amounts to an
However, there are
now express exceptions to this rule, including ‘legal practice engaged in
under the authority of a law of
... the Commonwealth’—for example,
work of a legal nature performed by licensed tax agents and registered patent
‘lawyers’ work’, in the nature of advice on legal matters, is
now performed by others, should client legal privilege
apply in such
circumstances and, if so, to what
6.195 The ‘compliance rationale’ for client legal privilege is
discussed in Chapter 2—that is, clients can obtain
the fullest legal
advice only where the lawyer is in possession of all relevant facts, so the
protection of communications encourages
greater compliance with the law as the
client is in the best position to be informed about what does (and does not)
amount to complying
conduct. This rationale has led some regulatory bodies, both
in Australia and overseas, to adopt various measures to extend a privilege
concession to other professionals whose advice falls within these types of
regulatory frameworks.
Comparative
United States
6.196 The widespread expansion of accounting firms into the arena of legal
advice prompted the US Congress to pass legislation in
1998 amending the
Internal Revenue Code
to extend client legal privilege to federally
authorised tax practitioners.
Section 7525 of the Code provides that:
With respect to tax advice, the same common law protections of confidentiality
which apply to a communication between a taxpayer
and an attorney shall apply to
a communication between a taxpayer and any federally authorized tax practitioner
to the extent that
the communication would be considered a privileged
communication if it were between a taxpayer and an attorney.
6.197 ‘Tax advice’ is given the broad meaning of ‘advice
which is in the individual’s authority to
limitations are applied to the privilege. For example, the privilege may only be
asserted in non-criminal tax matters brought
by the Internal Revenue Service
(IRS) or in a Federal Court.
It has no application to state matters. It also does not apply to any
communications regarding participation in a corporate tax
6.198 Concerns have been raised, however, regarding the scope of s 7525.
The IRS has the discretion to choose civil or criminal action,
giving rise to
concerns about whether the availability of the privilege could influence that
choice, and what happens if a civil
proceeding becomes a criminal one at a later
There is also
uncertainty about the definition of ‘tax advice’, as there are no
clear guidelines as to the appropriate
responsibilities of tax professionals. It
has been suggested that the section should be construed as meaning that
communications
only will be protected if they would have been covered by client
legal privilege if made by a client to a
New Zealand
6.199 In June 2005, the New Zealand Inland Revenue Department followed the US
example and enacted a new statutory privilege for opinion
on tax law by
registered tax practitioners. This extension was aimed at ‘promoting the
efficient conduct of compliance with
the law by allowing tax practitioners who
give opinions on tax law to have a candid relationship with their
6.200 The New Zealand scheme works as follows:
The privilege applies only to opinions on tax law given at any time
(whether before or after the filing of a tax return in respect
of a tax period)
by members of approved professional bodies.
The privilege applies only if claimed by the taxpayer and only in
respect of identified documents and information.
If a document includes both an opinion on tax law and other
information, the whole document will have to be provided, with any proper
deletions of the material consisting solely of the opinion on tax law being
clearly identified in the document. The balance of any
document consisting of
material that was not an opinion on tax law would not be privileged.
If the Inland Revenue disputes the validity of a privilege claim,
the privilege does not apply unless the claimant applies within
one month for
the determination by a District Court of what part, if any, is privileged
because it is an opinion on tax law. This
requires the taxpayer to provide the
unedited document to the court for review.
The privilege does not apply to advice designed to promote illegal
activities; however it is not restricted to civil
proceedings.
6.201 Unlike
the US model, the New Zealand approach does not use client legal privilege as
the basis for the privilege.
Kendall argues that the US model of tying the tax privilege to common law client
legal privilege means that any developments in the
common law will affect the
application of the provision. The New Zealand model deliberately separates the
statutory tax privilege
from the common law of client legal privilege so this
consequence will not
United Kingdom
6.202 In the United Kingdom (UK), s 20B of the
Tax Management Act 1970
(UK) sets out the privilege for a tax adviser against the powers of the Inland
Revenue Department to call for relevant documents
belonging either to a taxpayer
whose affairs are under scrutiny or to others. Under the provision, a tax
adviser (who can be ‘any
person appointed to give advice about the tax
affairs of another person’) cannot be obliged to make available to tax
authorities
documents that are the adviser’s property, and consist of
communication between the adviser and either the client or another
tax adviser
of the client, the purpose of which is the giving or obtaining of tax advice.
6.203 The legislation sets out further exceptions in
s 20B(11)–(12) for documents that contain information: explaining any
return, accounts or other documents which the adviser has assisted the
client in preparing for the tax authorities; or giving the
identity or address
of the taxpayer under investigation or any agent of the adviser, where this is
not already known.
6.204 The UK Parliament is currently considering the Legal Services Bill
which would,
among other changes to the regulation of the legal profession, permit new
business structures to be introduced into
the legal services
market—‘alternative business structures’—allowing
consumers to obtain legal services from
a business entity employing both lawyers
and non-lawyers. The Bill allows clients of an alternative business structure to
same privilege in their communications with approved non-lawyers who
provide legal advice within the practice as if they had received
legal services
from a lawyer.
The Bill is a
response to a number of reports produced in Britain looking at the efficiency
and regulation of legal services and
concern about unjustified restrictions of
competition in the legal services
6.205 Section 330
Proceeds of Crime Act 2002
amended recently to extend the ambit of client legal privilege to non-legal
professional advisers, such as accountants, auditors
and tax advisers.
creates a criminal offence of failure to disclose money laundering for
persons in a regulated sector where that person has reasonable
grounds for
suspecting that another person is engaged in money laundering, and that
information came to a person in the course of
business in the regulated sector.
Under this Act, legal advisers and ‘other relevant professional
from the requirement to disclose the information where it was received in
privileged circumstances.
6.206 In Australia, as a general rule, only qualified lawyers may give legal
However, there are
some exceptions to this, for example, tax agents who are registered with the Tax
Agents’ Board may give advice
on Commonwealth taxation
Registered patent
attorneys also may give advice on patents
6.207 In recognition of the type of advice offered by tax agents, and the
benefits to compliance of free and frank advice, the ATO
has issued an
administrative guideline which allows certain types of advice prepared for the
purpose of advising a client on taxation
matters to be kept confidential between
taxpayers and their professional accounting advisers. The ATO’s
and Information Gathering Manual
states that:
While recognising that the Commissioner has the statutory power to access most
documents, he accepts that there is a class of documents
which should, in all
but exceptional circumstances, remain confidential to taxpayers and their
professional accounting advisors.
In respect of such documents, the Tax Office
acknowledges that taxpayers should be able to consult with their professional
advisors to enable full discussion in respect of their rights and
obligations under tax laws and for advice to be communicated
6.208 This approach is widely described as ‘the accountants’
concession’.
client legal privilege, the concession is available for advice prepared by an
external professional accounting adviser
who is independent of the
It does not,
however, cover all confidential advice given, and only operates in relation to
certain types of documents.
6.209 Documents which record a taxation transaction or arrangement entered
into by a taxpayer are considered ‘source documents’
and not covered
by the concession. These include:
papers prepared in connection with the conception, implementation and formal
recording of a transaction or arrangement and which
explain the setting, context
and purpose of the transaction or
arrangement.
6.210 Examples of source documents include ledgers, journals, working papers
for financial statements, profit and loss accounts, balance
sheets and documents
comprising a permanent audit file. Such documents will be freely sought by ATO
6.211 Advice that is prepared solely for the purpose of advising a client on
matters associated with taxation are covered by the concession,
except where the
advice forms an integral part of the conception or implementation of a
transaction or arrangement. This is significantly
more limited than client legal
privilege, where the dominant purpose test applies.
6.212 The concession is also available for documents that are advice or
advice papers that are ‘non-source documents’—meaning,
example, that they do not materially contribute to an understanding of the
client’s tax strategy or relate to advice on
arrangements that the tax
payer has not put into place.
6.213 Documents that otherwise would be covered by the concession may be
requested by the ATO in exceptional circumstances. Under
Guidelines to Accessing Professional Accounting Advisors
officers are authorised to approve the lifting of the concession where the it
has been claimed and the ATO is unable to
ascertain from the documents provided
‘the facts necessary to determine the taxation consequences of the
particular transactions
arrangements’.
determination is made that exceptional circumstances exist, the ATO officer must
give the person a copy of the decision to
lift the concession. A decision under
the ATO Guidelines is not reviewable under the
Administrative Decisions
(Judicial Review) Act 1977
6.214 Again, this concession provides the taxpayer with less protection than
would be the case with client legal privilege, as privilege
applies regardless
of the circumstances.
has noted that, as the Guidelines do not have the backing of statute, they do
not provide additional legal rights to taxpayers—although
they do create a
legitimate expectation that the ATO will adhere to their
6.215 Patent attorneys are also afforded a privilege under the
Patents Act
(Cth). Section 200(2) of the Act states that ‘a registered patent
attorney has the same extent of privilege over communications
with their client
in intellectual property matters as is afforded in ordinary solicitor-client
relationships’.
Scope of the concessions
6.216 While the above arrangements resemble client legal privilege, their
scope is far more restricted. They are based on one of the
rationales of client
legal privilege: namely, that allowing the free flow of information between
client and adviser improves understandings
of legal rights and responsibilities
and promotes compliance. It has been argued by accountants and others that it
should flow logically
that, where legal advice is being provided by another
professional person, such advice should also be given some protection from
disclosure.
6.217 To date, these types of concessions have centred chiefly on the area of
taxation where an exception under federal law specifically
allows tax agents to
provide legal advice. In IP 33, the ALRC asked whether there were circumstances
in relation to other federal
investigatory agencies where a similar concession
should be extended to accountants or other professionals who provide what
to legal advice. The ALRC was also interested in by what means such a
concession or privilege would best be realised—for example,
legislation, regulation or administrative
instrument?
Submissions and
consultations
6.218 The Institute of Chartered Accountants in Australia (ICAA) submitted
that, given the extension of privilege in other jurisdictions,
the fact that
Australia has not yet adopted a formal legislative framework extending client
legal privilege to tax advice or opinions
on tax law, ‘suggests it is out
of step with global concepts on tax administration and commercial
reality’. The ICAA
recommended enactment of a statutory regime recognising
client legal privilege for accountants and tax agents which would ‘be
an equal footing to client professional privilege currently afforded to lawyers
in respect of curial and pre-curial
6.219 This view was shared by the Corporate Tax Association, which submitted
that changes to the role of taxation advisers over time
needed to be
recognised.
It needs to be borne in mind that the doctrine of legal professional privilege
was developed many centuries ago, at a time when the
provision of legal advice
was the sole providence of lawyers. There was no accounting profession as such,
with the role of bookkeepers
confined mainly to the keeping of accounts and
producing of non-public accounting reports. Moreover, there were few, if any,
revenue laws about which people or entities needed advice. Much has
changed over time, not only in relation to the complexity of
business and
related laws and regulations, but also to the provision of advice. Indeed, it
has been the recognition by the ATO of
the essential role played by the taxation
profession that the administrative access guidelines … were developed. A
other countries have recognised this anomaly, and have enacted what
amounts to statutory legal professional privilege for taxation
Given that the Commonwealth taxation law specifically authorises registered tax
agents to provide legal advice on Commonwealth taxation
law, the CTA submits
that there is a compelling case for Australia to follow the lead of countries
such as the US, New Zealand and
the United Kingdom in this
6.220 The Australian Financial Markets Association argued that it is
important to recognise that the privilege is that of the client,
not that of
their lawyer or accountant who provides tax advice.
In this context, we believe clients should be given the choice between a lawyer
and accountant for tax advice on matters that should
be covered by client legal
privilege. It is especially important that clients like small businesses and
individuals should have access
on this basis to accountants with whom they are
more likely to have formed an ongoing client/adviser relationship over time. It
also important for business more generally that the market for privileged
advice is not limited to a relatively small number of advisers
and that they
have a reasonable capacity to rely on internal advice for this
6.221 Kendall submitted that the rationale of client legal privilege is not
, but ensuring that the
legal system is able to function properly. This proper functioning is best
served when legal advisers, as
the bridge between persons subject to the legal
system and the legal system itself, are fully apprised of the relevant facts.
the compliance rationale can be extended to the accounting
profession, where, in practice, tax accountants play the same role as
6.222 Other stakeholders did not support any extension of the privilege
beyond lawyers.
This view was
based primarily on two reasons: first, that the rationale of the privilege
depends on the giving of ‘legal advice’,
which only should be given
by lawyers;
and secondly,
that other professionals were not subject to the same accountability as lawyers.
The Law Council, while not commenting
on the merits of extending the privilege,
noted that:
The acts of lawyers are subject to independent supervision by statutory
agencies, as well as judicial oversight. In addition, lawyers
as officers of the
court owe a paramount duty to the court and the administration of justice. If
privilege were to be extended to
another profession, consideration needs to be
given to whether the applicable regulatory regime is comparable to that
governing lawyers.
6.223 The Law Society of NSW agreed that:
The fact that lawyers are officers of the Court and owe duties to the Court,
imposes a degree of control upon the processes by which
claims of privilege are
made. Lawyers can be personally liable for costs incurred in mounting
applications without any basis for
doing so and also subject to professional
misconduct procedures. These potential threats impose a degree of care and
restraint upon
lawyers in relation to making claims for privilege. Similar care
may not be exercised by other categories of
6.224 The Australian Government Solicitor submitted that the question of
what, if any, concession should be granted in this area should
be characterised
not as an extension of client legal privilege, but as another head of privilege.
Such a ‘professional relationships’
privilege should be
discretionary, as under the
6.225 The Insolvency and Trustee Service Australia (ITSA) expressed some
concern about the extension of privilege to accountants in
the particular
context of investigations into a debtor’s affairs.
In the ordinary course, a debtor
will have had contact with an accountant or financial adviser prior to their
bankruptcy. Such an
adviser may provide information to the debtor on methods of
transferring assets to avoid their obligations to creditors … If
bankrupt were able to claim that these communications were privileged,
investigations into and successful prosecution of these
and other bankruptcy
offences would be significantly
Criticisms of the ATO Accountants’ Concession
6.226 A number of submissions took the view that any such concession should
be provided for in legislation rather than in administrative
guidelines. For
example, the Taxation Institute of Australia submitted that Parliament should
set the policy,
rather than there being an administrative guideline which has an exception that
results in a general belief amongst accountants that
the concession will be
withdrawn when it suits the
6.227 The ICAA agreed that the fact that the ATO can lift the
accountants’ concession if it considers that ‘exceptional
circumstances’ exist is a substantial limitation on its
In its view, the
criteria for what amounts to exceptional circumstances are broad and
ill-defined. The ICAA also criticised the concession
on the basis that it has a
sole purpose test, as opposed to the dominant purpose test under client legal
privilege law and was critical
of the fact that decisions based on the
Guidelines were not subject to judicial
Baker v Campbell
, Dawson J justified the restriction of
client legal privilege to members of the legal profession on the basis that:
The restriction of privilege to the legal profession serves to emphasise that
the relationship between a client and his legal advisor
has a special
significance because it is part of the functioning of the law itself.
Communications which establish and arise out
of that relationship are of their
very nature of legal significance, something which would be coincidental in the
case of other confidential
relationships.
6.229 The ALRC agrees that the purpose of client legal privilege is different
from that of other confidential relationships. It is
not the protection of
confidences that creates public interest rationale for client legal privilege,
but the effect that protection
of legal advice has on the operation of the legal
system. However, as discussed in Chapter 2, the basis of the protection is the
promotion of full and frank disclosure for the purpose of obtaining legal advice
(and legal services in litigation).
6.230 The ALRC considers the ‘compliance rationale’ to be a
significant part of the modern basis for the doctrine of client
legal privilege
in serving the administration of justice. It follows from this reasoning that
where legal advice is lawfully being
given in a similar context by a non-lawyer,
then the privilege should extend to the provision of that advice as well. The
also influenced by the fact that, on the basis of this reasoning, tax
advice is covered by a privilege under US, UK and New Zealand
legislation.
6.231 Australian taxation law is complex, and the self-assessment system
requires tax payers to have a good understanding of their
rights and obligations
before they can make an assessment of their tax liability. This justifies why
the tax legislation makes allowance
for accountants to give legal advice on
taxation law and the ATO has provided an administrative concession to tax
accountants.
6.232 It is therefore proposed that federal client legal privilege
legislation should provide that a person who is required to disclose
information
under a coercive information-gathering power of a federal body is not required
to disclose a document that is a tax advice
document prepared for that person.
If the ALRC’s proposal in ALRC 102—that the privilege provisions of
Evidence Act
be extended to pre-trial proceedings—is adopted,
then consideration could be given to the inclusion of a similar provision in
6.233 The ALRC supports the New Zealand model of creating a separate
‘client-accountant privilege’, rather than simply
extending client
legal privilege to accountants giving tax advice. This will allow Parliament
greater control over the operation
and scope of the client-accountant privilege.
Under the common law, client legal privilege is a dynamic doctrine that has
and extended over time. Linking an accountants’ advice to client
legal privilege could lead to extensions of the protection
afforded to the
advice provided by tax accountants that are inconsistent with its rationale. The
ALRC also considers there should
be some additional restrictions placed on the
operation of the accountants’ privilege, which are discussed below.
6.234 The ALRC supports drawing a distinction between source and advice
documents, as is presently the case under the current ATO
accountants’
concession. This is consistent with the principles of client legal privilege,
under which privilege does not attach
to evidence of transactions such as
contracts or conveyances, even where these are provided to a lawyer for advice
or for use in
litigation.
6.235 Following the New Zealand model, the dominant purpose test is proposed.
The ALRC considers that there should be an exception
for advice given in
furtherance of a crime or fraud, adopting the position in the
. The ALRC notes the concerns expressed by ITSA, that privilege could be
claimed over an accountant’s advice that would assist
in the investigation
of bankruptcy offences. It would appear to the ALRC, however, that the fraud
exception to the privilege would
operate to prevent this from occurring.
6.236 The ALRC has defined a ‘professional taxation adviser’ for
these purposes as a registered ‘tax agent’
in line with
s 251L(1)(b) of the
Income Tax Assessment Act 1936
(Cth). This is on
the basis that only registered ‘tax agents’ for the purpose of that
Act are allowed to give legal
6.237 The ALRC has included an additional protection that a federal body may
request that a lawyer certify that there are reasonable
grounds for a claim of
client-accountant privilege. The issue of whether advice meets the dominant
purpose test is a matter of some
complexity, which should be determined by a
lawyer not an accountant. This additional protection also removes the difficulty
accounting professional bodies have sufficient sanctions to address
improper claims, by placing the responsibility for certifying
reasonable grounds for the making of the claim on a lawyer. The details of this
additional requirement are part of the
recommendations on a uniform procedure
for claiming privilege contained in Chapter 8.
Proposal 6–3
Federal client legal privilege legislation should
provide that a person who is required to disclose information under a coercive
information-gathering
power of a federal body is not required to disclose a
document that is a tax advice document prepared for that person.
• A ‘tax advice document’ should be defined as a
confidential document created by an independent professional
accounting adviser
for the dominant purpose of providing that person with advice about the
operation and effect of tax laws. It does
not include ‘source
documents’, such as documents which record transactions or arrangements
entered into by a person
(for example, formal books of account or ledgers).
• An independent professional accounting adviser must be a registered
‘tax agent’ for the purpose of s 251L(1)(b)
Tax Assessment Act 1936
• No privilege should apply where a tax advice document is created in
relation to the commission of a fraud or offence or
the commission of an act
that renders a person liable to a civil penalty; or where the person or the
accounting adviser knew or ought
reasonably to have known that the document was
prepared in furtherance of a deliberate abuse of power.
• Claims that a document is a tax advice document may be required to
be certified by a lawyer in accordance with the procedures
set out in Proposal
Baker v Campbell
[1983] HCA 39
(1983) 153 CLR
See also New Zealand Law Commission,
Report 97 (2007), 355.
New Zealand Law
Commission,
, Report 97 (2007),
Chapter 5 outlines the examples
where privilege has been expressly abrogated in federal
The Daniels Corporation
International Pty Ltd v Australian Competition and Consumer Commission
[2002] HCA 49
(2002) 213 CLR 543.
[1965] HCA 49
(1965) 114 CLR 63
, 80 (Windeyer
The Daniels Corporation
International Pty Ltd v Australian Competition and Consumer Commission
[2002] HCA 49
(2002) 213 CLR 543.
This model of
abrogation could be combined with a number of different safeguards, including
immunity after disclosure, which is
discussed in Ch 7.
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Client Legal Privilege and Federal Investigatory Bodies
, IP 33 (2007),
See J Bentham,
Rationale of
Judicial Evidence
Book IX, Ch V is entitled
‘Examination of the Cases in which English Law Exempts One Person From
Giving Evidence Against Another’.
Australian Federal Police v
Propend Finance
(1997) 188 CLR 501,
Report of the Inquiry
into Certain Australian Companies in relation to the UN Oil-for-Food
(2006), [7.66].
Australian Law Reform
Commission, New South Wales Law Reform Commission and Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Uniform Evidence Law
, ALRC 102 (2005),
Baker v Campbell
[1983] HCA 39
(1983) 153 CLR 52
Affairs Commission of New South Wales v Yuill
[1991] HCA 28
(1991) 172 CLR 319
New Zealand Law Commission,
Tax and Privilege: Legal Professional Privilege and the Commissioner of
Inland Revenue’s Powers to Obtain Information
, Report 67 (2000),
The Daniels Corporation
International Pty Ltd v Australian Competition and Consumer Commission
[2002] HCA 49
(2002) 213 CLR 543.
Esso Australia
Resources Ltd v Commissioner of Taxation
[1999] HCA 67
(1999) 201 CLR
The dominant purpose test is
discussed in Ch 3.
The Daniels
Corporation International Pty Ltd v Australian Competition and Consumer
[2002] HCA 49
(2002) 213 CLR 543
Corporate Affairs Commission of
New South Wales v Yuill
[1991] HCA 28
(1991) 172 CLR 319
, 326. This case is discussed
further in Ch 5.
Competition and Consumer Commission v Daniels
[2001] FCA 244
(2001) 108 FCR 123
(Wilcox J).
Baker v Campbell
[1983] HCA 39
(1983) 153 CLR 52
Securities and Investments Commission,
New Zealand Stock Exchange v
[1992] 3 NZLR 1, 4.
Law Reform Commission,
Principled Regulation: Federal Civil and
Administrative Penalties in Australia
Baker v Campbell
[1983] HCA 39
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Principled Regulation: Federal Civil and Administrative Penalties
in Australia
, ALRC 95 (2002),
New Zealand Law Commission,
Tax and Privilege: Legal Professional Privilege and the Commissioner of
Inland Revenue’s Powers to Obtain Information
, Report 67 (2000),
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Principled Regulation: Federal Civil and Administrative Penalties
in Australia
, ALRC 95 (2002).
Ibid, [19.39].
The Daniels
Corporation International Pty Ltd v Australian Competition and Consumer
[2002] HCA 49
(2002) 213 CLR 543
Ibid, 557 (Gleeson CJ, Gaudron, Gummow and Hayne
Baker v Campbell
[1983] HCA 39
153 CLR 52.
Commonwealth Director of
Public Prosecutions,
Kennedy v Wallace
[2004] FCA 332
208 ALR 424.
Kennedy v Wallace
[2004] FCAFC 337
(2004) 213 ALR 108.
See I Govey, ‘Legal Professional Privilege and
Commonwealth Investigatory Bodies’ (Paper presented at 35th Australian
Legal Convention, Sydney, 23 March 2007),
(Unreported,
Supreme Court of Western Australia, 13 July 2004). For report of the appeal see
[2005] WASCA 74
(2005) 216 ALR 690.
Hart v Commissioner of Australian Federal Police
[2002] FCAFC 392
(2002) 196 ALR
Commonwealth Director of Public
Prosecutions,
12 June 2007. This investigation
was also referred to by the AFP: Australian Federal Police,
Consultation
, Canberra, 1 June 2007. Blanket claims are discussed further in
Chs 8 and 9.
Australian Taxation Office,
22 June 2007.
Esso Australia Resources Ltd v
Commissioner of Taxation
[1999] HCA 67
(1999) 201 CLR
The Daniels Corporation
International Pty Ltd v Australian Competition and Consumer Commission
[2002] HCA 49
(2002) 213 CLR 543
RJ Reynolds Tobacco Company
167 FRD 134 (D
Kan, 1996),
Australian National Audit Office,
ATO Administration of Tax Penalties
, Audit Report 31 (2000),
Report of the
Inquiry into Certain Australian Companies in relation to the UN Oil-for-Food
(2006), [7.42].
Ibid, [7.64]. The AWB case is
discussed further in Chapter 9.
Australian Competition and
Consumer Commission,
13 June 2007. This is
discussed further in Ch 9.
Ch 8 for further discussion of issues and problems in making a claim for
Members of the Victorian
Consultation
, Melbourne, 25 May 2007; Members of the
New South Wales Bar,
Consultation
, Sydney, 23 May 2007;
Regulatory lawyers of Clayton Utz,
Consultation
, Sydney, 15
Report of the
Inquiry into Certain Australian Companies in relation to the UN Oil-for-Food
(2006), [7.44].
Royal Commissions Act 1902
Report of the Inquiry into Certain Australian Companies in relation to the UN
Oil-for-Food Programme
The view of client legal
privilege as a ‘private interest’ is discussed in Ch
Report of the Inquiry
into Certain Australian Companies in relation to the UN Oil-for-Food
[7.67]–[7.68].
Ibid, rec 4.
(1997) 91 A Crim
Evidence Act 1958
s 19D. In other state legislation governing Royal Commissions, client legal
privilege is either expressly preserved (as in
the ACT), or the legislation is
silent on the issue.
(Confiscation and Evidence) Amendment Act 1998
James Hardie
(Investigations and Proceedings) Act 2004
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates
, House of Representatives, 2 December 2004, 1 (P
Costello—Treasurer), 2.
Special Commissions of Inquiry Act 1983
Carter v Northmore Hale
Davey & Leake
(1995) 183 CLR 121,
Legal Professional
Privilege: Law and Theory
‘Attorney-Client and Work
Product Privilege in a Utilitarian World: An Argument for Recomparison’
Harvard Law Review
1697, 1700. See also J Auburn,
Professional Privilege: Law and Theory
See, eg, B Saul, ‘Legal
Professional Privilege: Balancing Law Enforcement Against Protecting the
Regulated’ (2002) 76(2)
Law Institute Journal
A Bruce, ‘The
Practices Act 1974
and the Demise of Legal Professional Privilege’
Federal Law Review
, 394, citing D Boniface, ‘Legal
Professional Privilege and Disclosure Powers of Investigative Agencies’
Criminal Law Journal
The Daniels Corporation
International Pty Ltd v Australian Competition and Consumer Commission
[2002] HCA 49
(2002) 213 CLR 543
G Healy and A
Eastwood, ‘Legal Professional Privilege and the Investigative Powers of
the Australian Securities and Investments
Commission’
and Securities Law Journal
Australian Government
Practices Act
Review Committee,
Review of the Competition Provisions of the
Trade Practices Act
Ch 13, rec 13.5.
Pratt Holdings Pty
Ltd v Commissioner of Taxation
[2004] FCAFC 122
(2004) 207 ALR 217.
See discussion in Ch
G Healy and A Eastwood,
‘Legal Professional Privilege and the Investigative Powers of the
Australian Securities and Investments
Commission’
Company and
Securities Law Journal
American Bar Association,
Report of the Task Force on Attorney-Client Privilege
Pyneboard Pty Ltd v Trade
Practices Commission
[1983] HCA 9
(1983) 152 CLR
Environment Protection
Authority v Caltex Refining Co Pty Ltd
[1993] HCA 74
(1993) 178 CLR
B Bolton, ‘Compelling
Production of Documents to the ASC’
Queensland Law Society
, 238. Use and derivative use immunities are discussed in Ch
S McNicol, ‘Before the High
Court: Australian Competition and Consumer Commission v The Daniels Corporation
International
Pty Ltd and Another’
Sydney Law Review
Re Compass Airlines Pty
(1992) 35 FCR 447.
Transequity Ltd (in
(1991) 6 ACSR 517.
Baker v Campbell
[1983] HCA 39
(1983) 153 CLR 52
, 114 (Deane
Australian Competition and
Consumer Commission v Daniels
[2001] FCA 244
(2001) 108 FCR 123
Ibid, 146. See also S McNicol,
‘Before the High Court: Australian Competition and Consumer Commission v
The Daniels Corporation
International Pty Ltd and Another’
Sydney Law Review
The Daniels Corporation International Pty Ltd v Australian Competition and
Consumer Commission
[2002] HCA 49
(2002) 213 CLR 543
R Travers, ‘Confidentiality
of Legal Advice after Australian Competition and Consumer Commission v Daniels
Corporation’
Competition and Consumer Law Journal
A Pinto, ‘Cooperation and
Self-Interest Are Strange Bedfellows: Limited Waiver of the Attorney-Client
Privilege Through Production
of Privileged Documents in a Government
Investigation’ (2003–04)
West Virginia Law Review
United States Deputy Attorney
Principles of Federal Prosecution of Business Organizations
(2003) <www.usdoj.gov/dag/cftf/corporate_guidelines.htm> at 31 August
See, eg, testimony of the
American Bar Association <judiciary.senate.gov/ testimony.cfm?id=2054&wit_id=5742> at 31 August
See eg, testimony of Mr Mark
Sheppard, <judiciary.senate.gov/testimony.cfm?id=2054&wit_id=5744> at
31 August 2007.
The Bill is
available at <www.acc.com/public/attyclientpriv/thompsonmemoleg.pdf> at 31
August 2007. At 24 July 2007 the Bill
had been referred to the Full Committee of
the Senate Judiciary Committee.
McNulty Memorandum may be viewed at <news.findlaw.com/hdocs/docs/doj/
121206mcnultymemo.html> at 31 August
American Bar Association,
‘Thompson Memo Changes Not Enough, ABA Says’ (Press Release,
15 December 2006).
Securities and Investments Commission,
Commonwealth Director of
Public Prosecutions,
Australian Crime Commission,
Australian Competition and
Consumer Commission,
R Desiatnik,
Law Council of Australia,
19 July 2007.
Taxation Institute of
15 June 2007. However, it was this
AWB Royal Commission
to save time and expense: T Cole,
Report of the Inquiry
into Certain Australian Companies in relation to the UN Oil-for-Food
(2006), [7.64].
National Legal Aid,
13 June 2007; Australian
Institute of Company Directors,
8 June 2007;
New South Wales Bar Association,
5 June 2007,
National Australia Bank Limited and others,
BHP Billiton Mitsubishi
Law Council of Australia,
Fitzroy Legal Service,
4 June 2007; BHP Billiton Mitsubishi Alliance,
Australian Institute of
Company Directors,
Law Council of Australia,
4 June 2007, similar observations were made to
the ALRC in one consultation: Regulatory lawyers of Clayton Utz,
Consultation
, Sydney, 15 May
Australian Securities and
Investments Commission,
See, eg, Fitzroy Legal
Sussex Street Community Law
Services Inc,
Anti-Terrorism Act (No 2)
(Cth) sch 6, s 37QR(1)(c).
Fitzroy Legal Service,
4 June 2007. A similar
point was made by the Federation of Community Legal Centres (Vic) Inc,
Council of Australia,
4 June 2007. The
potential impact of abrogation in Australia on international business dealings
was also noted in the consultation
with one stakeholder group: Regulatory
lawyers of Clayton Utz,
Consultation
, Sydney, 15 May
Australian Securities and
Investments Commission,
29 June 2007; Taxation
Institute of Australia,
15 June 2007; National
13 June 2007; Australian Institute
of Company Directors,
8 June 2007; New South
Wales Bar Association,
5 June 2007; Human
Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission,
2007; Law Council of Australia,
4 June 2007;
R Desiatnik,
Australian Institute of
Company Directors,
19 July 2007.
Australian Securities and Investments Commission,
29 March 2007.
Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security,
1 June 2007.
Commonwealth Ombudsman,
Australian Law Reform
Commission, New South Wales Law Reform Commission and Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Uniform Evidence Law
Ibid, [14.172] referring to
Australian Law Reform Commission, New South Wales Law Reform Commission and
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Review of the Uniform Evidence Acts
ALRC DP 69, NSWLRC DP 47, VLRC DP (2005) and
Waterford v Commonwealth
[1987] HCA 25
(1987) 163 CLR 54
Australian Law Reform Commission, New South Wales Law Reform Commission and
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Uniform Evidence Law
, ALRC 102 (2005),
For example, I Temby,
19 July 2007; Australian Institute of Company
8 June 2007; Corporate Tax
Association,
Human Rights and Equal
Opportunity Commission,
New South Wales Bar
Association,
Ibid, citing S Prasser,
Royal Commissions and Public Inquiries in Australia
Ibid, citing Queensland Law
Reform Commission,
The Abrogation of the Privilege Against
Self-Incrimination
, Report 59
Australian Competition and
Consumer Commission,
Inspector-General of
Intelligence and Security,
1 June 2007.
Law Council of Australia,
Victoria Legal Aid,
14 June 2007. Safeguards are discussed in Ch
Carter v Northmore Hale Davey
(1995) 183 CLR 121,
See the discussion of client
legal privilege in common law and civil law countries in Ch
Legal Professional
Privilege: Law and Theory
I Turnbull,
3 June 2007; R O’Connor,
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Principled Regulation: Federal Civil and Administrative Penalties
in Australia
, ALRC 95 (2002), Rec
Australian Law Reform
Commission, New South Wales Law Reform Commission and Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Uniform Evidence Law
, ALRC 102 (2005),
Australian Government
Trade Practices Act
Review Committee,
Review of the Competition Provisions of
Trade Practices Act
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Principled Regulation: Federal Civil and Administrative Penalties
in Australia
, ALRC 95 (2002),
Baker v Campbell
[1983] HCA 39
(1983) 153 CLR 52
‘Towards a Broader Balancing of Interests: Exploring the Theoretical
Foundations of the Legal Professional Privilege’
African Law Journal
, 124. See also J Auburn,
Legal Professional
Privilege: Law and Theory
Attorney-General (NT) v
[1985] HCA 60
(1985) 158 CLR 500
Discussed in Ch 3.
Legal Professional Privilege: Law and Theory
Report of the
Inquiry into Certain Australian Companies in relation to the UN Oil-for-Food
(2006), Vol 1,
Australian Securities and
Investments Commission,
29 June 2007;
Australian Taxation Office,
22 June 2007;
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission,
13 June 2007.
Australian Transport
Safety Bureau,
Australian Pesticides and
Veterinary Medicines Authority,
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates
, House of Representatives, 2 December 2004, 1 (P
Costello—Treasurer), 1.
McCabe v British American Tobacco Australia Services Ltd
[2002] VSC 73
British American Tobacco Australia Services Ltd v Cowell
[2002] VSCA 197
British American Tobacco Australia Services Ltd v Cowell
[2003] VSCA 43.
See W Birnbauer ‘Top Lawyers Face Scrutiny’
Australian Crime
Commission,
Annual Report 2005–06
Australian Crime
Commission Act 2002
Australian Crime Commission
report, the QLRC considered that ‘abrogation [of the privilege against
self-incrimination] may be justified if the
information to be compelled as a
result of the abrogation concerns an issue of major public importance that has a
significant impact
on the community in general or on a section of the
community’: Queensland Law Reform Commission,
Abrogation of the
Privilege against Self-Incrimination: Final Report
, R 59 (2004),
[6.50]–[6.51].
Inspector-General of
Intelligence and Security Act 1986
s 18(6)(b).
provision also exists in the
Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission
, however, HREOC has advised this Inquiry that it
does not consider that client legal privilege is abrogated under its Act, and
it does not seek legal advice as part of its investigatory functions: Human
Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission,
Inspector-General of
Intelligence and Security,
1 June 2007. The
IGIS noted, however, that any abrogation in respect of litigation should not
extend to any situation where both
an agency and the Inspector-General are
parties to a particular action, while recognising that such a situation was
Commonwealth Ombudsman,
Queensland Law Reform
Commission,
Abrogation of the Privilege against Self-Incrimination: Final
, R 59 (2004), 36. See
Sorby v Commonwealth
[1983] HCA 10
(1983) 152 CLR
Environment Protection
Authority v Caltex Refining Co Pty Ltd
[1993] HCA 74
(1993) 178 CLR 477
, 493. See also the
discussion of approaches to the application of immunity (to documents and oral
statements) in Ch 7.
[1993] AC 45
Environment Protection Authority v Caltex Refining Co Pty Ltd
[1993] HCA 74
Queensland Law Reform
Commission,
Abrogation of the Privilege against Self-Incrimination: Final
, R 59 (2004),
Shapiro v United
[1948] USSC 104
(1948). See also New Zealand Law Commission,
Privilege against Self-Incrimination: A Discussion Paper
New Zealand Law Commission,
The Privilege against Self-Incrimination: A Discussion Paper
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Client Legal Privilege and Federal Investigatory Bodies
33 (2007), Question 6–5.
Council of Australia,
4 June 2007. See also
Victoria Legal Aid,
Australian Securities and
Investments Commission,
Commonwealth Director of
Public Prosecutions,
R Desiatnik,
Australian Securities and
Investments Commission,
29 June 2007;
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission,
13 June 2007.
Evidence Act 1995
div 1A. The Norfolk Island
Evidence Act 2004
follows the NSW model and has a qualified confidential relationships privilege.
Australian Law Reform Commission,
New South Wales Law Reform Commission and Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Uniform Evidence Law
, ALRC 102 (2005), Rec 15–1. The Commissions
also recommended that the confidential relationships privilege should apply to
pre-trial discovery and the production of documents in response to a
Evidence Act
Wilson v New South Wales
New South Wales,
Parliamentary Debates
, L Council, 1120 (J Shaw—Attorney General).
See S Odgers,
Uniform Evidence Law
(6th ed, 2004),
[1.3.11940].
the Inquiry into Certain Australian Companies in relation to the UN Oil-for-Food
(2006), [7.67].
Taxation Institute of Australia,
15 June 2007;
National Legal Aid,
13 June 2007; NSW Young
12 June 2007; R Desiatnik,
31 May 2007.
Society of New South Wales,
Australian Competition and
Consumer Commission,
Professional Privilege: Law and Theory
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Client Legal Privilege and Federal Investigatory Bodies
33 (2007), [2.62].
Patents Act
(Cth) ch 20.
Australian Law Reform
Commission, New South Wales Law Reform Commission and Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Uniform Evidence Law
, ALRC 102 (2005), Rec
F Bacon, ‘Of
The Essays, or, Counsels, Civil and Moral of Sir Francis
(1691 ed) 53. The collection of essays was first published in 1597.
Law Reform Committee of England
Privilege in Civil Proceedings
(1967), 9, cited in Australian
Law Reform Commission,
, ALRC 26 (1985),
Baker v Campbell
[1983] HCA 39
, 128. Australian Law Reform Commission,
(1985), [877]; Australian Law Reform Commission, New South Wales Law Reform
Commission and Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Uniform Evidence Law
ALRC 102 (2005),
[14.43]–[14.48].
Legal Profession Act 2004
See also Standing Committee of
Attorneys-General,
National Legal Profession Model Bill
Council of Australia, s
Legal Profession Act
R Baxt, ‘A Matter
of Privilege’ (1989) 60
Chartered Accountant
Internal Revenue Service
Restructuring and Reform Act 1998
(US): see K Kendall, ‘Prospects for
a Tax Advisors’ Privilege in Australia’ (2005) 1(3)
the Australasian Tax Teachers Association
Internal Revenue Code (1954)
26 USC §§ 7525(3)(B).
Ibid §§ 7525(2).
§§ 7525(3)(B)(b).
Kendall, ‘Prospects for a Tax Advisors’ Privilege in
Australia’ (2005) 1(3)
Journal of the Australasian Tax Teachers
Association
New Zealand Inland Revenue
Department,
Tax and Privilege: A Proposed New Structure: A Government
Discussion Document — May 2002
<www.taxpolicy.ird.govt.nz/publications/index.php?catid=2> at 31 August
Administration Act 1994
K Kendall, ‘Prospects
for a Tax Advisors’ Privilege in Australia’ (2005) 1(3)
of the Australasian Tax Teachers Association
The Bill is available at <
www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm200607/cmbills/135/2007135a.pdf>
at 31 August 2007
. The Bill is currently in the House of Commons,
having passed the House of Lords on 23 November
Legal Services Bill
2006–2007 (UK), Pt 5, s 190. Multi-disciplinary practices also exist in
Australia, see for example,
Legal Profession Act 2004
Client legal privilege does not extend, however, to advice provided by
non-lawyers employed by the
Office of Fair Trading
Competition in the Professions – A Report by the Director-General
of Fair Trading
(2001); United Kingdom Department for Constitutional
Competition and Regulation in the Legal Services Market
United Kingdom Department for Constitutional Affairs,
The Future of Legal
Services: Putting Consumers First
Defined as an accountant,
auditor or tax adviser who is a member of a professional body for their
respective professions, and where
the body tests the competence of those seeking
admission, and imposes professional and ethical standards for its members:
Proceeds of Crime Act 1992
Legal Profession
See also Standing Committee of Attorneys-General,
National Legal Profession Model Bill
(2006) Law Council of Australia, s
Income Tax Assessment
(Cth) s 251L(1)(b).
Patents Act 1990
Australian Taxation Office,
Access and Information Gathering Manual
<www.ato.gov.au> at 23
August 2007, [7.1.1].
Australian Taxation Office,
Guidelines to Accessing Professional Accounting Advisors’ Papers
<www.ato.gov.au> at 31 March 2007,
A Question of
Balance: Address to the American Club
(1999) <www.ato.gov.au/newsroom.asp> at 5 April 2007.
This is because the Guidelines are not an instrument made under the tax
legislation and therefore a decision made under them is
not a decision made
under an enactment for the purpose of judicial review:
White Industries v
Federal Commissioner of Taxation
K Kendall, ‘Prospects
for a Tax Advisors’ Privilege in Australia’ (2005) 1(3)
of the Australasian Tax Teachers Association
Institute of Chartered
Accountants in Australia,
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Client Legal Privilege and Federal Investigatory Bodies
33 (2007), Question 2–2.
Institute of Chartered Accountants in Australia,
4 June 2007. This submission was supported by: Australian Financial
Markets Association,
22 June 2007; Business
Coalition for Tax Reform,
19 June 2007;
National Institute of Accountants,
2007; CPA Australia Ltd,
Corporate Tax Association,
Australian Financial Markets
Association,
31 May 2007.
Australian Securities and Investments Commission,
29 June 2007; Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions,
12 June 2007; National Legal Aid,
13 June 2007; Australian Institute of
Company Directors,
I Turnbull,
3 June 2007.
Council of Australia,
Law Society of New South
Australian Government
Insolvency and Trustee
Service Australia,
Taxation Institute of
15 June 2007. See also Confidential,
This view was shared by the
Australian Financial Markets Association,
June 2007; Corporate Tax Association,
Institute of Chartered
Accountants in Australia,
4 June 2007. See
White v Commissioner of Taxation
[2007] FCA 511
, discussed
Baker v Campbell
[1983] HCA 39
(1983) 153 CLR 52
Regardless of the adoption of that recommendation, the ALRC proposes inclusion
of the accountants’ privilege in
federal privilege legislation, as this
legislation would deal with the procedural matters associated with the
application of the
privilege in federal investigations: see Ch
Baker v Campbell
[1983] HCA 39
86; R Desiatnik,
Legal Professional Privilege in
(2nd ed, 2005), 29.
The ALRC notes that a draft Tax Laws Amendment (Tax Agent Services) Bill 2007,
and associated draft Regulations and draft explanatory
materials has been
released for public comment (submissions closed on 10 August 2007). The Bill
makes a number of changes to the
regulation of tax agents, including
establishment of a new national tax practitioners board and changes to
disciplinary arrangements.
This Bill should not have an impact on the
ALRC’s proposal, however, the ALRC will continue to monitor developments
final report. The draft Bill may be viewed
<www.treasury.gov.au/contentitem.asp?NavId=037&ContentID=1218> (at 31 August
7. Safeguards
Introduction
Representation of a client in an investigation
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s views
Restrictions on the use of privileged information
Legislation conferring use immunity
Legislation conferring derivative use immunity
Choosing between use and derivative use immunity
Application of immunities to document production and oral statements
Royal Commissions of inquiry
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s views
Availability of privilege against third parties
Practices of federal bodies
Trends in the United States
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s views
Practice and procedure
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s views
7. Safeguards
Introduction
7.1 The Terms of Reference ask the ALRC to consider whether it would be
desirable to introduce or clarify statutory safeguards where
client legal
privilege is modified or abrogated, with a view to harmonising any such
safeguards across the Commonwealth statute book.
7.2 This chapter considers existing safeguards; those that might be put in
place if client legal privilege were abrogated or modified;
and whether
harmonisation of safeguards is necessary or desirable. In particular, the
chapter raises issues about whether restrictions
should be placed on the use of
privileged communications obtained by compulsion, and whether the privilege
should remain available
against third parties.
Representation of a
client in an investigation
7.3 A person’s ability to seek and receive legal advice in responding
to the coercive powers of a federal body is a significant
safeguard in ensuring
informed compliance with the requirements imposed by those powers. Legal advice
may prevent a person from incurring
penalties as a result of non-compliance.
Moreover, where a person is the target of a federal investigation,
representation in that
process can help to ensure that his or her interests are
properly protected and that informed decisions are made about how to
7.4 Representing a client in an investigation may involve giving advice about
how to respond to a notice requiring the production
of documents or information;
or representing a client at a compulsory examination. For example, a
person’s lawyer may be present
during an examination under the
Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act 2001
(Cth) (ASIC
Act), and is entitled to address the inspector and examine his or her client on
matters in respect of which the client
has been examined by an
For the purpose of
representing a client in an investigation, a lawyer might also take notes of the
client’s instructions or
prepare a chronology of events.
7.5 Where privilege is abrogated by express words or necessary implication,
there is some uncertainty whether the abrogation covers
communications that
relate to the representation of the client in an investigation or advice given
concerning the investigation itself—as
distinct from privileged
communications that relate to the actual matter under investigation.
7.6 Ashley Black has stated that, as a matter of practice, the Australian
Securities and Investments Commission (ASIC) does not typically
seek to exercise
its investigatory powers under the ASIC Act to obtain access to documents
relating to the representation of a client
investigation.
7.7 However, the ALRC understands that there have been occasions when federal
bodies have sought access to such documents. Professor
Warren Pengilley notes
A conference participant said publicly that the ACCC had issued [a notice under
Trade Practices Act 1974
(Cth)]. This was complied with
only to be met by a second
notice requesting production of the advice
the client was given in replying to the first
7.8 If one accepts the argument that a federal body should be allowed access
to privileged material in order to achieve greater efficiency
in investigations,
then it has been suggested that this argument is at its:
when it concerns access to advice given while
events under investigation were occurring; and
when it concerns access to confidential
communications or material tending to disclose confidential communications made
or prepared
for the purpose of representing a party in the investigation
itself—because this material is not, in any sense, part of the
‘matter’ under
investigation.
has expressed the view that the compulsory disclosure of communications relating
to the representation of the client in
an ASIC investigation would involve a
fundamental threat to a person’s right to legal representation in
connection with an
investigation.
Nicholas Korner has also expressed the view that the compulsory disclosure of
such communications undermines, and is inconsistent
with, the right to legal
representation.
Commonwealth of Australia v Frost
, Ellicot J held that a
person who was granted leave to appear before a Board of Accident Inquiry
pursuant to reg 291(4) of the
Air Navigation Regulations
(Cth) was entitled to claim client legal privilege in relation to documents
that were brought into existence for the sole purpose
of being used to enable
legal advisers to represent that person before the Board. Ellicot J
considered that preserving this type
of privilege was an incident of the
statutory right to legal representation.
In my opinion, the right to legal representation before the Board, which reg
291(5) expressly confers, carries with it the right
to claim legal professional
privilege. …
If the person represented could not in strict confidence instruct his solicitor,
confer with solicitor and counsel, receive advice
and obtain and supply to
counsel the proofs of witnesses for the purposes of his representation before
the Board the right of the
value of the right to representation must be
seriously diminished.
7.11 Where privilege is abrogated, there is precedent for a distinction to be
drawn between advice relating to the investigation itself
and advice relating to
the subject matter of the investigation. In the context of discussing
enforcement of cartel laws in Germany,
commentators have stated that:
The concept of legal privilege in Germany is not as broad as under the EU rules.
Attorney-client communications at the premises of
the undertaking under
investigation is only protected by legal privilege if the communication
specifically relates to the ongoing
investigation (defence correspondence). The
[Federal Cartel Office] will have full access to advice that was given before
the initiation
of proceedings relating to the conduct under
investigation.
Submissions and
consultations
Client Legal Privilege and Federal Investigatory Bodies
(IP 33), the ALRC asked if client legal privilege were to be abrogated or
modified, whether there should be a distinction drawn between
communications relating to the representation of a client in the investigation
process (to remain protected from disclosure),
and privileged communications
that relate to the subject matter of the
investigation.
7.13 Some stakeholders were against such a distinction being drawn, on the
basis that they opposed any modification or abrogation
of client legal
The Taxation
Institute of Australia submitted that, in general, no such distinction should be
drawn, but that it ‘should depend
upon the particular
circumstances’.
7.14 Other stakeholders supported the protection of privileged documents
relating to the representation of a client in the
investigation,
including on the
basis that it was important to maintain the integrity of the
The Law Society of New
South Wales (NSW) submitted that:
Irrespective of the presence or absence of a right to representation,
communications relating to advising or representing a client
in relation to an
investigation should remain privileged, notwithstanding any abrogation or
modification of privilege so far as it
relates to the original subject
7.15 A number of stakeholders commented on the difficulty—or
arbitrariness—of drawing a distinction between advice relating
investigation itself and advice relating to the subject of the
investigation.
The Australian
Government Solicitor (AGS) submitted that, although the distinction appeared
‘generally workable’,
a practical shortcoming with the distinction could arise where the conduct which
is the subject of the investigation is on-going,
or, at least, where the conduct
continues after an investigation into it has commenced. Undue subtlety may come
into play in trying
to apply the
distinction.
7.16 Similarly, the Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions (CDPP)
expressed concern about how the distinction would accommodate
offences that
continue after the investigation commences.
In such cases documents and communications may fall within both categories which
raises the possibility that the claim of client
legal privilege in those cases
may have to be litigated to determine whether the privilege applies or
7.17 The Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) submitted
would be content with a regime whereby privilege is retained in documents or
communications relating to the representation of a client
from the time the ACCC
makes the client aware of the investigation. The ACCC realises that where it is
investigating past conduct,
such material is generally not part of the
‘matter’ under investigation. Insofar as such material may fall
within that
description (for example, where the conduct is ongoing or for
proposed mergers), the ACCC is prepared to accept a practical solution
even in these cases, privilege remains available from the point where the ACCC
makes the client aware of the
investigation.
7.18 It is important that persons be able freely to seek legal advice
concerning their response to federal coercive powers, and, where
necessary or
appropriate, to seek legal representation in federal
investigations.
significant aspect of the fairness of an investigation process—increasing
the likelihood that persons are properly
informed about their obligations, and
that their rights are properly protected.
7.19 The ALRC considers that, as a matter of principle, any abrogation or
modification of client legal privilege should be limited,
as far as possible, to
abrogation or modification concerning advice on the subject matter of an
investigation, as opposed to advice
on, or representation in, the investigation
itself. The principle should be legislatively affirmed and consideration given
to properly
delineating its boundaries.
7.20 Where an investigation concerns past completed conduct—for
example, a one-off contravention of a particular statute alleged
to have been
committed on a particular day—any legal advice that the person receives in
relation to that investigation should
be protected from disclosure to a federal
body, even if the federal body is authorised by statute to obtain privileged
communications
concerning the particular contravention. Therefore, the ALRC is
of the preliminary view that, federal client legal privilege legislation
make it clear that abrogation of client legal privilege by another federal
statute does not extend to legal advice or representation
in the investigation
itself, provided that, or to the extent that, the investigation concerns
offences alleged to have been committed
prior to the commencement of the
investigation.
7.21 Adopting such an approach will mean that abrogation or modification of
client legal privilege by another federal statute may
extend to legal advice
that relates to the investigation itself in circumstances where:
the advice concerns alleged offences that continue after the
commencement of the investigation—irrespective of whether those
are ongoing or continue for a limited time only; and
those offences are the subject of the
investigation.
7.22 For example, a federal investigation concerning
alleged illegal fundraising may involve a series of separate but related
committed before and after the commencement of the investigation. In
such cases, where another federal statute abrogates client legal
privilege, the
effect of the ALRC’s proposed legislative provision will be to protect
from disclosure legal advice relating
to the investigation only insofar as the
advice relates to the investigation concerning those offences committed prior to
the commencement
of the investigation.
Proposal 7–1
Federal client legal privilege legislation should
provide that, if another federal statute expressly abrogates or modifies client
legal privilege, such abrogation or modification does not extend to legal advice
that relates to the investigation itself, or to
the representation of the client
in the investigation, provided that, or to the extent that, the investigation
concerns offences
alleged to have been committed prior to the commencement of
the investigation.
Restrictions on the
use of privileged information
7.23 An important issue in relation to client legal privilege is determining
the use to which privileged information, obtained by
coercion, can be put if
privilege were to be abrogated or modified.
7.24 At one end of the spectrum, it is possible for no restrictions to be
placed on the use of privileged information obtained by
coercion. For example,
James Hardie (Investigations and Proceedings) Act 2004
(Cth), which
abrogates privilege, does not contain any provisions restricting the use of
otherwise privileged material.
The Act provides that a claim of client legal privilege in relation to
‘James Hardie material’ does not prevent that
material from being
admissible in a ‘James Hardie
proceeding’.
Explanatory Memorandum to the
James Hardie (Investigations and Proceedings) Bill
states that:
Authorised persons, including ASIC and the DPP, will be able to obtain materials
that would otherwise be subject to legal professional
privilege and use them for
the purposes of certain investigations and
proceedings.
Evidence Act 1958
(Vic), which abrogates client legal
privilege in Royal Commissions established in Victoria, does not expressly
restrict the use to
which otherwise privileged information produced to a Royal
Commission can be put.
7.26 At the other end of the spectrum, there are two broad types of statutory
provisions that limit the use of privileged communications
obtained through the
exercise of coercive powers. The first type is a provision conferring what is
known as ‘use immunity’.
This usually limits the use of the
information in any subsequent criminal or civil penalty proceedings against the
person who provided
the information, except in proceedings in relation to the
falsity of the evidence itself.
7.27 The second type of
provision is one conferring ‘derivative use immunity’. This is wider
than use immunity, in that
it also renders inadmissible in subsequent
proceedings any evidence obtained as a result of the person having disclosed or
a privileged communication. Therefore, any documents obtained or
witnesses identified as a result of the information having been
provided are not
admissible against the person compelled to
7.28 Since few federal statutes expressly abrogate client legal privilege,
express use or derivative use immunity provisions in this
context are
comparatively rare. Such provisions are more commonly found in the context of
federal laws that abrogate the privilege
self-incrimination.
therefore be useful to draw upon experiences relating to the application of the
immunities where the privilege against self-incrimination
is abolished—and
this is done later in this chapter.
7.29 Where client legal privilege is taken to have been impliedly removed, it
may mean that no use immunity is expressly
As noted in
Principled Regulation: Federal Civil and Administrative Penalties in
(ALRC 95), this leads to the curious result that statutes
expressly removing client legal privilege may contain greater protections
statutes interpreted as impliedly removing the
Hence, persons
subject to coercive information-gathering powers may have different levels of
protection afforded to them depending
on whether privilege is removed expressly
or by implication, without any policy rationale for the difference in
Legislation
conferring use immunity
7.30 Examples of use immunity provisions in the context of the abrogation of
client legal privilege can be found in the
Proceeds of Crime Act 2002
Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security Act 1986
(IGIS Act), and the ASIC Act. Each of these is addressed below.
Proceeds of Crimes Act 2002
7.31 A person is not excused from providing certain property tracking records
pursuant to an order made by a magistrate under
Proceeds of
Crime Act 2002
on the ground that the records would disclose information
that is the subject of client legal
However, in the case
of a natural person, the record is not admissible in criminal proceedings
against the person, except in respect
of specified offences under the
Criminal Code
concerning the production of false or misleading
information or documents.
Inspector-General of Intelligence and
Security Act 1986 (Cth)
7.32 A person is not excused from providing documents or information to the
Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security (IGIS)
on the grounds that to do
so would disclose legal advice to a minister, agency or authority of the
Commonwealth.
However, the
information or documents are not admissible in evidence against the person in
any court or in any proceedings except
in prosecutions for specified offences,
an offence against s 18 of the IGIS Act which requires the
giving of information or the production of documents;
attempting, inciting or conspiring to commit an offence against
s 18 of the IGIS Act;
being an accessory after the fact in relation to an offence against
s 18 of the IGIS Act; and
offences against the
Criminal Code
concerning the production
of false or misleading information or
Securities and Investments Commission Act 2001 (Cth)
7.33 The ASIC Act provides that a statement that a person makes at a
compulsory examination is inadmissible against the person in
a proceeding
the statement discloses matter in respect of which the person could
claim client legal privilege; and
the person objects to the admission of evidence of the
Legislation
conferring derivative use immunity
Inspector-General of Taxation Act 2003
(Cth) contains an
example of a provision conferring both use and derivative use immunity. Under
of that Act a tax official is not excused from giving information,
producing a document, or answering a question on the ground that
to do so would
disclose material that is protected against disclosure by client legal
privilege. However, s 16(2) provides that neither:
the information or answer given or the document produced; nor
any information, document or thing obtained as a direct or indirect
consequence of giving the information or answer or producing
the document;
is admissible against the person in proceedings, other than in proceedings
for specified offences, including providing false or misleading
information or
documents or obstructing a Commonwealth public
of proceedings to which immunity provisions apply
7.35 Use and derivative use immunity provisions only prohibit the use of
privileged evidence obtained from a person by a coercive
information-gathering
power against that person. They do not prevent a federal investigatory body from
using the privileged information
against another person or entity in subsequent
proceedings, subject to the general rules of evidence.
7.36 Use and derivative use immunity provisions typically apply to subsequent
criminal proceedings and any proceedings for the imposition
of a penalty, such
as civil penalty proceedings. Immunity provisions do not usually apply to civil
proceedings that do not seek the
imposition of a penalty, so they do not affect
civil proceedings initiated by federal investigatory bodies, seeking injunctive
declaratory relief, restraining orders or asset-freezing
7.37 The issue of whether immunity provisions apply to banning or
disqualification orders has arisen in the context of the abrogation
privilege against exposure to a penalty. In
Australian Securities Commission
, the Federal Court held that the purpose of a proceeding to impose a
banning order was to protect the public and not to punish the
person in respect
of whom the order was sought—and therefore answers in respect of which an
examinee had claimed the privilege
against exposure to a penalty could be used
against the examinee in that
proceeding.
Rich v Australian Securities & Investments Commission
High Court stated that
should be overruled, and held that an order
seeking the disqualification of a person from managing a company did impose a
albeit not a pecuniary one. The High Court stated that a proceeding
seeking relief may both protect the public and also penalise
the person against
whom relief is granted.
7.39 On 20 August 2007, the
Corporations Amendment (Insolvency) Bill
—which abrogates the privilege against exposure to a penalty in
relation to banning orders and disqualifications—received
7.40 In the Second Reading of that Bill, the Parliamentary Secretary to the
Treasurer, the Hon Christopher Pearce MP, stated that:
The government will legislate to restore the longstanding position that the
privilege against exposure to a penalty does not apply
in proceedings where ASIC
is seeking disqualification or banning orders and no other
Choosing between use
and derivative use immunity
7.41 If safeguards restricting the use of privileged communications obtained
by coercion were to be introduced in the event of abrogation
or modification of
client legal privilege, questions arise about the precise form of those
safeguards; in particular, if an immunity
were to be conferred, which form it
should take.
7.42 In the 1990s, a number of arguments were made for and against the
conferral of derivative use immunity in the context of the
abrogation of the
privilege against self-incrimination in relation to investigations conducted by
the then Australian Securities
Commission (ASC), the predecessor to ASIC. These
arguments are addressed below. In IP 33, the ALRC asked whether such
arguments are
applicable in considering the application of derivative use
immunity in the context of any possible abrogation of client legal
As noted below, ASIC
expressed the view that the arguments are of direct
Australian Securities Commission Act 1989
(Cth) (ASC Act), a
predecessor to the ASIC Act, originally contained a provision conferring:
derivative use immunity in respect of oral statements obtained under
compulsion or the signing of a record of examination; and
use immunity in respect of the production of books pursuant to a
compulsory power;
where the statement, signing the record or the production of books had the
tendency to incriminate the person giving the information
or producing the
documents or to make him or her liable to a
Benefits of derivative use immunity
in the ASC Act
7.44 Potential benefits of conferring a derivative use immunity in these
circumstances included:
encouraging disclosures, making persons more likely to cooperate
during examinations, because they knew they had the protection of
protecting against an investigatory body misusing it
giving meaningful protection to direct use immunity—because
any attempt to admit as evidence in criminal proceedings the indirect
consequences of the person giving the information or document would undermine
the protection granted in respect of the answer
ensuring an appropriate balance between the interests of the state
and individual
of derivative use immunity in the ASC Act
7.45 The inclusion of a derivative use provision in the ASC Act was strongly
criticised by the then ASC, as well as the
The ASC and CDPP claimed
that the practical effect of the derivative use immunity provision was ‘to
place insurmountable obstacles
in the way of successful
prosecutions’.
7.46 In a combined submission to the Joint Statutory Committee on
Corporations and Securities (JSCCS), the ASC and CDPP argued for
the removal of
derivative use immunity, submitting that:
Should any prosecution of a person so compelled arise the prosecutor must prove
that the evidence being advanced was not gained directly
or indirectly from the
answers or documents obtained where the privilege against self-incrimination was
claimed by the person being
7.47 The CDPP stated that:
If there is an examination, every piece of evidence collected after that
examination will be subject to debate … that is going
to unduly complicate
trials, make them prolix, there will be hearings within hearings to determine
just when the document was obtained,
whether its use was derivative, et
7.48 The ASC considered that the provision conferring derivative use was an
‘absurdity’ because:
[Section 38 of the ASC Act] confers a power and section 68 establishes
dire consequences for exercising it … because you then
cannot use the
material you find as a result of the answer to the
7.49 The ASC highlighted the following predicament where oral explanation of
a transaction was required because it was not documented:
In the course of investigating the matter, we asked the simple question of one
of the parties: ‘Did you in fact come to any
agreement concerning your
shares with X?’ The unfortunate position is that when the answer to that
is, ‘Yes, I did. We
discussed it on two occasions; the nature of the
agreement was to this effect’, we cannot thereafter use not only the
of the person subject to examination but also the evidence of X to whom
7.50 The view was expressed that the derivative use provision rendered the
ASC’s investigatory power
a poisoned chalice—since you get the investigative power and if you use it
you kill off your ability to bring a criminal action
7.51 Other arguments against derivative use immunity, identified in John
Report on Review of the Derivative Use Immunity
include that:
a person might cooperate in an examination simply to achieve a
considerable forensic advantage for himself or herself—namely
that any information or document derived from the information provided was
thereby rendered inadmissible in any later criminal
or penalty-exposing
proceedings against the person;
the application of the immunity can have arbitrary or anomalous
outcomes. The immunity only protects the examinee, not any other
might also be incriminated in consequence of the information provided in the
examinee’s answer. Any document or
other thing obtained as a direct or
indirect result of the examinee’s answer could still be used against
another person, subject
to evidentiary rules. The order in which persons were
examined could therefore fundamentally affect the potential benefit of the
derivative use immunity for particular
abolition of derivative use immunity in the ASC Act
7.52 The JSCCS recommended that s 68 of the ASC Act and s 597(12)
of the (then)
Corporations Law
be amended to remove the derivative use
immunity provisions.
In so doing
it accepted the ASC’s evidence that
the immunity applying to the production of documents and the derivative immunity
applying to oral evidence curtail the ASC’s
investigatory powers to an
extent that seriously limits its capacity to discharge the responsibilities
placed on it by Parliament.
7.53 Following the recommendations of the JSCCS, the
Corporations
Legislation (Evidence) Amendment Act
(Cth) abolished the
derivative use immunity previously available under s 597 of the
Corporations Law
and s 68 of the ASC Act. The Explanatory Memorandum
to the Corporations Legislation (Evidence) Amendment Bill stated that derivative
use immunity placed an
excessive burden on the prosecution to prove beyond a reasonable doubt the
negative fact that an item of evidence (of which there
may be thousands in a
complex case) has not been obtained as a result of information subject to the
use immunity.
7.54 The amending Act also required that a report be made to the
Attorney-General by 1997 about the extent to which, and in what ways,
amending provisions helped the ASC in carrying out investigations and gathering
information.
7.55 In May 1997, Kluver concluded that the provisions removing derivative
use immunity had
greatly assisted the ASC in its enforcement of the national scheme laws,
primarily by increasing the Commission’s ability to
more fully and
expeditiously utilise its power to conduct compulsory oral examinations. …
The amendments have also assisted the ASC in initiating early injunctive or
other civil protective proceedings to preserve assets
or otherwise limit or
reduce the financial harm arising from suspected
wrongdoing.
7.56 Kluver also expressed support for the retention of ‘direct’
use immunity,
noting that it
provided protection to examinees without significantly impeding the ASC’s
investigative and enforcement
Application of
immunities to document production and oral statements
7.57 Federal provisions that contain use or derivative use immunity
provisions—either in the context of the abrogation of client
privilege or self-incrimination—take differing approaches to the
application of that immunity to documents and oral statements.
7.58 For example, the ASIC Act only gives use immunity to persons in relation
to the making of an oral statement or the signing of
a record, and not to the
production of documents.
regard, the JSCCS recommended that the then ASC Act be amended to remove use
immunity with regard to the fact that a person
has produced a document, where
production might tend to incriminate that
7.59 In contrast, the
Medicare Australia Act 1973
(Cth)—in the
context of the abrogation of the privilege against
self-incrimination—confers use and derivative use immunity
in relation to
both the production of documents and the giving of information pursuant to
Medicare Australia’s coercive information-gathering
power under the
Environment Protection Authority v Caltex Refining Co Pty Ltd
Mason CJ and Toohey J stated:
It is one thing to protect a person from testifying as to guilt; it is quite
another thing to protect a person from the production
of documents already in
existence which constitute evidence of guilt … [Documents] are in the
nature of real evidence which
speak for themselves as distinct from testimonial
oral evidence which is brought into existence in response to an exercise of
investigatory
power or in the course of legal
proceedings.
7.61 In IP 33, the ALRC expressed interest in hearing views about
whether a distinction should be drawn in the application of the
immunities to
the production of documents and the making of oral statements—in
particular, whether arguments supporting such
a distinction in the context of
the privilege against self-incrimination have any force in the context of client
legal privilege.
Stakeholders’ views on this are set out separately
Royal Commissions of
7.62 As discussed in Chapter 4, Royal Commissions of inquiry normally
are established only where a particular area of public concern
identified. Their purpose is to determine factual circumstances, report on the
matters specified in the Letters Patent (terms
of reference) and make
recommendations.
7.63 The discovery of the truth has been described as a prime function of a
Royal Commission.
However, while
the pursuit of the truth may be a compelling argument for the abrogation of
privilege in Royal Commissions, does the
argument have any force in considering
the issue of whether use or derivative use immunity should apply?
7.64 In this regard, it is important to note that the responsibility for
implementing the recommendations of a Royal Commission may
fall on other
Commonwealth investigatory bodies. The application of a use or derivative use
immunity on privileged evidence obtained
by compulsion by a Royal Commission
might significantly frustrate the ability of other federal bodies to bring
proceedings to seek
redress in respect of improper or unlawful conduct
identified by the Royal
Commission.
Royal Commissions Act 1923
(NSW) abrogates client legal
privilege but confers a use immunity that applies in any civil or criminal
proceedings against the person.
In contrast, while the
Evidence Act 1958
(Vic) has a specific provision
conferring use immunity in the context of the abrogation of
self-incrimination,
the statute
is silent on the question of immunity as it applies in the context of the
abrogation of client legal
X v Australian Prudential Regulation
Court decided that the use by the Australian Prudential Regulation Authority
(APRA) of the evidence of X and
before the HIH Royal
Commission did not contravene
Royal Commissions Act 1902
7.67 Following the HIH Royal Commission, APRA issued notices to X and Y under
Insurance Act
(Cth), requiring them to show cause why
they should not be disqualified from holding positions in Australia as senior
managers or
agents of a foreign general insurer. The ‘show cause’
notices were based on APRA’s preliminary view that X and
‘fit and proper’ persons for those roles. APRA formed its
preliminary view having regard to X and Y’s
involvement in the HIH
transactions and their evidence given to the HIH Royal Commission. The High
Court stated:
The evidence that X and Y gave at the Royal Commission may provide some, or even
all, of the material which APRA may consider, and
upon which it may rely, in
giving effect to the regulatory provisions of the
Insurance Act
disadvantage suffered by X or Y, as a consequence of the proper application of
those regulatory provisions, would not be ‘for
or on account of’ his
attendance at the Royal Commission or the evidence he
7.68 It has been suggested that the High Court’s decision is of
significance for clarifying the proper interpretation of
Royal Commissions Act 1902
(Cth) and the use of evidence obtained during
Royal Commissions by regulatory authorities in genuine discharge of their
Submissions and
consultations
Application of immunities
7.69 In IP 33, the ALRC asked if client legal privilege were to be
abrogated or modified, whether any safeguards should be put in
particular, whether use or derivative use immunity should be
7.70 Submissions and consultations were divided on the issue of immunities.
Some stakeholders that opposed abrogation of client legal
privilege also
expressed opposition to safeguards in the form of either of the
immunities.
For example, the NSW
Bar Association submitted that:
An abrogation of the privilege before a range of federal investigative agencies
coupled with a use immunity would effectively amount
to a destruction of the
privilege itself. …
The fact that the privileged communication could still be used in other
proceedings and by other parties, once it was publicly disclosed,
or that the
very same federal investigative agency could still use it as a basis to generate
further or other evidence from which
a charge could be made against the client,
means the client would be most reluctant to engage in the full sharing of
information
characteristic of the lawyer-client relationship.
A related problem is that, once the client’s communication is disclosed,
it may be able to be used against the client in proceedings
where the client is
a witness and not a party and thus unable to assert any use immunity.
Further, it has not been established that the addition of a derivative use
immunity can overcome the above problems with a mere use
immunity or that it is
broadly acceptable.
7.71 On the other hand, the Law Council of Australia (Law Council) submitted
that if there were to be abrogation of client legal privilege,
safeguards had to
be put in place and either use or derivative use immunity should
Similarly, National Legal
Aid submitted that it would support the introduction of ‘appropriate
safeguards’ in the event
client legal privilege was abrogated or modified,
and that such safeguards had to be considered on a case by case
7.72 ASIC suggested the adoption of a safeguard other than an immunity. It
submitted that:
Instead we suggest a balanced approach to the use of otherwise privileged
material may be achieved by applying legal privilege as
a qualified privilege in
court proceedings.
7.73 ASIC explained its support of such an approach in the following way:
ASIC’s use in enforcement actions of materials otherwise covered by client
legal privilege should be limited to court proceedings,
and should be subject to
the discretion of a judge. That is, if ASIC wishes to rely on the material as
evidence in a civil or criminal
proceeding, it will be admissible only if a
judge exercises a discretion based on the evidential value of the material and
the detriment
that may be suffered by a
7.74 Set out below is a summary of the views of stakeholders on the
application of each of the immunities.
Use immunity
7.75 Some stakeholders expressed a preference for the conferral of use
immunity in the event that client legal privilege is abrogated—on
basis that it represented a more practical limitation than derivative use
immunity. For example, the CDPP submitted that:
While this office is of the view that use immunity would be a more practical
limitation than derivative use immunity … , this
office must also point
out that there are obvious disadvantages to the prosecution if use immunity
applies in that the prosecution
is unable to use the communication that was
previously privileged in evidence. The impact that this would have on
prosecutions would
depend on the individual facts of the
7.76 The ACCC submitted that:
If legal professional privilege was to be abrogated in relation to s 155
notices [issued under the
Trade Practices Act 1974
(Cth)] the ACCC would
not consider the implementation of a use immunity provision to be inappropriate,
provided such a provision
was clearly restricted in application to the use of
the information in subsequent criminal
proceedings.
7.77 In contrast, ASIC submitted:
Given that access to legally privileged material may be critical to undertaking
some enforcement actions, ASIC believes that, should
there be an
abrogation/modification of legal privilege, a use immunity should not be applied
in that context.
7.78 In IP 33, the ALRC said that it was interested in hearing whether
the conferral of use immunity (in respect of those statutes
that have abrogated
or modified client legal privilege), has stymied the conduct of investigations
conducted under those statutes.
In this regard, the IGIS submitted that:
Section 18(6) of the IGIS Act provides for use immunity and I can say
confidently that this has not been an inhibition to effective
investigation in
my experience.
Arguably, use immunity provides additional incentive for a person to cooperate
In my view, it is intuitively fair that use immunity be available if the normal
right concerning self-incrimination is not
Derivative use immunity
7.79 Submissions and consultations were divided among those who supported the
conferral of derivative use immunity—either in
including as a
default protection
those who opposed derivative use
7.80 The Law Society of NSW submitted that:
Consistent with a view that the privilege ought not be abrogated or limited
(save, perhaps, in certain very narrow and well defined
circumstances involving
a clearly paramount public interest) derivative use immunity ought to apply as a
default protection.
7.81 NSW Young Lawyers expressed the view that:
If client legal privilege was abrogated or modified, anything less than applying
derivative use immunity would fail to protect the
person’s fundamental
common law right to claim client legal
7.82 Victoria Legal Aid agreed with the benefits identified in IP 33 for
conferring derivative use immunity—including that it
disclosures, protected against investigatory bodies misusing their powers, and
ensured an appropriate balance between
the interests of the state and
individuals.
7.83 The Australian Transport Safety Bureau submitted that:
A derivative use immunity provision is appropriate in the context of the
Transport Safety Investigation Act 2003
(Cth) (TSI Act)] where the
exercise of the powers is not meant to apportion blame or assist with
determining liability, but is for
the purpose of improving transport safety in
the future.
7.84 In contrast, a number of federal bodies—as well as other
stakeholders—expressed opposition to derivative use immunity.
For example,
the IGIS submitted that:
Derivative use immunity is not provided for in the IGIS Act and I see no reason
to contemplate its introduction into the
7.85 The ACCC submitted that it
would be strongly opposed to a derivative use immunity provision, which would
prevent it from using any evidence obtained as a result
of the provision or
disclosure of a privileged communication in subsequent legal proceedings. Such a
provision would clearly affect
the ACCC’s ability to use privileged
information obtained in its investigation where it would otherwise assist in
contravention of the [
Trade Practices
7.86 ASIC submitted that:
If derivative use immunity applies, an investigatory body may restrict its
ability to undertake enforcement action by compelling
the production of
otherwise privileged information at an early stage of an investigation. This is
because, in doing so, a body exposes
itself to the risk of a challenge in
relation to material subsequently gathered on the basis that that material was
obtained as a
result of derivative use of the privileged material. Such a
challenge may not ultimately succeed, but the risk of it being made and
consequent delays to an investigation would make a prudent regulator cautious
The submissions, findings and recommendations that were made in the 1990s that
derivative use immunity should not apply in the context
of the abrogation of the
privilege against self-incrimination pursuant to
of the ASC Law are
directly relevant to any consideration of abrogating client legal privilege in
combination with a derivative use
immunity. That relevance is not based on the
principles underlying the two privileges being the same, but on the practical
difficulties
that would be created by the application of a derivative use
7.87 The AGS noted that derivative use immunity ‘by depriving a
document of any evidentiary value’ would in many cases
‘so derogate
from the effect of abrogation of the privilege as to render the abrogation as of
little or no value.
7.88 The ALRC’s views on the application of the immunities are set out
Scope of immunities
Application of immunities to corporations and individuals
7.89 In IP 33, the ALRC asked, if use or derivative use immunity were to
be introduced as a safeguard in the event of client legal
privilege being
abrogated or modified, whether a distinction should be drawn between the
application of the immunities to corporations
individuals.
7.90 IP 33 noted that there are some differences in the consequences of
protecting individuals and corporations from having privileged
information
obtained by coercion used against them in criminal proceedings. These
differences flow from the fact that many of the
sentences that can be imposed on
natural persons following a criminal conviction cannot be imposed on
corporations.
7.91 Submissions and consultations strongly supported the application of the
immunities to both individuals and corporations, in the
event that the
immunities were introduced as a
Stakeholders
expressed the view that a distinction between individuals and corporations
should not be made mainly on the basis that
the rationales for the
privilege—in particular the compliance rationale—applied equally to
corporations as it did to
individuals.
7.92 For example, ASIC submitted that:
Given that the principal rationale that underlies client legal privilege is
equally applicable to natural persons and corporations,
there is no basis, as a
matter of principle, for corporations to have a lesser entitlement to immunities
than natural persons.
7.93 Victoria Legal Aid expressed support for conferring immunity on both
corporations and individuals, noting that:
whilst the liberty of the corporation itself is not at stake, the liberty of
individual corporate officers may
7.94 The Law Society of NSW expressed the view that:
The arguments in favour of differential application of the privilege and
consequential safeguards as between corporations and individuals
do not seem
particularly strong. Contrast the position regarding privilege against
self-incrimination.
Application of immunities to document production and oral
7.95 In IP 33, the ALRC asked, if use or derivative use immunity were to
be introduced as a safeguard in the event of client legal
privilege being
abrogated or modified, whether a distinction should be drawn between the
application of the immunities to the production
of documents and the making of
oral statements.
7.96 The majority of submissions and consultations that addressed this issue
expressed the view that no such distinction should be
For example, the Law
Council submitted that such a distinction ‘may result in less advice being
committed to written form,
particularly on sensitive
Society of NSW expressed the view that:
It seems contrary to principle, and to common sense, for the privilege and any
consequential protections to apply only to statements
Harmonisation of approach
7.97 In IP 33, the ALRC raised the question whether it is legitimate to
have one type of immunity apply across the range of federal
statutes if
privilege were to be abrogated or modified, or whether different investigatory
contexts justify the application of different
In particular,
IP 33 asked if distinctions should be drawn:
among federal bodies, depending upon the functions that they
between federal agencies exercising coercive powers and Royal
Commissions of inquiry?
between federal investigations conducted in public, and those
conducted in
approaches based on function?
7.98 Submissions and consultations were divided, with some supporting the
application of immunities across the range of federal bodies—irrespective
of the functions performed by those
suggesting instead that the issue of safeguards should be considered on a case
by case basis.
7.99 The Law Society of NSW expressed the view that it would be
‘worthwhile if the need to develop a functional taxonomy of
investigative
agencies can be
NSW Young Lawyers submitted that:
The immunities should apply in the same manner regardless of the functions of
the Commonwealth bodies. … There is no guarantee
that a document produced
or statement provided to a Commonwealth body exercising a compliance function
will not be used by a Commonwealth
body exercising an enforcement function. If
these safeguards were not in place, the person would not be encouraged to
cooperate with
the Commonwealth body for fear of future action being taken
against them.
7.100 However, National Legal Aid submitted that:
Any modification/abrogation of the privilege should be on a case by case basis
taking into account the functions of the agency and
the subject matter. The
question of safeguards should be dealt with
accordingly.
Royal Commissions
7.101 There was a divergence of opinion concerning the application of the
immunities to Royal Commissions, if client legal privilege
were to be abrogated
in that context. For example, the Law Council submitted that if privilege were
to be abrogated or modified specifically
for Royal Commissions, use or
derivative use immunity should
The Law Society of NSW
expressed the view that:
wider rather than narrower immunities should apply in the case of Royal
Commissions as opposed to Commonwealth agencies exercising
coercive powers, the
James Hardie example
notwithstanding.
7.102 Other stakeholders maintained that if privilege were to be abrogated or
modified in the context of a Royal Commission, then
there should be no
restrictions on the use to which otherwise privileged information obtained by
the Royal Commission could be put,
and cautioned against the use of immunity
provisions in such a
7.103 One stakeholder submitted that:
Where the privilege does not apply to the investigation leading to, and the
conduct of a commission of public importance, the privilege
[should] also be
lost in relation to any related proceedings, in the way that the
James Hardie
has done. It would make the work of commissions of public importance
appear somewhat futile if their findings could not be successfully
because material available to them was not then admissible in subsequent court
proceedings.
7.104 Similarly, ASIC submitted that it
envisages that, in some cases, its investigations would be helped by any legally
privileged information which a Royal or other Special
Commission may be able to
obtain if client legal privilege were abrogated in relation to those
Commissions. Accordingly, ASIC believes
that caution should be exercised in
considering the application of any immunities to information obtained by Royal
Commissions or
other Special Commissions of
Public versus private investigations
7.105 The general theme that emerged from submissions on this issue was that
no distinction should be drawn between the application
of the immunities to
federal investigations conducted in public and those conducted in private, but
that additional safeguards should
be introduced to protect privileged
information given in a public
investigation.
7.106 For example, the Law Society of NSW expressed the view that:
It might be thought that any proposal that lesser protections should apply to
proceedings conducted in public view could have a counter-productive
leading to the possibility of perceived ‘show trials’ were evidence
obtained by Royal Commissions over otherwise
valid objections later used to
secure convictions.
7.107 NSW Young Lawyers submitted that:
For investigations conducted in public, there is usually strong media presence
that gives rise to an expectation to deal with illegal
or unlawful conduct that
is uncovered during an investigation. There is a significant risk that the media
will influence the conduct
of the proceedings.
The public interest is not affected by whether the investigation is conducted in
private or public. Ultimately, the applicability
of the immunities should not be
varied to align with the current public interest issue that the media is
focusing on.
7.108 Victoria Legal Aid submitted that:
We support conferring the immunity in all investigations. However, as an
additional safeguard, we suggest that in public hearings
[information subject to
a claim for client legal privilege] should be provided in
7.109 ASIC agreed that:
Any detriment a claimant of privilege may suffer due to an abrogation or
modification of client legal privilege may be reduced if
the disclosure of the
privileged information is restricted. Such a requirement may be imposed for both
Royal Commissions and court
proceedings.
7.110 The ALRC considers that if client legal privilege is abrogated or
modified in respect of any federal investigation, the ordinary
presumption
should be that safeguards ought to be implemented—in one form or
another—to protect the use to which otherwise
privileged information can
be put. A consideration of specific factors (addressed below) may operate to
displace that presumption.
Harmonisation
7.111 The ALRC is of the preliminary view that attempting to prescribe a
‘one-size fits all’ approach to safeguards—regardless
functions or exigencies of the particular federal investigatory body, or indeed
the exigencies of particular inquiries or
investigations—is fraught with
difficulties. This is consistent with the view expressed by the ALRC in
Chapter 5 concerning
the difficulties in establishing a uniform approach to
the application of client legal privilege.
7.112 As discussed previously in this Discussion Paper, federal bodies with
coercive information-gathering powers operate in vastly
different areas and
there are important differences in their aims, functions, operations and
Significantly, while
some bodies have enforcement functions, others do not, and of those bodies
possessing enforcement functions
there are noteworthy differences in their
policies and practices concerning resort to enforcement activity.
7.113 Consequently, if privilege is or were to be abrogated, the safeguards
that may be appropriate and practical in the context of
some federal
investigations—for example those conducted by an oversight body, such as
the IGIS—may not be appropriate
in the context of other investigations,
such as those conducted by a Royal Commission of inquiry.
7.114 The divergence of stakeholders’ views on the application of the
immunities is also testament to the difficulties of attempting
uniform approach to safeguards. For example, the ACCC supported use immunity in
certain proceedings, while ASIC did not.
7.115 The proposed adoption of a default safeguard provision in the event
that client legal privilege is abrogated (discussed below)
may, however,
introduce an appropriate degree of uniformity, without impeding flexibility of
approach where warranted.
Relevant factors to be
7.116 As discussed in Chapter 6, the ALRC envisages that any abrogation
of client legal privilege will occur only in a few exceptional
circumstances—not as a matter of course. Therefore, the issue of what
safeguards, if any, should apply in a particular federal
investigation where
privilege is abrogated should similarly arise only in exceptional circumstances.
If exceptional circumstances
warrant the abrogation of the privilege,
consideration will have to be given to whether it is appropriate for the
application of
any particular safeguard to render nugatory the effect of
abrogation.
7.117 The factors relevant to a consideration of whether, and which,
safeguards should be applied in the event of an abrogation or
modification of
the privilege overlap, to some degree, with the factors relevant to considering
whether the public interest in a
particular case warrants the abrogation or
modification of the
These factors
the federal body’s role and functions;
the nature and gravity of the matters under consideration, including
whether the investigation concerns an issue of major public
importance that has
a significant impact on the community in general or on a section of the
community; and
the likelihood and degree to which the privileged information will
benefit any action, including enforcement action, to be taken
as a result of the
investigation, particularly where legal advice is central to the issues being
considered.
Enactment of a default
7.118 In order to give effect to the presumption that where client legal
privilege is abrogated or modified safeguards should apply
to protect the use to
which otherwise privileged information can be put, the ALRC is of the
preliminary view that federal client
legal privilege legislation should contain
a default safeguard provision—the form of which is addressed below.
7.119 The ALRC envisages that the default provision will operate in the same
way as the default provision proposed in Chapter 5 (preserving
application of client legal privilege to the coercive powers of federal
investigatory bodies), in that it can be displaced only
by clear and express
words conveying a contrary approach. The ability to displace the default
provision ensures that an appropriate
degree of flexibility is retained with
respect to the application of safeguards—recognising the exigencies of
different investigatory
7.120 The default provision can coexist with existing provisions conferring
use or derivative use immunity—such as those in
the IGIS Act and the
Inspector-General of Taxation Act
—in respect of which no particular
criticisms have been levelled in the context of this Inquiry.
Choosing between use immunity and derivative
use immunity as a default provision
7.121 As a general proposition, the ALRC considers that the default safeguard
should be one that is ‘low to mid range’
on the spectrum of
safeguards. Therefore, the ALRC does not support the adoption of derivative use
immunity (which is broader in
application than use immunity) as a default
provision—despite the fact that the ALRC considers that the application of
a derivative
use immunity may be appropriate in the context of investigations
conducted by the Inspector-General of Taxation.
7.122 The ALRC is mindful of the criticisms made of derivative use immunity
by the then ASC, the CDPP and the JSCCS in the context
of its application to the
privilege against self-incrimination in ASC investigations. The ALRC tends to
agree that derivative use
immunity can operate as a ‘poisoned
genuine practical obstacles to enforcement action, and render virtually
worthless the effect of abrogation of privilege.
7.123 Consequently, the ALRC would support use immunity as a more appropriate
default safeguard than derivative use immunity. ALRC
95 recommended that
where legislation abrogated or modified client legal privilege, a default use
immunity provision should apply
in the absence of any clear express statutory
statement to the
Choosing between use immunity and judicial
discretion to admit evidence
7.124 The ALRC has some reservations about the arbitrary nature in which a
use immunity provision might operate where client legal
privilege—as
opposed to the privilege against self-incrimination—is abrogated. As noted
above, a use immunity provision
typically limits use of privileged information
in any subsequent criminal or civil penalty proceedings against the person who
the information, except in proceedings in relation to the falsity of
the evidence itself. In the context of the privilege against
self-incrimination,
by definition, people can only ‘self-incriminate’
themselves—so there is a rationally consistent
basis for limiting the use
of the information against the person who provided it.
7.125 Similarly, where a person who is the holder of client legal privilege
in a communication produces that communication in response
to a federal
investigatory coercive power, there is a rational basis for adopting the
position that the privileged information cannot
be used against that person.
However, in responding to the coercive powers of federal investigatory bodies, a
person other than the
holder of the privilege may produce a document containing
a communication subject to client legal privilege. As noted previously
Discussion Paper, information may be compelled not only from persons suspected
of wrongdoing, but also from persons or entities
who happen to have information
or documents that may be relevant to an investigation into the conduct of
In such cases, it
appears meaningless to confer a safeguard on the person who produced the
information.
7.126 Therefore, the ALRC is of the preliminary view that if a use immunity
provision were to be adopted as a default provision, careful
attention would
need to be given to its drafting, to make it clear that the information the
subject of the claim could not be used
against the
privilege. The ALRC is interested in hearing views about whether the statutes
that currently confer use immunity in the context
of the abrogation of client
legal privilege need to be clarified in this respect.
7.127 The ALRC has some reservations about proposing a default use immunity
provision in the context of an abrogation of client legal
privilege in Royal
Commissions of inquiry. The ALRC notes the concerns expressed by some
stakeholders that the work of Royal Commissions
could be rendered futile if
their recommendations could not be acted upon because of an inability to use
otherwise privileged information.
Of course, whether the work of any particular
Royal Commission would be compromised would depend upon the extent to which use
information the subject of client legal privilege was central to the ability
to mount action to implement that Royal Commission’s
recommendations.
Presumably, if the Australian Parliament considers that abrogation of privilege
in a particular Royal Commission
of inquiry is warranted, having regard to the
fact that legal advice itself is central to the issues being considered, then it
likely to be equally important for other federal bodies to be able to use
that legal advice in any subsequent action.
7.128 The ALRC is of the preliminary view that a feasible alternative to
conferring absolute use immunity in criminal and civil proceedings,
as a default
safeguard provision, is to allow a judicial discretion to limit the use as
evidence in criminal or civil proceedings
of otherwise privileged information
obtained pursuant to the exercise of a federal coercive information-gathering
power that abrogates
privilege. This approach would require a federal body to
apply to a court if it wishes to rely on otherwise privileged information
evidence in any court proceedings. This would equally apply to federal bodies
wishing to use, as evidence, privileged information
that they had obtained
pursuant to their coercive powers, as well as federal bodies, wishing to use, as
evidence, privileged information
provided to a Royal Commission of inquiry.
7.129 The court would have a general discretion to admit the use of that
information, balancing the public interest in allowing the
information to be
used against a consideration of whether the particular use of that information
would be unfairly prejudicial to
a party. Such an approach received some support
in submissions and is consistent with that recently recommended by the New
Commission.
The proposed discretion is consistent with the general discretions to limit the
use of evidence contained in:
s 136 of the Uniform Evidence Acts, which provides that a court
may limit the use of evidence, if there is a danger that a particular
evidence might be unfairly prejudicial to a party or be misleading or confusing;
s 137 of the Uniform Evidence Acts, which provides that in a
criminal proceeding the court must refuse to admit evidence adduced
prosecutor if its probative value is outweighed by the danger of unfair
prejudice to the defendant.
7.130 As the judicial discretion to
admit evidence is limited to civil and criminal proceedings, it would need to be
supplemented
by a default residual use immunity provision barring the use of
otherwise privileged information in administrative penalty proceedings.
7.131 Importantly, the proposed discretionary safeguard differs from the
qualified privilege approach discussed in Chapter 6, and
rejected as an
option for reform by the ALRC. A qualified privilege acknowledges that it may be
in the interests of justice to protect
the confidentiality of a particular
relationship in the context of a matter. In a case where client legal privilege
is expressly
abrogated by statute, the Australian Parliament already has made
the decision that, in the context of the application of a particular
investigatory power, the public interest in obtaining privileged information
outweighs any harm that might be done to the
relationship between a lawyer and a
client. The proposed discretionary safeguard is based more generally on
affording fairness to
the privilege holder—and not on protecting the
communications made in confidence between a lawyer and client.
7.132 The benefit of adopting use immunity as a safeguard is that it promotes
certainty of approach—the privileged information
will not, pursuant to the
ALRC’s model, be able to be used against the privilege holder in
subsequent proceedings. The provision
can make it clear that the proceedings
include criminal, civil and administrative penalty proceedings. The restriction
against the
use of the information is inflexible, however, not catering for the
particular circumstances of any case.
7.133 In contrast, adopting a judicial discretion to admit privileged
information in civil and criminal proceedings has the disadvantage
uncertain in outcome, but the advantage of flexibility—acknowledging that
in particular cases where the Australian
Parliament has decided in the public
interest to abrogate client legal privilege, there also may be a public interest
to allow use
of that information as evidence in criminal or civil
proceedings—which must be balanced against considerations of fairness
7.134 Therefore, while ALRC 95 recommended a general default use
immunity provision to apply to criminal, civil and administrative
proceedings—in the context of a broader inquiry on federal civil and
administrative penalties—in the context
of this focused inquiry on client
legal privilege, the ALRC has identified a judicial discretion to admit
privileged information
in court proceedings as a potential feasible alternative
to conferring use immunity in civil and criminal proceedings, as a default
safeguard. Adoption of the judicial discretion would be supplemented by a more
limited use immunity provision—aimed to prevent
the use of otherwise
privileged information in administrative penalty proceedings—the latter
being consistent with the approach
in ALRC 95.
7.135 The ALRC leans towards adopting the identified alternative
and, given that it
was not an option canvassed in IP 33, is particularly interested in hearing
stakeholders’ views in this
regard. The ALRC emphasises that the suggested
approach is a default provision only—it remains open to the Australian
expressly to depart from this position in particular circumstances.
7.136 In the event that use immunity or derivative use immunity is applied as
a safeguard in any particular case, the ALRC sets out
below its views on the
scope of those immunities.
Application of immunities to corporations and
individuals
7.137 The ALRC agrees with the strong views expressed by stakeholders that if
use or derivative use immunity were to be conferred
in the event that client
legal privilege were abrogated or modified, then no distinction should be made
in the application of the
immunities to corporations and individuals.
7.138 This is consistent with the ALRC’s views (expressed in
Chapter 3) that client legal privilege should be available to both
individuals and corporations. Given that the rationales for the privilege are
equally applicable to individuals and corporations,
it is philosophically
coherent to refrain from drawing a distinction in the application of the
immunities on the basis of whether
the privilege belongs to a natural person.
While the privilege against self-incrimination applies only to individuals and
not corporations,
the rationale for the privilege against self-incrimination is
distinct from the rationale for client legal privilege.
Application of immunities to document
production and oral statements
7.139 The ALRC considers that if use or derivative use immunity were to be
conferred in the event that client legal privilege is abrogated
or modified,
then no distinction should be made in the application of the immunities to the
production of documents and the making
of oral statements containing
communications subject to client legal privilege.
7.140 The ALRC is persuaded by the views of a majority of stakeholders on
this issue. As noted in Chapter 6, it has been suggested
that one of the
effects of abrogating client legal privilege might be to chill legal
communications or to render it less likely that
lawyers will provide written, as
opposed to oral, advice. The ALRC considers that the application of use or
derivative use immunity
to the production of documents containing communications
subject to client legal privilege would go some way towards negating the
that the abrogation of client legal privilege will provide a strong disincentive
for lawyers to record their legal advice.
Public versus private
investigations
7.141 The ALRC agrees with the views expressed by stakeholders that
additional safeguards need to be put in place to protect the dissemination
privileged information disclosed in a federal investigation that takes place in
a public setting—especially in light of
the fact that public
investigations—such as high profile Royal Commissions—can generate a
great deal of publicity.
7.142 The ALRC considers that if privilege were abrogated or modified in a
federal investigation conducted in public, then evidence
that may disclose
communications subject to client legal privilege should be presented in-camera,
or may be subject to a non-publication
order. The ALRC notes, in this regard,
that a Royal Commission has power to direct that evidence be taken in private in
certain situations.
Notification of application of
7.143 In Chapter 8, the ALRC expresses the view that federal bodies
should be required to notify persons the subject of coercive
information-gathering
powers, as well as those who provide information on a
voluntary basis, whether or not client legal privilege applies to the exercise
of a particular power or to the production of information on a voluntary
This does not entail a
federal body giving advice about whether or not privilege applies to any
particular communication or document
but only whether client legal privilege is
available as an excuse for not producing documents or information in complying
given information-gathering power.
7.144 Consistent with that approach, it is important for persons to know,
when client legal privilege has been abrogated, about whether
safeguards apply to the use of their otherwise privileged information in any
subsequent proceedings. Federal bodies should
be required to notify persons
whether legislation permits the unrestricted use of otherwise privileged
information in subsequent
proceedings or whether any of the following safeguards
apply to an abrogation of client legal privilege: a judicial discretion to
otherwise privileged information in court proceedings, or a use or derivative
use immunity.
7.145 The precise manner of
notification should not be prescribed in legislation. The ALRC considers that it
is best to retain some
flexibility in this
Proposal 7–2
Federal client legal privilege legislation should
provide that, in the absence of any clear, express statutory statement to the
where federal legislation abrogates the application of client legal
privilege to the exercise of a federal coercive information-gathering
(a) a federal body that seeks to rely on otherwise privileged information as
evidence in any court proceedings must apply to the
court for permission to do
(b) the court will have a general discretion to allow use of the information
as evidence, balancing the public interest in allowing
the information to be
used against a consideration of whether the use of that information would be
unfairly prejudicial to a party;
(c) a federal body is precluded from using otherwise privileged information
against the holder of client legal privilege in any administrative
proceedings.
Proposal 7–3
Federal client legal privilege legislation should
provide that where client legal privilege has been abrogated in respect of any
coercive information-gathering power, federal bodies should be required
to notify persons the subject of such powers, as well as
those who produce
information on a voluntary basis,
safeguards apply to the use of otherwise privileged information in subsequent
proceedings.
Proposal 7–4
Where client legal privilege is abrogated or
modified in a federal investigation that takes place in a public
setting—such as
a Royal Commission—evidence that may disclose
communications subject to client legal privilege should be presented in-camera,
or may be subject to a non-publication order.
Availability of
privilege against third parties
7.146 If privilege were to be abrogated or modified, should privilege remain
available against third parties, despite not being available
against a federal
investigatory body? Should the fact that a statutory provision abrogates the
privilege in response to the coercive
information-gathering power of a federal
body mean that the communications can become available to other parties wishing
access to them? There is authority for the proposition that the
production of communications under compulsion does not, of itself,
constitute a
waiver of client legal
7.147 Some Commonwealth statutes abrogating or modifying client legal
privilege contain provisions limiting the extent of the abrogation
modification. For example:
Law Enforcement Integrity Commissioner Act
(Cth) provides that the fact that a person is not excused from answering a
question or producing a document on the ground that it
would disclose certain
does not otherwise affect a claim
of privilege that anyone may make in relation
to that answer or
Inspector-General of Taxation Act 2003
(Cth) provides
that information or documents do not cease to be the subject of client legal
privilege merely because they are given
or produced in response to a statutory
request or requirement.
James Hardie (Investigations and Proceedings) Act
(Cth), which abrogates client legal privilege in relation to ‘James Hardie
material’, provides that the Act does not
otherwise abrogate or affect the
law relating to client legal
It also provides
that, if apart from the Act material would have been privileged for the purposes
Freedom of Information Act 1982
Archives Act 1983
Proceeds of Crime Act 2002
(Cth), then for the purposes of those
subsections material is still taken to be privileged from production in legal
proceedings.
Royal Commissions Act 1902
(Cth) provides that a Royal Commission record
or material referred to in a Royal Commission record does not cease to be the
of a claim for client legal privilege merely because a person or body
has custody of the record, or is given access to the records
under regulations
or a direction under the
Archives Act 1983
Inspector-General of Taxation Act 2003
prohibits the
Inspector-General from including in his or her reports to the minister and in
annual reports information produced that
is the subject of client legal
privilege or is derived from information or a document that is the subject of
7.150 Federal investigatory bodies may be subject to statutory duties of
confidentiality or secrecy.
However, there are several ways in which a federal investigatory body in
possession of material obtained under compulsion may be
called upon to produce
or release that information. A federal investigatory body may:
be issued with a subpoena to produce
receive a statutory request for release of
information;
be requested to release information pursuant to the
Information Act 1982
be required to disclose communications in order to discharge the
prosecution’s duty of disclosing material which the prosecution
use to prove its case or affects the credibility or reliability of any witness,
as well as the duty of disclosing unused
be a party to a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with other
Commonwealth or state bodies, which provides for the exchange of
information—although
an MOU does not provide a legal basis for the
disclosure of information. Its operation is dependent upon the use or disclosure
authorised by law or
7.151 In relation to the prosecution’s duty of disclosure,
referred to above, the CDPP’s
Statement on Prosecution Disclosure
provides that the prosecution should disclose to the defence all unused material
in its possession, unless it is considered that
client legal privilege should be
claimed in respect of the
However, it is not
clear whether the exception applies only to material in respect of which the
investigatory body—as opposed
to a third party—could claim
R v McLaughlin
, Judge David of the District Court of South
Australia made the following comments concerning the use of a transcript of
produced on compulsion to ASIC, in respect of which receivers
maintained a claim for client legal privilege:
In my view the relevant sections of the ASIC Act make it clear that legal
professional privilege is abrogated to the extent of the
relevant documents
being handed over to ASIC for the purposes of further investigation. I find that
there is clear implication that
privilege is further abrogated to allow the
material to be handed over to the … [CDPP]. … I find there is a
further clear
implication that the [CDPP] would be allowed to have the material
inspected by the defence in any action pursuant to procedures of
disclosure in
criminal trials.
Practices of federal
7.153 In IP 33, the ALRC expressed interest in hearing about the
practices and policies of federal investigatory bodies in relation
maintaining privilege against third
7.154 The federal investigatory bodies that provided information to the ALRC
in this regard included those in respect of which client
legal privilege has
been expressly abrogated,
and, in the case of ASIC, a federal body that takes the view that certain of its
powers abrogate client legal
7.155 David Vos, the current Inspector-General of Taxation noted:
Inspector-General of Taxation Act 2003
provides the
Tax Office and taxpayers with the basis to maintain privilege against third
parties … This is despite the fact
that they have provided privileged
information to my office. In the case of privileged information obtained from
the Tax Office,
the privilege will also be maintained where I have referred to
that information in my reports to Government. As an additional safeguard,
secrecy provisions prevent my office’s disclosure of protected information
to third parties.
7.156 Similarly, Ian Carnell, the current IGIS stated:
If necessary, the privilege could be maintained against third parties because
the Inspector-General and the staff of the office cannot
be compelled to
disclose information (see in particular s 34 of the IGIS Act). This has not
arisen as a practical issue in the experience
7.157 ASIC informed the ALRC about its approach to protecting privileged
information from third parties in each of the contexts raised
In considering whether to release legally privileged material, ASIC places
considerable weight upon the submission made by the claimants
of legal privilege
and upon the fact that legal privilege applies to the material. Accordingly,
notwithstanding that ASIC may be
authorised by statute to release legally
privileged information, it will only do so in very limited circumstances and
where it is
satisfied that:
(i) it is necessary to achieve the purpose of the release; and
(ii) there are no other appropriate avenues pursuant to which the proposed
recipients of the information should seek to obtain the
information.
If ASIC were to release legally privileged information its practice would be to
impose strict conditions which limit the use of the
information and prevent its
disclosure beyond officers of the agency to which it was disclosed.
Duty of disclosure in criminal matters
ASIC believes that the prosecution’s obligations of disclosure are subject
to claims of legal professional privilege.
Accordingly, in the absence of a court order, if ASIC holds legally privileged
material, ASIC (via the prosecution) will not disclose
those documents to the
defence but will merely provide … a description of those documents and
will notify the defence that
the disclosure of the documents is precluded by
legal professional privilege.
Subpoenas for production in civil and criminal matters
Where ASIC receives a subpoena for the production of legally privileged
documents, it is obliged to and does produce those documents
to the court.
However, those documents are produced in a separate bundle and are identified as
being subject to a claim of legal
professional privilege. …
It is ASIC’s practice, upon receipt of a subpoena, to notify the persons
who are entitled to claim legal professional privilege
of the fact that the
subpoena has been issued to ASIC and that ASIC is required to produce the
privileged documents. ASIC does so
in order to enable those persons to take any
action which they consider necessary in order to assert their claim of
privilege. In
doing so, those persons may seek to have the documents excused
from production to the court or if the documents have already been
they may seek orders precluding access to
7.158 Medicare Australia, the Australian Communications and Media Authority
(ACMA), and APRA also provided information in this regard.
Medicare Australia
informed the ALRC that ‘while [it] was unaware of examples where the issue
has arisen, as a matter of principle,
Medicare Australia would seek to maintain
privilege against third
7.159 ACMA submitted that:
Subject to compliance with its statutory and legal obligations, ACMA would
generally maintain privilege in respect of any information
which it receives as
a result of the exercise of its coercive powers, against third parties (for
instance, if privilege was waived
for the purposes of giving information to
ACMA). It is noted however, that to date, ACMA has not had to deal with a
request to release
such information under a legislative provision or in relation
to a criminal matter.
7.160 APRA stated that the issue of providing privileged material to third
parties has only arisen rarely.
APRA’s practice has been not to produce such material unless consent has
been obtained from the party concerned or, at least,
that the party has had the
opportunity to comment on the proposed release. …
APRA accepts its duty of disclosure in criminal matters would require it to
disclose the existence of all information in its possession.
As yet, no policy
has been required prescribing how to deal with issues of confidentiality,
whether privileged or otherwise, in response
to APRA’s obligations in
criminal matters.
Trends in the United
7.161 Chapter 6 discusses the trends in the United States (US) for
government agencies to seek waiver of client legal privilege from
under investigation. Judicial opinions in the US have diverged in relation to
the question of whether a disclosure of privileged
information to a government
agency constitutes a waiver against third parties.
7.162 Since 1978, the United States Courts of Appeal have been divided on the
issue of selective waiver—that is, allowing a
corporation or person to
disclose confidential communications to a particular party—such as a
government agency—and limit
the scope of the waiver to that particular
party only. The three different positions adopted by the courts are:
selective waiver is permissible;
selective waiver is never permissible; and
selective waiver is permissible only in situations where the
government has, prior to the disclosure, signed a binding confidentiality
agreement with the
corporation.
commentator has stated that:
Although the attorney-client privilege is ordinarily waived by disclosure of
privileged information to a third party, a circuit split
exists over whether
waiver occurs when disclosure is made to the government. The Eighth Circuit has
held that the attorney-client
privilege is waived only with respect to the
government, and the DC Circuit takes the position that the disclosure of
information to any third party, including the government, destroys
the privilege.
7.164 The US trends have to be assessed in context, however. The disclosure
of privileged information to federal bodies is not typically
pursuant to the
exercise of a federal investigatory power that abrogates client legal
privilege—but rather, as outlined in
Chapter 6, pursuant to practices
and policies of federal bodies to require ‘voluntary disclosure’ of
such information.
Submissions and
consultations
7.165 In IP 33, the ALRC asked, if client legal privilege were to be
abrogated or modified, whether it should remain available against
parties—for example, in response to a subpoena issued to the federal body
or pursuant to a statutory request for release
information.
7.166 The clear majority of submissions that addressed this question
supported client legal privilege being maintained against third
parties in the
event that it is abrogated in any federal investigation—many stating that
the public interest considerations
which might warrant the abrogation of the
privilege in the context of a federal investigation had no or minimal
application to third
7.167 For example, the Law Council submitted that:
The Law Council does not support abrogation or modification of [client legal
privilege]. However, in the event that it is abrogated
or modified as against
the Commonwealth, the Law Council strongly supports the retention of [the
privilege] against third parties.
Legislative abrogation or modification …
would be only for the purpose of facilitating the activities of coercive
investigative
bodies. It should not follow that the privilege should also
disappear in other situations in which it is currently available. Statutory
provisions should expressly provide that, despite any such abrogation or
modification … all other protections of client legal
privilege must
remain. The destruction of the privilege for one purpose does not justify the
removal of the privilege for other unrelated
7.168 The Law Society of NSW expressed the view that:
What may stand as an argument at the margin for abrogating or limiting client
legal privilege based on the competing public interests
at stake in Commonwealth
investigations does not carry the same weight in favour of third parties, except
perhaps in the case of
the requirement that the Commonwealth investigatory
bodies discharge any prosecutorial duties they may have by disclosing material
upon which they intend to rely in order to prove their
7.169 The AGS submitted that the jurisprudential basis for the abrogation or
modification of the privilege not affecting the availability
of the privilege
against third parties ‘would seem to be strong’:
To treat the abrogation of client legal privilege for the exercise of a coercive
power as a constructive or implied waiver of the
privilege would seem a far
reaching measure in itself and go beyond any need served by the coercive power.
The High Court’s
decision in
Johns v Australian Securities
view, affords firm support for the proposition that information obtained by
coercive powers remains confidential in the hands
of the acquiring agency, only
to be used as provided for under the legislation conferring those
7.170 As a general principle, the ALRC considers client legal privilege
should remain available against third parties when it is abrogated
in respect of
a federal investigatory body’s powers. A private litigant, for example,
should not be able to gain a forensic
advantage over another party to litigation
by being able to access privileged information produced on compulsion to a
federal investigatory
body—when it would not otherwise be able to access
such information.
7.171 The ALRC agrees with the proposition that the higher public interests
that may warrant an abrogation of client legal privilege
in a federal
investigation are unlikely, or less likely, to warrant an outright abrogation of
the privilege against third parties.
This is particularly so if one considers
that a third party might wish to use the privileged information produced to a
federal investigatory
body for purposes unrelated to the investigation.
7.172 Therefore, the ALRC is of the preliminary view that federal client
legal privilege legislation should include a default provision
that—in the
absence of any clear, express words to the contrary—where other federal
legislation abrogates or modifies
the privilege in federal investigations, that
abrogation or modification does not affect the holder of the privilege from
maintaining
privilege against a third party.
7.173 Federal bodies should take appropriate steps to protect privileged
information that they obtain during their investigations,
from disclosure to
third parties.
supports the practices—adopted by some federal bodies that made a
submission to this Inquiry—of seeking the
consent of privilege holders
before releasing or producing their privileged information or giving
notification about any proposed
release or production to enable them to take
steps to protect their position.
7.174 The ALRC also considers that it would be beneficial if the CDPP amended
Statement on Prosecution
to make it clear that the
exception to disclosing unused privileged information to the defence applies
irrespective of whether the
privilege holder is the federal investigatory body
that refers the matter to the CDPP, or a party that produced information to that
federal investigatory body in the course of its investigation. Increased clarity
in this respect may prove to be of particular utility
in guiding federal
investigatory bodies whose powers may become subject to an abrogation of client
legal privilege, about their duties
disclosure.
Proposal 7–5
Federal client legal privilege legislation should
provide that, in the absence of any clear, express statutory statement to the
where other federal legislation abrogates or modifies client legal
privilege in federal investigations that abrogation or modification
affect the holder of the privilege from maintaining privilege against a third
Proposal 7–6
The Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions
(CDPP) should amend its
Statement on Prosecution Disclosure
clear that the exception to disclosing unused privileged information to the
defence applies irrespective of whether the
privilege holder is the federal
investigatory body that refers the matter to the CDPP, or a party that produced
information to that
federal investigatory body in the course of its
investigation.
Practice and
7.175 Questions arise about whether particular practices and procedures need
to be developed and implemented by federal investigatory
bodies in the event
that client legal privilege is abrogated or modified in respect of their
7.176 Chapter 8 discusses a number of general issues of practice and
procedure, including notification by federal bodies of whether
client legal
privilege applies to their coercive information-gathering powers, and making and
resolving claims for client legal privilege.
It also contains a number of
proposals directed towards the development and publication of practices and
procedures by federal investigatory
bodies about their approaches to various
aspects of client legal privilege, and addresses the general benefits of
developing and
publishing policies. The section in this chapter on practice and
procedure is therefore to be read as a complement to the fuller
exposition of
this topic in
7.177 In the specific context of considering safeguards where privilege is
abrogated or modified, there is a question about how a
federal body that
receives privileged information pursuant to the exercise of a coercive power
should manage and record that information.
This issue is of particular
importance where use or derivative use immunity applies or, despite the
production of privileged information,
the privilege is not taken to have been
lost against third parties.
7.178 In this respect, it is relevant to note that ASIC’s covering
letter to recipients of certain notices under the ASIC Act
states that the
person’s claim for privilege will be recorded on registration of the
Submissions and
consultations
7.179 In IP 33, the ALRC asked, if client legal privilege were to be
abrogated or modified, whether federal investigatory bodies should
be required
to develop and publish their policies in relation to accurately informing
persons of their position, and managing and
recording the documents or
communications received in respect of which a claim for privilege has been
7.180 In relation to the question about ‘accurately informing persons
of their position’, IP 33 asked, if a statute were
to abrogate or
modify the application of client legal privilege to the exercise of a federal
information-gathering power, whether
it should be incumbent on the federal body
exercising that power to notify the subjects of that power whether:
and to what extent, the privilege has been abrogated or modified;
the abrogation or modification applies to privileged communications
relating to the representation of the client in the investigation
use or derivative use immunity applies; and
the privilege remains available as against third
clear majority of submissions that addressed these questions expressed support
for federal bodies to develop and implement
such practices and to publish their
policies in this regard.
Law Council submitted that such measures were
‘imperative’.
7.182 A number of stakeholders commented, in particular, on the desirability
of, or even necessity for, procedures being put in place
for managing and
recording any document or communication received, in respect of which a
privilege claim has been made. For example:
Victoria Legal Aid submitted that federal bodies should
‘implement appropriate document management systems to protect the
confidentiality
of [privileged]
information’;
the Law Society of NSW stated that ‘it was essential that
privileged communications be carefully segregated and
the Law Council noted that:
The retention of [client legal privilege] against third parties would be
ineffectual if a Commonwealth body did not develop practices
and procedures
requiring that documents the subject of a privilege claim be clearly identified
as such, and be kept separately from
7.183 The Law Society of NSW also supported the development of a protocol
addressing the return of privileged information by federal
investigatory
Notification obligations
7.184 In Chapter 8, the ALRC expresses the view that federal bodies
should be required to notify persons:
whether or not client legal privilege applies to the exercise of a
coercive information-gathering power or to the voluntary production
information; and
that they may wish to seek independent legal advice concerning their
response to a coercive information-gathering
7.185 Earlier in this chapter, the ALRC proposes that federal
bodies should be required to notify persons whether any safeguards apply
use of otherwise privileged information in subsequent
proceedings.
7.186 At this stage, the ALRC is of the view that the above proposals are
sufficient to ensure that persons are informed of their
position concerning the
production and use of information subject to a client legal privilege claim in
the event that the privilege
is abrogated or modified.
Recording, managing and returning documents
the subject of a claim
7.187 The ALRC considers that, if client legal privilege is abrogated or
modified, it should be incumbent on federal bodies to implement
appropriate
document management systems to ensure that documents the subject of a privilege
clearly identified or recorded as such;
stored and managed appropriately—for example, this might
entail keeping such documents separate from ones in respect of which
no claim is
made, to the extent that this is reasonably practicable; or restricting access
to privileged information ‘on a
need to know basis’ within federal
investigatory bodies;
returned to the person who produced them as soon as that can be
done, having regard to the exigencies of the investigation and any
action that
is to be taken as a result of the investigation.
7.188 Clearly
identifying and/or segregating privileged information is essential to ensure
that a federal body can take appropriate
steps to prevent the disclosure of that
information to third parties in respect of whom the privilege is not taken to
have been waived.
Proposal 7–7
If client legal privilege is abrogated or modified
in respect of any federal body with coercive information-gathering powers, that
federal body should be required to:
(a) implement appropriate document management systems to ensure that
documents the subject of a client legal privilege claim are:
(i) clearly identified or recorded as such;
(ii) stored and managed appropriately; and
(iii) returned, as soon as practicable, to the person who produced them;
(b) publish its policies and procedures in this regard.
In Australian Law Reform Commission,
Managing Justice: A Review of the Federal Civil Justice System
(2000), [5.9]–[5.10] the ALRC noted the importance of legal representation
to the client and to the legal system,
for example in increasing the likelihood
of matters being settled by consent and reducing the time and costs of
litigation.
Australian Securities and
Investments Commission Act 2001
Crime Commission Act 2002
which provides for legal
representation at an examination.
Black, ‘Representation of Clients in Investigations by the Australian
Securities & Investments Commission’ (2005)
(June–August)
Commercial Law Quarterly
Pengilley, ‘Daniels: Legal Professional Privilege Against the ACCC
Unanimously Upheld in the High Court’ (2002) 18(7)
Trade Practices
See N Korner,
‘The Role of Procedural Fairness in ASC Proceedings—Do the Rules Go
Far Enough?’ (Paper presented
at Corporations Law Workshop, Wollongong,
18–20 November 1994), 118–119.
A Black, ‘Representation of Clients in Investigations by the Australian
Securities & Investments Commission’ (2005)
(June–August)
Commercial Law Quarterly
Korner, ‘The Role of Procedural Fairness in ASC Proceedings—Do the
Rules Go Far Enough?’ (Paper presented at
Corporations Law Workshop,
Wollongong, 18–20 November 1994),
Commonwealth of Australia v
(1982) 41 ALR 626
, 632, 633. See also
Three Rivers District Council
v Governor and Company of Bank of England
[2004] UKHL 48
[2005] 1 AC 610
, mentioned in
A Rinne, T Siebert and A Walz,
The European Antitrust Review 2007: A Global Competition Review Special
Report—Germany: Cartels
(2007) Global Competition Review
<www.globalcompetitionreview.
com/ear/germany_cartels.cfm> at 30 August
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Client Legal Privilege and Federal Investigatory Bodies
33 (2007), Question 6–1.
Victoria Legal Aid,
14 June 2007; Law Council
of Australia,
4 June 2007; R Desiatnik,
Taxation Institute of Australia,
15 June 2007. See also Insolvency and Trustee
Service Australia,
20 June 2007, which
expressed the view that in the context of bankruptcy, ‘the circumscribing
of the information-gathering
powers [under the
Bankrutpcy Act 1966
by reference to the debtor’s ‘examinable affairs’ provides an
appropriate balance between the disclosure
of information which would allow for
a full investigation of a debtor’s financial affairs and that which would
tend to interfere
with the conduct of proceedings unrelated to those
Australian Securities
and Investments Commission,
29 June 2007;
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission,
13 June 2007.
D Jackson, J Sheahan and
Consultation
, Sydney, 14 June
Law Society of New South Wales,
Commonwealth Director of Public
Prosecutions,
12 June 2007; Australian
Government Solicitor,
13 June 2007; Law Council
of Australia,
4 June 2007; Australian
Government Attorney-General’s Department,
Consultation
, Canberra, 31 May 2007.
Australian Government Solicitor,
Commonwealth Director of Public
Prosecutions,
Australian Competition and
Consumer Commission,
The ALRC proposes in Ch 8
that federal bodies develop and publish their policies and procedures in
relation to notifying persons
that they may wish to seek independent legal
advice or legal representation in this regard: see
Proposal 8–22.
Hardie (Investigations and Proceedings) Act 2004
(Cth) is also discussed in
‘James Hardie material’ and ‘James Hardie proceeding’
are defined in
Explanatory
Memorandum,
James Hardie (Investigations and Proceedings) Bill 2004
Evidence Act 1958
s 19C(D). Restricting use of privileged information in Royal Commissions of
inquiry is discussed further below.
See P Sofronoff, ‘Derivative Use Immunity and the Investigation of
Corporate Wrongdoing’
[1994] QUTLawJl 6
Queensland University of Technology Law
Enforcement Integrity Commissioner Act 2006
Crime Commission Act 2002
Australian Securities
and Investments Commission Act 2001
Retirement Savings
Account Act 1997
(Cth) s 117;
Medicare Australia Act 1973
See, however, discussion
Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act 2001
s 76(1)(d).
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Principled Regulation: Federal Civil and Administrative Penalties
in Australia
, ALRC 95 (2002),
Proceeds of Crime Act
s 206(1)(c).
Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security Act 1986
, which is discussed in Ch 4 as an example of a provision that
partially abrogates or modifies client legal
Securities and Investments Commission Act 2001
s 76(1)(d).
Commissions Act 1923
Evidence Act 1958
s 19C(2) where use immunity is conferred on all types of civil proceedings.
Royal Commissions Act 1902
Australian Securities
Commission v Kippe
[1996] FCA 517
(1996) 67 FCR
Rich v Australian Securities
& Investments Commission
[2004] HCA 42
(2004) 220 CLR 129
, [30]–[37].
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary
, House of Representatives, 31 May 2007, 3 (C
Pearce—Parliamentary Secretary to the Treasurer),
In Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Principled Regulation: Federal Civil and Administrative Penalties
in Australia
, ALRC 95 (2002), Rec 19–3, the ALRC recommended that
where legislation abrogated or modified client legal privilege, a default
immunity provision should apply in the absence of any clear express statutory
statement to the contrary. In Australian Law Reform
Commission,
But Not By Trust Alone—AFP & NCA Complaints and Disciplinary
, ALRC 82 (1996), Rec 57, the ALRC recommended that derivative
use immunity apply in relation to the abrogation against self-incrimination
investigations of complaints against the Australian Federal Police and the
(then) National Crime Authority (NCA).
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Client Legal Privilege and Federal
Investigatory Bodies
, IP 33 (2007),
Australian Securities and
Investments Commission,
Australian Securities
Commission Act 1989
See J Kluver,
Review of the Derivative Use Immunity Reforms
[3.52]–[3.53].
See J Longo, ‘The Powers
of Investigation of the Australian Securities Commission: Balancing the
Interests of Persons and
Companies Under Investigation with the Interests of the
Company and Securities Law Journal
(referring to a view of the Law Institute of
See Ibid, 237,
P Sofronoff, ‘Derivative
Use Immunity and the Investigation of Corporate Wrongdoing’
[1994] QUTLawJl 6
Queensland University of Technology Law Journal
also Parliament of Australia—Joint Statutory Committee on Corporations and
Securities,
Use Immunity Provisions in the Corporations Law and the
Australian Securities Commission Law
Parliament of
Australia—Joint Statutory Committee on Corporations and Securities,
Immunity Provisions in the Corporations Law and the Australian Securities
Commission Law
(1991), [1.12].
Ibid, [1.13]–[1.14].
Report on Review
of the Derivative Use Immunity Reforms
[3.71]–[3.74].
See Parliament of
Australia—Joint Statutory Committee on Corporations and Securities,
Immunity Provisions in the Corporations Law and the Australian Securities
Commission Law
(1991), [4.20].
Ibid, [4.11].
Explanatory Memorandum,
Corporations Legislation (Evidence) Amendment Bill 1992
Corporations Legislation
(Evidence) Amendment Act 1992
See J Kluver,
Review of the Derivative Use Immunity Reforms
Australian Securities and
Investments Commission Act 2001
concerning use
immunity in respect of a privileged statement made at an oral examination is
discussed above. See also
in relation to use immunity in respect of
statements and signing of records of examination which might tend to incriminate
or make him or her liable to the imposition of a
Parliament of
Australia—Joint Statutory Committee on Corporations and Securities,
Immunity Provisions in the Corporations Law and the Australian Securities
Commission Law
(1991), [4.20].
Medicare Australia Act 1973
Environment Protection
Authority v Caltex Refining Co Pty Ltd
[1993] HCA 74
(1993) 178 CLR 477
Report of the Inquiry into
Certain Australian Companies in relation to the UN Oil-for-Food Programme
(2006), Vol 1, [7.66].
stakeholders on whether immunities should apply to Royal Commissions of inquiry,
if client legal privilege were to be abrogated,
are set out
Royal Commissions Act
Evidence Act 1958
X v Australian
Prudential Regulation Authority
[2007] HCA 4
(2007) 232 ALR
X and Y were two senior managers
of an international reinsurance business based in
Royal Commissions Act
provides that a person who uses, causes or inflicts any
violence, punishment, damage, loss or disadvantage to any person for or on
account of the person having appeared as a witness before a Royal Commission; or
any evidence given by him or her before any Royal
Commission is guilty of an
indictable offence.
X v Australian
Prudential Regulation Authority
[2007] HCA 4
(2007) 232 ALR 421
Sparke Helmore Lawyers,
Court Challenge to Regulator’s Use of Royal Commission Evidence
Unsuccessful
(2007) <www.sparke.com.au/sparke/news/publications.jsp>
at 10 April 2007.
See Australian Law
Reform Commission,
Client Legal Privilege and Federal Investigatory
, IP 33 (2007),
Question 7–2.
See, eg, New
South Wales Bar Association,
5 June 2007; R
1 June 2007; New South Wales Public
Defenders Office,
Consultation
, Sydney, 12 June
New South Wales Bar Association,
5 June 2007. The NSW Bar Association also
emphasised the ‘related but distinct’ rationales for client legal
and the privilege against self-incrimination, submitting that client
legal privilege should be more closely protected than the privilege
self-incrimination.
Law Council of
National Legal Aid,
Australian Securities and
Investments Commission,
Ibid. Victoria Legal Aid also
expressed support for judicial discretion to admit or exclude privileged
information to operate as
a safeguard if client legal privilege were to be
abrogated or modified: Victoria Legal Aid,
Commonwealth Director of
Public Prosecutions,
12 June 2007. See also I
Australian Competition and
Consumer Commission,
Australian Securities and
Investments Commission,
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Client Legal Privilege and Federal Investigatory Bodies
33 (2007), [7.28].
Inspector-General
of Intelligence and Security,
Australian Pesticides and
Veterinary Medicines Authority,
6 June 2007;
Australian Transport Safety Bureau,
Victoria Legal Aid,
14 June 2007; NSW Young Lawyers,
12 June 2007; Law Society of New South
Law Society of New South Wales,
See, eg, Australian Securities
and Investments Commission,
29 June 2007;
Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions,
12 June 2007; Australian Competition and Consumer Commission,
13 June 2007; I Turnbull,
2007; B McKillop, M Kumar and F Beaupert,
Consultation
Sydney, 21 May 2007.
Law Society of
New South Wales,
NSW Young Lawyers,
Victoria Legal Aid,
Australian Transport Safety
Inspector-General of
Intelligence and Security,
Australian Competition and
Consumer Commission,
Australian Securities and
Investments Commission,
29 June 2007. Another
stakeholder agreed with the proposition that derivative use immunity placed
‘insurmountable obstacles
to prosecution’: I Turnbull,
Australian Government
13 June 2007. A similar view was
expressed by the CDPP: Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions,
12 June 2007. Academics from the University of
Sydney Law School also noted that derivative use immunity could ‘shut off
evidence’: B McKillop, M Kumar and F Beaupert,
Consultation
, Sydney, 21 May 2007.
See Australian Law Reform Commission,
Client Legal Privilege and Federal
Investigatory Bodies
, IP 33 (2007), Question 7–3(a),
[7.45]–[7.49]. In Ch 3, the ALRC addresses the related issue of
whether client legal
privilege should apply only to natural persons and not
corporations.
Securities and Investments Commission,
2007; Victoria Legal Aid,
14 June 2007;
Taxation Institute of Australia,
15 June 2007;
NSW Young Lawyers,
12 June 2007; Australian
Institute of Company Directors,
8 June 2007;
Law Council of Australia,
Australian Securities and
Investments Commission,
29 June 2007. NSW Young
Lawyers expressed a similar view: NSW Young Lawyers,
12 June 2007.
Law Society of New South
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Client Legal Privilege and Federal Investigatory Bodies
Question 7–3(b).
eg, Victoria Legal Aid,
14 June 2007; Taxation
Institute of Australia,
15 June 2007; Law
Society of New South Wales,
1 June 2007; Law
Council of Australia,
4 June 2007; Regulatory
lawyers of Clayton Utz,
Consultation
, Sydney, 15 May
Law Council of Australia,
4 June 2007. Victoria Legal Aid expressed a
similar view: Victoria Legal Aid,
Law Society of New South
1 June 2007.
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Client Legal Privilege and Federal Investigatory Bodies
Question 7–3(c)–(e).
See, eg, Victoria Legal Aid,
14 June 2007; NSW
Young Lawyers,
12 June 2007; Law Society of New
South Wales,
National Legal Aid,
13 June 2007. See also Law Council of
Law Society of New South
NSW Young Lawyers,
National Legal Aid,
13 June 2007.
Law Council of Australia,
Law Society of New South
19 July 2007; Australian Securities and Investments Commission,
29 June 2007; Hon T Cole,
Consultation
, Sydney, 1 March 2007.
Australian Securities and
Investments Commission,
See Victoria Legal Aid,
14 June 2007; NSW Young Lawyers,
12 June 2007; Law Society of New South Wales,
1 June 2007; Law Council of Australia,
4 June 2007.
Law Society of New South Wales,
NSW Young Lawyers,
Victoria Legal Aid,
14 June 2007. The Law Council expressed a
similar view: Law Council of Australia,
Australian Securities and
Investments Commission,
The different investigatory
contexts of federal bodies are set out in Ch 4 and discussed more generally
See discussion in
Parliament of
Australia—Joint Statutory Committee on Corporations and Securities,
Immunity Provisions in the Corporations Law and the Australian Securities
Commission Law
(1991), [4.12], referred to
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Principled Regulation: Federal Civil and Administrative Penalties
in Australia
, ALRC 95 (2002),
See discussion
on third parties in Ch 8.
Zealand Law Commission,
, Report 97 (2007),
rec 12.19 states that ‘the court should have the discretion to give
directions that are necessary to limit
the use made of any privileged
information that is obtained as a result of the exercise of an enforcement
Proposal 7–2.
Royal Commissions Act 1902
See discussion in Ch 8 on
‘Notification of application of privilege’ and
Proposal 8–1.
ALRC’s views on manner of notification are set out more fully in
Competition & Consumer Commission v George Weston Foods Ltd
[2003] FCA 601
Woollahra Municipal Council v Westpac Banking Corporation
33 NSWLR 529.
Law Enforcement
Integrity Commissioner Act 2006
Inspector-General
of Taxation Act 2003
James Hardie
(Investigations and Proceedings) Act 2004
Hardie material’ is defined in
Inspector-General of Taxation
(Cth) s 27.
Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act 2001
Australian Prudential Regulation Authority Act 1998
For example, an accused
person may issue a subpoena to the Commonwealth investigatory body that
conducted the investigation which
led to charges being laid against him or
Securities and Investments Commission Act 2001
, which allows
ASIC to release a transcript of a compulsory examination together with a copy of
any related book to a person’s
lawyer if the lawyer satisfies ASIC that
the person is carrying on or is contemplating in good faith a proceeding to
which the examination
related. ASIC may impose conditions on the release of the
information. See also Ibid
, which authorises ASIC to release
information of its own volition or where it has been requested to do
The prosecution’s duty of
disclosure is considered further
See, eg, Australian
Prudential Regulation Authority and Australian Taxation Office,
Memorandum of
Understanding Between the Australian Prudential Regulation Authority and the
Australian Taxation Office
, 16 April 1999, [4.2], which provides that:
‘The agencies agree that, subject to legislative provisions, information
to one agency which is relevant to the responsibilities of the other
agency will be shared as requested. … This will be subject
conditions which the provider of the information might place upon the use or
disclosure of the information, such as
claims of legal professional
privilege’.
See Commonwealth
Director of Public Prosecutions,
Statement on Prosecution Disclosure
<www.cdpp.gov.au/Prosecutions/Disclosure/> at 10 April 2007,
R v McLaughlin
, [20]. Judge David held that the transcript could be viewed by the
defendant and his counsel ‘for the purpose of the forthcoming
the abrogation of legal professional privilege is confined to that purpose and
will go no further’: Ibid,
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Client Legal Privilege and Federal Investigatory Bodies
33 (2007), [7.74].
Inspector-General of Taxation and the
Inspector-General of Taxation,
16 May 2007.
Inspector-General of Intelligence
and Security,
Australian Securities and
Investments Commission,
Medicare Australia,
Australian Communications and
Media Authority,
Australian Prudential
Regulation Authority,
Z Dostart, ‘Selective
Disclosure: The Abrogation of the Attorney-Client Privilege and the Work Product
Doctrine’ (2005–06)
Pepperdine Law Review
also A Pinto, ‘Cooperation and Self-Interest Are Strange Bedfellows:
Limited Waiver of the Attorney-Client Privilege
Through Production of Privileged
Documents in a Government Investigation’ (2003–04)
Virginia Law Review
Z Dostart, ‘Selective
Disclosure: The Abrogation of the Attorney-Client Privilege and the Work Product
Doctrine’ (2005–06)
Pepperdine Law Review
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Client Legal Privilege and Federal Investigatory Bodies
33 (2007), Question 7–4.
Australian Securities and Investments Commission,
29 June 2007; Australian Corporate Lawyers Association,
22 June 2007; Victoria Legal Aid,
14 June 2007; Taxation Institute of
15 June 2007; Australian Government
13 June 2007; Law Society of New
South Wales,
1 June 2007; Law Council of
Law Council of Australia,
4 June 2007. Similarly, the Taxation Institute
of Australia expressed the view that ‘it was critically necessary that
be a raft of provisions available to preserve the privilege [against third
parties]’: Taxation Institute of Australia,
15 June 2007.
Law Society
of New South Wales,
Johns v Australian
Securities Commission
[1993] HCA 56
(1993) 178 CLR 408
Government Solicitor,
This is discussed further in
the section below on practices and
procedures.
Ch 6 sets out the
factors that the ALRC proposes should be considered in making any decision to
abrogate client legal privilege.
See, in particular, those parts of Ch 8 headed ‘Notification of
application of privilege’ and ‘Other policies
and procedures’,
and Proposals 8–1, 8–2,
Securities and Investments Commission,
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Client Legal Privilege and Federal Investigatory Bodies
33 (2007), Question 7–5.
Ibid, [7.76].
Victoria Legal Aid,
14 June 2007; Taxation Institute of Australia,
15 June 2007; National Legal Aid,
13 June 2007; Law Society of New South Wales,
1 June 2007; Law Council of Australia,
4 June 2007; R Desiatnik,
1 June 2007. ASIC expressed support for the
development and publication of such policies ‘once the issues concerning
legal privilege raised in the Issues Paper have been solved’:
Australian Securities and Investments Commission,
29 June 2007. See also Australian Government Solicitor,
Law Council of Australia,
Victoria Legal Aid,
Law Society of New South
Law Council of Australia,
Law Society of New South
See Proposals 8–1,
8–22. In Ch 8 the ALRC also expresses the view that federal bodies
should be required to develop
and publish policies concerning the manner of
notification: See
Proposal 8–2.
Proposal 7–3.
S Marsic and L Inge,
Government Law Group—Managing Confidential
Information
(2007) Australian Government Solicitor.
8. Practice and Procedure
Introduction
Notification of application of privilege
Practices of federal bodies
Should federal bodies be required to give notification?
ALRC’s views
Making a privilege claim
Issues and problems
Submissions and consultations on reform options
ALRC’s views
Unrepresented persons
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s views
Third parties
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s views
Resolving privilege disputes
Issues and problems
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s views
Electronic material
Submissions and consultations on reform options
ALRC’s views
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s views
Other policies and procedures
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s views
8. Practice and Procedure
Introduction
8.1 A strong theme that has emerged in this Inquiry is the need to address
the significant issues and problems associated with the
practices and procedures
for making and resolving client legal privilege claims in federal
investigations. Existing practices and
procedures have been criticised for being
inadequate, inconsistent or uncertain—causing delay and hindering access
bodies to information not the subject of a claim for privilege.
8.2 It is important to distinguish criticisms concerning client legal
privilege claims from general criticisms of federal investigatory
practices. For
example, stakeholders have expressed concerns about the onerous nature of
electronic information requests or that
broadly worded notices issued by federal
bodies have the capacity to require the production of privileged material that
is only peripherally
relevant to the actual transactions under
investigation.
8.3 This chapter addresses a number of issues
concerning the practices and procedures for making and resolving client legal
claims in federal investigations. It discusses the respective
obligations of persons the subject of coercive information-gathering
powers, and
the federal bodies exercising those powers. The chapter contains a mix of
legislative and policy-based proposals aimed
at achieving transparency, clarity
and uniformity in procedures, as well as reducing delay.
Notification
of application of privilege
8.4 Arguably, before a person can make a claim for client legal privilege in
response to a federal coercive information-gathering
power he or she ought to be
aware of whether or not the legislation under which the power is being exercised
preserves, modifies
or abrogates the privilege.
Client Legal Privilege and Federal Investigatory Bodies
(IP 33), the ALRC asked whether federal bodies should be required to
provide accurate information to persons of their position concerning
when that information should be given, and in what
For example, should notices
to produce documents—or the covering letter to such documents—state
expressly whether or
not the privilege applies to the exercise of the coercive
powers the subject of the notice? Should persons, who are the subject of
compulsory oral questioning, be informed up-front as to whether or not they can
claim client legal privilege?
8.6 Prior to considering judicial commentary, and the views of stakeholders
on this issue, it is convenient to canvass the actual
practices of federal
bodies concerning notification of whether the privilege applies to their
coercive powers.
Practices of federal
8.7 The ALRC wrote to approximately 40 federal bodies with coercive
information-gathering powers and asked whether they make the recipients
notices, concerning the exercise of a compulsory power, aware of their rights in
relation to client legal privilege. The responses
to this question revealed
inconsistent practices in this regard.
Examples of notification
8.8 Few federal bodies notify persons about whether or not privilege applies
to the exercise of their coercive information-gathering
powers; although it is
often the case that notice is given only in respect of the exercise of
particular powers—and not across
the range of a federal body’s
coercive information-gathering powers. The manner in which persons are notified
8.9 Some federal bodies provide notification about the application of client
legal privilege by providing recipients of notices with
a copy of the relevant
legislative provisions concerning
For example, notices
issued by the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) under
Trade Practices Act 1974
(Cth) (TPA) are accompanied by
As mentioned
in Chapter 5,
states that a person is not required to
produce a document that would disclose privileged information.
8.10 In other instances, notification is provided in the notice setting out
the coercive power,
covering letter to a notice. Letters enclosing notices issued by the Australian
Securities and Investments Commission (ASIC)
to persons who are not lawyers,
pursuant to its investigative powers under
Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act 2001
(Cth) (ASIC
Act), state expressly that the recipient is not excused from producing documents
on the ground that the documents may
contain information which is privileged.
The covering letter to such notices contains a statement to the following
You are not excused from producing documents on the ground that the documents
may contain information that is subject to legal professional
privilege. If you
believe that any of the documents contain information which is subject to legal
professional privilege, you should
prepare a list which identifies each document
you claim is privileged and include the list when producing the books to ASIC.
claim of privilege will be recorded on registration of the
8.11 Where a notice is issued to a lawyer under ss 30–33 and
s 49(3) of the ASIC Act, the covering letter informs the lawyer
her right to refuse to produce information if it would involve disclosing a
client’s privileged
communication.
8.12 The Australian Taxation Office’s Access and Information-Gathering
Manual (the ATO Manual) instructs Australian Taxation
Office (ATO) officers that
at the time of giving a person a notice or, at the very latest, at the time of
entering premises, they
are to hand out and explain Charter Booklet No 9,
Fair Use of Our Access and Information-Gathering Powers
. That booklet
You’ll be given reasonable opportunity at any time to consult with your
advisers. We will respect your right to claim legal
professional privilege for
certain communications between you and your barrister or
8.13 The Office of the Australian Building and Construction Commissioner
All witnesses who are served with a
Notice to attend and answer questions
under section 52(e) of the [
Building and Construction Industry
Improvement Act
receive a covering letter setting out in plain
English the requirements of the Notice. The covering letter clearly states that
examination will be held in line with the [
Guidelines in Relation to the
Exercise of Compliance Powers in the Building and Construction Industry
which are available from the contact officer upon request. … [Client legal
privilege] is covered in the
Guidelines.
8.14 A number of federal bodies stated that they provide notification to
persons about the application of client legal privilege when
exercising search
warrant powers.
ASIC, for example,
stated that search warrants issued pursuant to
(Cth)—whether in respect of searches of legal
premises, non-legal premises or the person—contain a statement endorsing
the right of the person to make claims for client legal privilege, and attach
guidelines about client legal privilege
8.15 Medicare Australia stated that:
A person who has consented to a search of their premises will generally not be
made expressly aware of their rights in relation to
legal professional
privilege. [But] where a person has consented to a search of premises under
s 8X [of the
Medicare Australia Act
] … Medicare Australia
investigators would be expected to provide the person with [a copy of the
guidelines setting out the
procedures for making a privilege claim in respect of
the searches of legal premises and/or non-legal
Examples of non-notification
8.16 Many federal bodies do not notify the recipients of notices issued under
coercive information-gathering powers about their rights
to claim client legal
Federal bodies
expressed diverse reasons for adopting this approach.
8.17 Some federal bodies were of the view that such notification would
constitute the provision of legal advice and was therefore
inappropriate.
Others expressed
concern that notification would lead to the withholding of information. The
Australian Transport Safety Bureau (ATSB)
stated that it
has held the concern that specifically advising of any potential right to claim
legal professional privilege may result in significant
information about the
contributing factors of an accident being withheld. Again, though, we emphasise
that we exercise our powers
in a context different to many other investigatory
8.18 The Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority submitted that:
In the ordinary course of the exercise of [its] powers, circumstances have not
yet arisen whereby there has been a need for recipients
to be made aware of
their rights in relation to legal professional
8.19 The Australian Prudential Regulation Authority (APRA) stated that it was
not aware of any obligation on its part to notify persons
that a claim for privilege may be available. It expressed the view that
‘the exercise of what rights
and entitlements are available is a matter
for the recipient of the relevant
8.20 In contrast to ASIC’s position concerning the issue of notices
under the ASIC Act, ASIC does not refer to client legal
privilege in notices
that it issues under the
Corporations Act 2001
(Cth). ASIC recognises
that privilege applies to its powers under that Act.
ASIC does not, as a matter of practice, seek legally privileged information
pursuant to its
Corporations Act
powers, and, in our experience, such
information is not provided to ASIC in answer to
Corporations Act
8.21 The notices that ASIC issues requiring a person to appear for an
examination pursuant to s 19 of the ASIC Act do not contain
reference to client legal
ASIC stated that:
Unless the application of legal professional privilege is raised by the examinee
and/or the examinee’s lawyer, no direct reference
is made to legal
professional privilege in the preamble to a s 19 examination.
If an examinee refuses to answer a question and/or asserts that he/she is
entitled to refuse to answer a question on the basis of
legal professional
privilege, then it is ASIC’s practice to respond to the examinee as
ASIC considers that the case that deals with the question of legal professional
privilege in relation to ASIC notices is
Corporate Affairs Commission (NSW) v
. That case means that you are not able to refuse to answer the
question even if the answer discloses information subject to legal
professional
privilege. Accordingly, I direct you to answer the question.
(Should the
examinee continue to refuse to answer the question) ... I note for the record
that you have claimed that you are not obliged
to answer my question because to
do so would disclose information subject to legal professional privilege. ASIC
does not accept that
you may validly refuse to answer my question, even if the
answer would disclose information subject to legal professional privilege.
will consider whether to seek an order that you answer this question and it
reserves all of its rights to do so. If ASIC obtains
such an order, it will be
necessary to complete this examination at a later time. Otherwise, I propose to
continue with this
examination.
8.22 Similarly, the standard introductory remarks for an examination under
s 155(1)(c) of the TPA do not contain specific information
concerning the
rights of the recipient in relation to
8.23 The Australian Transaction Reports and Analysis Centre (AUSTRAC) stated
that it does not currently make recipients of notices
concerning the exercise of
powers under the
Financial Transaction Reports Act 1988
(Cth) aware of
their rights in relation to client legal privilege, but noted that:
The provisions under the [
Anti-Money Laundering and Counter-Terrorism
Financing Act 2006
(Cth)] are relatively new and the notice forms and
policies in regard to them are still being
formulated.
8.24 The nature of covert
coercive information-gathering powers precludes the giving of notification about
whether client legal privilege
applies to the exercise of those
Should federal
bodies be required to give notification?
8.25 The common law, other inquiries and stakeholders in this Inquiry, have
expressed varying views on whether a federal body should
be required to notify
the subjects of coercive powers about whether client legal privilege applies to
the exercise of a coercive
Fieldhouse v Commissioner
of Taxation
, Lockhart J
stated that:
The citizen is plainly at risk, whether through ignorance or otherwise, of being
denied a fundamental right to assert a claim for
legal professional privilege.
There is I think much to commend the view that when issuing notices under
s 264 [of the
Income Tax Assessment Act 1936
(Cth)] it would be
appropriate for the Commissioner to insert a paragraph or two in the notice
drawing the attention of the recipient
to his rights with respect to legal
professional privilege so that at least he is alerted to them and can take
whatever steps he
wishes to obtain legal
8.27 Though not strictly a case in the context of federal investigations, the
decision of the Full Court of the Federal Court in
SZHWY v Minister for
Immigration and Citizenship
supports the principle of notifying a person
The Federal Court
quashed a decision of the Refugee Review Tribunal because the Tribunal had asked
an applicant for review to divulge
the content of a conversation with his legal
representative without informing him of his right to claim client legal
privilege. Lander
In my opinion, the Tribunal was under an obligation to advise the [applicant]
that he was entitled to refuse the questions which
the Tribunal asked of him if
they were to disclose the contents of a confidential communication with his
lawyer for the purpose of
obtaining or giving legal advice or assistance or for
use in the proceedings before the Tribunal. …
In my opinion, the Tribunal, when conducting its inquiry and in the exercise of
its inquisitorial function, should advise a person
of their right to claim
… legal professional privilege if it appears that a question asked of the
person may give rise to a
legitimate claim of that
8.28 The Administrative Review Council, in its draft report on the coercive
information-gathering powers of federal bodies, has recommended
that if client
legal privilege is available, federal bodies should indicate this in the notice
setting out the power or in related
correspondence.
8.29 Academics from the
University of Sydney Law School expressed the view that it was important for
federal bodies to let persons
know of their right to claim
Similarly, BHP
Billiton Mitsubishi Alliance submitted that protocols governing federal bodies
should provide for:
The holder of the information to be informed by the relevant body of the
holder’s legal rights and obligations. Included in
this should be
notification that the holder is not obliged to hand over material that is
subject to client legal
8.30 On the other hand, the Australian Government Solicitor (AGS) expressed
the view that:
It must be remembered that, with the exercise of coercive powers, the
investigatory body responsible has made a judgment that it
needs to invoke the
powers. This will, in some cases, have, in turn, involved a judgment that the
prospect of the person holding
those documents volunteering them otherwise is
poor. Particularly in the latter case, requirements that involve the need to
persons against whom those powers are to be exercised of potential
legal considerations, such as the making of privilege claims,
may not only prove
needlessly tedious, but may also, by encouraging the persons concerned to
clarify all these considerations, only
facilitate delay or obstruction on their
part in responding. Overall, this could finish up reducing the utility of the
powers themselves.
Notification
8.31 As discussed elsewhere in this Discussion Paper, the High Court has held
that client legal privilege is an important common law
The ALRC considers that
it is important, in order for persons to exercise the right to claim privilege,
that they are notified by
the federal body exercising a coercive
information-gathering power about whether or not client legal privilege applies
to that power.
This does not entail a federal body giving advice about whether
or not privilege applies to any particular communication or document—only
whether client legal privilege is available as an excuse for not producing
documents or information in complying with any given information-gathering
8.32 If the privilege applies, persons will be alerted to their ability to
make a claim and withhold the production of privileged
documents. But even if
the privilege is abrogated, persons should be notified that, while they may not
withhold documents or information
on the basis of client legal privilege, they
should still indicate which documents would have been the subject of a privilege
In such cases, the federal body can take any appropriate steps to
safeguard that material—for example, to protect it from disclosure
against third parties.
8.33 The ALRC considers that such notification—in addition to promoting
clarity of approach—is an aspect of
The need for fairness
arises particularly in respect of unrepresented persons who are the subject of
coercive powers.
In the context
of litigation, the Commonwealth and its agencies are obliged under its own rules
to act as ‘model litigants’,
fairly, with complete propriety, and in
accordance with the highest professional standards in handling claims and
litigation brought
by or against
In the ALRC’s
preliminary view, there is a strong argument that comparable standards of
fairness should be applied to the Commonwealth
and its agencies in conducting
investigations.
8.34 It is important that the information provided by federal bodies to
persons about their right to claim privilege is accurate.
Given that, following
the decision in
, ASIC’s position—that client legal
privilege is abrogated in respect of its powers under the ASIC Act—has
questioned,
there may be an
issue about whether it is appropriate for ASIC to state unequivocally in its
covering letters to notices issued to
non-lawyers under ss 30–33 of
the ASIC Act that client legal privilege is not available.
8.35 One qualification to the ALRC’s views that federal bodies should
be required to give such notification is that, in the
interests of practicality,
such an obligation should be imposed only on those federal bodies that exercise
coercive information-gathering
powers which raise or are likely to raise the
application of client legal privilege. If a particular coercive
information-gathering
power is unlikely to bring privileged information within
its ambit—for example, the powers of the Australian Fisheries Management
Authority (AFMA) to examine equipment capable of being used for fishing, or
the obligation to give
notification will not arise.
8.36 The ALRC also considers that persons who produce information or
documents on a voluntary basis—where such information or
documents could
have been sought pursuant to a coercive information-gathering power—also
should be notified whether client
legal privilege applies to the voluntary
production of information. As discussed in Chapter 4, many federal bodies
seek information
from persons on a cooperative basis—preferring to
encourage voluntary compliance with requests for
information.
8.37 A person who chooses to cooperate in a federal investigation should not
be prejudiced by not being told about their rights concerning
privilege. For
example, if a person is served with a notice pursuant to s 155 of the TPA
in an investigation being conducted by the
ACCC, that person is not required to
produce documents the subject of a claim for client legal privilege. If the
person is prepared
to produce documents to the ACCC in the absence of a notice,
the ACCC should let that person know that if the information were sought
compulsory basis, a claim for client legal privilege would be available. Of
course, it is always open to a person to produce
privileged information to a
federal body on a voluntary basis—just as a person may choose to waive
privilege in responding
to a coercive power which preserves its application.
8.38 The ALRC supports the approach taken by Medicare Australia in providing
information about client legal privilege to persons who
consent to searches
under s 8X of the
Medicare Australia Act 1973
Manner of notification
8.39 As the discussion above bears out, the federal bodies that notify
persons about the application of privilege do so in various
8.40 The ALRC considers that it would be too prescriptive to require all
federal bodies to provide notice only in one particular way.
Depending on the
following ways:
(a) in the notice setting out the coercive power, or in the covering letter
to such notice;
(b) in the search warrant, or in an attachment to the search warrant;
(c) in a letter requesting information to be produced on a voluntary
(d) by providing a copy of the relevant section of the legislation which
abrogates, modifies or preserves the privilege at the time
a notice setting out
the coercive power is issued or a search warrant is exercised; or
(e) in the case of information sought orally, by informing the person prior
to the commencement of questioning.
8.41 As a general proposition, the ALRC considers that federal bodies ought
to provide notification in the actual notice or related
correspondence (the
approach in (a) above), as opposed to providing the recipient with a copy of the
relevant section of the legislation
concerned with the application of client
legal privilege (the approach in (d) above).
8.42 However, the ALRC considers that it is best to allow flexibility in this
regard. The federal bodies that expressed concern that
the giving of
notification would be inappropriate because it would amount to giving legal
advice—an assertion with which the
ALRC does not
—may be more
comfortable in providing copies of relevant legislative provisions about client
legal privilege to persons and
informing them to seek independent legal
8.43 Accordingly, in order to achieve an appropriate degree of flexibility,
the ALRC—while supporting a legislative duty on
the part of federal bodies
to provide the requisite notification—proposes that federal bodies develop
and publish their own
practices and procedures in relation to the precise manner
of notification that they adopt.
Proposal 8–1
Federal client legal privilege legislation should
require federal bodies with coercive information-gathering powers—the
of which raise, or are likely to raise, the issue of the application of
the privilege—to notify persons the subject of those
powers, as well as
those who provide information on a voluntary basis, whether or not client legal
privilege applies to:
(a) the exercise of a particular power; and
(b) the voluntary production of information.
Proposal 8–2
Federal bodies with coercive information-gathering
powers—the exercise of which raise, or are likely to raise, the issue of
the application of client legal privilege—should develop and publish
policies and procedures in relation to the manner of notifying
persons whether
the privilege applies to the exercise of their information-gathering powers and
to the voluntary production of information.
Making a privilege
8.44 As stated in Chapter 3, client legal privilege must be claimed in
order to be applied. A party making a claim of privilege must
provide the party
seeking disclosure with sufficient information to allow it to make a decision
However, those who
make privilege claims in federal investigations are not generally subject to
legislative requirements to provide
details of their claims to federal
Policies of federal bodies
8.45 Unlike many federal bodies, the ATO has policies and procedures setting
out how persons should make client legal privilege claims
in it investigations.
The ATO Manual sets out what a person claiming privilege should
Drawing on principles
established by the common law, the ATO’s policy in relation to persons
claiming privilege is that the
person should:
make it clear that the claim is being made—a vague assertion
of the privilege is insufficient;
provide the ATO with enough information to enable it to decide
whether to accept or resist the claim;
justify the claim—resort to a verbal formula is insufficient;
provide evidence of all the elements of the relevant limb of
privilege for each document for which privilege is claimed, and specify
features of each document, including its
not make a blanket claim—that is, assert that all documents in
a room or cabinet are privileged without examining the documents
to verify their
claim. However, a person does not make a blanket claim where they refuse access
to all documents until they have
established whether they are
privileged.
The ATO has proformas that it requests persons claiming privilege to complete
for each individual claim—although it acknowledges
that they are not
compelled to do so.
separate proformas for claims made in respect of:
communications in documents prepared by in-house legal
communications in attachments to a primary document; and
copies of original
addition, under the guidelines agreed between the Commissioner of Taxation and
the Law Council of Australia (Law Council)
in relation to the exercise of the
ATO’s access powers at lawyers’ premises in circumstances where a
claim of client
legal privilege is made (ATO
Guidelines),
where a lawyer
asserts privilege in response to the exercise of a coercive
information-gathering power by the ATO on a lawyer’s
premises, a list of
the documents in respect of which privilege is claimed is to be made. That list
is to contain a number of specific
details, including:
the nature and date of each document;
the exact number of documents and pages contained in the documents
the identity of the person who prepared or signed the document, and
to whom it was directed;
a physical description of each document—for example, typed or
handwritten;
whether the document is an original or photocopy;
the grounds on which privilege is claimed in respect of each
document; and
the person in whose name the claim is
stated that there have been very few claims made for privilege in its
investigations but that usually where such a claim
is made, a fairly detailed
description of documents subject to the claim is provided—either in
support of the claim or at APRA’s
Privilege claims in litigation
8.49 In considering what the processes should be for making client legal
privilege claims in response to the coercive information-gathering
federal bodies, it is useful to consider, by analogy, the processes that exist
in relation to the making of such claims
in the context of discovery obligations
in litigation.
8.50 In the Federal Court, a party giving discovery is required to:
list all documents which have been in its possession, custody or
describe each document, or in the case of a group of documents of
the same nature describe the group, sufficiently to enable the
document or group
to be identified; and
sufficiently state the grounds of privilege, where the party claims
that any document is privileged from
production.
8.51 Form 22
of the Federal Court Rules envisages the listing of privileged documents, and
verification on oath by the party. It reads
1. The party has in his possession, custody or power the documents enumerated in
Schedule 1.
2. The documents enumerated in Part 2 of Schedule 1 are privileged from
production on the ground–
(a) as to documents numbered 4–7 inclusive, that (state the ground);
(b) as to documents 8 and 9, that (state the ground).
8.52 However, the New South Wales (NSW) Bar Association submitted that, in
its experience, ‘typically a party does not list
privileged documents
individually, unless vigorously pressed to do
8.53 Where the party making the list of documents has a solicitor in the
proceeding, the solicitor is required to certify that according
to instructions
received, the list and the statements in the list are
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005
(NSW) require a party
giving discovery to identify any document that is claimed to be privileged and
to specify the circumstances
under which the privilege is claimed to
The list is to be
accompanied by a supporting affidavit, in which the deponent is to state, in
respect of any document that is claimed
to be privileged, the facts relied on as
establishing the existence of the
If the party giving
discovery has a solicitor, the list also must be accompanied by a
solicitor’s certificate of
8.55 In general terms, other court rules governing discovery also require a
party making a privilege claim to describe or identify
documents—whether individually or by reference to a group;—state the
basis of the claim on oath; and have
the list certified by a lawyer if the party
is represented.
8.56 Submissions and consultations revealed a number of issues and problems
concerning the making of privilege claims. These include:
that persons are not always given an opportunity to make a
a lack of consistency in the manner in which claims are made;
a lack of transparency in claims;
the need to address blanket claims of privilege;
over-claiming of
over-use of masking of documents;
to a lesser degree, ‘warehousing’ and
‘privileging’;
concerns about waiving privilege in the process of making a
8.57 Some of
these issues are considered in more detail below.
Lack of opportunity to make a
8.58 The circumstances in which information can be required to be produced
vary in significant respects. Persons the subject of a
coercive power may have
some time within which to produce documents or information. For example, some
statutes stipulate a minimum
period within which documents are to be
circumstances, information must be produced immediately. This may be the case
where statutory notices to produce documents
require production forthwith or
within 24 hours, or where documents are sought to be seized during a search.
8.59 Whether a person has been allowed a reasonable opportunity to make a
claim for privilege may be more of a contentious issue in
the context of the
execution of searches. BHP Billiton Mitsubishi Alliance stated that:
Federal investigatory bodies are in a position where they are able to demand
access to information in circumstances where the relevant
individual or
corporation is denied the ability to obtain legal advice as to whether access
should be denied.
8.60 The ATO Manual states that an ATO officer exercising access powers is
required to give the custodian of documents an adequate
opportunity to claim
privilege, unless there is no realistic possibility of privilege being
applicable.
A reasonable
opportunity to allow a person to make a claim has been described as going beyond
a mere obligation to respond reasonably
to a claim when
Oke v Commissioner of the Australian Federal Police
evidence established that a search was carried out in several rooms of the
premises prior to the arrival of the occupant’s
solicitor despite the
occupier’s assertion that there were privileged documents on
Further, the
occupier’s solicitor was not permitted to inspect documents sought to be
seized by the Australian Federal Police
(AFP) officers prior to inspection by
them in order to determine whether a claim for privilege legitimately could be
made. Mansfield
J concluded that such inappropriate behaviour on the part
of the AFP no doubt resulted in the solicitor making a blanket claim for
privilege, and that:
The transcript recording of the execution of the … warrant reveals that,
although the AFP officers were aware of an occupier’s
right to claim
privilege over documents which may prima facie appear to fall within the
warrant’s terms, they had a limited
understanding of what was required to
give meaning to that right.
Lack of transparency in claims
8.62 IP 33 raised the question whether those subject to notices, search
warrants or other coercive-information gathering powers should
be required to:
(a) notify a federal body that documents the subject of a privilege claim have
been withheld; and (b) provide the
federal body with details of those
8.63 Submissions and consultations revealed that some federal bodies
experience difficulties in testing privilege claims because those
coercive powers sometimes do not alert the federal body of the existence of a
claim or, when claims are made, insufficient
details are
8.64 The Australian Communications and Media Authority (ACMA) submitted that
greater transparency is required in the making of client
legal privilege claims
to federal bodies in answer to their coercive information-gathering powers.
While legitimate claims for [privilege] are an essential right for clients
communicating with their legal representatives, at times,
it is not obvious that
the claim is appropriate or proper in the
circumstances.
8.65 The ACCC expressed concern that:
in the context of responding to
notices, there is scope to claim
legal professional privilege without a proper basis and that, from time to time,
claims have been made. …
Sometimes … parties claiming legal professional privilege over documents
do not alert the ACCC to a claim of privilege being
made at all. …
Documents are provided in response to a
notice without reference to
the fact that other documents have not been produced upon the basis of a claim
for privilege. Alternatively,
the party producing documents may simply assert
that privilege has been claimed over documents without providing a schedule of
documents or any details about them or the claim (such as the nature of
the communication or the relevant parties). It is the ACCC’s
that, when notice recipients are asked for an explanation of the basis upon
which privilege is claimed, the response has
been that there is no legal
obligation to provide such information …
As a result, … in most cases, the ACCC is not in a position to determine
whether such claims are properly
8.66 The ACCC provided the following case studies to illustrate its
Company A responded to a
notice by supplying a large number of
documents (approximately 32 folders). A considerable number of these were masked
in whole or
in part. The documents were labelled as ‘privileged’ or
‘redacted’.
The supply of the documents came with a cover letter that stated
documents to which Company A claims to have legal professional
privilege have been either excluded or masked (where only part of the
is privileged)
’. A list of excluded documents was not provided, nor
was any further information or explanation given relating to the grounds
privilege. ….
ACCC staff discovered that documents that were masked were also provided in
unmasked form (identical documents). This revealed that
some of the claims of
legal professional privilege made by Company A had been invalid.
ACCC staff raised concern about the way in which Company A had complied and
in response, Company A relinquished claim of privilege
over some of the
documents. However, when initially pressed for an explanation for each claim of
privilege, Company A stated that
‘it does not consider that it is under a
legal obligation to provide such information’. The information provided by
A to explain the basis for [its] claims for privilege was so vague and
general that it was of no assistance to ACCC staff in determining
whether they
should seek the release of the documents in
CASE STUDY TWO
[This example] demonstrates the … ‘random’ way the ACCC
might discover an improper claim for privilege. It involved
the investigation of
allegations of an anti-competitive agreement between Company B and Company C.
Company B claimed privilege over
documents (or part of documents) that it
provided to the ACCC pursuant to a
similar terms was also served upon Company C. The documents produced by Company
C included complete copies of the documents
over which privilege had been
claimed by Company B. This revealed that some of the claims of legal
professional privilege made by
Company B were not soundly
8.67 The ATO submitted that:
A major problem that arises concerning the making of a claim for [privilege] in
response to an exercise of our information-gathering
powers is that claims often
provide very little information and do not provide us with sufficient details to
decide whether the documents
would even be relevant to our compliance activities
The Tax Office considers that [its proformas] have gone some way in helping to
resolve [privilege] disputes. However, in practice,
we find that taxpayers often
refuse to complete the forms where their claim for [privilege] relates to a
large number of documents.
Whilst the forms have some basis in law insofar as
the common law prescribes that a claim for [privilege] must be in proper form
and expose sufficient facts to justify the claim, we cannot compel taxpayers to
complete the forms.
8.68 However, the Taxation Institute of Australia expressed the view that the
ATO’s regime for making a valid claim of privilege
is unworkable and
onerous, requiring the completion of multiple proforma documents ‘for each
and every document over which
a claim for privilege is
Lack of consistency in providing particulars
8.69 The difficulties encountered by the ACCC in obtaining particulars of
privileged information contrasts with that of APRA—which,
as stated above,
noted that in most cases where a claim of privilege is made, a detailed
description of the documents is provided
8.70 There is an enormous disparity in the approaches taken by persons
subject to federal coercive powers to justify their claims
of privilege. At one
end of the spectrum, persons choosing to cooperate within the ATO’s
framework provide the details requested
in the ATO’s proformas in respect
of each document for which they make a claim. At the other end of the spectrum,
persons fail
to inform the ACCC of the fact that documents are withheld on the
basis of privilege.
Blanket claims
8.71 The ATO submitted that there is a major problem with claimants making
‘blanket claims’ of privilege—alleging
that all documents in a
room or in their possession are privileged without examining the documents to
verify the claim.
We consider that blanket claims should not be permitted, and that a specific
claim for privilege should be made in respect of each
8.72 ASIC submitted that:
Blanket claims of privilege are unhelpful because they do not identify the
particular documents in respect of which privilege is
claimed and the basis of
the claim, Accordingly, they provide limited assistance in resolving privilege
claims or in allowing them
to be tested. However, … provision for them may
be necessary where it is not possible to expeditiously review and make privilege
claims over documents, particularly those that may be stored
electronically.
Over-masking
8.73 The NSW Bar Association submitted:
Masking most frequently occurs not in respect of primary privilege claims, but
in respect of secondary or derivative claims: a summary
of legal advice in one
sentence in a 10-page board paper, extracts of a conversation with a solicitor
in a client’s longer
file note etc …
Over-masking is likely to be the product either of an attempt to widen a
privilege claim inappropriately or of a caution bred of
a lack of understanding
8.74 The ATO and the Law Council noted that there was a concern among the
subjects of coercive information-gathering powers that providing
information about a client legal privilege claim (such as completing an ATO
proforma) could amount to a waiver of
Submissions and
consultations on reform options
8.75 The Australian Corporate Lawyers Association (ACLA) submitted that there
would be ‘value in putting greater focus on the
processes by which [client
legal privilege] claims are made and on the accountabilities of those … by
whom they are made’.
8.76 Other stakeholders made specific suggestions about improving the
processes by which privilege claims are made, and these are
discussed below.
Provision of particulars
8.77 There was strong support in submissions and consultations—from
federal bodies and the legal profession—for requiring
claimants, when
responding to federal coercive powers, to provide details of the communications
in respect of which they claim
8.78 ACMA submitted that requiring a claimant to provide a detailed
description of the documents in respect of which a privilege claim
is made would
significantly assist a federal body in determining whether a claimant was
properly resisting disclosure:
For example, a document description that indicated an advice from Counsel to a
client might be sufficient to satisfy the regulator
that … the claim for
privilege in respect of that document was
legitimate.
8.79 The ATO submitted that there should be a mandated process for claiming
client legal privilege and that this process should
• prescribe minimum details that must be provided by the claimant in
support of a claim—this should be a level of detail
that allows federal
investigatory agencies to decide whether to accept or reject a claim …
• require persons who make claims in respect of communications with
in-house legal advisers to provide additional details about
the communication.
This will assist agencies to assess the independence of the in-house adviser and
ascertain the capacity in which
he or she provided the advice …
• prohibit blanket claims; and
• clarify that complying with minimum disclosure requirements would not
result in a common law waiver of
[privilege].
8.80 The ACCC submitted that privilege claimants should be required to
identify to a regulator the privilege claims which are made
and the basis for
those claims. The ACCC supported a legislative requirement that claimants
provide a number of specific details—as
set out in the ATO
Guidelines—including the nature and date of each document, the identity of
the person who prepared or signed
the document and to whom it was directed, and
whether the document is an original or
8.81 The Australian Institute of Company Directors (AICD) also supported a
legislative mechanism as a way of addressing the lack of
consistency in the
making of privilege claims.
It is inappropriate to rely on guidelines as the basis for making claims
• not all agencies make guidelines, and they differ. This is of
particular concern in multi-task forces;
• as they are voluntary, the consequences of non-compliance by the
agency are uncertain; [and]
• they can be easily changed by administrative process potentially
without consultation, and grant too much power and/or discretion
8.82 The NSW Bar Association expressed support for amendment to Federal Court
and Supreme Court discovery rules requiring the listing
of documents brought
into existence prior to the commencement of litigation
by reference to date, type, author and recipient of the document, or if this
information is not available, a sufficient description
of the document, and
[for] the facts relied upon for the existence of the privilege [to be]
identified as specifically as possible
on a document by document
8.83 It submitted that:
While the requirement that a party specify the grounds for a claim for privilege
may appear to adequately expose the basis of the
privilege claim for testing and
may also provide the necessary discipline for the claimant, we consider that the
utility of this
requirement may be undermined to the extent that documents over
which a claim for privilege is made are not listed individually.
8.84 ASIC submitted that guidelines to assist in making claims would be
APRA noted that where it
has been provided with descriptions of documents ‘such descriptions
… [have] enabled a fairly
well informed decision to be
Verification on oath and certification of
8.85 Stakeholders also expressed some support for privilege claims made to
federal bodies to be verified on oath and/or certified
by lawyers—as is
the practice in relation to discovery. ACMA stated that, depending on the nature
of a claim and the nature
of the investigation, it may seek an affidavit from a
claimant about the nature of the documents the subject of a
8.86 The ACCC submitted that where the claim is made by a lawyer on behalf of
a client, the lawyer should be required to verify on
he or she has reviewed all documents in respect of which the claim for privilege
has been made and is satisfied that the claim is
a proper one; and secondly,
that he or she is satisfied that none of the documents in respect of which the
claim has been made come
within the fraud or crime exception to legal
professional privilege.
8.87 The NSW Bar Association supported a similar approach. It submitted that
the senior solicitor with carriage and control of the
matter should certify, at
the time of making a privilege claim, that each privilege claim is supported by
reasonable grounds, and
that the grounds for each claim have been identified.
Such a certificate could be analogous in form and status to certificates given
by a practitioner under
section 347(b)
Legal Profession Act 2004
(NSW) … warranting reasonable prospects of success in respect of
proceedings.
Time limits
8.88 ASIC and the ATO expressed the need for time limits to be set within
which claimants are to provide details of client legal privilege
response to the coercive information-gathering powers of federal bodies.
8.89 In this regard, the ATO submitted that the process for making a claim
prescribe statutory time periods within which details of a claim must be
provided, or allow for a longer period where this is agreed
to in writing by the
relevant federal investigatory agency and the
8.90 ASIC submitted that details of privilege claims should be provided
within time limits that are defined but may be flexible depending
particular circumstances.
noted that flexibility was necessary to take into account the fact that
documents the subject of privilege claims may be voluminous
or mixed amongst
large amounts of non-privileged documents covered by the coercive power.
Establishing a procedure for the making of
8.91 The ALRC considers that federal client legal privilege legislation
should provide a mechanism for the making of privilege claims
investigations. The ALRC’s proposed statute of general application
provides an appropriate vehicle to establish
uniform procedures for making
8.92 Court rules do not provide an appropriate vehicle for the making of
privilege claims in federal investigations because there
may not be any court
proceedings on foot arising from an investigation—nor may there ever be.
The experience of federal bodies—in
particular the ACCC and
ATO—suggests that guidelines of themselves are inadequate because, in the
absence of legislative compulsion,
some persons consider that they are justified
in their refusal to provide particulars of their privilege claims. However, as
below, the ALRC considers that federal body policies have a role to
play in complementing the proposed legislative scheme for making
8.93 The lack of clear and consistent practices surrounding the making of
client legal privilege claims in federal investigations
needs to be addressed.
The absence of a process requiring transparent claims may encourage blanket
claims, over-claiming privilege,
over-masking or otherwise arguably
inappropriate claims—thereby hindering the ability of federal bodies to
access material
relevant to their investigations.
8.94 It is unsatisfactory that federal bodies may not be made aware of the
fact that allegedly privileged material has been withheld
from production. It is
important for federal bodies to be able to satisfy themselves that claims of
client legal privilege appear
to have a proper basis. Increasing the
transparency of claims may have the salutary effect of decreasing the likelihood
of inappropriate
claims—and therefore maximising the production of
relevant non-privileged material to federal investigatory bodies pursuant
their coercive powers. It may also reassure such bodies that client legal
privilege claims are being appropriately made.
Obligations of federal bodies and
8.95 The mechanism for making a claim should set out the respective
obligations of federal bodies and claimants. Federal bodies must
give persons a
reasonable opportunity to make a claim.
8.96 The ALRC considers that, in order to enjoy the benefit of an important
right—as the ability to make a claim of client legal
is—claimants must be prepared to meet certain obligations in demonstrating
their entitlement to exercise that right.
Court discovery rules provide a
precedent for creating obligations on those who make privilege claims to provide
details of their
8.97 The ALRC agrees with the approach supported by a number of stakeholders
that claimants should be required to provide details
of privileged
communications withheld from federal bodies. However, not every federal body in
respect of the exercise of each of
its coercive information-gathering powers
will necessarily require particulars of privileged information withheld from
production.
Whether a federal body does so may depend on its nature, the
particular investigation that it is undertaking, and the power that
exercising. Accordingly, in order to achieve an appropriate degree of
flexibility, the ALRC proposes that claimants be obliged
to provide certain
particulars of privileged communications only when a federal body has requested
8.98 Where particulars are requested, claimants should be required to specify
the grounds on which privilege is claimed. In addition,
where claims are made in
respect of communications in documents, claimants, on the request of the federal
body, should be required
describe the documents either individually or by bundle,
sufficiently to enable the document or bundle to be
identified;
identify any communications prepared by or involving an in-house
counsel. This can be done globally by indicating that a particular
referred to in the list of documents is an in-house counsel;
provide sufficient details about the independence of the in-house
counsel. Such details might include a description of the in-house
counsel’s role, in particular whether it involves making commercial
decisions, and performance accountabilities—for example,
whether he or she
is responsible for commercial
identify ‘tax advice documents’ (as defined in
Proposal 6–3) prepared by a professional accounting adviser. A
can make the general statement that a particular person referred to in
the list is a professional accounting adviser.
8.99 The ALRC’s
approach also addresses concerns expressed about the making of blanket claims.
Where a federal body requests
particulars of privilege claims, they will have to
be provided.
8.100 The ALRC’s preliminary views about the consequences of a person
failing to provide particulars are addressed separately
Verification and certification
8.101 Where a person makes a privilege claim in a federal investigation, and
a federal body has requested particulars of that claim,
the federal body, if it
so chooses, should be able to require the person to verify his or her claim on
oath or affirmation. This
is consistent with the obligations imposed on
claimants in court discovery processes.
8.102 In addition, where a person is represented in a federal investigation
or has otherwise received advice in relation to the preparation
of the list of
privileged documents, the federal body may request that the lawyer certify that,
having reviewed the documents the
subject of a privilege claim, in his or her
opinion there are reasonable grounds for the making of the claim.
8.103 It is the ALRC’s preliminary view that the verification and
certification processes serve the salutary function of focusing
attention by
claimants and their lawyers on the merits of the claims for
privilege—increasing the likelihood that possibly
inappropriate claims are
eliminated at an early stage.
8.104 In certifying that there are reasonable grounds for a privilege claim a
lawyer, in effect, will also be expressing the view
none of the documents the subject of the claim are subject to the
fraud and crime exception to the privilege; and
if portions of documents are privileged, a claim has been made only
in relation to those specific
8.105 Verification
and certification may engender trust on the part of a federal body as to the
legitimacy of the claims being made—thereby
possibly reducing the need to
dispute privilege claims.
8.106 However, where a federal body seeks particulars of a privilege claim,
it may not always need that claim to be verified or certified.
Whether it does
so may depend on a number of factors, including the nature of the investigation,
and the person who is the subject
of the coercive information-gathering power.
Therefore, to achieve an appropriate degree of flexibility, the ALRC proposes
that claimants
and their lawyers be required to verify and certify claims only
where the federal body has requested them to do so. As discussed
below, it may
be appropriate for policies on the making of privilege claims of individual
federal bodies to address the circumstances
in which those bodies will request
verification or certification of
8.107 The proposed model for making privilege claims recognises the proposed
extension of client legal privilege to tax advice provided
by professional
accounting advisers.
it only allows lawyers to certify such claims—recognising that advice
a communication is legal advice
which a professional accounting adviser is not qualified to give, unless that
person is also a lawyer.
8.108 The ALRC’s views on the consequences of a lawyer failing to
provide certification are set out separately below.
8.109 The ALRC supports the approach suggested by the ATO and considers that
federal client legal privilege legislation should make
it clear that providing a
description of documents or a bundle of documents in accordance with legislative
requirements will not
of itself amount to a waiver of client legal privilege.
8.110 However, the ALRC envisages that the details provided should be able to
be used by a federal body to dispute the claim.
Time limits
8.111 It is impossible for legislation to specify a time period within which
persons in all federal investigations making a claim
for privilege are to
provide particulars of privileged documents, where requested by federal bodies.
8.112 Each federal body should have the discretion to set reasonable time
frames for the provision of particulars of privileged information,
depending on
the circumstances of each particular request for information. The types of
factors that might be considered in determining
a reasonable time frame include:
the number of documents that a claimant is required to review;
the need to access and identify electronically-stored documents;
whether the information is required pursuant to the exercise of a
the urgency and seriousness of the investigation being conducted by
the federal body; and
the time frame for production of documents pursuant to the coercive
8.113 The last consideration recognises that persons subject
to coercive information-gathering powers may be faced with competing
There may be a deadline for the production of information sought under a
particular power—whether the deadline is
statutorily imposed or determined
at the discretion of the federal body—in addition to the deadline imposed
by the federal
body for the provision of particulars of privileged information
(where such particulars have been requested).
8.114 From a practical perspective, federal investigatory bodies presumably
would want to have access to non-privileged information
possible—in order to advance their investigations. The production of
non-privileged information should not be delayed
by requirements to provide
particulars of privileged information. Therefore the ALRC envisages that, in
general terms, the time limit
set by a federal body for the provision of
particulars of privileged information would not be earlier than the time limit
compliance with the power.
Failure by claimant to provide
particulars
8.115 A claimant may fail to comply with a federal body’s request to
provide particulars by not providing any particulars, or
by providing, in the
federal body’s view, inadequate particulars.
8.116 The claimant’s failure may be due to a range of reasons. The time
frame designated by the federal body in the first instance
may have been
unrealistic; the claimant may be unrepresented and not understand the nature of
the obligation to provide particulars;
or, more cynically, the claimant may be
aware that the particulars will not support his or her claim, or he or she is
frustrate or delay the federal investigation.
8.117 Because the failure to provide particulars may be due to a range of
reasons, it is necessary to have a process that can deal
with failure in a
flexible manner, depending on the particular circumstances. Therefore the ALRC
is of the preliminary view that
federal client legal privilege legislation
should provide that where a person fails to comply with a federal body’s
to provide particulars of communications in respect of which privilege
is claimed, the federal body may apply for a declaration that
privilege is not
maintainable unless particulars are provided forthwith or within a designated
time determined at the discretion
of the court.
8.118 The court may have regard to a range of factors in determining what is
reasonable—including the time that the federal
body gave the claimant to
provide the particulars, the urgency of the federal body’s inquiry, and
the quantity of documents
in respect of which particulars are required. The
court may order a timetable for the particulars to be provided in stages. For
particulars relating to documents about a certain transaction under
investigation may be ordered to be produced by a particular date;
particulars relating to documents relating to another transaction under
investigation by the federal body may be ordered to be
produced by a later
8.119 However, under this approach, it would be open to the court to consider
that the time frame originally provided by the federal
body to provide
particulars was reasonable, and in the absence of justification by the claimant
for why he or she did not provide
any particulars within that time, to order the
claimant to provide the details forthwith—which could effectively mean an
for production within 24 hours.
8.120 If a person fails to produce the particulars within the time frame
designated by the court, the court’s declaration that
the privilege claim
is not maintainable would take effect. This would mean that the legislation
containing the coercive power would
have the effect of requiring production of
the documents (in respect of which a non-maintainable claim had been made) to
the federal
body (assuming those documents fell within the scope of the
8.121 The ALRC is interested in hearing views about whether this approach
needs to be modified in the context of search warrants—in
particular,
whether there is a stronger argument in that framework for a failure by a
claimant to provide particulars within the
requisite time frame to lead to the
consequence that an investigatory body can take possession of
the documents in respect of which no particulars were provided.
Failure by lawyer to certify claim on
8.122 A lawyer may fail to certify a client’s legal privilege claim for
a number of reasons. At one end of the spectrum, he
or she may be negligent or
reckless. At the other end, he or she may have genuine reservations about a
client’s claim that
properly preclude him or her from certifying that
there are reasonable grounds for the making of the
It is important that
any process seeking to address the failure of a lawyer to certify a claim does
not prejudice a claimant who
has engaged a negligent lawyer.
8.123 The ALRC considers that where there has been a failure by the lawyer to
certify, the federal body should inform the claimant
of this fact, if it appears
to the federal body that the claimant may not be aware of this. In addition, the
federal body should
inform the claimant about the consequences of
non-certification. In the ALRC’s preliminary view, the consequences should
The federal body may apply to the court for a declaration that,
unless the court otherwise orders, if certification is not made within
provided by the court, the claim for privilege is not maintainable. A court may
‘otherwise order’, for example,
where there has been a partial
certification of privilege claims. If a claimant claims privilege over ten
documents, and a lawyer
certifies that he or she believes there are reasonable
grounds for the claims made in documents one to five, the federal body would
entitled to request the court to draw the inference that the lawyer did not
consider there were reasonable grounds for the making
of the claims in relation
to documents six to ten, rendering the claims in relation to those documents
unmaintainable.
The person may apply to the court for a declaration that privilege
applies despite the lack of certification.
Federal client legal privilege legislation should provide a
mechanism for the making of privilege claims in federal investigations.
provisions should include a requirement that persons be given a reasonable
opportunity to claim privilege, and where a federal
body requests particulars
(a) the person specify the grounds on which client legal privilege is
claimed; and
(b) where claims are made in respect of communications contained in
(1) the person making the claim describes the documents or in the case of a
bundle of documents of the same or similar nature, describe
each bundle,
sufficiently to enable the document or bundle to be identified;
(2) communications prepared by or involving an in-house counsel should be
(3) in respect of the in-house counsel referred to in the list, the claimant
is to provide sufficient details about that person’s
independence;
(4) ‘tax advice documents’ (defined in Proposal 6–3)
prepared by a professional accounting adviser should be indicated;
(5) where a federal body so requests:
(i) the particulars of the privileged documents and the basis for the
claims are to be verified on oath or affirmation by the person
making the claim;
(ii) where the person is represented in the federal investigation or has
otherwise received legal advice in relation to the preparation
particulars of documents subject to a claim for privilege, the person’s
lawyer is to certify that having reviewed the
documents the subject of a
privilege claim, that in his or her opinion there are reasonable grounds for the
making of the claim.
Proposal 8–4
Federal client legal privilege legislation should
specify that providing a description of the documents or bundle of documents in
accordance with legislative requirements of itself will not amount to waiver of
the privilege.
Proposal 8–5
Federal client legal privilege legislation should
specify that the
particulars of documents subject to a claim for
privilege are to be provided to the federal body within the time frame defined
that body, which must be reasonable having regard to the circumstances of
each particular request for information. The types of factors
that may be
relevant include:
(a) the number of documents that a claimant is required to review;
(b) the need to access and identify electronically-stored documents;
(c) whether the information is required pursuant to the exercise of a search
warrant (or a search without warrant);
(d) the urgency and seriousness of the investigation being conducted by the
federal body; and
(e) the time frame for production of documents pursuant to the coercive
Proposal 8–6
Federal client legal privilege legislation should
provide that where a person fails to comply with a federal body’s request
to provide particulars of communications in respect of which privilege is
claimed the federal body may apply for a declaration that
privilege is not
maintainable unless particulars are provided to the court forthwith or within a
designated time determined at the
discretion of the court.
Proposal 8–7
Federal client legal privilege legislation should
provide that where a person is represented in the federal investigation—or
has otherwise received legal advice in connection with the production of
information pursuant to a coercive power—and the federal
body requests
that any claims for client legal privilege made by the person be certified by
his or her lawyer, and the lawyer fails
to certify any or all of the privilege
claims made by that person:
(a) the federal body should inform the person that the lawyer has not
certified some or all of the claims (if it appears that the
person may not be
aware of this fact) and of the consequences of failure to certify (as set out
(b) the federal body may apply to the court for a declaration that, unless
the court otherwise orders, if certification is not made
within the time
provided by the court, the claim for privilege is not maintainable; and
(c) the person may apply to the court for a declaration that privilege
applies despite the lack of certification.
Unrepresented
8.124 The ALRC has previously considered the particular difficulties faced by
unrepresented litigants.
the context of this Inquiry, consideration needs to be given to the issues that
arise in relation to persons who are unrepresented
in the investigation process.
In IP 33, the ALRC sought feedback about what these issues might
8.125 Coercive information-gathering powers may be exercised against persons
who do not receive advice concerning the exercise of
those powers or who are not
represented. Persons may be unrepresented for a variety of reasons. For example,
they may choose to act
without representation or they may not be able to afford
it. Such persons may have privileged information or documents but may not
understand, or be aware of, their rights in relation to making a claim for
privilege. That is, they may not be aware of whether a
claim for client legal
privilege is a reasonable excuse for not producing information to a federal body
pursuant to a coercive power.
8.126 Sussex Street Community Law Services Inc submitted that:
An issue we face as a Community Legal Centre is the fact that there is a lack of
access to justice for a large proportion of our
community. When dealing with
Centrelink a majority of their customers would not seek legal advice or
assistance when faced with an
investigation, so they are generally in the
situation that they have not received legal advice in relation to their rights
investigation.
8.127 The Taxation Institute of Australia submitted:
There is no evidence which suggests that bodies exercising coercive
information-gathering powers are inclined to ‘go easy’
or to assist
[an unrepresented] person in understanding their
8.128 As a consequence of not knowing their rights, unrepresented persons may
produce privileged material to a federal body in response
to a coercive
power—including to a body that recognises that its statutory powers do not
override privilege. Production in
such circumstances may potentially prejudice a
person’s position—particularly where a federal body interprets the
of privileged material as constituting waiver.
8.129 IP 33 noted that
Taxation Administration
provides a model that could be applied in cases where privileged information is
produced by a person who is unaware of his or her
rights concerning the making
of a claim for privilege. The section applies where no claim of privilege is
made in respect of a document
produced to the Commissioner of State Revenue, but
it is apparent on examination of the document by the Commissioner or
investigator
that material in the documents is, or is likely to be, protected by
privilege. In those circumstances, it becomes the duty of the
Commissioner or an
investigator to separate the document from those in respect of which no claim is
made and to refrain from using
the document for any
8.130 There is precedent for investigatory bodies addressing in guidelines
the receipt of material considered to be subject to a claim
for client legal
privilege where no claim is made. The Serious Fraud Office, in the United
Kingdom, for example, sets out in its
Operational Handbook, a procedure to be
followed in such cases:
If no [client legal privilege] claim has been made
but there is doubt as to the status of the material, the case controller should
ask the Divisional Assistant Director to appoint a [Serious Fraud Office (SFO)]
lawyer unconnected with the case to examine the material
and advise on its
If [client legal privilege] status is confirmed, the material must be returned
immediately to the person entitled to it.
If it appears that the material might be covered by [client legal privilege] but
the SFO lawyer is unable to confirm the status of
the material without obtaining
further information, the Case controller must alert the person entitled to the
material and seek an
agreed method of
resolution.
Section 120
of the uniform Evidence Acts protects confidential
communications and confidential documents made by an unrepresented litigant for
the dominant purpose of preparing for or conducting that litigation. There is no
equivalent statutory protection given to confidential
communications and
documents made by an unrepresented person in preparing for examinations or
interviews conducted as part of federal
investigations or in preparing to comply
with other types of coercive information gathering orders. IP 33 sought
information from
federal bodies about whether, as a matter of practice, they
ever seek such material as part of their investigation
The ALRC did not
receive any information in this regard.
Submissions and
consultations
8.132 As discussed above in the section dealing with notification of
application of privilege, there was some support in submissions
consultations for requiring federal bodies exercising coercive
information-gathering powers to notify persons about whether or
not client legal
privilege applies to the exercise of those
8.133 Some stakeholders addressed the issue of informing persons about their
right to seek legal assistance. Sussex Street Community
Law Services Inc
supported a requirement that investigatory bodies, as a matter of natural
justice, inform a person under investigation
that they have a right to legal
assistance.
The Law Society
of NSW submitted that:
It would seem unnecessary to impose a regime which requires people to obtain
legal advice and incur legal costs unnecessarily if
the treatment of the
privilege is non-contentious.
8.134 There was some support for a model based on
Taxation Administration Act 2003
(WA), to address the production of
privileged material by unrepresented
The Law Society of
NSW submitted that it was a ‘useful’
although the Law
Council noted that:
There is currently little practical experience or feedback about how this
section may operate in practice. … The efficacy of
the procedure would
depend to a large extent on the expertise of the investigator in determining
what may be privileged.
8.135 The Law Society of NSW also submitted that:
Regardless of whether a legislative model can be agreed, agencies should be
required to produce uniform guidelines setting out their
requirements and a
process for review by the person or entity
8.136 Although not in the specific context of addressing the particular needs
of unrepresented persons, the NSW Bar Association submitted
that uniform
protocols for federal investigatory bodies should include a provision that:
where it reasonably appears to the responsible officer within the federal
investigative agency that client legal privilege may exist
in relation to a
document or communication coming into the hands of the agency then the agency
must take reasonable steps to notify
the client (either directly or through an
available lawyer for the client) and give that client the opportunity to claim
before further inspecting or using the
8.137 NSW Young Lawyers expressed support for a provision protecting the
confidential communications and documents prepared by an
unrepresented person in
preparing for examinations or interviews conducted in federal investigations or
in preparing to comply with
other types of coercive information-gathering
Preventing unintentional disclosure of
privileged material by unrepresented persons
8.138 The ALRC considers that other proposals made in this Discussion Paper
will be of particular benefit in preventing the unintentional
disclosure of
privileged material by unrepresented persons. These include, in particular, the
proposals requiring federal bodies
to notify persons about whether client legal
privilege applies to the exercise of a coercive power or the voluntary
production of
information.
8.139 The ALRC also makes a number of proposals directed to the development
and publication of policies by federal bodies with coercive
information-gathering powers. One of those proposals is aimed at policies in
relation to notifying persons that they may wish to
seek independent legal
advice about responding to a coercive power—which could include advice
privilege to a particular communication—or,
if applicable, seek legal
representation.
Such policies
should address the circumstances in which federal bodies will give such notice.
Relevant factors may include:
whether the person the subject of the power is the subject of the
investigation;
whether the person the subject of the power is known to be
unrepresented;
the type of power being exercised;
the nature of the investigation; and
whether the statute conferring the power confers a right to legal
representation in an interview or
examination.
unintentional disclosure of privileged material by unrepresented
8.140 The ALRC considers that there may be situations in which the receipt of
privileged material from an unrepresented person—in
respect of which no
claim for privilege is made—places an obligation on the federal body to
take reasonable steps to contact
the person to allow that person a reasonable
opportunity to seek legal advice about whether to claim or waive the privilege.
8.141 The ALRC is of the preliminary view, however, that it would be unduly
prescriptive and onerous to place such a requirement on
all federal bodies in
all instances—without regard to the particular circumstances of each case.
For example, considerations
of fairness may not require a federal body to
the federal body notified the person
client legal privilege applied to the
exercise of its coercive information-gathering power; and
he or she could seek independent legal advice or legal
representation;
the unrepresented person is not the target of the federal
body’s investigation; and
the privileged information produced by the unrepresented person does
not prejudice that person’s position.
8.142 Consequently, the
ALRC supports a flexible approach, requiring federal bodies with coercive
information-gathering powers—the
exercise of which raise or are likely to
raise the issue of the application of client legal privilege—to develop
and publish
their policies concerning the manner in which they deal with
apparent unintentional disclosures of privileged material by unrepresented
persons. The policies should address the circumstances in which they recognise
that such persons should be given an opportunity to
seek legal advice about
whether to claim or waive privilege.
Extension of privilege in s 120 Evidence
8.143 The ALRC does not make any proposal to protect the confidential
communications and documents of unrepresented persons in preparing
with federal investigatory powers. As a matter of principle, it is difficult to
reconcile such an approach with the underlying
rationale for client legal
8.144 The adoption of such an approach also would present some practical
difficulties. In Chapter 7, the ALRC expresses the view that,
even where a
statute abrogates client legal privilege, abrogation does not extend to legal
advice that relates to the representation
of the client in the investigation
itself, provided that, or to the extent that, the investigation concerns
offences alleged to have
been committed prior to the commencement of the
investigation. However, abrogation may apply to the extent that the advice
continuing conduct that is the subject of the
investigation.
8.145 If an analogous approach were to be applied to the material of an
unrepresented person concerning that person’s preparation
in complying
with federal investigatory powers, it may be difficult for some unrepresented
persons to assess whether an investigation
concerns conduct allegedly committed
exclusively in the past. This would affect the practicality of such an
Proposal 8–8
Federal bodies with coercive information-gathering
powers—the exercise of which raise, or are likely to raise, the issue of
the application of client legal privilege—should develop and publish their
policies and procedures for addressing apparent
unintentional disclosures by
unrepresented persons of material likely to be subject to a claim of client
legal privilege; particularly
the circumstances in which they recognise such
persons should be given an opportunity to seek legal advice about whether to
or waive the privilege.
Third parties
8.146 Different issues may arise in relation to privilege depending upon from
whom information is compelled. As noted in Chapter 4,
depending on the
circumstances, information may be compelled not only from persons suspected of
wrongdoing, but also from persons
or entities who happen to have information or
documents that may be relevant to an investigation into the conduct of others.
example, information or documents may be sought from a person’s
lawyer, accountant, service providers, employer, business associates,
8.147 Where the information is sought from a person’s lawyer, that
lawyer is likely to be in a comparatively sound position
to facilitate the
making of a privilege claim on behalf of his or her client, where appropriate.
However, where a person other than
a person’s lawyer—such as a
person’s relative (X)—holds documents belonging to another (Y) that
privileged communications, questions arise as to whether:
the giving of the information by Y to X waived the privilege;
X can inadvertently waive Y’s right to claim
X is aware that any documents in his or her possession may be
privileged; and
X is in a position to take steps to protect Y’s privileged
information.
8.148 Key issues will include the circumstances in
which a person came to hold the documents of another and the relationship
the two persons.
8.149 The ability of a person holding documents on behalf of another to take
steps to protect privileged information may be restricted
by statutory secrecy
provisions. In some cases a person who is the subject of a coercive
information-gathering power is prohibited
from disclosing that fact. For
example, a person may be prohibited from disclosing the fact that he or she has
been required to produce
documents to the Australian Crime Commission
—although a lawyer
may make a disclosure for the purpose of obtaining the agreement of another
person to the lawyer answering
a question or producing a document at an
examination.
Rio Tinto Ltd v Commissioner of Taxation
, Sundberg J stated:
It may be that a party to whom privileged documents are provided, in
circumstances that are not inconsistent with the maintenance
of the privilege,
has a general or limited right to assert that privilege on behalf of any person.
Where a document which is privileged, or alleged to be privileged, in the hands
of the client for whom it was prepared, is then provided
to a third party, the
party claiming privilege bears the burden of proving that the provision of that
document to the third party
did not waive privilege. … An ex post facto
request by the client for the third party to maintain the privilege does not
the burden.
8.151 Dr Sue McNicol has expressed the view that a person other than the
holder of the privilege can claim the privilege.
The only person who can waive the privilege is the ‘holder’ of the
privilege. The holder of the privilege is, however,
not necessarily the person
who claims, invokes or exercises the
Submissions and
consultations
8.152 While submissions and consultations identified the issues concerning
the compulsion of material from third persons, few of them
suggested any reform
options. The AGS submitted that:
there must be a proper limit to what action a federal body can reasonably be
expected to take in anticipation of the possibility
that information or
documents which the body is seeking through the exercise of coercive powers are
subject to client legal privilege.
This is regardless of whether the person in
whose favour the privilege subsists is the holder of the information … or
the holder be some other
8.153 The Law Society of NSW suggested that there be penalties imposed on
federal bodies where they used privileged information without
opportunity for a claim of privilege to be made.
8.154 Others expressed the view that a federal body should not take unfair
advantage of a privilege holder in these
circumstances,
fairness could require the claimant to be notified that potentially privileged
information had been sought and provided an
opportunity to make a privilege
Pre-production obligations
8.155 The ALRC’s proposal to require federal bodies to notify persons
of a coercive power
may assist in alerting the recipients of notices required to produce documents
belonging to another, of the ability
to claim privilege in relation to the
production of those
For example, if
the recipient of a notice is a firm of accountants with an in-house counsel,
that counsel could undertake to identify
potentially privileged information
belonging to a client that falls within the terms of the notice, and, where not
legislatively
prohibited from doing so, seek instructions from the client in
relation to making a claim. However, not all ‘third party’
recipients will possess comparable levels of legal knowledge.
Post-production obligations—covert
investigations
8.156 Different considerations come into play once a federal body receives
potentially privileged information from a person other
than the holder of the
privilege in circumstances where a claim has not been made. In particular,
complex issues arise where:
a federal body is undertaking a covert investigation;
potentially privileged information belonging to a covert target is
produced pursuant to a coercive power by a person other than the
the person producing the information is prohibited by secrecy
provisions from notifying the target about the production of documents—or
to give the target an opportunity to claim privilege; and
the federal body considers that notifying the target to allow an
opportunity to claim privilege would be likely to prejudice the
investigation.
8.157 The ALRC is of the preliminary view that reforms to practice
and procedure cannot adequately or completely address such circumstances,
that the exigencies of covert investigations should be one of the relevant
factors considered by the Australian Parliament in
deciding whether to abrogate
client legal privilege in a particular
Persons in such
circumstances do not have a reasonable opportunity to claim the
privilege—their circumstances are arguably
akin to persons subject to
telecommunications interception powers.
Post-production obligations—overt
investigations
8.158 In overt investigations there is a stronger case for ensuring that
privilege holders are given an opportunity to establish their
circumstances where a federal body compulsorily obtains their privileged
information from other persons (the notice recipients).
While the provision of
the privileged information by privilege holders to the notice recipients may
have resulted in the waiver of
the privilege, this is not necessarily the
case—for example, where the notice recipient is merely a storage provider.
8.159 In the ALRC’s preliminary view, in such circumstances a federal
body should be required to take reasonable steps to allow
privilege holders an
opportunity to establish that their privilege was not waived by the giving of
the privileged information to
the notice recipients. The ALRC considers that
such an approach is consistent with the concept of a ‘model
investigator’.
Such an obligation may also act as a safeguard in ensuring
that federal bodies do not unfairly issue notices to parties with the
intention of hoping to access information that, if sought from the privilege
holder, would be likely to be subject to a
claim for privilege.
8.160 Because this proposal operates in respect of overt investigations only,
there ought not to be any prohibitions on the notice
recipient seeking
instructions from the privilege holder about any privilege claims prior to
producing documents to the federal body.
Where such a course of action is taken
by the notice recipient, it will be unlikely, or at least less likely, that the
federal body
will receive from the notice recipient the privilege holder’s
privileged information.
8.161 In circumstances where privilege holders establish that privilege was
not waived by the provision of privileged information
to the notice recipients,
the production by a notice recipient of the privileged information to the
federal body should not prevent
the privilege holder from being entitled to
relief, for example, in the form of an injunction restraining the federal body
the privileged information or adducing it in
Proposal 8–9
Federal client legal privilege legislation should
provide that, other than in covert investigations, where a federal body receives
apparently privileged information from a person other than the privilege holder
(the notice recipient)—pursuant to the exercise
of a coercive power that
does not abrogate client legal privilege—the federal body should take
reasonable steps to give the
privilege holder an opportunity to establish that
privilege had not been waived by the privilege holder’s provision of the
information to the notice recipient.
Resolving privilege
Practices of federal bodies
8.162 Many federal bodies do not have any standard procedures for resolving
privilege claims. This is sometimes due to the fact that
issues of client legal
privilege do not typically arise in their investigations. A number of federal
bodies informed the ALRC that
no claims of privilege had been made in their
investigations in their corporate
nor had they ever
challenged a claim for privilege asserted in respect of the exercise of their
coercive powers.
8.163 Medicare Australia stated that it was aware of only one case in which
privilege was raised during the execution of a
Similarly, the
Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security stated that he was aware of only
one instance in which client legal
privilege was an issue in the context of the
powers under
Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security
8.164 Comcare informed the ALRC that it has no current procedure for
resolving claims because, to date, this has been
unnecessary.
The National
Offshore Petroleum Safety Authority stated that, in its short period of
existence, it had not been challenged by privilege
issues in its major
investigations.
8.165 AUSTRAC submitted that:
Reflecting the absence of any challenges on the ground of client legal
privilege, AUSTRAC has not established practices and procedures
to deal with
such a challenge should it arise in response to the exercise of a coercive
information-gathering power, nor does it
have any policies or manuals that set
out its practice in relation to client legal privilege. However, as AUSTRAC
progressively implements
the [anti-money laundering/counter-terrorism financing]
reforms and mounts an expanded compliance audit program across a broader
of reporting entities, it will keep the matter of client legal privilege under
close review.
8.166 Only a very few federal bodies appear to have formal policies and
practices concerning the resolution of privilege
Notably, the ATO
has developed and published guidelines concerning procedures to be adopted in
relation to resolving claims for client
legal privilege made in response to the
exercise of its information-gathering powers. The ATO Manual summarises the law
to the ATO’s statutory powers for gaining access to information
and describes how the ATO exercises those powers.
8.167 The ATO Manual encourages a consultative approach to resolving claims
of privilege. Tax officers are to work with claimants
to develop a procedure
for resolving privilege
Further, tax officers
are encouraged to consult generally with a person before exercising notice
powers—which may result in
negotiation to resolve privilege issues before
a notice is sent.
8.168 The ATO Manual identifies an inspection process as a means of resolving
claims for privilege. The process allows for the ATO
and the claimant each to
nominate a person to inspect documents and agree whether or not privilege
applies. The ATO has devised an
Inspection Agreement
8.169 Where the ATO decides to resist or refuse a claim for privilege, some
of its options are:
instituting proceedings for injunctive or declaratory relief;
seeking independent third party review or arbitration; or
resolution by an independent
addition, as mentioned above, the ATO Guidelines—agreed to between the
Commissioner of Taxation and the Law Council—address
the exercise of the
ATO’s access powers at lawyers’ premises in circumstances where a
claim of client legal privilege
8.171 Insolvency and Trustee Service Australia (ITSA) has produced a document
Official Receiver Best Practice Statement
, which sets out the
procedure to be followed where a claim for privilege is made in respect of the
exercise of certain of the Official
Receiver’s coercive powers under the
Bankruptcy Act 1966
(Cth). In relation to powers under
access books and premises, the document sets out the following procedure:
Where the occupier claims that books are subject to legal professional
privilege, the owner of the books should, in the presence
of the Official
Receiver, place them in envelopes or boxes and seal them, and give them to the
Official Receiver. The Official Receiver
cannot determine whether the claim is
validly raised.
In those circumstances, the Official Receiver will retain the sealed records and
make arrangements with the parties for the claim
to be determined by the
Statutory procedures
8.172 Given that federal legislation conferring coercive powers is usually
silent on the issue of privilege, it is rare for such legislation
provision for the procedures to be adopted in resolving claims for privilege.
One notable exception is the
Royal Commissions Act 1902
(Cth), which is
discussed in Chapter 5.
8.173 An example of a state provision which sets out a procedure for the
resolution of privilege claims is
Taxation Administration
requires a person to produce an ‘official document’ to
the Commissioner of State Revenue or an investigator when required
whether or not the document would be subject to client legal privilege;
requires the documents the subject of a claim to be separated from
other documents and to be retained in a sealed container;
prohibits the Commissioner or investigator from viewing, accessing
or otherwise dealing with the privileged material;
empowers the Commissioner or the person who claims privilege to
apply to the Supreme Court or a judge for a declaration that privilege
does not apply to the documents provided;
empowers the Commissioner to apply to the Supreme Court or a judge
for an order to extinguish privilege where it applies; and
requires that privileged documents be returned to the person making
the claim where the court declares that privilege applies or
refuses to make an
order to extinguish
and problems
Delay, costs, lack of uniformity and
8.174 Central concerns raised in this Inquiry are the significant delays and
costs in resolving client legal privilege
and the lack of clear,
uniform and expeditious processes to deal with privilege disputes—which
have adverse impacts on the
subjects of coercive powers as well as on the
efficiency of federal investigations. These central concerns were seen to be
interrelated—for
example, delays are partly attributed to the fact that
there is a lack of clear and expeditious processes.
8.175 The Law Council expressed the view that:
The development of effective practices and procedures to resolve privilege
claims is a more appropriate response to [federal] agency
concerns regarding the
use of [client legal privilege] rather than modifications to, or abrogation of,
[the privilege].
8.176 The ACCC expressed concern about the lack of an effective procedure for
adjudicating client legal privilege claims at the non-curial
At present, there is no forum, other than a court, where the proper basis for a
claim can be determined. Therefore, even where there
is a basis for considering
that a claim for privilege has been improperly made, the delay caused by
disputing the claim can significantly
investigations.
8.177 The AICD submitted that a key problem for its members is
that a claim for privilege is likely to result in protracted negotiations with
the investigatory body or involve legal proceedings,
both of which, particularly
the latter, are likely to be highly expensive and time
8.178 The Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions (CDPP) gave an example
of a case where, following an execution of a search
warrant, documents in
respect of which privilege were claimed were held at the Federal Court registry
on the basis that the applicants
had to commence action establishing their
privilege claim within a certain period of time.
No action in relation to legal professional privilege was commenced and the
documents remained in the Federal Court Registry for
years, denying the
investigators access to the documents. Eventually, the investigators sought
access to the documents and the applicants
made no attempt to enforce their
claim of [privilege]. The documents were used in the trial of [three] accused
for conspiracy to
defraud the Commonwealth. All [three] were convicted.
In this case it appears that there was a strong argument that [privilege] did
not actually apply to the documents because [they]
were brought into existence
to facilitate the fraud. This issue was never determined by the court because
the applicants did not
commence an action in the Federal Court to uphold their
claim to [privilege].
Onus of establishing claim
8.179 Part of the lack of clarity in resolving disputes centres around issues
of onus of proof. Submissions and consultations revealed
that there was some
disagreement among stakeholders in relation to which party bears the onus where
a federal body disputes a claim
of client legal
8.180 In the guidelines governing search warrants agreed to by the Law
Council and the AFP in 1997, the onus is on the person who
claims client legal
privilege to institute proceedings within a set time to establish the privilege
8.181 In relation to disputed claims made in ATO investigations, the ATO
submitted that:
Some legal practitioners have mistakenly argued that the [ATO] bears a burden to
disprove a claim for
[privilege].
Alternative models
8.182 In IP 33, the ALRC sought feedback about procedures that would be
effective in resolving privilege claims, and in particular,
the practicalities
of using alternative dispute resolution models—such as recourse to an
independent third party—in order
to expedite the resolution of privilege
IP 33 also asked
whether such alternative models would be inappropriate for any particular
investigations or in respect of any federal
body, such as a Royal
Commission.
8.183 In relation to the use of alternative dispute resolution schemes,
consideration must be given to the fact that Chapter III of
Constitution
precludes anyone other than a judicial officer from exercising judicial
The concept of
judicial power is affected by many variables, which makes it incapable of
exhaustive definition.
Nicholas v The Queen
, Gaudron J stated that:
The difficulties involved in defining ‘judicial power’ are well
known. In general terms, however, it is that power which
is brought to bear in
making determinations as to rights, liabilities, powers, duties or status put in
issue in justiciable controversies,
and in making adjustment of rights and
interests in accordance with legal
8.184 A decision about whether or not a communication is privileged involves
the determination of a party’s right to seek the
protection granted by the
privilege. If a party other than a judicial officer were to make such a
decision, it would appear that
it could not be binding on the parties for
constitutional reasons.
AWB Ltd v Cole
, Young J stated that he did not doubt that a
Royal Commissioner could make a
non-binding
decision concerning a claim
for privilege. Where a Royal Commissioner rejected a privilege claim, his or her
ruling would provide
the foundation for an application to be made to the court
for an appropriate declaration or
injunction.
Limitation periods
8.186 The ACCC stated that it is not infrequent for restrictive trade
practices matters to come to its attention ‘well into,
and sometimes close
to, the expiry of the limitation period for commencing
In such cases
it could not risk the expiry of the limitation period by challenging privilege
claims—although a successful challenge
would have allowed it to obtain
access to any material the subject of an improper claim.
8.187 The ACCC expressed concern that targets of its investigations had made
inappropriate privilege claims as a means of exploiting
the fact that the
limitation period had nearly expired—thereby forcing the ACCC not to
commence proceedings at all or to commence
them without the benefit of the best
possible evidence to support its
Submissions and
consultations
Addressing delay
8.188 There was strong support in submissions and consultations for the
establishment of ‘fast-tracking’ court arrangements
privilege-related matters on short
Suggestions ranged
from establishing special listing systems within the existing court structure to
establishing a special practices
court to deal with privilege matters. For
example, the NSW Bar Association submitted that:
Federal and state Courts could be approached to further extend the procedures
now being made available whereby Judges can hear and
determine claims at short
Need for uniform procedures
8.189 There was support in submissions and consultations for federal bodies
to adopt uniform procedures or protocols for dealing with
Establishing a procedure for resolving
8.190 There was support amongst stakeholders for a dispute resolution process
involving referral of a disputed privilege claim to
an independent third party
(or parties),
stakeholders submitting that it would be appropriate in some
circumstances,
suggesting that consideration be given to making such a referral
compulsory.
8.191 Dr Ronald Desiatnik submitted that consideration be given to
establishing a body of persons with expertise in client legal privilege
for set periods or on an ad hoc basis to deal with disputed privilege
The NSW Bar
Association submitted that barristers could be made available on short notice to
act as arbitrators on privilege
8.192 Some stakeholders made suggestions about the type of model that might
be adopted. For example, the ATO submitted that legislation
could prescribe a
process for resolving privilege disputes, such as the appointment of an external
expert to assess whether documents
are privileged.
In the past taxpayers have entered into written agreements with the [ATO] that
in the event of a dispute an external expert (considered
suitable by both sides)
will be engaged to examine documents subject to a claim of privilege. The
external expert will provide an
assessment of whether documents are
‘privileged’, ‘not privileged’ or whether he or she is
unable to make
an assessment of whether the documents are privileged. Both
parties then have a seven day period in which to commence declaratory
proceedings in the Federal Court if they disagree with the expert’s
determination. If neither party commences proceedings within
that timeframe the
expert’s decision is treated as final. This process is useful because it
allows the parties to resort to
the Federal Court if necessary, but also offers
an alternative (and sometimes quicker) means of resolving a dispute over whether
documents are privileged.
The [ATO] considers that it [is] worth exploring whether it would be beneficial
for legislation to prescribe a dispute resolution
mechanism along these lines.
Such a mechanism may enable [client legal privilege] claims to be resolved
quickly and efficiently.
8.193 ASIC suggested a model for dispute resolution where a federal body
disputes a privilege claim, including, among others, the
following features:
a claimant could elect to submit to a non-binding determination of a
privilege claim by an independent Senior Counsel or commence
court proceedings
to establish its claim;
if a claimant fails to take the above action it would be taken to
have waived its claim;
a claimant and a federal body could each agree to abide by the
decision of the Senior Counsel but would not be bound to do so;
if Senior Counsel makes a finding that a document is not privileged
and the claimant declines to be bound, then failure by the claimant
to institute
proceedings within a defined time will result in the claim being waived;
costs of the independent determination should be on a ‘costs
follows the event’
Law Council submitted that a consultative approach should be adopted for
resolving privilege disputes and that, where possible,
federal bodies should
seek to negotiate with the affected party an agreed procedure for resolution. It
supported a process whereby
an independent third party could be engaged to
determine the claim, and that upon receiving the view of the third party, each
would have seven days to commence proceedings seeking declaratory orders
from a superior court in relation to whether the material
privileged.
8.195 Some stakeholders expressed opposition to the use of alternative
dispute resolution models to resolve privilege disputes in
the context of Royal
Commissions, on the basis that it would be
inappropriate.
8.196 The CDPP expressed opposition to alternative dispute resolution (ADR)
processes for privilege claims in any federal investigations:
The first [problem] is that this process still requires that the material over
which the claim is made is removed from the investigation
until the issue is
resolved through an ADR process which delays the investigation, even if the ADR
process might ultimately be quicker
than resolving the issues in the court. The
second [problem] is that the decision made out of the ADR process is not binding
may lead to further court action being initiated to resolve the
8.197 The ATO submitted that there should be a ‘mandated process’
for claiming client legal privilege that places the
onus of proof on the
claimant to prove that privilege attaches to a
communication.
8.198 In contrast, the Law Council submitted that the onus of disputing a
claim should be on the federal body, except where it is
necessary for a claimant
to raise client legal privilege by way of defence for a prosecution for failure
to comply with a notice
exercising a coercive power. It stated:
The Search Warrant Guidelines were agreed between the Law Council and the AFP in
1990, and since that time the application of [privilege]
investigations has become clearer. Since
’ confirmation of
[privilege] as a fundamental right, the Law Council no longer considers it
appropriate that [privilege] should
be taken to be abandoned if a claimant does
not institute proceedings within three working days. … the onus of
disputing [privilege]
ought to be on the agency. Alternatively, if the current
procedure is to be maintained, then reasonable time (say 14 days) should
Limitation periods
8.199 The ACCC submitted that legislation should provide that where a claim
for privilege is the subject of a challenge, limitation
periods should cease to
run until the claim is
8.200 The ACCC expressed the view that it was neither appropriate or
practical for its suggested suspension of the limitation period
to be applied to
private applicants who may be affected by the same conduct being investigated by
the ACCC, and who may also wish
to commence proceedings seeking damages against
the persons being investigated by the
It noted that the
determination of limitation periods could differ between proceedings taken by
the ACCC and those taken by private
applicants.
8.201 The ACCC also expressed the view that insofar as it investigates
potentially unlawful conduct and later takes representative
proceedings in
respect of that conduct, persons on whose behalf proceedings are taken would
benefit from any suspension of the limitation
period obtained by the
Addressing delay
8.202 Given the considerable concerns expressed about the delays occasioned
by attempting to resolve privilege claims, the ALRC considers
important that the Federal Court and the Supreme Courts of each state and
territory have appropriate arrangements in place
to cater for hearing
applications on short notice concerning disputes about client legal privilege
claims in federal investigations.
8.203 The types of applications that a court should be able to deal with
expeditiously include the following:
where a federal body applies for declaratory relief following a
person’s failure to provide particulars of client legal privilege
(see Proposal 8–6);
where either a federal body or the person making the privilege claim
applies for declaratory relief following the failure by a lawyer
to certify a
privilege claim (see Proposal 8–7); and
where there is a dispute about a privilege claim, including where a
party has not accepted the assessment of the claim by an independent
seeks a court
determination.
for uniformity
8.204 The ALRC considers that there should be a substantial degree of
uniformity of approach in resolving claims for client legal
privilege in federal
investigations. However, to require absolute uniformity across all federal
bodies in the event of all disputed
claims—regardless of the circumstances
of the case, or the attitudes of the party involved in a dispute—appears
unrealistic.
8.205 The ALRC is of the preliminary view that, in order to balance the
competing needs for uniformity and flexibility a multifaceted
response involving
legislative and policy change is required. First, a minimum legislative
framework for the resolution of claims
(discussed below) should be contained in
federal client legal privilege legislation. This also will assist in achieving
Second, policies about resolving privilege disputes should be
individually developed by federal bodies—to meet the exigencies
particular circumstances—but they should be based on a model procedure
(the proposed features of which are addressed
8.206 The ALRC does not propose that this approach be adopted for Royal
Commissions. As stated in Chapter 5, the
Royal Commissions Act
includes a procedure for the resolution of privilege claims. The procedure
applicable to Royal Commissions is not one the ALRC
considers to be appropriate
for other federal bodies insofar as it would require production of a disputed
document to the federal
body in order for the federal body to decide whether or
not to accept the claim for privilege. While it may be appropriate for Royal
Commissioners—who are usually retired judges—to assess whether or
not a document is privileged, in the context of an
independent inquiry to
discover the truth
is not, in the ALRC’s preliminary view, appropriate for members of other
federal bodies or government departments
to make such an
assessment—particularly where those bodies have enforcement functions.
Proposed legislative framework
8.207 The ALRC considers that federal client legal privilege legislation
should establish a minimum framework for the resolution of
disputes—to be complemented by the policies of federal bodies in this
regard. In particular, there is a need for
clarity concerning the onus of
establishing a privilege claim, and for the dispute resolution process to
accommodate an independent
review mechanism.
8.208 Therefore, in the ALRC’s preliminary view, federal client legal
privilege legislation should provide that where a federal
body (other than a
Royal Commission) disputes a privilege claim (after having received details of
the documents in respect of which
a claim of privilege is made in answer to the
exercise of a coercive power), there be a system in place for resolving the
with the following attributes:
A claimant should be given the opportunity within a defined time to
agree to an independent review mechanism to resolve the claim.
This approach
does not legislatively mandate that claimants avail themselves of that
mechanism, nor does it mandate the features
of that mechanism. It requires only
notification by the federal body to the claimant about the option of independent
review. As discussed
below, the features of the independent review mechanism are
to be set out in the policies of federal bodies based on a model scheme.
Where a claimant does not agree to have the claim independently
assessed, the onus should be on the claimant to commence proceedings
establish the claim. Casting the onus on a federal body to disprove the claim
would place the body in the difficult position of
trying to prove a negative.
Evidence relating to the circumstances in which a document was created is
obviously more likely to be
within the knowledge of the claimant. However, the
ALRC’s proposal in this regard is not intended to affect the current onus
that a federal body bears in proving that a document is subject to the fraud or
crime exception.
Having regard to the concerns expressed by the Law Council, the ALRC
considers that the time that a claimant should have to commence
such proceedings
should be reasonable. Adopting the suggestion of the Law Council, the ALRC
proposes a 14 day period.
A federal body also should have the option of commencing proceedings
within the 14 day period but, in such a case, the onus of establishing
should remain on the claimant.
Where the claimant fails to commence proceedings within the required
time (or such other time as may have been allowed by the court),
the federal
body will be entitled to regard the claim as having been waived, in the absence
of special circumstances that negate
this inference. For example, the inference
might be negated if the claimant subsequently establishes that an emergency or
of God’ precluded him or her from commencing
proceedings.
8.209 This process will be activated only where a
federal body disputes a claim following the claimant’s provision of
particulars
of that claim. As discussed above, the ALRC has proposed a separate
scheme where a claimant has failed to provide particulars of
the claim or where
a lawyer has failed to certify a privilege claim where certification has been
requested by the federal body.
Development of individual policies and the model scheme
8.210 Only those federal bodies which have coercive information-gathering
powers the exercise of which raise, or are likely to raise,
the issue of the
application of client legal privilege should be required to develop policies and
procedures about the resolution
of privilege claims. This would apply, for
example, to major regulators like ASIC and the ACCC. As far as practicable, such
should be uniform. In this regard, the policies of relevant federal
bodies should be based on a model procedure.
8.211 The ALRC tends to the view that the development of a model procedure
for resolving disputed privilege claims in federal investigations
driven by the Attorney-General’s Department, in consultation with relevant
federal bodies. The ALRC is interested
in hearing views about where the uniform
model should be located. Possibilities are to include it in the
Government Investigation Standard
—which is not a publicly available
document—or to require federal bodies to prepare a
‘stand–alone’
model protocol in this regard. Although the ALRC
has not proposed an exclusive and comprehensive legislative framework for
privilege disputes, it is interested in hearing views from
stakeholders about whether the proposed model should be located in
legislation.
Features of the proposed model scheme
8.212 The ALRC considers that there are several important features that the
model procedure for resolving disputed privilege claims
should include and these
are set out below.
Flexibility
8.213 The model should allow federal bodies flexibility to negotiate disputed
privilege claims, and to agree to a method of resolution
with the claimant that
may be appropriate in the circumstances of the particular case. For example, in
cases involving claims over
many documents of a similar nature that are in
dispute, the claimant may seek declaratory relief in respect of a representative
of those documents, and the parties may then negotiate an agreement in
respect of the remainder of the documents.
Voluntary participation in independent review process
8.214 One of the methods of resolution that the model should address is the
availability of an independent review process. Some stakeholders
expressed the
view that there should be a compulsory reference to a third party. However, the
ALRC considers that there are some
philosophical and practical problems
associated with forcing persons to submit to an independent review process. If
persons are compelled
to submit to a process to which they would otherwise not
have been subject, then there is a real risk that they will ignore the outcome
of that process and automatically seek resolution via court proceedings. In such
circumstances, in order to avoid the delay and costs
of an independent review
process, it would be better for such persons to commence court proceedings from
the outset to establish
their claims.
Mandatory notification of availability of independent review
8.215 The ALRC considers that, where a federal body disputes a privilege
claim, it should be mandatory for the federal body to inform
the claimant of the
availability of an independent review process to resolve the dispute and to give
the claimant a reasonable time
within which to agree or decline to participate
in that review process.
Nature of independent review
8.216 The independent review can be carried out by one or more persons. If
the parties cannot agree to one person carrying out the
review, they may be more
comfortable with a model—similar to that adopted by the ATO—whereby
each party nominates an
independent person to conduct the review. Independent
reviewers should have appropriate legal qualifications. Their level of seniority
and whether they are sourced from the bar, government, legal practice, the
retired ranks of the bench or elsewhere, should be a matter
for the parties.
Constitutional considerations necessitate that any assessment given by the
independent reviewers is not binding
However, the
claimant and federal body may agree to accept the assessment as binding.
Assessment by independent reviewer
8.217 The model process should set out the mechanics of the assessment. Upon
signing a confidentiality undertaking, those conducting
the independent review
should be given access to the documents containing the communications in dispute
and should assess each in
one of the following categories:
privileged;
partly privileged;
not privileged; or
unable to make an assessment.
Consequences of
independent review
8.218 The model process should set out the consequences of the assessment of
an independent review—covering both situations
where the parties have, or
have not, agreed to accept the assessment as binding.
8.219 Where the parties have not agreed to accept the assessment as binding,
either party should have seven days or such other period
agreed to, within which
to commence proceedings seeking declarations from a superior court in relation
to whether the documents are
privileged. The ALRC has nominated a seven day time
limit having regard to the fact that the ATO’s current dispute resolution
process allows parties seven days to commence declaratory proceedings where they
disagree with the determination of an external expert.
8.220 If an independent review’s assessment is that a document is
privileged, a claimant should be entitled to retain possession
of the document
unless the federal body obtains a declaration that the document is not
privileged.
8.221 If an independent review’s assessment is that a document is
partly privileged, the claimant should mask those parts of
the document assessed
to be privileged and produce the remainder of the document to the federal body,
unless the claimant seeks declaratory
relief within the required time frame.
8.222 If an independent review’s assessment is that a document is not
privileged, the claimant should produce the document to
the federal body, unless
the claimant seeks declaratory relief within the required time frame.
Costs of independent reviewers
8.223 Determining who should bear the costs of an independent reviewer or
reviewers is a difficult issue. There are vast differences
in the economic
resources available to claimants who may wish to participate in an independent
review process. While meeting the
hourly costs of a Senior Counsel appointed to
be a reviewer may not be an issue for large corporations, it is or may be beyond
means of many individuals or small businesses. Any costs model should
therefore retain an appropriate degree of flexibility to cater
for varying
circumstances, and, in particular, allow a federal body the discretion to meet
the entire costs in appropriate circumstances.
8.224 The ALRC notes that ASIC supported the costs of an independent review
to be allocated on a ‘costs follows the event’
model—so that a
claimant would be required to pay the costs of a review to the extent that the
review found that documents
the subject of a privilege claim were not, in fact,
privileged.
8.225 If a ‘costs follow the event’ model were to be adopted,
however, the claimants in such disputes would not know up-front
the estimate of
costs that they would be expected to meet. This could be a disincentive to their
agreeing to participate in an independent
review process. It may be preferable
for persons to have a degree of certainty about the costs that they are expected
8.226 The ALRC is therefore of the preliminary view that where an independent
review takes place, the parties may agree on who is
to pay the costs of the
reviewers, but the ordinary presumption should be that the costs will be shared
equally. Sharing the burden
of costs also recognises that each party has an
interest in resolving the dispute.
Court costs
8.227 Liability for costs for any court proceedings are to be determined by
the courts in accordance with their rules. For example,
Civil Procedure Rules
(NSW), the general rule is that costs
follow the event, unless it appears to the court that some other order should be
Limitation periods
8.228 The ALRC considers that there are valid concerns expressed by the ACCC
to act as barriers to the
challenge of privilege claims and to be exploited by targets of investigations.
Such concerns need to be
addressed. The ALRC is interested in hearing the views
and experiences of other federal bodies in this regard.
8.229 However, the ALRC is of the preliminary view that granting an automatic
suspension of a limitation period each time a privilege
claim is challenged is
unnecessary. Not every case where there is a challenge will need the limitation
period to be suspended—for
example, if the limitation period is six years
and a federal body challenges a privilege claim in the first year of that
8.230 Automatic suspensions of limitation periods may also have undesirable
consequences. If there are no limits to the number of
challenges that a federal
body can make in the course of an investigation, conceivably there could be a
number of automatic suspensions
granted, which could blow out a limitation
period beyond what is reasonable—adversely affecting those who are the
federal investigations.
8.231 Consequently, the ALRC considers that a more discretionary mechanism
should be adopted. The ALRC is of the preliminary view
that federal client legal
privilege legislation should enable superior courts to authorise the extension
of a limitation period where
a federal body intends to challenge a client legal
privilege claim, if granting the extension is in the interests of justice.
Proposal 8–10
The Federal Court and the Supreme Court of each
state and territory should have appropriate arrangements in place to cater for
applications on short notice concerning disputes about client legal
privilege claims in federal investigations.
Proposal 8–11
Federal client legal privilege legislation should
provide that, where a federal body (other than a Royal Commission), disputes a
claim (after having received particulars of the documents in respect
of which a claim of privilege is made in answer to the exercise
of a coercive
• A claimant should be given the opportunity within a defined time to
agree to an independent review mechanism to resolve the
• Where a claimant does not agree to have the claim assessed by an
independent reviewer or reviewers, the claimant must commence
proceedings in a
superior court within 14 days seeking a declaration that the disputed material
is subject to client legal privilege.
• The federal body may also commence proceedings within 14 days but the
onus of establishing client legal privilege is on the
• Where the claimant fails to commence proceedings, the federal body
will be entitled to regard the claim as having been waived,
in the absence of
special circumstances that negate this inference.
Proposal 8–12
Federal bodies (other than Royal Commissions) with
coercive information-gathering powers—the exercise of which raise, or are
likely to raise, the issue of the application of client legal
privilege—should develop and publish procedures in relation to
resolution of disputed privilege claims. Such procedures should, as far as
practicable, be uniform. (See Proposals 8–13
Proposal 8–13
The Attorney-General’s Department in
consultation with federal bodies with coercive information-gathering
powers—the exercise
of which raise, or are likely to raise, the issue of
the application of client legal privilege—should establish a model
for resolving disputed privilege claims in federal investigations.
Proposal 8–14
Where a federal body disputes a privilege claim,
the model procedure for resolving the claim (referred to in Proposal 8–13)
should include the following features:
(a) Where possible, the federal body should adopt a flexible approach to the
mechanism used to resolve the claim.
(b) The federal body should notify the claimant of the availability of an
independent review process to resolve the dispute, in accordance
procedures, and give the claimant a reasonable time limit in the circumstances
within which to indicate whether or not
he or she agrees to submit to that
review process.
(c) The claimant may agree to the engagement of a mutually acceptable
independent reviewer or reviewers (with appropriate legal qualifications)
make a non-binding assessment of the claim, although the claimant and federal
body may agree to accept the assessment as binding.
(d) Upon signing a confidentiality undertaking, those conducting the
independent review should be given access to the documents containing
communications in dispute and should make an assessment of each in the following
categories:
(i) privileged;
(ii) not privileged;
(iii) partly privileged; or
(iv) unable to make an assessment.
(e) Upon receiving the assessment of the independent review, either party
may within seven days (or another period agreed to by the
parties) commence
proceedings seeking declarations from a superior court in relation to whether
the documents are privileged.
(f) If the independent review’s assessment is that a document is
privileged, the claimant is entitled to retain possession
of the document unless
the federal body obtains a declaration that the document is not privileged.
(g) If the independent review’s assessment is that a document is
partly privileged, the claimant should mask those parts that
are assessed to be
privileged, and produce the remainder of the document to the federal body,
unless the claimant seeks declaratory
relief within the required time frame.
(h) If the independent review’s assessment is that a document is not
privileged, the claimant should produce the document to
the federal body, unless
the claimant seeks declaratory relief within the required time frame.
(i) If an independent review process takes place, the parties may agree on
who is to pay the costs of the reviewers but the ordinary
presumption is that
the costs will be shared equally. A federal body may, in its discretion, agree
to meet the entire costs.
(j) Liability for costs for any court proceedings are to be determined by
courts in accordance with their rules.
Proposal 8–15
Federal client legal privilege legislation should
enable superior courts to authorise the extension of a limitation period where a
federal body intends to challenge a privilege claim, if granting the extension
is in the interests of justice.
8.232 Information the subject of a coercive power may be held in electronic
form—for example on computers, discs, blackberries
8.233 Electronic files can be ‘live’,
deleted, or exist in partial form as ‘file
fragments’.
‘Live’ or ‘active’ files are files that are visible to
the computer operating system. Deleted files are former
‘live’ files
that have been marked by the operating system for deletion and to be
overwritten—but can be accessed
and retrieved by computer forensic
specialists.
8.234 The compulsory production or seizure of voluminous electronic material,
in itself, has been described as problematic. The Law
Society of NSW submitted
It is self-evident that significant problems can arise, for example, upon the
seizure of computers (including laptops) and the ability
of those computers to
store thousands of documents and records. Where that equipment is necessary for
the day-to-day operational
business, its detention for significant periods needs
to be properly regulated. …
Generally, it is the experience of lawyers that obligations on citizens
(including corporations) to disclose electronic material
(be it in the context
of discovery in civil litigation, or in respect of responding to subpoenas or
onerous, time-consuming and
8.235 Similarly, the Corporate Tax Association expressed concerns about
the highly onerous nature of information requests relating to electronically
held information, which can be extensive and pervasive
throughout large business
organisations.
8.236 It is relevant to note, by analogy, that the NSW Supreme Court has
introduced new rules for the discovery of documents in certain
proceedings in
the Equity Division, which require discovery of documents in electronic form.
Significantly, the rules allow lawyers
to discover documents:
• without the need to go through the information in detail to
categorise it into privileged and non-privileged information;
• without prejudice to an entitlement to subsequently claim privilege
over any information that has been discovered and is claimed
privileged.
Seizure of electronic material during
8.237 The guidelines that are attached to Commonwealth search warrants about
managing client legal privilege claims during the execution
of a warrant, do not
specifically refer to electronically-stored
information.
8.238 Several cases illustrate that the production or seizure of material
held on computer drives and discs presents different practical
considerations
from the seizure of paper records. The AFP—or other investigator—may
need to examine a hard drive for
specific keywords in such a manner as to ensure
that the data on the computer system are not altered during the examination
The process may
involve the AFP taking an image of a hard
8.239 Seamus Byrne, Director of Forensic Technology, Vincents Chartered
Accountants, stated that, in addition to creating a forensic
image of a hard
an emerging practice in the specialised field of computer forensics provides the
opportunity to seize selected ‘active files’
stored on a hard drive
or other electronic storage media by creating a forensically-acceptable image
(or copy) of specified files
(logical forensic imaging). …
An additional emerging practice is to create a forensically-acceptable forensic
image whilst a computer is still in operation (live
forensics). The method, as
opposed to traditional computer forensics, allows for [electronically-stored
information] contained on
one or more computers on a computer network to be
the computers involved.
8.240 Byrne noted that there was uncertainty associated with claims for
privilege over information contained in deleted files.
It is currently unclear as to whether a diligent legal practitioner can and/or
should make a claim [in respect of] information which
readily accessible by [the] client, but is likely [to be] accessible by [federal
investigatory bodies] with use
of their … specialist computer forensics
… it is arguable whether privilege would be waived … or whether the
information would continue to be protected under
inadvertent disclosure or
another related exception.
8.241 ASIC also noted a number of difficulties associated with the seizure of
electronic material during searches:
Where documents have been held in electronic form and have been the subject of
(i) the rights and obligations of the executing officer and the privilege
claimant in relation to potential privilege claims over
electronic documents
during the execution of a warrant; and
(ii) whether documents subject to privilege claims may be removed or seized
where they are contained in a digital media that contains
other material covered
by the search warrant but which is not claimed to be privileged.
Given the large number of documents that are often stored on electronic devices
and the fact that they cannot often be quickly identified
and retrieved, it is
not practically feasible to impose a requirement that a privilege claimant be
entitled to identify all privileged
material before the device can either be
imaged or removed from the premises for further examination.
It is also not practically feasible … to impose a requirement that
allegedly privileged material not be copied if a copy is
otherwise made of the
electronic data. … Evidentiary considerations also operate in favour of
copying all data that is contained
on a digital media to ensure the data is
accurately preserved.
Kennedy v Baker (No 2)
, Branson J rejected a submission that
the creation and removal from search premises of an imaged hard drive were
unlawful because
its contents included communications to which client legal
privilege attached.
Resolution of claims
8.243 Resolving privilege claims in respect of communications held in
electronic form may present particular difficulties. It is possible
privileged documents to be electronically ‘tagged’ by a forensic
computer examiner and hidden from view of the federal
investigatory
Oke v Commissioner of the Australian Federal Police
parties had different views about the workability and enforceability of an
agreement they had reached concerning the process
to be undertaken by them in
identifying disputed privileged material held on computer records, which had
been seized under a Commonwealth
the process initially agreed to by the parties had commenced 12 months
and that the task had only been partially completed.
The task of identifying those documents and files on the computer records in
respect of which there is a disputed claim to privilege
so that the dispute may
be determined by the Court is a very large one. There are apparently some
hundreds of thousands of documents
and files on the computer
8.245 In 2007, in related proceedings, Mansfield J noted that:
attempts to agree upon and implement an efficient and effective procedure to
identify which, if any, contents of the laptop computer
[were] in fact the
subject of legal professional privilege, and so are not capable of being seized
under the … warrant, have
to date been
unsuccessful.
Submissions and
consultations on reform options
Development of policies
8.246 In IP 33, the ALRC asked whether policies and procedures governing
the execution of Commonwealth search warrants need to be
amended specifically to
address claims for privilege in respect of documents stored
electronically.
8.247 There was support in submissions and consultations for procedures
governing access powers of federal bodies—including
powers—to be amended specifically to address privilege claims in respect
of electronically-stored
information,
publicly documented.
8.248 The Law Council submitted that such processes should make it clear that
a person should be able to claim client legal privilege
despite any potential or
actual seizure or imaging of data by an
investigator.
8.249 The ATO submitted that:
The development of any mandatory process for claiming [client legal privilege]
should include processes that are capable of being
applied in respect of …
electronic materials.
8.250 The Law Society of NSW submitted that:
The policies and procedures governing the execution of Commonwealth search
warrants need to be consistent irrespective of the mechanism
used to store
documents. … Policies and procedures need to place the holder or the
person with control of the documents in
a position of responsibility so that
future claims of out-of-jurisdiction arguments cannot be entertained. The
policies and procedures
that exist, or as modified to take account of electronic
storage, must be regularly monitored as new technologies and electronic
processes develop.
Other suggestions for reform
8.251 Byrne submitted that electronically-stored information, as potential
evidence, should be searched and seized by federal bodies
with the use of
specialist computer forensic personnel.
To date, only a very small number of computer forensic specialists within
Australian [federal investigatory bodies] have had relevant
training and
experience in both logical forensic imaging and live forensic methods to seize
[electronically-stored
information].
8.252 Byrne also submitted that logical forensic imaging may be a feasible
alternative in non-hostile situations when a federal body
is certain that only a
specific amount of active electronic files on a hard drive need to be
seized—as opposed to an entire
Legislative clarification
8.253 The ALRC is of the preliminary view that legislative clarification is
warranted to address the concerns identified by stakeholders
in relation to the
uncertainty concerning:
the legality of seizing or imaging hard drives containing both
non-privileged seizable information and information potentially subject
privilege claim; and
any consequential waiver in the event of such seizure or
8.254 The ALRC considers that federal client legal
privilege legislation should provide that an officer executing a Commonwealth
warrant is not precluded from imaging an electronic medium that contains
non-privileged information that falls within the scope of
a Commonwealth search
warrant in circumstances where potentially privileged information is stored on
the same medium. This is consistent
with the approach taken by Branson J in
Kennedy v Baker (No
8.255 The legislation should also provide that the imaging of the medium, of
itself, does not amount to a waiver of privilege—thereby
preserving the
holder’s right to make a claim.
8.256 The ALRC is interested in hearing views from stakeholders about
introducing any other necessary safeguards if the proposed legislative
clarification is implemented. For example, the ALRC leans to the view that the
practices and policies of federal bodies should address
the erasing or return of
any imaged data that are established as privileged or outside the scope of a
Commonwealth search warrant.
Is it also necessary and appropriate to preserve expressly a person’s
ability to seek judicial relief in relation to any proposed
imaging of an
electronic medium—despite the existence of relevant non-privileged
information stored on that medium—in
circumstances where the imaging is
disproportionate to the needs of the investigation? An example of
disproportionality might be
if it could be shown that the electronic medium in
question contained only a discrete number of relevant non-privileged documents
that were capable of being provided in hard-copy or in otherwise readable form,
and a large number of privileged documents.
Development of policies and
8.257 The ALRC considers that policies and procedures governing the execution
of Commonwealth searches—whether pursuant to a
warrant or not—should
be amended specifically to address claims for privilege in respect of documents
stored electronically.
8.258 In the ALRC’s preliminary view, such policies should be developed
by key stakeholders involved in executing, advising
on, or responding to,
Commonwealth search and seizure powers—namely the Law Council, the AFP,
the CDPP and—in recognition
of the proposed extension of the
privilege—relevant accounting professional
8.259 It is important that such guidelines be developed in consultation with
federal bodies who possess search and seizure powers,
and computer forensic
experts. Such guidelines could address, for example, the treatment of claims in
respect of information in deleted
files; the electronic ‘tagging’ of
privileged information; and where appropriate, the deletion or return of
information that has been imaged by a federal investigatory body. The
guidelines also might place an onus on the privilege claimant
to deliver to a
federal body, in readable form, non-privileged electronic information. However,
as far as practicably possible, the
guidelines should be consistent with the
processes for dealing with privilege claims in respect of information in paper
8.260 The guidelines should be provided to persons the subject of a
Commonwealth search at the time a search warrant (or search without
warrant) is
8.261 The ALRC considers that federal bodies with coercive
information-gathering powers (in addition to search warrant powers)—the
exercise of which raise, or are likely to raise the issue of the application of
client legal privilege—should develop and publish
policies and procedures
in relation to managing and resolving claims for privilege in respect of
electronically-stored information.
8.262 For example, such policies could address the circumstances—if
any—in which a federal body would:
negotiate the production of electronic material without prejudice to
the ability of a person, the subject of a coercive power, to
make a subsequent
claim for privilege—that is, adopt a model similar to that of the NSW
Supreme Court in the context of discovery;
adopt each of the different types of forensic imaging
Proposal 8–16
Federal client legal privilege
legislation should provide that where information which may be subject to a
claim for client legal
privilege is stored on the same electronic medium as
non-privileged information that falls within the scope of a Commonwealth search
(a) the executing officer is not precluded from copying or imaging that
medium and causing it to be removed from the premises for
further inspection;
(b) such copying or imaging does not amount to a waiver of privilege.
Proposal 8–17
The Law Council of Australia, the Australian
Federal Police, the Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions, and relevant
professional bodies in consultation with (a) federal bodies that
possess search and seizure powers and (b) computer forensic experts,
devise a set of guidelines to
cover the resolution of client
legal privilege claims in respect of electronically-stored information (The ESI
Guidelines). The ESI
Guidelines should be adaptable for use at searches of
premises of lawyers and accountants, other premises and searches of the person,
and should be provided to persons at the time a Commonwealth search warrant is
executed. The ESI Guidelines should, as far as possible,
be consistent with the
processes for dealing with the resolution of privilege claims in respect of
information in paper form.
Proposal 8–18
Federal bodies with coercive information-gathering
powers—the exercise of which raise, or are likely to raise, the issue of
the application of client legal privilege—should develop and publish
policies and procedures in relation to managing and resolving
privilege in respect of electronically-stored information. The policies and
procedures should, as far as possible, be
consistent with the processes for
dealing with the resolution of privilege claims in respect of information in
paper form.
warrant guidelines
8.263 The practicalities of answering a notice to produce documents (where
the recipient of the notice is in control of the process
of searching for those
documents) is markedly different from the execution of searches or the on-site
inspection of documents by
federal bodies (where representatives of those bodies
play a role in controlling the process of gathering information). In the latter
case, there may be a conundrum insofar as the inspector or investigator is not
entitled to seize privileged material but may need
to look at it first, in order
to determine that it cannot be
8.264 In his dissenting judgment in
Baker v Campbell
concerning the application of privilege to a Commonwealth search
warrant—Brennan J stated:
If the privileges which affect the obligation to testify or to produce documents
in judicial proceedings are to be engrafted upon
and to modify powers conferred
on investigative agencies, some procedure for determining the validity of a
claim of privilege has
Execution of warrants at premises of
8.265 In 1997, a protocol establishing Guidelines between the AFP and the Law
Council (the AFP Guidelines) came into effect concerning
the execution of
Commonwealth search warrants on the premises of lawyers, law societies and
similar institutions.
Guidelines are specifically concerned with the procedures to be adopted where a
claim for privilege is made, and aim to ‘negate
or reduce the risks of
documents which may be subject of legal professional privilege being
Guidelines, in part, provide that:
an officer executing a search warrant at the premises of a lawyer or
Law Society is to invite the lawyer or representative of the
Law Society to
cooperate in the search;
where the lawyer or Law Society refuses to cooperate, the executing
officer is to advise that:
(1) the search will proceed and that
this may entail a search of all files and documents;
(2) a document will not be seized if, on inspection, the executing officer
considers that it falls outside the terms of the warrant
or is privileged;
where the lawyer or Law Society agrees to cooperate with the search
(1) the executing officer is to give them the opportunity
to claim privilege in respect of any documents identified as potentially
within the warrant;
(2) if a claim for privilege is made the lawyer or Law Society is to
indicate the grounds upon which, and in whose name, the claim
(3) documents the subject of a privilege claim are to be placed by the
lawyer or the Law Society in a sealed container;
(4) a list of the documents the subject of a claim is to be prepared;
(5) the list and container are to be endorsed to the effect that the
parties agree that the warrant has not been executed in respect
(6) the documents are to be given forthwith into the custody of the
magistrate or justice who issued the warrant or another independent
pending resolution of the disputed claim;
(7) where proceedings to establish the privilege claimed have been
instituted the documents are to be delivered into the possession
Registrar of the Court in which the proceedings are commenced; and
(8) where proceedings to establish privilege have not been instituted
within three working days of the delivery of the documents
into the possession
of the third party,
the parties have agreed about the disclosure of all or some of the documents,
the parties shall ask the third party to release
to the executing officer all of
the documents or only those agreed upon.
8.266 Shortly after the AFP Guidelines came into effect they were the subject
of some criticism.
McNicol observed that ‘although the [AFP] Guidelines generally seem to
have worked in practice, there are still several
the AFP Guidelines, contrary to their objective, do not preserve
privilege insofar as they proceed on the basis that warrants will
issue in terms
which encompass privileged
the AFP Guidelines are not rules of law and any breach or violation
will have ‘little or no sanction attached to it in practical
a question arises as to why
documents for which privilege
is claimed have to be placed in a sealed container instead of only the ones
where the claim is
contentious;
the role of the third party seems negligible because the AFP
Guidelines suggest that the documents held by the third party are not
read by the third party but are ultimately delivered to the Registrar of the
Court or released to the executing officer,
depending on the
circumstances.
of warrants at other premises
8.267 Documents the subject of client legal privilege can fall within the
scope of search warrants executed at premises other than
those of a lawyer or
law society. In these circumstances, search warrants may have a notice attached
to them headed ‘Claims
for Legal Professional Privilege: Premises other
than those of a Lawyer, Law Society or Like Institution’ which sets out a
procedure for claiming client legal
The procedure,
which is to be followed to the extent that it is possible to do so, similarly
provides for the placing of documents
subject to a claim in a sealed container;
the listing of those documents; and the delivery of the list and container to a
third party
pending resolution of the claim. One difference is that the person
claiming privilege has four—rather than three—working
delivery of the documents to the third party in which to commence proceedings to
establish the privilege
Execution of search warrants on a
8.268 Documents the subject of a claim for client legal privilege can fall
within the scope of a search warrant executed on a person.
Warrants to search
persons obtained by ASIC pursuant to
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth), have a document attached to them entitled ‘Claims for Legal
Professional Privilege: Searches of the Person’ which
sets out the
procedure to be followed where a person, the subject of a search, makes a
8.269 The procedure allows an officer to look at each document briefly,
without reading its contents, to assess whether it appears
likely that the
document contains privileged information. The procedure provides that:
the officer is to return the document if satisfied that it is not
relevant or that it is clearly covered by client legal privilege;
the officer is entitled to seize the document if of the view that it
is clearly not covered by client legal privilege; and
where the officer decides the document is relevant but cannot form a
view about whether it is privileged, he or she is to ask the
person to agree to
a set procedure for resolving the claim. That procedure also provides for the
listing of the documents, the placing
of the documents in an envelope or sealed
container; and the delivery of the list and container to a third party pending
Submissions
and consultations
8.270 In IP 33, the ALRC sought feedback about whether existing search
warrant guidelines were working in a satisfactory
8.271 The AGS submitted that the AFP Guidelines arguably represented the most
effective way of dealing with procedural difficulties
arising from privilege
claims made in the context of search
Some stakeholders
suggested changes to the AFP Guidelines and other search warrant
guidelines—including matters that should
be added—but nobody
suggested that they should be dispensed with or were fundamentally inadequate.
8.272 The Law Society of NSW submitted that:
Other than anecdotally, it is a safe assumption that the execution of federal
warrants on law firms and the like is highly contentious
and needs careful
attention. For example, the manner in which a law [firm’s] files can be
seized (for example by ASIC), the
period during which they are detained and the
accessibility of the information particularly of the third parties contained in
is largely unknown. The mere fact that it is ‘unknown’ must
raise concerns as to whether there are appropriate procedures
being followed.
The process needs to be somewhat more transparent after seizure, and the rights
of the concerned parties better
identified.
8.273 The Law Council submitted that:
A Commonwealth investigatory agency may possess search and seizure powers but
offer no publicly available information about how these
powers will be used in
practice, including its approach to [privilege] claims during the execution of
In these circumstances [and subject to certain qualifications] … it [is]
appropriate for such a … body to follow the
relevant AFP
Guidelines—for either lawyer’s or non-lawyer’s
premises—when executing a search warrant and
dealing with [privilege]
claims. A copy of the relevant guidelines should also be annexed to the
8.274 The Law Council also submitted that some form of alternative dispute
resolution process should be included in search warrant
guidelines. As noted
the Law Council
submitted that the onus of disputing a claim should be on the federal body
or—if the current regime is to be
maintained—that a claimant should
be given a reasonable time (such as 14 days) to institute proceedings to
establish its claim.
8.275 ASIC submitted that search warrant guidelines should address:
the making of claims in respect of electronic
the circumstances in which blanket claims are or are not acceptable;
the uncertainty about whether the AFP Guidelines apply to the
execution of search warrants on non-legal premises insofar as those
contain the workspace of in-house
AFP Guidelines and guidelines in relation to
other premises and searches of the person
8.276 The ALRC considers that it is important for persons whose premises or
person are the subject of a Commonwealth search warrant
to be provided with
guidelines about the procedures to be adopted in making and resolving a claim
for privilege. Such guidelines
should be attached to search warrants executed by
all federal investigatory bodies. The immediacy and circumstances of a search
the significance of ensuring that affected persons are informed
up-front about the protocols to be adopted in protecting their rights
8.277 The ALRC is of the preliminary view that other proposals made by the
ALRC concerning practice and procedure necessitate changes
to the AFP Guidelines
and to the guidelines concerning the search of non-legal premises and the
person. In particular, all search
warrant guidelines should be amended to:
refer to the proposed method of making a privilege claim—(to
be set out in the proposed federal client legal privilege
legislation);
incorporate an independent review mechanism. The guidelines should
give persons an opportunity to agree to an independent review
mechanism. This is
consistent with Proposals 8–11 and 8–14 above. The features of the
independent review mechanism should
include those set out in
Proposal 8–14; and
refer specifically to the procedures for resolving client legal
privilege disputes in respect of electronically-stored information—see
Proposal 8–17.
8.278 In order to promote clarity and certainty
of approach, the AFP Guidelines should be amended to state that they apply to
part of non-legal premises that contain the work space of an in-house
8.279 The ALRC expressed the view earlier in this chapter that claimants
should be given a reasonable opportunity to institute proceedings
to establish
their claim and proposed a 14 day period—taking up the suggestion of the
Law Council in this regard.
This proposal will also necessitate a change to search warrant guidelines
insofar as they allow claimants only three or four days
to commence proceedings.
The ALRC is interested in hearing the views of other
stakeholders—particularly federal investigatory
bodies—in relation
to the impact of this proposed extension of time to commence proceedings and, in
particular, whether there
is a case for giving claimants more time than they
currently have to institute proceedings under the search warrant guidelines.
Premises of professional accounting
8.280 In view of the proposed extension of client legal privilege to
‘tax advice’ given by professional accounting
the ALRC considers
that guidelines need to be developed to address the execution of search warrants
at the premises of such advisers.
In the ALRC’s preliminary view, the
guidelines should be developed by the AFP, the ATO and legal and accounting
professional
Proposal 8–19
The Australian Federal Police and the Law Council
of Australia should revise the
General Guidelines between the Australian
Federal Police and the Law Council of Australia as to the Execution of Search
Warrants on
a Lawyers’ Premises, Law Societies and Like Institutions in
Circumstances where a Claim of Legal Professional Privilege is
(a) refer to the proposed method of making a claim, as set out in the
proposed federal client legal privilege legislation;
(b) allow the claimant an opportunity to agree to an independent review
process to resolve the claim. The process to be adopted should
meet the minimum
requirements set out in Proposal 8–14;
(c) state that the Guidelines apply to any part of non-legal premises that
contain the work space of in-house counsel; and
(d) refer to the procedures for making and resolving claims in respect of
electronically-stored information. (See Proposal 8–17).
Proposal 8–20
The Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions,
in consultation with relevant federal bodies that possess search warrant powers,
should amend the following documents which are attached to Commonwealth search
Claims for Legal Professional Privilege: Premises other than those
of Lawyer, Law Society or Like Institution
(Non-Legal Premises Notice)
Claims for Legal Professional Privilege: Searches of the Person
to include the matters referred to in Proposal 8–19 (a), (b) and (d)
Proposal 8–21
The Australian Federal Police, the Australian
Taxation Office and legal and accounting professional bodies should negotiate
concerning the execution of search warrants on the premises of
professional accounting advisers in circumstances where a claim of
client legal
privilege is made. The guidelines should include the matters referred to in
Proposal 8–19 (a), (b), and (d) above.
Other policies and
8.281 Many of the proposals in this chapter are directed towards increasing
transparency in the approach taken by federal bodies to
client legal privilege
by proposing that such bodies develop and publish their policies and procedures
in relation to a number of
approach is premised on the preliminary view that obligations of federal bodies
concerning privilege arise at various
stages, namely, before a privilege claim
is made, when it is made and after it is made.
8.282 The Administrative Review Council, in its draft report on the coercive
information-gathering powers of federal bodies, has recommended
Agencies should keep written records of the situations where the privilege
applies, especially if it is waived. Agency guidelines
should be developed in
the area of privilege. Topics covered should include the procedures to be
adopted by agencies in responding
to a claim for privilege and the nature and
effect of a waiver of
8.283 Some federal bodies have internal policies and procedures that address
client legal privilege claims but these are not always
apparent, transparent or
accessible. The ATO’s policies on privilege—which are accessible on
its website—are a
As discussed
above, those policies are set out in the ATO Manual. The ATO Guidelines on
exercising access powers on the premises
of lawyers are also published and
accessible, being an appendix to Chapter 6 of the ATO Manual.
Principled Regulation: Federal Civil and Administrative Penalties
in Australia
(ALRC 95), the ALRC made recommendations that regulators
develop and publish guidelines or policies in a number of areas including:
enforcement policies; penalty-related settlements; enforceable undertakings;
publicity; and leniency and
For example, a
number of benefits were identified in requiring regulators to develop and
publish enforcement policies, some of which
may equally be applicable to a
requirement that bodies publish policies about privilege. These benefits
improving the understanding of the regulated community as to what
compliance requires;
accountability and transparency in the exercise of discretionary
governmental power;
consistency in enforcement decision making;
guidance to regulator staff;
a coordinated approach with other regulators and agencies; and
the accumulation of
Submissions
and consultations
8.285 In IP 33, the ALRC asked whether federal bodies exercising
coercive information-gathering powers should be required to develop
and publish
policies in relation to: informing persons of their position concerning
privilege; the procedures to be adopted in making
and resolving claims for
privilege; and managing and recording documents or communications received in
respect of which a claim for
privilege has been
8.286 There was strong support in submissions and consultations for the
development and publication of such
stakeholders specifically supporting the ATO’s practices in this
For example, BHP
Billiton Mitsubishi Alliance submitted that the publication of procedures
in a manner readily accessible to the public will … assist in raising
awareness of the procedures and ensuring that they are
8.287 The Law Council submitted that:
Publishing guidelines will increase understanding by all parties about what is
involved in the investigatory process, improve accountability
and transparency
in how those powers are exercised and lead to consistent practices in resolving
situations where documents or communications
do, or may, become the subject of
claims for [privilege].
8.288 As noted elsewhere in this chapter, there was general support for
procedures to be uniform.
8.289 Some stakeholders submitted that it was important that the policies of
federal bodies include giving persons notification about
their ability to seek
legal advice, legal representation or legal aid. For example, Desiatnik
submitted that:
What[ever] information is given it should be prefaced with the warning that it
is subject to whatever legal advice the recipient
may wish to
8.290 Fitzroy Legal Service submitted it should not be left to individual
federal bodies to develop policies about all aspects of
client legal privilege.
It submitted that overarching federal legislation should set out:
• the procedures to be followed when potentially privileged information
• how potentially privileged information will be handled by the
organisation;
• which independent third party (court or otherwise) will determine
whether the information is privileged;
• that documents will be returned if a claim for privilege is
successful.
8.291 It also submitted that it ‘would be beneficial for [federal
bodies] to articulate policies so long as they were consistent
legislative
structure’.
8.292 However, publication of policies was not uniformly supported. Officers
from the Australian Security Intelligence Organisation
(ASIO) expressed concerns
that publication of ASIO’s policies would have an adverse impact on its
operational activities.
8.293 The articulation of transparent and accessible policies by federal
bodies on various aspects of client legal privilege has an
important role to
play—whether by itself or as a complement to the ALRC’s proposed
federal client legal privilege legislation—in
addressing issues of
clarity, accountability and fairness.
8.294 In addition to the other proposals made in this chapter, which require
relevant federal bodies to develop and publish various
policies about specific
aspects of privilege, the ALRC considers that federal bodies should also develop
and publish their policies
and procedures in relation to:
notifying persons that they may wish to seek independent legal
advice concerning their response to a coercive power or, if applicable,
legal representation; and
making a claim for
ALRC also considers that federal bodies that possess coercive powers that
abrogate or modify client legal privilege should
be required to develop and
publish additional policies and procedures concerning the management, recording
and return of privileged
information produced to them. The ALRC’s proposal
in this regard is set out in Chapter 7.
8.296 The ALRC recognises that there are aspects of policy and procedure that
federal bodies may wish not to publish for sensitive
operational reasons. This
may be the case in particular with a federal body such as ASIO—especially
in relation to the exercise
of its covert powers. In some cases, it may be
appropriate for an abridged version of a policy to be made public. In other
federal bodies with oversight powers—such as the Inspector-General
of Intelligence and Security—should satisfy themselves
that the federal
bodies which they oversee have appropriate internal policies about privilege in
Notification about independent legal
8.297 As discussed above, the ALRC has proposed that federal bodies should be
required to notify persons about whether client legal
privilege applies to the
exercise of a particular coercive power. However, it is not the responsibility
of a federal body to advise
a person about whether client legal privilege
attaches to any particular communication falling within the scope of a notice
under a coercive power. This is properly the subject of independent legal
advice. The policies should address the circumstances in
which federal bodies
will give notification about seeking independent legal advice in responding to a
coercive power, including,
where applicable, seeking legal representation. As
discussed above, relevant factors may include: whether the person the subject
the power is the subject of the investigation; whether the person the subject of
the power is known to be unrepresented; the type
of power being exercised; the
nature of the investigation; and whether the statute conferring the power
confers a right to legal
representation in an interview or
examination.
Making claims for privilege
8.298 Policies about making claims for privilege should be consistent with
the proposed legislative procedure for making a privilege
claim. They could
address, for example, the circumstances in which a federal body will request
particulars, verification, and certification
of client legal privilege claims
made in response to the exercise of coercive information-gathering powers.
Proposal 8–22
Federal bodies with coercive information-gathering
powers—the exercise of which raise, or are likely to raise, the issue of
the application of client legal privilege—should develop and publish their
policies and procedures in relation to:
(a) notifying persons that they may wish to seek independent legal advice
concerning their response to a coercive power or, if applicable,
representation; and
(b) making claims for
privilege—which should be consistent with the proposed legislative
procedures.
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Client Legal Privilege and Federal Investigatory Bodies
, IP 33 (2007),
Australian Commission for Law
Enforcement Integrity,
20 July 2007; Australian
Competition and Consumer Commission,
Australian Competition and Consumer
Commission,
For example, notices issued under
Superannuation Industry (Supervision) Act 1993
contain a statement that only a lawyer is entitled to refuse to comply with a
requirement under the notice concerning a privileged
communication made by or to
the lawyer in his or her capacity as such: Australian Securities and Investments
Commission,
Australian Securities and
Investments Commission,
29 March 2007. See also
G Healy and A Eastwood, ‘Legal Professional Privilege and the
Investigative Powers of the Australian
Securities and Investments
Commission’
Company and Securities Law Journal
Australian Securities and
Investments Commission,
Australian Taxation Office,
Access and Information Gathering Manual
<www.ato.gov.au> at 23
August 2007, [6.64]; Australian Taxation Office,
Taxpayers’ Charter:
Fair Use of Our Access and Information Gathering Powers
<www.ato.gov.au/content/downloads/N2559book9web.pdf> at 23 August 2007,
Office of the Australian Building and
Construction Commissioner,
Australian Customs Service,
13 June 2007; Australian Pesticides and
Veterinary Medicines Authority,
6 June 2007;
Medicare Australia,
10 April 2007; Australian
Securities and Investments Commission,
Australian Securities and
Investments Commission,
29 March 2007. Search
warrant guidelines are discussed separately
Medicare Australia,
Australian Prudential Regulation
6 July 2007; Australian Government
Office of the Privacy Commissioner,
2007; Comcare,
14 June 2007; Insolvency and
Trustee Service Australia,
20 June 2007;
Australian Government Department of Immigration and Citizenship,
12 June 2007; Australian Transport Safety
28 May 2007; Australian Transaction
Reports and Analysis Centre,
4 June 2007; Human
Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission,
2007; Australian Communications and Media Authority,
29 May 2007; Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority,
1 June 2007; Officers from the Australian Security Intelligence
Organisation and the Inspector-General of Security and Intelligence,
Consultation
, Sydney, 26 June
Australian Government Office of
the Privacy Commissioner,
29 June 2007; Human
Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission,
The ATSB noted that its seeks to
avoid apportioning blame or determining liability in its investigations:
Australian Transport Safety
2007. See also discussion of the ATSB’s functions in
Great Barrier Reef Marine
Park Authority,
Australian Prudential Regulation
Australian Securities and
Investments Commission,
Notices under s 49(3) of
the ASIC Act similarly do not contain an express reference to client legal
privilege: see Ibid.
Australian Competition and
Consumer Commission,
Australian Transaction Reports
and Analysis Centre,
Officers from the Australian
Security Intelligence Organisation and the Inspector-General of Security and
Intelligence,
Consultation
, Sydney, 26 June 2007. See also
Carmody v Mackellar
(1997) 76 FCR 115
, discussed in
Fieldhouse v
Commissioner of Taxation
[1989] FCA 397
(1989) 25 FCR 187
SZHWY v Minister for
Immigration and Citizenship
[2007] FCAFC
Ibid, [75]; [77]. See also [163]
where Rares J expressed the view the Tribunal committed a jurisdictional
Administrative Review Council,
Government Agency Coercive Information-Gathering Powers [Draft Report]
(2007), Principle 13.
B McKillop,
M Kumar and F Beaupert,
Consultation
, Sydney, 21 May
BHP Billiton Mitsubishi
Australian Government Solicitor,
See discussion on
The Daniels
Corporation International Pty Ltd v Australian Competition and Consumer
[2002] HCA 49
(2002) 213 CLR 543
Safeguards are discussed in
The issue of clarity is
considered in Ch 5.
The issue of
unrepresented persons is considered
Legal Services Direction
2005: Appendix B—The Commonwealth’s Obligation to Act as a Model
See discussion in
Ch 5 on the implications of
The Daniels Corporation International Pty
Ltd v Australian Competition and Consumer Commission
[2002] HCA 49
(2002) 213 CLR
Fisheries Management Act
,(h)(ii). See discussion of AFMA in Ch 4 .
These bodies include the ACCC, APRA,
the ATO, the Commonwealth Ombudsman, the Human Rights and Equal Opportunity
Commission and
the Inspector-General of Taxation. The ATO noted that claims for
privilege can be made in many circumstances, including when a tax
requests information or documents from a taxpayer on a cooperative basis: see
Australian Taxation Office,
As noted above, the approach
supported by the ALRC requires a federal body to notify a person about whether
client legal privilege
applies to the exercise of a particular power. It does
not entail the federal body giving advice about the application of the privilege
to any particular document or
communication.
Policies about
informing persons about the right to seek legal advice are discussed below. This
would include seeking legal advice
particular communication. See Proposal
National Crime
Authority v S
[1991] FCA 234
(1991) 29 FCR 203
, 211. See also
Barnes v Commissioner of
[2007] FCAFC 88
, [18], which stated that ‘the authorities
emphasise the need for focused and specific evidence in order to ground a claim
legal professional privilege’. On the facts of that case, the Full
Federal Court (at [19]) held that the evidence supporting
the privilege claim
was ‘manifestly insufficient and [did] not establish any basis for [the]
claim of privileges.’
of transparency of privilege claims is discussed
Australian Taxation Office,
Access and Information Gathering Manual
<www.ato.gov.au> at 23
August 2007, [6.22],
[6.6.49]–[6.6.50].
[6.6.49]–[6.6.50].
[6.6.18], [6.6.26],
[6.6.31]–[6.6.32].
Taxation Office,
See Australian Taxation Office,
Access and Information Gathering Manual
<www.ato.gov.au> at
23 August 2007, App B.
Ibid, App B, [23].
Prudential Regulation Authority,
Federal Court Rules 1979
(Cth) O 15, r 6(2)–(4).
New South Wales Bar Association,
Federal Court Rules 1979
(Cth) O 15, r 6(8).
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005
(NSW) r 21.3(2)(d).
Rule 21.3(2)(b)
allows documents to be described by
Supreme Court
(General Civil Procedure) Rules 2005
(Vic) r 29.04, Form 29B;
Supreme Court Rules
(NT) rr 21.03, 21.04, Form 29A;
Procedure Rules 2006
(ACT) rr 607–609, Form 2.23;
Civil Procedure Rules 1999
(Qld) rr 217(3)(c), 226;
the Supreme Court 1971
(WA) O 26 rr 4,
See, eg, Fitzroy Legal Service,
4 June 2007; BHP Billiton Mitsubishi Alliance,
See, eg, New South Wales Bar
Association,
5 June 2007. National Legal Aid
also expressed the view that there were issues in relation to
‘inappropriate’ privilege
claims: National Legal Aid,
New South Wales Bar Association,
5 June 2007. ‘Warehousing and
privileging’ are discussed in Ch 9.
See, eg, Law Council of Australia,
4 June 2007. Issues concerning abuse of
privilege claims are also considered in
Contracts Act 1984
(at least 30 days’ notice to
A New Tax System (Family Assistance) (Administration) Act 1999
Medicare Australia Act 1973
(Cth) s 8Q (at least
14 days’ notice to be given).
BHP Billiton Mitsubishi Alliance,
1 June 2007.
See also Fitzroy Legal Service,
Australian Taxation Office,
Access and Information Gathering Manual
<www.ato.gov.au> at 23
August 2007, [6.2.3],
[6.6.4]–[6.6.11].
Question of
Law Reserved (No 1 of 1998)
[1998] SASC 6634
(1998) 70 SASR 281
Kennedy v Baker
[2004] FCA 562
(2004) 135 FCR 520
Commissioner of Australian Federal Police
[2007] FCA 27
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Client Legal Privilege and Federal Investigatory Bodies
33 (2007), [5.55].
See, eg, Australian
Taxation Office,
22 June 2007; Australian
Competition and Consumer Commission,
Australian Communications and
Media Authority,
Australian Competition and
Consumer Commission,
Australian Taxation Office,
22 June 2007.
Taxation Institute of Australia,
15 June 2007. Another stakeholder group noted
that the ATO required more information than a court would require to uphold a
for privilege: Regulatory lawyers of Clayton Utz,
Consultation
, Sydney, 15 May 2007.
Australian Taxation Office,
Australian Securities and
Investments Commission,
New South Wales Bar Association,
5 June 2007. See also Members of the Victorian
Consultation
, Melbourne, 25 May
Australian Taxation Office,
22 June 2007; Law Council of Australia,
4 June 2007. See also Members of the Victorian
Consultation
, Melbourne, 25 May
Australian Corporate Lawyers
Association,
Australian Securities and
Investments Commission,
29 June 2007;
Australian Taxation Office,
22 June 2007;
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission,
13 June 2007; New South Wales Bar Association,
5 June 2007; Law Society of New South Wales,
June 2007; Australian Communications and Media Authority,
29 May 2007; New South Wales Public Defenders Office,
Consultation
, Sydney, 12 June 2007; G Healy and A
Eastwood—Freehills,
Consultation
, Sydney, 12 June
2007. The Law Council submitted that claimants should provide descriptions of
documents if the federal body requested
them to do so: Law Council of Australia,
4 June 2007.
Australian Communications and Media
Australian Taxation Office,
Australian Competition and
Consumer Commission,
Australian Institute of Company
New South Wales Bar Association,
Australian Securities and
Investments Commission,
Australian Prudential Regulation
Australian Communications and
Media Authority,
Australian Competition and
Consumer Commission,
New South Wales Bar Association,
Australian Taxation Office,
Australian Securities and
Investments Commission,
See discussion on ‘Other
policies and procedures’ below and
Proposal 8–22.
Zealand Law Commission has recommended that statutory privilege procedures set
out a process to require privilege claims
to be particularised, subject to the
right of the privilege claimant to apply to the court for relief or directions
where particular
circumstances preclude adequate particularisation: see New
Zealand Law Commission,
, Report 97 (2007)
[12.61], recs 12.14, 12.29.
Examples of bundles are ‘drafts one to four of document X’ or
‘letters from A to B (in-house counsel) between
1 January 1999 and 30
January 1999 concerning advice on Project
In the ATO’s proforma
concerning communications with in-house counsel, the ATO seeks details such as
the capacity in which
a person was acting at the time a document or
communication was prepared and whether or not he or she owns shares in the
see Australian Taxation Office,
Ch 9 makes a number
of proposals designed to reduce the risk of inappropriate privilege claims being
made by lawyers.
This also addresses
the issue of appropriate use of
See discussion on
‘Other policies and procedures’ below and
Proposal 8–22.
Proposal 6–3.
discusses the proposed consequences of a lawyer making a certification without
reasonable grounds.
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Managing Justice: A Review of the Federal
Civil Justice System
, ALRC 89 (2000), Ch 5. See also Australian Law
Reform Commission,
Same Crime, Same Time: Sentencing of Federal
, ALRC 103 (2006), Ch 13, which considered the situation of
unrepresented persons at a sentencing
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Client Legal Privilege and Federal Investigatory Bodies
33 (2007), Question 5–3.
Sussex Street Community Law Services Inc,
Taxation Institute of
This section is discussed in
more detail at [8.173] below.
Taxation Administration Act 2003
United Kingdom
Government Serious Fraud Office,
Operational Handbook
<www.sfo.gov.uk/
handbook/> at 15 August 2007.
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Client Legal Privilege and Federal
Investigatory Bodies
, IP 33 (2007), [5.20]. Issues concerning the production
of documents to a federal body relating to the representation of a client
investigation process are discussed in
BHP Billiton Mitsubishi
1 June 2007; B McKillop, M Kumar and
F Beaupert,
Consultation
, Sydney, 21 May 2007.
Compare, however, Australian Government Solicitor,
13 June 2007.
Sussex Street
Community Law Services Inc,
Law Society of New South
NSW Young Lawyers,
12 June 2007; Law Society of New South Wales,
1 June 2007; Law Council of Australia,
Law Society of New South
Law Council of Australia,
Law Society of New South
New South Wales Bar
Association,
NSW Young Lawyers,
See Proposals 8–1,
Proposal 8–22.
Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act 2001
See Ch 7 and
Proposal 7–1.
was identified by the Law Council: see Law Council of Australia,
R Desiatnik,
Current proceedings in the
Federal Court of Australia between the ACC and MM and DD concern notices issued
by the ACC as part of
Operation Wickenby—a cross agency taskforce
investigating tax fraud and money laundering—to an accountancy firm that
was prohibited from notifying its clients that their files had been seized
because of the ACC’s secrecy provisions. Orders
in this case have been
suppressed. See, however,
A3 v Australian Crime Commission (No 2)
Australian Crime
Commission Act 2002
Section 29B(1)
provides that
failure to comply with a non-disclosure order carries a maximum penalty of
$2,200 or imprisonment for one year.
Rio Tinto Ltd v Commissioner of Taxation
[2006] FCA 1200
of Privilege
(1992), 13. See also Ibid, 21,
Australian Government
Consultation
, by phone, 22 May
Australian Securities and
Investments Commission,
Proposal 8–1.
is discussed in Ch 6.
Australian Competition & Consumer Commission v George Weston
[2003] FCA 601
(2003) 129 FCR 298.
See, eg, Australian Pesticides and Veterinary Medicines Authority,
6 June 2007; Great Barrier Reef Marine Park
1 June 2007; Australian Quarantine
and Inspection Service,
See, eg, Australian
Government Office of the Privacy Commissioner,
29 June 2007; Comcare,
14 June 2007;
Centrelink,
17 July 2007; Human Rights and
Equal Opportunity Commission,
4 June 2007;
Australian Communications and Media Authority,
29 May 2007.
Medicare Australia,
Inspector-General of
Intelligence and Security,
14 June 2007.
National Offshore Petroleum Safety Authority,
1 June 2007.
Australian Transaction
Reports and Analysis Centre,
containing such dispute resolution models are addressed separately below. Some
federal bodies stated that
they were prompted by the ALRC Inquiry to develop
policies or review their operational procedures in this regard.
See Australian Taxation Office,
Access and Information Gathering Manual
<www.ato.gov.au> at
23 August 2007, [6.6.9].
Ibid, [6.6.12].
See Ibid, [6.6.38]. The
ATO considers that Australian Government Solicitors or a firm of solicitors
would be suitable third parties.
See Ibid, App B.
and Trustee Service Australia,
Official Receiver Best Practice
Statement—Exercise of Official Receiver’s Powers to Assist
(2007), [2.12]. See also [3.11], which is expressed in similar
terms in relation to the Official Receiver’s powers under
provision is also considered at [8.129]
Issues of delay caused by
privilege claims are discussed in
Law Council of
Australian Competition and
Consumer Commission,
Australian Institute of
Company Directors,
8 June 2007. Similar
concerns were expressed by the Taxation Institute of Australia: see Taxation
Institute of Australia,
Commonwealth Director of
Public Prosecutions,
This is discussed further
See Australian Federal
Police and Law Council of Australia,
General Guidelines Between the
Australian Federal Police and the Law Council of Australia as to the Execution
of Search Warrants on
Lawyers’ Premises, Law Societies and Like
Institutions Where a Claim of Legal Professional Privilege is Made
Taxation Office,
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Client Legal Privilege and Federal Investigatory Bodies
33 (2007), Question 5–6, [5.30]. Stakeholders’ views on the use
of an independent third party are set out separately
See Australian Law Reform
Commission,
The Judicial Power of the Commonwealth: A Review of the
and Related Legislation
S Ratnapala,
Constitutional Law: Foundations and Theory
Nicholas v The Queen
[1998] HCA 9
(1998) 193 CLR 173
, [70]. See also
Huddart Parker & Co Pty Ltd v
[1909] HCA 36
(1909) 8 CLR 330
‘Binding’ refers to the enforceability of a decision: see
v Human Rights & Equal Opportunity Commission
[1995] HCA 10
(1995) 183 CLR
AWB Ltd v Cole
(2006) 152 FCR 382, [187].
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission,
13 June 2007.
Australian Securities and
Investments Commission,
29 June 2007; New South
Wales Bar Association,
5 June 2007; National
Australia Bank Limited and others,
4 June 2007;
A Brown—Law Society of New South Wales,
Consultation
Sydney, 21 May 2007.
See also National Australia Bank Limited and others,
4 June 2007 (expression of support for
improvements in court
administration).
New South Wales
Bar Association,
See, eg, Australian
Pesticides and Veterinary Medicines Authority,
6 June 2007; New South Wales Bar Association,
June 2007; Law Society of New South Wales,
See, eg, Australian
Securities and Investments Commission,
2007; New South Wales Bar Association,
2007; R Desiatnik,
1 June 2007; Members of the
Victorian Bar,
Consultation
, Melbourne, 25 May 2007. BHP
Billiton expressed support for third parties—such as law and accounting
firms—to act as
custodians of disputed privileged material, pending
determination of a claim: see BHP Billiton Mitsubishi Alliance,
Australian Communications and
Media Authority,
29 May 2007. See also Law
Council of Australia,
4 June 2007 (expression
of support for development of alternative dispute resolution models in
appropriate circumstances).
Australian Taxation Office,
22 June 2007;
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission,
13 June 2007.
R Desiatnik,
New South Wales Bar
Association,
Australian Taxation Office,
Australian Securities and
Investments Commission,
Law Council of Australia,
Ibid; Hon T Cole,
Consultation
, Sydney, 1 March
Commonwealth Director of
Public Prosecutions,
Australian Taxation Office,
Law Council of Australia,
Australian Competition and
Consumer Commission,
Australian Competition and
Consumer Commission,
The ALRC’s proposal
for an independent review mechanism for the resolution of privilege claims is
discussed below.
The functions and
powers of Royal Commissions are discussed in Ch 4, and also referred to in
Constitutional
considerations are discussed above in the section on ‘Alternative
Uniform Civil
Procedure Rules 2005
The ATO has specific
policies and procedures in relation to obtaining electronically-stored
information: see Australian Taxation
Access and Information Gathering
<www.ato.gov.au> at 23 August
2007, Ch 5.
A file fragment has no
marker—such as a header or a footer and, as such, it is not possible to
ascertain where such a file
begins or ends. All fragments are treated as
‘unallocated space’ and privileged material may be contained in such
J Forsyth of <e.law> australia,
‘Presentation to Australian Law Reform Commission on Computer
Forensics’ (Paper
presented at ALRC, Sydney, 29 May 2007).
Law Society of New South
Corporate Tax Association,
4 June 2007. See also Australian Institute of
Company Directors,
Supreme Court of New South
Practice Note No SC Eq 3—Supreme Court Equity Division:
Commercial List and Technology and Construction List
, 30 July 2007,
[29.4.1]–[29.4.2].
See also M Priest, ‘Discovering
Ways to Cut High Legal Costs’,
Australian Financial Review
(online), 21 July 2007,
<www.afr.com>.
guidelines are discussed below.
Kennedy v Baker
[2004] FCA 562
(2004) 135 FCR 520
, [25]–[27]. A
write-blocking device enables a hard drive to be accessed without alteration: J
Forsyth of <e.law> australia,
‘Presentation to Australian Law Reform
Commission on Computer Forensics’ (Paper presented at ALRC, Sydney, 29 May
Crimes Act 1914
allows the use of electronic equipment at search premises to copy
evidential data onto a disk, tape or other device and authorises
the removal of
the device from the premises.
Australian Securities and
Investments Commission,
Kennedy v Baker (No 2)
[2004] FCA 809
(2004) 138 FCR 414
of <e.law> australia, ‘Presentation to Australian Law Reform
Commission on Computer Forensics’ (Paper
presented at ALRC, Sydney, 29 May
Oke v Commissioner of
Australian Federal Police
[2005] FCA 1363
, [18], [32]. In a later case, the
execution of the warrant in this matter was held to be unlawful. See
Commissioner of Australian Federal Police
Oke v Commissioner of
Australian Federal Police
[2007] FCA 27
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Client Legal Privilege and Federal Investigatory Bodies
33 (2007), Question 5–5.
Australian Securities and Investments Commission,
29 June 2007; Taxation Institute of Australia,
15 June 2007; National Legal Aid,
June 2007; Law Council of Australia,
2007; S Byrne,
4 June 2007.
Council of Australia,
Australian Taxation Office,
Law Society of New South
4 June 2007.
Kennedy v Baker (No
[2004] FCA 809
(2004) 138 FCR 414.
A Firm of Solicitors v District Court at
[2005] NZCA 435
[2006] 1 NZLR 586
This is addressed further
below. In Ch 7, the ALRC proposes as a safeguard to the abrogation or
modification of privilege that federal
bodies implement appropriate document
management systems to ensure that documents the subject of a client legal
privilege claim are
returned, as soon as practicable, to the person who produced
them: see Proposal 7–7.
See Proposal 6–3.
also discussion on search warrant guidelines
The Full Federal Court held
JMA Accounting Pty Ltd v Carmody
(2004) 139 FCR 537
, 542 that in some
circumstances it may be appropriate for a tax officer to examine a document
cursorily in order to determine if
privilege applied—the document is not
to be looked at closely; merely enough to enable the officer to decide whether
[1983] HCA 39
(1983) 153 CLR 52
, 105. See also
Australian Federal Police v
Propend Finance
(1997) 188 CLR 501, 505–506 (Brennan J);
Victorian Parliament Law Reform Committee,
The Powers of Entry, Search,
Seizure and Questioning by Authorised Persons
(2002), rec 36, which
states that agencies should ensure they have a protocol in place for the seizure
of documents over which client
legal privilege is
See Australian Federal
Police and Law Council of Australia,
General Guidelines Between the
Australian Federal Police and the Law Council of Australia as to the Execution
of Search Warrants on
Lawyers’ Premises, Law Societies and Like
Institutions Where a Claim of Legal Professional Privilege is Made
The parties may agree to
another reasonable time period.
S McNicol, ‘Unresolved Issues Arising from the General Guidelines between
the AFP and the Law Council of Australia’
Australian Law
This point was made by Gaudron
Australian Federal Police v Propend Finance
(1997) 188 CLR 501, 537.
See S McNicol, ‘Unresolved Issues Arising from the General Guidelines
between the AFP and the Law
Council of Australia’
Law Journal
McNicol, ‘Unresolved Issues Arising from the General Guidelines between
the AFP and the Law Council of Australia’
Australian Law
Kennedy v Baker
[2004] FCA 562
135 FCR 520
, [19]–[20];
Kennedy v Wallace
[2004] FCA 332
(2004) 208 ALR 424
Oke v Commissioner of Australian Federal Police
[2007] FCA 27
The parties may agree to
another time period.
Securities and Investments Commission,
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Client Legal Privilege and Federal Investigatory Bodies
33 (2007), Question 5–4.
Australian Government Solicitor,
Law Society of New South
Law Council of Australia,
See discussion above on onus
in resolving privilege disputes.
Issues and proposals in relation to electronic material are discussed
Australian Securities and
Investments Commission,
Proposal 8–3.
discussion above on resolving privilege disputes and Proposal
Proposal 6–3.
Proposals 8–2, 8–8, 8–12,
Administrative Review
Government Agency Coercive Information-Gathering Powers [Draft
Principle 16.
Australian Commission for Law Enforcement Integrity,
Practice Notes
May 2007, [59]–[60].
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Principled Regulation: Federal Civil and
Administrative Penalties in Australia
, ALRC 95 (2002), Rec 10–1
(enforcement policies); Rec 16–1 (penalty-related settlements);
Rec 16–3 (enforceable
undertakings); Rec 16–4 (publicity);
Rec 17–1 (leniency and
See Ibid, Ch 10,
especially [10.60]. In order to accommodate concerns that some regulators had
concerning the publication of their
policies, the ALRC also suggested the
development of internal enforcement guidelines that are not required to be
published if it
is considered necessary to supplement the publicly available
guidelines.
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Client Legal Privilege and Federal Investigatory Bodies
33 (2007), Question 5–7.
Australian Securities and Investments Commission,
29 June 2007; Taxation Institute of Australia,
15 June 2007; National Legal Aid,
June 2007; Australian Pesticides and Veterinary Medicines Authority,
6 June 2007; Law Society of New South Wales,
1 June 2007; Corporate Tax Association,
4 June 2007; Law Council of Australia,
4 June 2007; R Desiatnik,
1 June 2007; BHP Billiton Mitsubishi Alliance,
1 June 2007.
eg, Corporate Tax Association,
4 June 2007;
Fitzroy Legal Service,
BHP Billiton Mitsubishi
Law Council of Australia,
See, eg, Australian
Pesticides and Veterinary Medicines Authority,
6 June 2007; Law Council of Australia,
R Desiatnik,
Fitzroy Legal Service,
Officers from the Australian
Security Intelligence Organisation and the Inspector-General of Security and
Intelligence,
Consultation
, Sydney, 26 June
These are addressed
separately below.
See discussion
above on unrepresented persons.
Ensuring Professional Integrity—Education and Accountability
Introduction
Examples of alleged abuse
The extent of the problem of abuse
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s views
Responding to abuse
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s views
Legal education
Academic qualifications
Practical legal training requirements
Continuing legal education
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s views
Ensuring Professional Integrity—Education and Accountability
Introduction
9.1 The ALRC has heard allegations that lawyers have at times
‘overstepped the mark’ in some way in relation to claims
certain communications are the subject of client legal privilege. In the Issues
Client Legal Privilege and Federal Investigatory Bodies
the ALRC raised a number of questions on this topic, as concerns have been
expressed that claims of privilege can be maintained
for the purpose of
frustrating investigations.
9.2 The misuse of privilege claims as a tactic for delay or obstruction may
be seen to fly in the face of the very purpose of administration
of justice that
privilege is said to serve.
lawyer ultimately owes a duty to the court, misuse of privilege also goes
against the duty to the court by frustrating court
process and the
administration of justice.
Law Council of Australia (Law Council) commented that lawyers have a duty to the
to ensure that claims of [client legal privilege] are soundly based. This is
part of their duty not to assist in an abuse of process
or in misleading the
court. A claim for [privilege] that is made without merit, to cause delay or
obstruction, is an abuse of
9.3 Similarly, NSW Young Lawyers stated that:
A lawyer engaging in [improperly claiming client legal privilege] risks
undermining the reputation of the legal profession as a whole
and reduces the
confidence of litigants in the Court
9.4 The appropriate framework for making and maintaining claims of client
legal privilege is considered in Chapter 8. Ways to deter—and
punish—alleged misuse or abuses are the principal subject of this chapter.
Examples of alleged
9.5 Three examples may be used to illustrate the challenges posed in
identifying alleged abuse of client legal privilege claims: the
Australian Wheat
Board (AWB) Royal Commission;
British American Tobacco
litigation;
Seven Network Ltd v News
While only the first
concerns client legal privilege claims in the context of a federal investigatory
body, all three attracted media
and public attention to the issue of alleged
‘overreaching’ in relation to lawyers’ practices more
9.6 During the AWB Royal Commission, Commissioner Cole expressed some
concerns regarding AWB’s claims for client legal privilege,
the Royal Commission repeatedly sought a complete list from AWB of
all documents not produced on the basis of a privilege claim,
and this list was
never provided;
AWB finally conceded that many documents for which privilege had
been claimed were no longer claimed to be
privileged;
AWB’s claims for privilege significantly delayed completion of
9.7 Commissioner
Cole stated that:
The claim for legal professional privilege [by AWB] in respect of the Project
Rose brief to Mr Tracey QC, abandoned on day 62 of
the hearings, resulted in
great delay and expense to the Inquiry. Had AWB produced the brief earlier, with
most of the relevant documents
contained in it, the course of this Inquiry would
have been different, and its duration and expense much less. Whatever may be
brief, it is plain that the original documents copied in
the brief were all
material to this Inquiry, would have had to be produced in response to notices,
and would, after the expenditure
of significant time and money, be compiled by
the Inquiry to give a chronological picture of the involvement of AWB and its
in the payment of monies by way of trucking fees. Had there been
frankness or real cooperation on the part of AWB, most material
documents could
have been produced in November
9.8 The second example arises in the tobacco litigation context. A former
legal counsel for British American Tobacco Australasian
Services (BATAS) gave
evidence that BATAS and its lawyers had participated in a
‘contrivance’ to hide evidence behind
client legal privilege.
BATAS would give [its lawyers] copies of its documents (including those that
might harm it if discovered in litigation) ostensibly
for legal advice. The
originals would be destroyed under the document retention policy while [the
lawyers] kept the copies but claimed
that they were protected by
9.9 At first instance, Eames J held that the process of discovery ‘was
subverted’ by BATAS and its solicitor, ‘with
the deliberate
intention of denying a fair trial to the
plaintiff’.
It was not a
strategy, he said, ‘which the court should countenance’. In such
circumstances he held that it was an outcome
that could not be cured and the
‘only appropriate order’ was to strike out the defence and to enter
judgment for the
9.10 The Victorian Court of Appeal held, however, that the decision at first
instance was flawed and allowed the defendant’s
claim of client legal
This meant that the
documents had not properly been admitted into evidence and thus the basis of
Eames J’s conclusion—that
there was a deliberate strategy to destroy
disadvantageous documents—even if correct, could not
9.11 Although the outcome of the appeal was to put the documents back behind
the cloak of privilege, the fact that they had been seen
brought certain
practices into the spotlight. The dispute is now the subject of continuing
litigation.
9.12 The third example similarly arose in the context of
Seven Network Ltd v News
applicant’s claim for access to certain documents in this case was
resisted on the basis of client legal privilege. The
documents in question had
been prepared by in-house counsel for News Ltd and the central issue was the
‘dominant purpose test’—had
the documents been prepared for
the dominant purpose of giving legal
9.13 The privilege claim originally covered around 300 documents in an
affidavit sworn by the Chief General Counsel for News Ltd.
By the time of the
hearing, nearly seven months later, the claims with respect to approximately one
third of the documents had been
withdrawn and verifying affidavits were set
9.14 Tamberlin J was critical of News Ltd’s conduct of the discovery
The importance of the availability of documentation to parties in litigation,
particularly in litigation on the scale of the present
case, and the public
interest in the courts making fully informed decisions by reference to
documentary records, requires scrupulous
compliance with the requirements of the
[Federal Court Rules] and the accepted principles for discovery and the
assertion of privilege.
… The Court must be able to rely on diligent
compliance with its orders and this is reflected in the requirement that the
must give a
certificate.
9.15 Tamberlin J rejected the privilege claim with respect to all but four of
the documents and described the initial claim as ‘substantially
excessive’.
circumstances he awarded costs on an indemnity basis against News
9.16 These three examples prompt the questions to be considered in this
chapter—do any, or all, of the practices highlighted
by the examples take
client legal privilege beyond its legitimate bounds and into the area of misuse
or abuse and, if so, what should
be the appropriate responses?
response is required is evident. As the Law Council
commented: ‘lawyers who knowingly make excessive claims of [client legal
privilege] do a great disservice to the justice system and the legal profession
and should be subject to
sanctions’.
9.18 Associate Professor Adrian Evans also commented on the importance of
responding to the concerns expressed by Commissioner Cole
in the AWB Royal
Commission.
Commissioner Cole carefully criticised not the actual claim of privilege by AWB
over the edited minutes of its Board Meetings, but
the public wisdom in the
decision to make the claim of privilege at all. Cole was referring to the effect
on the public reputation
of AWB that it would seek to use privilege to keep
secret its Board Minutes. This observation captures the community cynicism that
privilege claims
are conspicuously associated with deceit,
commercial exploitation and criminal behaviour. I don’t think the position
bad as that, but the perception does justify this
9.19 The challenge for the ALRC is to disentangle the issues of perception of
abuse from those of valid practice and to assess what
should be appropriate
responses to actual instances of, for example, ‘deceit, commercial
exploitation and criminal
behaviour’.
The difficult
issue of weighing up when an expansive claim of privilege becomes an improper
one also is compounded by potential breadth
of a test which requires the
assessment of the ‘dominant purpose’ of the communications in
The extent of the
problem of abuse
9.20 A major problem identified in relation to claims of client legal
privilege is the delay that such claims may generate for investigations
federal investigatory bodies. In IP 33, the ALRC sought comment on the use of
such claims as a tactic for delay or
obstruction.
9.21 In analysing the submissions and consultations, comments about
procedural delay—and appropriate ways to resolve it—needed
distinguished from the use of delay as a tactic to obstruct investigations. The
general issue of delay is considered in Chapter
6. Ways to improve transparency
in the making of claims and processes to avoid delay and the resolution of
claims are proposed in
9.22 The ALRC considers that the combination of improvements, proposed
throughout this Discussion Paper, should make a significant
contribution towards
the reduction of delay and facilitate a more cooperative environment in which
federal investigatory bodies are
able to seek and obtain information, with or
without the specific exercise of coercive information-gathering powers, by:
clarifying whether client legal privilege is abrogated or not, in
the first place—hence avoiding litigation of the kind in
The Daniels
Corporation International Pty Ltd v Australian Competition v Consumer
providing a clear framework for the provision of information to
persons the subject of coercive information-gathering
making explicit the information that persons the subject of coercive
information-gathering powers need to provide, where they seek
to make a claim of
client legal privilege;
establishing an effective framework for the resolution of disputes
in relation of client legal
these proposals are implemented, the extent of the perceived problem of abuse
may be significantly reduced. The comments in
submissions and consultations need
to be considered, therefore, with such proposals in mind.
Submissions and
consultations
9.24 A common theme in the submissions and consultations was the difficulty
in establishing when a claim of client legal privilege
amounts to abuse. Where a
lawyer is testing the boundaries of the doctrine of privilege with an arguable
case, this is different
from making a hopeless claim as a tactic in order to
frustrate or delay an investigation. Issues in relation to client legal
are not necessarily straightforward—the disagreement between
Eames J and the Victorian Court of Appeal in the British American
litigation as to what amounted to a waiver of privilege, is a significant
illustration in point.
rejected claim of client legal privilege, therefore, is not necessarily an
improper one.
9.25 The difficulty of proving bad faith was emphasised, for example, in the
submission of the Australian Institute of Company Directors
The privilege is that of the client not the lawyer. ‘Bad faith’ can
be difficult to determine. A claim of privilege may
be made in good faith on the
basis that the claim is arguable. Lawyers have a professional duty towards their
client to put their
case. If a claim for privilege fails, AICD is concerned that
it may be all too easy to claim bad faith. To impose penalties and sanctions
place the person, particularly a client, in a position of ‘double
jeopardy’ having lost the claim for privilege and
subject to the
consequences that flow from
9.26 The New South Wales (NSW) Bar Association considered that abuse is
likely to arise in particular areas:
(a) over-claiming—in the sense that the decisions are made to claim
privilege on an overly cautious or inexperienced basis
leading to some of the
claims, upon examination, being found to be unsustainable, but with proceedings
delayed in the meantime;
(b) lack of transparency in the making of claims—parties not providing a
full list with separate identification of the various
privilege documents until
being pressed to do so, again delaying resolution of proceedings;
(c) over-use of masking of documents for privilege;
(d) (probably most rarely) warehousing or
privileging.
9.27 The practice of
‘masking’—sometimes described as
‘redaction’—involves the obscuring of those
parts of documents
that are claimed to be subject to client legal privilege. According to the NSW
Bar Association, ‘masking’
most frequently occurs
not in respect of primary privilege claims, but in respect of secondary, or
derivative claims: a summary of legal advice in one sentence
in a 10-page board
paper; extracts of a conversation with a solicitor in a client’s longer
file note etc.
[It] is likely to be the product either of an attempt to widen a privilege claim
inappropriately or of a caution bred of a lack of
understanding about how
appropriately to mask a
9.28 ‘Warehousing’ and ‘privileging’ of documents,
referred to above, are described as follows:
‘Warehousing’ is the act of placing prejudicial documents in the
hands of third parties and beyond the power of a party
to litigation on the
understanding that such documents may be retrieved by the party ‘by the
grace and favour of the third
‘Privileging’ is the act of placing prejudicial documents ‘in
the hands of lawyers under cover of spurious requests
for legal advice so as to
permit a claim for privilege’
This may be done by labelling
otherwise non-privileged documents ‘for the purpose of legal advice’
and providing the
documents to a lawyer purportedly for the purpose of seeking
legal advice.
9.29 The purpose of both such practices, so described, is ‘to enable a
party to place prejudicial documents beyond the reach
litigants’.
9.30 The Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) also drew
attention to the tactic of potential over-claiming through
the making of
‘blanket claims’ during the course of investigations and the
inherent dangers of such practice.
The ACCC’s practical experience shows that ordinary Court procedures which
apply in relation to dealing with claims of legal
professional privilege can be
‘gamed’ to seriously stifle or lengthen an investigation by, for
example, making a blanket
claim of legal professional
9.31 A key issue is whether notorious examples, such as those that arose in
the AWB Royal Commission, are isolated ‘one-offs’,
or are actually
examples of a much bigger problem. A number of submissions and consultations
queried the extent of the alleged problem
in relation to actual misuse of client
legal privilege claims. The Law Society of New South Wales commented that:
A brief review of reported and unreported NSW cases has not turned up an
instance to date of professional disciplinary action having
been taken against a
solicitor or barrister on such a
9.32 Similarly, the NSW Bar Association suggested that:
To the extent privilege is thought to have been
misused before federal investigative agencies, for example as per the Cole
there is no evidence of a widespread problem, certainly not one
sufficiently widespread to commend to anyone radical changes to the
9.33 While the NSW Bar Association identified the practices of
‘warehousing’ and ‘privileging’ as troubling,
commented that there was no evidence available to it to suggest that these
practices were widespread.
9.34 Conversely, the ACCC expressed concern that it is very difficult to
determine whether the abuse is more than ‘occasional’,
It should not be accepted as axiomatic that legal professional privilege is only
occasionally abused in the absence of reliable evidence
to support this. There
have been rare occasions where the ACCC has been made aware of inappropriate
privilege claims because of particular
unique circumstances. … Of course,
the fact that it is only on rare occasions that such abuse is able to be
uncovered by the
ACCC does not support the proposition that it only occurs on
rare occasions.
9.35 While there is no clear evidence of chronic abuse of claims of client
legal privilege, there is evident distrust on the part
of federal investigatory
bodies that claims are not being made legitimately in some cases.
9.36 It should be noted, however, that as it is in the very nature of client
legal privilege that communications are kept confidential—and
known to anyone other than the lawyer and client involved—it is difficult
to gauge the extent of any actual abuse.
Federal investigatory bodies are,
therefore, necessarily reliant on the integrity of lawyers in asserting claims
of client legal
9.37 It is the ALRC’s preliminary view that if co-operation and trust
were improved in relation to the making and maintaining
of claims through the
procedures suggested in Chapter 8, the scope for suspicion of abuse on the part
of federal investigatory bodies
would be minimised.
9.38 The introduction of more transparent processes, while working to dispel
some of the evident distrust by federal investigatory
bodies that claims are not
always being made legitimately, does not, however, address the issue of
‘gaming’, or using
claims to privilege as ‘a tool to
which may take
the practice into the area of alleged abuse. This is considered further
Responding to
9.39 In IP 33, the ALRC queried whether professional disciplinary action
should follow in cases where a lawyer has maintained a claim
for client legal
privilege improperly as a tactic for delay or
obstruction.
9.40 The rules of conduct of state and territory law societies and bar
associations cover various aspects of practice; and the Legal
Profession Acts in
each state and territory
the definitions of conduct that may lead to disciplinary action. This is
considered further below.
9.41 One case which is analogous and instructive in relation to the possible
application of the existing disciplinary frameworks to
an alleged abuse of a
claim for client legal privilege is
Clough v Queensland Law Society Inc; A-G
solicitor, Clough, supplied information in the course of litigation that was
incomplete and incorrect.
Solicitors’ Complaints Tribunal of Queensland suspended him from practice
for a period of 12 months and required him satisfactorily
to undertake a legal
education program in civil litigation prior to his applying to have his
practising certificate restored. Clough
appealed from this ruling. The
Attorney-General and the Law Society also appealed on the basis that the penalty
was inadequate and
sought to have Clough removed from the roll of legal
practitioners altogether.
9.42 The Law Society considered that although Clough was not dishonest, he
had been guilty of ‘malpractice and/or professional
misconduct and/or
unprofessional conduct or practice’ in relation to, inter alia, the
disclosure of certain documents in relation
to a matter in the District
9.43 In considering the appeal, Muir J commented that:
To supply false and misleading material to a solicitor on the other side of the
record and to the solicitor’s client, was to
conduct the case unfairly and
to fall short of, to a substantial degree, the standards of professional conduct
observed or approved
by members of the profession of good repute and competency.
The conduct thus went beyond mere negligence and amounted to unprofessional
9.44 Clough erred in relation to the extent of the required disclosure in the
relevant action. The Tribunal ‘found actions and
statements which might
have been regarded as chicanery to be honest but
The Court of
Appeal dismissed both appeals, leaving the original penalties imposed by the
Tribunal to stand, but required Clough
to pay the costs of the appeal.
9.45 Reasoning by analogy from this case, it would be possible for a lawyer
to come within the realm of ‘unprofessional conduct’
‘professional misconduct’ under the applicable disciplinary regimes,
depending on the seriousness, and intention,
with respect to an unfounded claim
of client legal privilege in the particular case. Under the relevant
disciplinary legislation,
the lawyer may be subject to a range of consequences.
In NSW, for example, penalties may include: a caution; conditions imposed on
practising certificate; a fine of up to $75,000; and removal from the
9.46 The ability to initiate disciplinary proceedings is also wide. For
example, in NSW, ‘every person’ has the right
to complain about the
conduct of lawyers to the relevant legal professional association or the
independent Legal Services
Commissioner.
‘lawyer’, in this context, applies to those lawyers who hold
practising certificates as well as to those who
9.47 The Law Council noted that in some cases where misconduct is suspected,
judges have referred the matter directly to the relevant
legal services
regulator, citing
Linfox v Yates
as a specific
Hence, if a federal
investigatory body considers that a lawyer has abused a claim of client legal
privilege it would be open for
the body to make a complaint about the lawyer to
a legal services regulator.
9.48 There are also examples, however, of specific legislative provisions
dealing with abuse of client legal privilege.
Section 103(9)
Administration Act 2003
(WA), for example, provides that:
A person, either personally or on another’s behalf, who claims that legal
professional privilege applies to a document, information
or relevant material
and who knows, or ought to know at the time that claim is made that it is false,
misleading, or without substance,
commits an offence.
Penalty: $20000.
9.49 A more general example of provisions imposing penalties on lawyers and
clients for intentionally thwarting court processes is
seen in the
Document Destruction) Act
(Vic). This legislation created a
new criminal offence—in direct response to the British American Tobacco
litigation in Victoria.
documents or other things are reasonably likely to be required in any ongoing or
potential future legal proceedings, a person
who knows this and destroys or
conceals them with the intention of preventing their use in a legal proceeding
is guilty of an indictable
9.50 In other jurisdictions such matters may be considered under general
legal profession rules. For example, in NSW, the inappropriate
destruction of
documents is proscribed by the
Legal Profession Regulation 2005
9.51 In the context of this Inquiry, the question remains whether specific
penalties are needed—such as the provision in Western
Australia—or
whether the existing general disciplinary regimes are adequate.
Submissions and
consultations
9.52 In IP 33, the ALRC sought comment on whether professional disciplinary
action should follow, and what penalties should be imposed,
where there was an
abuse of a claim of client legal
9.53 The ALRC also sought information on whether, as a matter of historical
fact, professional disciplinary action has ever been taken
against a lawyer for
improperly maintaining a claim for client legal privilege; and whether the
threat of professional disciplinary
action might act to inhibit lawyers from
providing proper representation to their
9.54 The general thrust of submissions and consultations was that
disciplinary action should follow an abuse of a claim of client
The principal
disagreement was about
this should occur. On the one hand, it was
argued that there are sufficient avenues for dealing with misuse within the
existing disciplinary
framework for lawyers; on the other, there were arguments
that there should be a specific penalty regime to deal with alleged misuse
privilege claims. There were also comments about the impact that such a penalty
regime might have in relation to the lawyer-client
relationship.
Existing disciplinary framework
9.55 Many submissions pressed the view that existing disciplinary frameworks
are adequate to deal with situations of alleged misuse
of claims of client legal
privilege, or, as a Committee of the Law Society of NSW put it, that issues
regarding abuse of client legal
privilege claims are just a ‘subset’
of broader issues concerning lawyers’ ethical
responsibilities.
9.56 The Law Council noted that heavy sanctions already are provided for
under the Legal Profession Acts
in each state and territory. In its view,
such sanctions should be regarded as ‘sufficient’:
the present sanctions available for abuse of [client legal privilege], namely
rules of Court, professional disciplinary rules or
(in some jurisdictions)
prosecution, are adequate and that no further provisions are required.
The Courts already have discretionary power to award costs against counsel and
solicitors where costs are incurred improperly, without
reasonable cause, are
wasted by undue delay, or by any other misconduct or default by the legal
practitioner, e.g.
Federal Court Rules
, Order 62, rule 9(1);
the Supreme Court of Victoria
9.57 The Law Society of NSW submitted, similarly, that:
There is absolutely no evidence to show that existing systems of professional
conduct, regulation and discipline, the law of contempt
and the Court’s
anything other than adequate,
appropriate and well adapted to deal with such
9.58 NSW Young Lawyers also drew attention to the scope of existing
disciplinary frameworks for lawyers:
Lawyers are required to adhere to minimum ethical standards in practice and
complete an ethics course as part of their practical
legal training requirements
entitling them to practice.
If client legal privilege is improperly claimed over a communication as a tactic
for delay it would be well understood by the lawyer
that they have engaged in
conduct that falls outside minimum ethical standards required in the practice of
The conduct of a lawyer who knowingly engages in conduct that falls outside
minimum ethical standards in the practice of law should
be considered
professional misconduct.
9.59 Victoria Legal Aid supported the ‘appropriate use of complaints
and disciplinary
procedures’.
Legal Aid also endorsed this
9.60 It was also submitted that the same rules should apply to all lawyers
and, in particular, to in-house counsel, who may not hold
certificates.
9.61 The NSW Bar Association endorsed the application of professional
disciplinary sanctions where improper claims are made, but also
made express
suggestions as to amendments that could be made to professional disciplinary
rules to ensure that such claims are caught
more readily. The Association
specifically suggested:
a separate professional rule stipulating obligations in respect of privilege
claims which would provide greater clarity as to the
specific content of a
practitioner’s duty to the court, and would focus for practitioners the
serious and substantive nature
of a claim to
9.62 The NSW Bar Association further spelled out
the form that such amended rules could take. For example, the amendment proposed
for solicitors was as follows:
A. For solicitors:
Revised Professional Conduct and Practice Rules 1995
, Rule A.15AA:
A practitioner must ensure that any advice which he or she gives to his or her
client in respect of making or maintaining a claim
of client legal privilege in
respect of a communication, and any such claim made or maintained, is supported
by reasonable grounds.
When making or maintaining a claim to client legal privilege on behalf of a
client, the senior practitioner who is responsible for
the provision of the
service or a principal of the practice must certify that each claim is supported
by reasonable ground(s) and,
to the extent possible, must identify the ground(s)
for each claim.
In determining whether a claim to client legal privilege is supported by
reasonable ground(s), a practitioner must have regard to
the content of the
document, the existence or otherwise of any contemporaneous records made by the
author of the communication to
the effect that it is considered to be
privileged, and any factual matters bearing upon the creation of the
communication, including
the purpose(s) of the author and recipient or both.
In making partial claims of privilege in respect of communications in or
recorded in a document, a practitioner must mask only those
portions of the
document the disclosure of which would result in the substance of privileged
communications being revealed.
For the purposes of this Rule, ‘client legal privilege’ has the
meanings ascribed to that term at
sections 117
Evidence Act
(NSW), as amended from time to time; and other terms as defined in the
Legal Profession Act 2004
, as amended from time to time have the
same meanings in this rule.
9.63 Some of these suggestions are similar in content to the proposals
included in Chapter 8 in relation to a requirement of certification
privilege claim. The ALRC’s proposal is for the certification of claims,
when requested by federal investigatory bodies,
and that the requirements of
such a certification process be set out in federal client legal privilege
legislation. The ALRC proposes
that, where it is requested, a lawyer must
certify that there are reasonable grounds for the making of the privilege
9.64 Concerns were expressed, however, about whether the present disciplinary
procedures ever actually ‘caught’ lawyers
who had abused client
legal privilege claims. Andrew Brown, in-house counsel for the Law Society of
NSW advised that, to his knowledge,
there had never been a case of professional
disciplinary action taken against a lawyer for improperly maintaining a claim
legal privilege.
ALRC heard that there also had been no such cases in
Queensland.
9.65 The absence of professional disciplinary action in circumstances of
alleged abuse of client legal privilege claims may be because
there is no basis
for complaint; or, where there is, that complaints are not being made. Dr
Christine Parker pointed out that professional
disciplinary action is usually
initiated by clients and, in the case of client legal privilege; it is more
likely to be that the
client is being protected ‘too well’. She
suggested that, if federal investigatory bodies considered that there were
of suspected abuse of client legal privilege claims, the agencies themselves
should invoke the existing complaints mechanisms
against lawyers.
If regulators such as the ATO, federal police etc could cooperate with the
professional [disciplinary bodies] in such circumstances
to provide evidence,
then there would be more likelihood of successful disciplinary
action—which in turn would provide a signal
to the profession as to the
ethical conduct expected.
9.66 Parker also drew attention to the particular problem of triggering the
application of the disciplinary provisions in the context
of in-house counsel
the client does not have any incentive to complain, and even if they do have
complaints about their lawyer, they don’t need
to use the disciplinary
system because they are employing the lawyer and can therefore control or
discipline them in other ways.
9.67 The behaviour of in-house counsel is, therefore, only going to come to
the attention of the disciplinary authorities if a complaint
is made by:
‘other lawyers working with them on the case’; ‘the other side
(ie the investigatory agency and/or
its lawyers’; a judge; or the
disciplinary authority investigates the lawyer’s conduct of its own
motion. Parker comments,
however, that the latter course of action has
particular obstacles, as disciplinary bodies
would find it difficult to get access to information—by
definition—because of the privilege claims, especially where
the complaint
involves a lawyer inside a large company represented by a big law firm because
they are set up and resourced to deal
mostly with complaints about service from
individual clients about individual lawyers (mostly in smaller law firms). They
have the resources and capacity to manage these more complicated
investigations with the level of legal ‘firepower’ likely
arrayed against them on the other
9.68 Parker advocates that federal investigatory bodies develop ‘a
protocol of informing the relevant professional disciplinary
authority’.
suggests that judges—and lawyers themselves—ought to take the
initiative in making complaints to disciplinary
bodies where they consider that
a lawyer has acted unethically.
Notwithstanding the issues concerning the activation of the existing
professional disciplinary provisions, Parker preferred such
an approach of
dealing with alleged abuses of privilege claims to one of ‘proliferating
penalty provisions in legislation in
other areas’:
That approach can be used in a tactical or political way to scare off lawyers
from representing their clients fearlessly, and it
seems better to deal with
allegations of lawyer misconduct within the disciplinary regime that is
specifically set up to deal with
appropriately.
9.69 Where current disciplinary frameworks apply, however, the Australian
Government Solicitor (AGS) added a note of caution about
disciplinary action
being initiated by federal investigatory bodies:
Investigatory bodies must respect the role of lawyers in properly protecting
clients’ rights and interests. Like in any other
context, the
investigatory body could make a complaint about a lawyer’s conduct to the
relevant legal profession disciplinary
authority. The making of client legal
privilege claims with no real foundation might well, in the particular
circumstances, constitute
unprofessional conduct. However, to be seen to be
acting responsibly itself, the investigatory body would need to have some sound
basis in the circumstances for submitting that the lawyer’s conduct was
unprofessional.
9.70 In IP 33, the ALRC asked whether a person who makes or maintains a claim
for client legal privilege in bad faith, either personally
or on another’s
behalf, should be made liable to penalties, whether criminal, civil or
administrative.
Section 103(9)
Taxation Administration Act 2003
(WA), set out above, was used as
an example.
9.71 The Law Council explained that this provision was introduced ‘to
counter the perceived problem of serious abuses of client
legal privilege by
legal practitioners’.
the time it was introduced, the Law Council gave qualified support to its
introduction, ‘as a measure preferable to
abrogation’.
9.72 The Law Society of Western Australia opposed the introduction of this
provision and attempted to have it removed from the
Taxation Administration Bill
It submitted to the
Attorney General of Western Australia that there had been no instances of such
The Law Society also
submitted that client legal privilege is a client’s fundamental common law
right and that the creation
of a penalty provision could result in lawyers
adopting a ‘safety first’ attitude by refraining from claiming the
to avoid the possibility of prosecution or professional disciplinary
proceedings.
9.73 The Law Council argued that the example of the Western Australian
provision should not be followed, however, now that more general
provisions were
The Law Council notes that the
Taxation Administration Act
precedes the now existing legal services regulatory regime. Given that clearly
adequate remedies now exist for the abuse
of [privilege] … the Law Council
does not support specific penalties directed at abuse of [client legal
privilege].
9.74 However, in the event that specific penalties were to be introduced, the
Law Council made suggestions about what might be included:
rather than automatically making claiming [client legal privilege] an offence if
a practitioner ‘ought to have known’
that the privilege was
unavailable, each case should be considered on its facts. For example, the
failure to be aware that the privilege
was unavailable might be explicable on a
basis such as lack of legal knowledge, incompetence or carelessness, rather than
abuse of process, in which case it should not attract as heavy a
pecuniary penalty as those provided for by the
Taxation Administration Act
(WA). In addition, as IP 33 notes, the law of privilege has developed
and evolved over time, partly due to the inclination of the
legal profession to
test its boundaries. A blanket penalty to catch practitioners who ‘ought
to have known’ that [client
legal privilege] did not apply may
unnecessarily deter exploration of the boundaries of [client legal
privilege].
9.75 The Australian Securities and Investments Commission (ASIC) argued that
‘there are sound reasons for imposing penalties
on lawyers who make bad
faith claims’.
affirmed a view of the doctrine of client legal privilege as a
‘fundamental human
Desiatnik commented that:
It has risen from the ranks of other evidentiary laws to achieve post-graduate
status while retaining its under-graduate evidentiary
qualifications. As such,
any assertion or maintenance of the privilege in bad faith by a lawyer, or the
lawyer’s properly informed
client, should carry a mandatory civil penalty,
and a discretionary criminal
9.76 In support of introducing specific penalties, ASIC pointed to the effect
that ‘bad faith’ claims had in relation
to investigations:
Costs are incurred by privilege claims that are made in bad faith, (including
money, impeding the effective administration of justice
and reducing timely and
effective regulation).
9.77 The ACCC recommended a regime of sanctions on lawyers ‘responsible
for spurious claims’:
Such sanctions could range from costs orders against the lawyers personally
through to disciplinary measures imposed by the relevant
professional body. More
serious sanctions would be reserved for those lawyers who misstate material
facts in support of the claim
9.78 The issue of the application of penalties to persons other than lawyers,
also was remarked upon. The Australian Tax Office (ATO)
assumed that ‘a
person’ (as referred to in IP
is a broad category and it
could include ‘the client who is claiming [client legal privilege], his or
her legal representative,
or any other person making a claim for [client legal
privilege] on his or her
9.79 In relation to penalising non-lawyers, ASIC commented that:
For privilege claims made by non-lawyers who have not received legal advice in
relation to them, it is likely to be difficult to
establish that the claims have
been made in bad faith and that they warrant the imposition of penalties. In
view of the complexity
of the law relating to client legal privilege and the
fact that lawyers may experience difficulty in readily assessing whether a
of privilege is available, it may be considered overly harsh to expose
non-lawyers to the risk of penalties for invalidly claiming
Kinds of penalties
9.80 Some submissions included specific recommendations about the kinds of
penalties that might be imposed. For example, ‘providing
for the making of
costs orders for unreasonable privilege claims and criminal penalties for bad
faith privilege claims’.
The ATO suggested that:
Costs could be ordered against a person who makes an improper claim for [client
legal privilege] where litigation is on foot or,
as suggested in the ALRC Issues
Paper 33, there may be some form of criminal sanction. It may also be worth
exploring the introduction
of some form of evidentiary or administrative
sanction against a person who makes or maintains a claim for [client legal
in bad faith. For example, in the tax context an administrative
penalty could perhaps be linked to the amount of revenue involved
particular case.
Negative impact of penalties
9.81 A number of submissions commented that a regime of specific sanctions
directed to alleged abuse of client legal privilege claims
would have a chilling
effect in relation to legal practice and that this would operate to the
detriment of clients and the operation
of the legal system.
9.82 For example, Keith Kendall commented that ‘introducing sanctions
for any assertion of client legal privilege is likely
to create more problems
than it solves’.
Introducing sanctions for deemed abuses of client legal privilege is likely to
produce a new problem, being the inhibition of the
provision of the legal advice
itself. How is a legal adviser to know in advance whether an assertion of
privilege will lead to sanctions?
This is likely to create conflicts of interest
for the legal adviser, in that the legal adviser will have to temper pursuing
client’s case as vigorously as possible with a concern for their own
professional standing. This could lead to a situation
in which legal advisers
are reluctant to assert privilege for fear of the sanctions. This could then
lead, later, to professional
negligence claims should the client later find out
that a privilege claim could have been sustained, but damaging communications
were nevertheless disclosed.
9.83 Victoria Legal Aid expressed a similar concern about the detrimental
effect on the relationship between lawyers and clients that
a penalty regime may
… there is a real risk that such steps could be used to encourage lawyers
to not assert rights which they should by asserting
on behalf of clients or on
behalf of the legitimate expectations and rights of the persons entitled to the
benefit of privilege in
communications.
9.84 The Law Society of NSW warned that:
This question is somewhat like suggesting that a person who pleads ‘not
guilty’ but who is ultimately found ‘guilty’
should not only
be found guilty of the crime for which they have been prosecuted but also be
found to have been guilty of the second
crime of pleading ‘not
guilty’. Generally, a person should not be afraid to mount an argument on
the basis that, if the
argument is lost, they are exposed to an allegation that
they have put forward an argument in bad faith. That exposure makes a person
reluctant to put forward an argument and works against the proper right to
invoke privilege particularly in a case where privilege
is arguable but not
9.85 The AICD noted that any ‘additional requirements’—on
top of existing professional standards and obligations—may
deter lawyers
‘from providing frank
9.86 The AGS expressed concerns about how coercive information-gathering
powers may be perceived if a penalties regime were introduced
for the misuse of
claims of client legal privilege.
There would be a danger that sanctions against improper claims may be portrayed
as oppressive, and bring the coercive powers themselves
into some disrepute as
needlessly draconian. A failure to sustain a claim to client legal privilege
before the courts would in the
ordinary course be visited with a costs order
against the claimant. The prospect of this is always going to act as some
disincentive
to the making of claims for privilege that lack
foundation.
9.87 Problems in the application of a penalties regime were also identified
in some submissions. The ‘challenge’, as one
submission put it,
‘will be to prove that the claim was asserted or maintained in bad
This is because assessing whether a claim [of privilege is valid] is not always
clear. This factor also supports the position that
Commonwealth investigatory
bodies should publish clear guidelines on when a person can assert and maintain
9.88 Kendall also identified a range of practical issues in relation to a
penalties regime:
In particular, who would decide what constitutes bad faith? Even if such an
arbiter could be decided upon, there would need to be
some predetermined
yardstick by which bad faith could be measured. Deciding such matters only with
the benefit of hindsight is unsatisfactory
in a context where serious penalties
are being considered. Anything other than a reliable objective measure would
create an element
of uncertainty that is likely to affect the provision of legal
9.89 In view of such difficulties, the Fitzroy Legal Service submitted
Rather than seeking to impose disciplinary penalties, we feel that it would be
more appropriate for lawyers to be fully instructed
privilege, if this is not already the
9.90 The ALRC’s emerging view is that the major problems identified in
relation to claims of client legal privilege are best
addressed through a more
transparent and expeditious framework for the making and assessing of
complemented by
better education of lawyers to inculcate a far greater understanding of the
nature of, and responsibilities in relation
to, the making of privilege
9.91 The ALRC’s preliminary view also is that the best strategies for
addressing alleged instances of misuse or abuse of claims
of client legal
privilege are to clarify and enhance the existing disciplinary frameworks that
apply to lawyers to ensure that cases
of actual abuse are appropriately caught
and punished. This is considered preferable to introducing a provision like
Taxation Administration Act 2003
(WA). The ALRC considers
that client legal privilege is best seen as one aspect of a lawyer’s
overall ethical responsibilities—and
misuse of claims punished as
such—rather than singling out privilege for specific attention on its
9.92 It is also evident, however, that such strategies may not cover all
areas of alleged abuse. Professional disciplinary frameworks
have the most
potent impact where a person may lose his or her practising certificate. In
appropriate cases the practising certificate
may be cancelled and conditions
imposed upon any application for renewal, and so
If a lawyer does not have
a practising certificate, he or she may still be removed from the roll of the
relevant courts, in addition
to whatever other penalties may be imposed under
the relevant legal professional legislation.
9.93 The legislation regulating the legal profession in each jurisdiction
provides mechanisms for receiving and investigating complaints
against lawyers.
The ALRC has heard that such provisions are not being utilised to punish lawyers
who have allegedly abused privilege
claims and is interested in hearing about
how those provisions might be activated more effectively in such
circumstances.
9.94 The ALRC agrees with submissions that recommended that the professional
conduct rules of the relevant legal professional associations
clarified to make the obligations with respect to client legal privilege much
more obvious as examples of the broader ethical
responsibilities of lawyers.
9.95 Further, it is the ALRC’s view that, if the procedure of
certification proposed in Chapter 8 is implemented, certification
by a lawyer
without reasonable grounds also should be listed as an example of conduct that
contravenes the relevant conduct
Proposal 9–1
State and territory legal professional associations
should clarify their professional conduct rules to provide specific guidance
a lawyer’s ethical duties with respect to making and maintaining a
claim of client legal privilege.
State and territory legal professional associations should clarify
their professional conduct rules to provide that a certification
of documents as
privileged—in line with Proposal 8–3—without reasonable
grounds, is an example of conduct that
contravenes the relevant professional
conduct rules.
9.96 Legal education refers to both the legal knowledge and competencies
required to qualify a person to be admitted to practice as
a lawyer; and the
continuing legal education of lawyers, both mandatory and voluntary. The rules
governing admission to practise
as a lawyer in all jurisdictions require the
attainment of approved academic qualifications and satisfactory completion of
practical legal training
requirements.
governing practising certificates also stipulate certain requirements in
relation to continuing legal
The concern, in
this context, is whether there is sufficient training—in all
respects—in relation to legal ethics and
professional responsibility, and
specifically in relation to the responsibilities in making claims of client
legal privilege.
9.97 In discussing the ethics of corporate lawyers, Parker and Evans,
Ethically unreflective corporate lawyering can sometimes occur not so much
because of failures of personal ideals as because of narrow
legalistic training
and culture that do not equip corporate lawyers to know how to put ethics into
action … or even to recognise
ethical issues when they
9.98 In its review of the federal civil justice system, the ALRC found that
insufficient attention is given to training Australian
lawyers in legal ethics
and professional
responsibility.
In the final
report of that inquiry,
Managing Justice: A Review of the Federal Civil
Justice System
the ALRC stated that
education and training clearly play a critical role in shaping legal
professional culture is ‘one that values lifelong learning and takes
ethical concerns
seriously’.
qualifications
9.99 In all states and territories, the minimum academic requirements
comprise 11 areas of study (known as the ‘Priestley Eleven’).
South Wales, for example, these are set out in the Schedule Five of the
Profession Admission Rules 2005
. Client legal privilege may fall
within several of the listed areas in these Rules:
procedure’;
professional
legal training requirements
9.100 The Revised Uniform Admission Rules recommend that students seeking
admission as lawyers should have to achieve standards of
competency in ten of 15
designated areas of practical legal training, one of which is ethics and
professional responsibility.
In NSW, for example, Rule 96 requires that the course of practical training
includes ‘evidence of attainment of competencies’
in listed areas,
including ‘Values—Ethics and Professional
Responsibility’.
9.101 A synopsis of the competencies is then set out in the Sixth Schedule of
Legal Profession Admission Rules 2005
. Client legal privilege may
broadly fall within the following listed areas of competency required of an
‘entry-level lawyer’:
civil litigation practice;
criminal law practice; and
ethics and professional
responsibility.
last topic is described in some detail, including eight specific elements:
acting ethically;
discharging the legal duties and obligations of legal
practitioners;
complying with professional conduct rules;
complying with fiduciary duties;
avoiding conflicts of interest;
acting courteously;
complying with rule relating to the charging of fees; and
reflecting on wider
duties and obligations of legal practitioners include the duty:
of confidentiality;
to act competently and to maintain competence;
to act honestly;
not to mislead the court; and
not to pervert the course of justice or the due administration of
legal education
9.104 The rules in each jurisdiction prescribe that, for the maintenance of
practising certificates, a specified number of continuing
legal education units
be completed.
Continuing Professional Development Rules 2007
example, require that each year a practitioner must complete at least one unit
(the equivalent of one hour of face to face
training) in each of four fields,
one of which is ‘Ethics and Professional Responsibility’. An example
of a topic that
may be included within this field is the ‘difference
between the duty of confidentiality and legal professional
privilege’.
9.106 In NSW, the Mandatory Continuing Legal Education Rules
that a practitioner, unless exempted by the Council of the Law Society, must
complete a required number of points each
To be eligible under
the rules, a course must be:
of significant intellectual or practical content and must deal
primarily with matters directly related to the practice of law;
conducted by persons who are qualified by practical or academic
experience in the subject covered; and
relevant to the practitioner’s immediate or long term needs in
relation to the practitioner’s professional development
practice of
9.107 Unless
specifically required of a particular practitioner as a condition of his or her
practising certificate, however, the
compulsory areas set out in the
Profession Regulation 2005
do not include ‘Ethics and Professional
Responsibility’.
Submissions and
consultations
9.108 In IP 33, the ALRC asked whether there are sufficient systems in place
to ensure that lawyers are properly informed about their
professional ethics and
responsibilities in relation to the making and maintaining of claims of client
legal privilege;
and what is
the best way of ensuring lawyers are properly informed about their professional
ethics and responsibilities in relation
to: (a) making and maintaining claims of
client legal privilege; and (b) identifying privileged communications at the
time of creation.
9.109 Submissions and consultations endorsed the importance of educating
lawyers thoroughly about their ethical responsibilities in
relation to client
legal privilege claims—and agreed that this would help deal with some of
the perceived problems. ASIC, for
example, commented that:
initiatives that promote the education of lawyers concerning their legal and
ethical obligations in making and maintaining privilege
claims will potentially
assist in reducing the extent to which legal privilege may be invalidly
9.110 This view also was clearly put in other
submissions.
emphasis was principally upon post-admission education, some comments also
focused upon pre-admission issues.
9.111 Consultations with legal academics evidenced a strong commitment to the
importance of ethics in the law curriculum. It was suggested
that best practice
in ethical education is that ethical matters be embedded throughout the law
school curriculum as they arise. It
was admitted, however, that it is
challenging to find the best place, or places, to achieve
If privilege is
included as part of an ethics component taught in first year, the students may
find it very confusing, and they have
little knowledge of the law at that
9.112 Legal academics also considered it important to try to inculcate a
‘resilience’ in law students—so that, for
example, as
practitioners they would be able to cope with ‘the culture of law
firms’ and to deal with the requests of
‘powerful partners’ or
9.113 Parker commented that:
privilege really is one of those areas where the clients, the courts and the
community are completely and utterly dependent on lawyers
fulfilling their
ethical obligations properly. This must be one area where it is particularly
important that aspiring lawyers understand
that their own conduct will be
crucial in making sure the rationale of the privilege is met
9.114 NSW Young Lawyers emphasised the importance of taking a multi-faceted
view of education.
The ethics components taught, as part of the practical legal training courses
that individuals have to undertake to become a legal
practitioner, should
include a strict curriculum to ensure that individuals are clearly aware of
their ethical obligations in relation
to claims of client legal privilege.
The professional conduct committees of the various legal bodies should play a
role in ensuring lawyers are properly informed about
their professional ethics
and responsibilities in relation to making and maintaining claims of client
legal privilege.
Professional conduct committees can do this by providing advisory services to
practitioners who are unsure whether their particular
circumstances would allow
them to maintain a claim of client legal privilege so as to encourage only
proper claims of client legal
privilege. Such services should be actively
promoted and lawyers should be strongly encouraged to use those services when in
as to making or maintaining a claim of client legal
9.115 The Law Council also reinforced the need for effective continuing
professional education for all practitioners. The Council
commented that:
It is important for the legal profession to have effective educational systems
in place to ensure that all practitioners, no matter
how inexperienced or senior
they may be, keep up to date with their professional ethics and
responsibilities. The Law Council considered
that this method is the best way to
ensure that practising lawyers are informed about their professional and ethical
obligations
in relation to both making claims of privilege and identifying
privileged communications.
9.116 The Law Council provided a number of examples of how client legal
privilege issues have been emphasised in continuing legal
education schemes in
Victoria, NSW and Queensland. For example, it cited the ‘pro-active
approach’ of the Law Institute
of Victoria, which has provided six
seminars in the last three years on the subject and the example of a
hypothetical seminar on
client legal privilege run in conjunction with the ATO,
‘involving a panel of experienced practitioners and ATO staff, exploring
how [client legal privilege] claims made as part of an ATO investigation were
resolved in
9.117 In relation to the mandatory continuing legal education requirement in
NSW, the Law Society of NSW submitted that, while it
was ‘not aware of
deficiencies in the method of training lawyers or in the requirements for
continuing legal education’,
[it] would not oppose giving consideration to modifying mandatory Continuing
Legal Education (CLE) requirements, so that a solicitor
must attend a minimum
number of seminars over a specifically regulated period on the subject of legal
client privilege and the associated
obligations of lawyers in claiming privilege
on behalf of clients.
9.118 The Law Council reported that the ethics strategy in Queensland was
‘still in its infancy having begun in 2006’
and that ‘the
current strategy has an early intervention approach which focuses on
establishing ethical sensitivity and decision-making
skills from law school on
through admission’.
9.119 The NSW Bar Association considered that education was crucial in
relation to specific practices where errors of judgment were
easily made and
should not be regarded as subject to privilege. A particular example given was
where, it was submitted,
guidelines could be published in the
Law Society Journal
‘in order to inculcate improved masking
practices’.
9.120 Other educational strategies identified in submissions were the
provision of advisory bulletins on a continuing basis to practitioners
availability of information through dedicated officers or telephone
‘hotlines’ to assist in providing up to date,
practical information
in relation to ethics and professional
responsibilities.
9.121 The Law Council drew attention to the Ethics Rulings of the Law
Institute of Victoria’s Ethics Committee, which are published
Law Institute Journal
and detailed on the Institute’s
website with other ethical information and
9.122 There was support for continuing education of other kinds as
well—not merely those associated with the renewal of practising
certificates. This is particularly relevant where lawyers do not hold practising
certificates, which may be the case, for example,
with some in-house counsel.
The Australian Corporate Lawyers’ Association (ACLA) noted that
Regardless of any changes that may be recommended in the law, there is a need
for the ongoing education of lawyers and others in
regard to law and practice
and relevant ethical requirements in this area. ACLA has been—and will
continue to be—active
in promoting programs of this kind for all in-house
counsel and expects to do so in the
9.123 A specific example of such ongoing education is ACLA’s manual,
Ethics for In-house Counsel
, which includes a section on ‘best
practice guidelines’ in relation to privilege. This states:
In-house counsel:
• have an obligation to ensure that their organisations are aware of
the conditions under which privilege will apply or could
• have a duty to advise employees within their organisation that they
and cannot be their personal legal adviser in any situation where
that could conflict with their duty to represent the organisation
itself. They
should advise such employees to take separate representation
• must always keep in mind who
the client? Counsel should
regard the organization itself as the client
• may make a claim for privilege if a case for privilege exists but not
if it is clearly known that the privilege has in fact
9.124 A further strategy suggested by National Legal Aid was the introduction
of ‘appropriate induction courses’ by employers,
would assist to reinforce and contextualise the professional ethics studies
undertaken at university. Continuing professional development
programs should
also address issues relating to professional ethics and
responsibilities.
9.125 An improvement in the internal review practices of law firms also was
advocated. Parker suggested that professional associations
might identify best
practice in terms of internal monitoring by undertaking an internal
‘ethical audit or review’, to
ensure that each work team’s
claims of privilege were appropriately
9.126 A specific question in IP 33 concerned whether communications should be
identified as privileged at the time of creation. NSW
Young Lawyers responded
Obvious difficulties may arise where lawyers, under the pressures of time, are
put in a position of determining whether certain communications
are privileged.
Therefore, identifying privileged communications at the time of creation is
usually a matter of practice for most
However lawyers should be made aware of their professional responsibilities in
identifying privileged communications at the time
of creation through the ethics
and professional conduct committees of their law society or institute on a
regular basis.
9.127 While identifying
communications as privileged at the time of their creation is good practice, it
is not necessarily a straightforward
exercise—particularly in the context
of the ‘dominant purpose’
Peter Brereton
commented that:
It is often very difficult, or impossible, to determine whether a document is
privileged merely by looking at it, particularly applying
the dominant purpose
test. Even with the benefit of speaking with the author and the recipient of the
document it can be difficult
to determine whether a document reflects a
privileged communication. The challenge can be especially acute in the context
of communications
involving in-house counsel and also where there is a lengthy
gap between the time of the communication and the time when the question
privilege arises. These difficulties mean that there is a wider area in which
minds can legitimately differ about whether a document
is privileged than we
would like to think.
The most important time for giving attention to the question of privilege is at
the time of communication. Lawyers should ensure
that a privileged communication
is marked as privileged and be equally vigilant to ensure that only privileged
communications are
so marked. This is a discipline that is important for all
lawyers, but is of special significance for in-house
9.128 The ALRC’s preliminary view is that there is considerable scope
for improving the various levels of legal education to
identify client legal
privilege issues more particularly—both prior to and after admission to
practice—to ensure a better
understanding of the obligations of lawyers in
relation to privilege claims within the context of a lawyer’s overall
responsibilities to the court.
9.129 For example, the stipulation in the academic requirements for admission
to practice that ‘privilege’ be covered
under the topic of Evidence,
could be amended to include an express reference to ethical obligations in
relation to, inter alia,
making claims that communications are the subject of
client legal privilege.
9.130 This level of particularity also should be included in relation to the
competencies specified for practical legal training;
in mandatory continuing
legal education requirements; and in relevant specialist accreditation
9.131 Professional associations should utilise a range of communication
strategies to identify and publicise best practice in relation
to client legal
privilege claims—and ethical issues more generally—and support to
their members through the provision
of advisory services, such as the existing
telephone ‘hotlines’.
Proposal 9–3
University and other legal education programs on
legal ethics and professional responsibility that are accepted for admission
should include specific consideration of the ethical responsibility of
lawyers in relation to making and maintaining a claim of client
legal privilege.
Proposal 9–4
The study of legal ethics requirement found in
state and territory rules and Uniform Admission Rules governing admission to
as a lawyer should include the responsibility of lawyers in relation to
making and maintaining a claim of client legal privilege.
Proposal 9–5
Continuing legal education programs (including
those required for the maintenance of a current practising certificate) should
a regular review of the law and responsibilities in relation to the
making and maintaining of a claim of client legal privilege.
Proposal 9–6
Professional associations should issue to their
members ‘best practice’ notes from time to time, about the law and
responsibilities
in relation to making and maintaining a claim of client legal
Confidential,
12 June 2007.
Law Council of
4 June 2007,
NSW Young Lawyers,
12 June 2007,
Report of the Inquiry into
Certain Australian Companies in relation to the UN Oil-for-Food Programme
AWB v Cole (No 5)
[2006] FCA 1234.
McCabe v British American Tobacco
Australia Services Ltd
[2002] VSC 73
British American Tobacco Australia
Services Ltd v Cowell
[2002] VSCA 197
British American Tobacco Australia
Services Ltd v Cowell
[2003] VSCA 43.
Seven Network Ltd v News Ltd
Report of the Inquiry
into Certain Australian Companies in relation to the UN Oil-for-Food
(2006), [7.42].
C Parker and A Evans,
Inside Lawyers’ Ethics
McCabe v British American
Tobacco Australia Services Ltd
Ibid, [385].
British American Tobacco Australia
Services Ltd v Cowell
[2002] VSCA
McCabe v British American
Tobacco Australia Services Ltd
[2002] VSC 73
For example,
British American Tobacco Australia Services Ltd
Seven Network Ltd v News
[2005] FCA 142.
Seven Network Ltd v News Ltd
[2005] FCA 142
Law Council of Australia,
27 March 2007.
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Client Legal Privilege and Federal Investigatory Bodies
, IP 33 (2007),
Question 7–6.
The Daniels
Corporation International Pty Ltd v Australian Competition and Consumer
[2002] HCA 49
(2002) 213 CLR 543.
McCabe v British American
Tobacco Australia Services Ltd
[2002] VSC 73
British American Tobacco
Australia Services Ltd v Cowell
[2002] VSCA
See, eg, G Healy and A
Eastwood—Freehills,
Consultation
, Sydney, 12 June
2007; Regulatory lawyers of Clayton Utz,
Consultation
Sydney, 15 May 2007.
Institute of Company Directors,
8 June 2007.
See also Fitzroy Legal Service,
New South Wales Bar Association,
Ibid, citing
Re Mowbray:
Brambles Australia Ltd v British American Tobacco Australia Services Ltd
[2006] NSWDDT 15
Wales Bar Association,
Australian Competition and
Consumer Commission,
13 June 2007. ASIC also
raised concerns in relation to blanket claims—particularly in relation to
electronically stored information—and
the delays that this causes for
investigations: Australian Securities and Investments Commission,
29 June 2007. See also Australian Taxation
22 June 2007. The issue of
‘blanket claims’ is considered in Ch
Law Society of New South Wales,
New South Wales Bar Association,
5 June 2007, [5]. See also I Temby,
19 July 2007.
New South Wales Bar Association,
Australian Competition and
Consumer Commission,
13 June 2007. The ACCC
cited a number of illustrations of difficulties it had in identifying improper
claims of privilege having
been made, and the difficulties it has in verifying
claims of privilege. This is discussed further in Ch
Commonwealth Director of Public
Prosecutions,
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Client Legal Privilege and Federal Investigatory Bodies
33 (2007), Question 7–6.
Legal Profession Act 2006
Legal Profession Act 2004
Legal Profession Act 2006
Legal Profession Act 2007
Legal Practitioners Act 1981
Legal Profession Act 1993
Legal Profession Act 2004
Legal Practice Act 2003
(WA). See also Standing Committee of Attorneys-General, National Legal
Profession Model Bill (2006).
Clough v Queensland Law Society Inc
[2002] 1 Qd R
Ibid, [3] (Pincus
Legal Profession Act 2004
‘legal practitioner’ applies to those who hold practising
certificates:
[2004] NSWSC 943:
Law Council of Australia,
4 June 2007.
Administration Act 2003
is discussed in detail in
For example, in introducing
the Second Reading of the Bill in the Legislative Assembly, the
Attorney-General, the Hon RJ Hulls,
stated that ‘the bill responds to
important issues that arose in the recent case of
in the Victorian
Court of Appeal’(
British American Tobacco Australia Services Ltd v
[2002] VSCA 197):
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative
Assembly, 16 November 2005, 2181 (R
Hulls—Attorney-General).
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Client Legal Privilege and Federal
Investigatory Bodies
, IP 33 (2007), Questions 7–6, 7–7,
For example, Australian
Securities and Investments Commission,
2007; Australian Taxation Office,
22 June 2007;
Victoria Legal Aid,
14 June 2007; Taxation
Institute of Australia,
15 June 2007; National
13 June 2007; NSW Young Lawyers,
12 June 2007; New South Wales Bar Association,
5 June 2007; National Australia Bank Limited
and others,
4 June 2007; Law Council of
4 June 2007; R Desiatnik,
1 June 2007; I Turnbull,
3 June 2007.
Wales Law Society Litigation and Practice Committee,
Consultation
, Sydney, 28 May 2007.
Council of Australia,
4 June 2007See also
Victoria Legal Aid,
14 June 2007; A
Brown—Law Society of New South Wales,
Consultation
Sydney, 21 May 2007.
Law Society of
New South Wales,
1 June 2007.
NSW Young Lawyers,
12 June 2007.
14 June 2007.
National Legal Aid,
13 June 2007.
Australian Corporate Lawyers Association,
Consultation
Sydney, 13 February 2007.
Wales Bar Association,
Ibid. A similar amended rule
was proposed for barristers.
Proposal 8–3.
A Brown—Law
Society of New South Wales,
Consultation
, Sydney, 21 May
Correspondence
14 September 2007.
Correspondence
, 27 August 2007.
Correspondence
, 14 September
Correspondence
, 27 August 2007.
Correspondence
, 14 September
Australian Government
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Client Legal Privilege and Federal Investigatory Bodies
33 (2007), Question 7–7.
Council of Australia,
R O’Connor, ‘Legal
Professional Privilege, the Daniels Case and the
Taxation Administration Bill
(WA)’ (2003) 30(1)
Law Council of Australia,
Australian Securities and
Investments Commission,
29 June 2007. See also
NSW Young Lawyers,
12 June 2007, 15;
Confidential,
See the discussion of a rights
analysis of client legal privilege in Ch
R Desiatnik,
1 June 2007.
Securities and Investments Commission,
Australian Competition and
Consumer Commission,
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Client Legal Privilege and Federal Investigatory Bodies
33 (2007), [7.92].
Australian Taxation
Australian Securities and
Investments Commission,
19 July 2007.
Australian Taxation Office,
31 May 2007.
Victoria Legal Aid,
14 June 2007. See also National Legal Aid,
13 June 2007, 9; Fitzroy Legal Service,
4 June 2007; A Brown—Law Society of New
South Wales,
Consultation
, Sydney, 21 May
Law Society of New South
Australian Institute of
Company Directors,
Australian Government
Confidential,
31 May 2007.
Legal Service,
As discussed in Ch
The issue of legal education is
considered below.
In this regard
Clough v Queensland Law Society Inc
[2002] 1 Qd R 116
considered above.
See Ch 8 for a
discussion on the consequences of a failure to certify communications as
privileged and, in particular, Proposal
Profession Act 2004
Legal Profession Admission Rules
(NSW) r 94.
Continuing Professional Development Rules 2007
New South Wales
Solicitors’ Rules
; Law Society of New South Wales,
Professional Conduct and Practice Rules
, Solicitors Rules,
C Parker and A Evans,
Inside Lawyers’ Ethics
See Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of the Federal Civil Justice System
, DP 62 (1999),
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Managing Justice: A Review of the Federal Civil Justice
, ALRC 89 (2000).
Ibid, Ch 2.
Legal Profession
Admission Rules 2005
(NSW) sch 5, Civil Procedure, under topic 6,
‘Obtaining evidence—discovery of documents, interrogatories,
subpoena and
other devices’.
Ibid, Evidence, under topic 3,
‘Privilege’.
comprising ‘Professional and personal conduct in respect of
practitioner’s duty: (a) to the law, (b) to the Courts,
clients, including basic knowledge of the principles of trust accounting, and
(d) to fellow practitioners.
South Wales Office of the Legal Services Commissioner,
Lawyer Regulation in
Australia: Admission
<www.lawlink.nsw.gov.au/lawlink/olsc/ll_olsc.nsf/pages/lra_admission> at
13 April 2007.
Legal Profession
Admission Rules 2005
(NSW) r 96.
Ibid sch 6.
Ibid, ‘Explanatory
Note’, at the end of the section on ‘Ethics and Professional
Responsibility’.
Continuing Professional Development Rules 2007
(Vic) r 5.2(b); App
Law Society of New South Wales,
Revised Professional Conduct and Practice Rules
, Solicitors Rules;
South Wales Solicitors’ Rules
Law Society of New South Wales,
Revised Professional Conduct and Practice Rules
, Solicitors Rules,
42.1.1–42.1.4.
The compulsory
areas are: the principles of equal employment opportunity; the law relating to
discrimination and harassment; occupational
health and safety law; employment
law; and the management of legal practice consistent with such matters:
Profession Regulation 2005
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Client Legal Privilege and Federal Investigatory Bodies
33 (2007), [7.96].
Ibid, Question
Australian Securities
and Investments Commission,
29 June 2007.
For example, Australian Government
13 June 2007; Fitzroy Legal Service,
4 June 2007; Regulatory lawyers of Clayton Utz,
Consultation
, Sydney, 15 May
Academics of the Law School
of the Australian National University,
Consultation
Canberra, 1 June 2007; B McKillop, M Kumar and F Beaupert,
Consultation
, Sydney, 21 May 2007; C Parker,
Correspondence
August 2007.
Academics of the Law
School of the Australian National University,
Consultation
Canberra, 1 June 2007.
Correspondence
, 27 August
NSW Young Lawyers,
12 June 2007. See also, eg, Confidential,
Law Council of Australia,
4 June 2007. See also Victoria Legal Aid,
14 June 2007; Taxation Institute of Australia,
Law Council of Australia,
Law Society of New South
1 June 2007. The Taxation Institute of
Australia also recommended attendance at a compulsory seminar dealing with the
maintaining of client legal privilege claims every three years:
Taxation Institute of Australia,
Law Council of Australia,
4 June 2007. The seminars offered by the
Queensland Law Society include issues of confidentiality and duties to clients,
the matter of client legal privilege. The curriculum for continuing
professional development seminars is also currently under
New South Wales Bar
Association,
NSW Young Lawyers,
12 June 2007; Law Council of Australia,
4 June 2007. The Law Council noted that the
Client Relations Centre of the Queensland Law Society reportedly receives, on
3 calls per month specifically relating to client legal privilege. The
establishment of such services was recommended in New South
Wales Law Reform
Commission,
Scrutiny of the Legal Profession: Complaints Against Lawyers
Report 70 (1993), rec 63, [5.31].
Law Council of Australia,
Australian Corporate Lawyers
Association,
Australian Corporate Lawyers
Association and Corporate Lawyers Association of New Zealand,
In-house Counsel
(2004). The second edition was published in 2004, in
cooperation with the Corporate Lawyers Association of New Zealand, St James
Ethics Centre and Minter Ellison.
National Legal Aid,
Correspondence
, 27 August
NSW Young Lawyers,
P Brereton,
Correspondence
, 14 September 2007.
Appendix 1. Table of
Legislation
Commonwealth legislation containing
coercive information-gathering powers
Federal body
Commonwealth legislation
Australian Building and Construction Commissioner
Building and Construction Industry Improvement Act 2005
Australian Crime Commission
Australian Crime Commission Act 2002
Surveillance Devices Act 2004
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act 1979
Australian Commission for Law Enforcement Integrity
Law Enforcement Integrity Commissioner Act 2006
Surveillance Devices Act 2004
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act 1979
Australian Communications and Media Authority
Broadcasting Services Act 1992
Interactive Gambling Act 2001
Radiocommunications Act 1992
Telecommunications Act 1997
Telecommunications (Consumer Protection and Service Standards) Act
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission
Trade Practices Act 1974
Australian Customs Service
Customs Act 1901
Australian Energy Regulator
National Electricity (South Australia) Act 1996
Australian Federal Police (AFP)
The legislation listed for the AFP is by way of example only. There are
numerous acts containing, for example, AFP powers of search
Crimes Act 1914
Proceeds of Crime Act 2002
Surveillance Devices Act 2004
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act 1979
Australian Fisheries Management Authority
Fisheries Management Act 1991
Torres Strait Fisheries Act 1984
Australian Maritime Safety Authority
Australian Maritime Safety Authority Act 1990
Occupational Health and Safety (Maritime Industry) Act 1993
Navigation Act 1912
Australian Pesticides and Veterinary Medicines Authority
Agricultural and Veterinary Chemicals (Administration) Act
Agricultural and Veterinary Chemicals Code Act 1994
Australian Prudential Regulatory Authority (APRA)
Banking Act 1959
Insurance Act 1973
Australian Quarantine Inspection Service
Australian Meat and Livestock Industry Act 1997
Export Control Act 1982
Imported Food Control Act 1992
Quarantine Act 1908
Australian Securities and Investments Commission (ASIC)
Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act 2001
Corporations Act 2001
Insurance Contracts Act 1984
Life Insurance Act 1995
Retirement Savings Accounts Act 1997
Superannuation Industry (Supervision) Act 1993
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act 1979
Australian Taxation Office
Fringe Benefits Tax Assessment Act 1986
Income Tax Assessment Act 1936
Product Grants and Benefits Administration Act 2000
Petroleum Resources Rent Tax Assessment Act 1987
Superannuation Contributions Tax (Assessment and Collection) Act
Superannuation Contributions Tax (Members of Constitutionally Protected
Funds) Assessment and Collection Act 1997
Superannuation Guarantee (Administration) Act 1992
Taxation Administration Act 1953
Termination Payments Tax (Assessment and Collection) Act 1997
Australian Transaction Reports and Analysis Centre
Anti-Money Laundering and Counter-Terrorism Financing Act 2006
Financial Transaction Reports Act 1988
Australian Transport Safety Bureau
Transport Safety Investigation Act 2003
A New Tax System (Family Assistance) (Administration) Act 1999
Farm Household Support Act 1992
Social Security Act 1991
Social Security (Administration) Act 1999
Student Assistance Act 1973
Child Support Agency
Child Support (Assessment) Act 1989
Child Support (Registration and Collection) Act 1988
Civil Aviation Safety Authority
Civil Aviation Act 1988
Asbestos-Related Claims (Management of Commonwealth Liabilities Act
Occupational
Health and Safety Act 1991
Safety, Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1988
Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions
Proceeds of Crime Act 2002
Commonwealth Ombudsman
Ombudsman Act 1976
Department of Defence and the Australian Defence Force
Defence Act 1903
Defence Force Discipline Act 1982
Department of Environment and Water Resources
Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999
Department of Health and Ageing:
Aged Care Act 1997
Department of Health and Ageing:
Therapeutic Goods Administration
Therapeutic Goods Act 1989
Department of Immigration and Citizenship
Migration Act 1958
Gene Technology Regulator
Gene Technology Act 2000
Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority
Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Act 1975
Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission
Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission Act 1986
Insolvency and Trustee Service Australia
Bankruptcy Act 1966
Inspector of Transport Security
Inspector of Transport Security Act 2006
Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security
Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security Act 1986
Inspector-General of Taxation
Inspector-General of Taxation Act 2003
Medicare Australia
Medicare Australia Act 1973
Migration Agents Registration Authority
Migration Act 1958
National Offshore Petroleum Safety Authority
Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Act 1967
Office of the Privacy Commissioner
Royal Commissions
Royal Commissions Act 1902
Workplace Ombudsman
Workplace Relations Act 1996
A number of other federal investigatory
bodies have powers of search and seizure under the
Crimes Act 1914
Appendix 2. List of
Submissions
Submission Number
Attorney General’s Department of New South Wales
Submission LPP 13
Australia and New Zealand Banking Group Limited; BHP Billiton Limited;
Foster’s Group Limited; National Australia Bank Limited;
Orica Limited;
Telstra Corporation Limited; The Shell Company of Australia Limited; Westpac
Banking Corporation; Zinifex Limited
Submission LPP 30
4 June 2007
Australian Commission for Law Enforcement Intergrity
Submission LPP 69
20 July 2007
Australian Communications and Media Authority
Submission LPP 20
29 May 2007
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission
Submission LPP 2
Submission LPP 53
Submission LPP 75
14 March 2007
13 June 2007
14 August 2007
Australian Corporate Lawyers Association
Submission LPP 66
22 June 2007
Australian Crime Commission
Submission LPP 8
29 June 2007
Australian Customs Service
Submission LPP 56
13 June 2007
Australian Financial Markets Association
Submission LPP 67
22 June 2007
Australian Fisheries Management Authority
Submission LPP 37
5 June 2007
Australian Government Department of Health and Ageing
Submission LPP 51
17 July 2007
Australian Government Department of Immigration and Citizenship
Submission LPP 73
Submission LPP 46
4 July 2007
12 June 2007
Australian Government Inspector of Transport Security
Submission LPP 7
Australian Government Office of the Privacy Commissioner
Submission LPP 71
29 June 2007
Australian Government Office of the Gene Technology Regulator
Submission LPP 68
25 June 2007
Australian Government Solicitor
Submission LPP 50
13 June 2007
Australian Institute of Company Directors
Submission LPP 43
8 June 2007
Australian Pesticides and Veterinary Medicines Authority
Submission LPP 45
6 June 2007
Australian Prudential Regulation Authority
Submission LPP 74
6 July 2007
Australian Quarantine and Inspection Service
Submission LPP 16
29 May 2007
Australian Securities and Investments Commission
Submission LPP 5
Submission LPP 70
29 March 2007
29 June 2007
Australian Taxation Office
Submission LPP 65
22 June 2007
Australian Transaction Reports and Analysis Centre
Submission LPP 31
4 June 2007
Australian Transport Safety Bureau
Submission LPP 34
28 May 2007
BHP Billiton Mitsubishi Alliance
Submission LPP 21
1 June 2007
Business Coalition for Tax Reform
Submission LPP 63
19 June 2007
Submission LPP 35
17 July 2007
S Cirillo and R Withana
Submission LPP 9
10 May 2007
P Clay and V Tekic
Submission LPP 11
30 April 2007
Submission LPP 64
14 June 2007
Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions
Submission LPP 61
12 June 2007
Commonwealth Ombudsman
Submission LPP 47
12 June 2007
Confidential
Submission LPP 48
12 June 2007
Confidential
Submission LPP 60
18 June 2007
Corporate Tax Association
Submission LPP 32
4 June 2007
CPA Australia Ltd
Submission LPP 44
14 June 2007
R Desiatnik
Submission LPP 24
1 June 2007
Submission LPP 4
27 March 2007
Federation of Community Legal Centres (Vic) Inc
Submission LPP 38
5 June 2007
Fitzroy Legal Service
Submission LPP 29
4 June 2007
Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority
Submission LPP 17
1 June 2007
Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission
Submission LPP 28
4 June 2007
Insolvency and Trustee Service Australia
Submission LPP 62
20 June 2007
Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security
Submission LPP 22
1 June 2007
Inspector-General of Taxation
Submission LPP 13
16 May 2007
Institute of Chartered Accountants
Submission LPP 1
Submission LPP 25
14 March 2007
4 June 2007
Submission LPP 57
31 May 2007
Law Council of Australia
Submission LPP 26
4 June 2007
Law Society of New South Wales
Submission LPP 40
1 June 2007
Medicare Australia
Submission LPP 06
10 April 2007
National Institute of Accountants
Submission LPP 59
20 June 2007
National Legal Aid
Submission LPP 52
13 June 2007
National Offshore Petroleum Safety Authority
Submission LPP 23
1 June 2007
Submission LPP 42
9 June 2007
New South Wales Bar Association
Submission LPP 41
5 June 2007
New South Wales Council for Civil Liberties Inc
Submission LPP 39
5 June 2007
NSW Young Lawyers
Submission LPP 49
12 June 2007
Submission LPP 36
5 June 2007
C O’Donnell
Submission LPP 14
16 May 2007
Office of the Australian Building and Construction Commissioner
Submission LPP 33
4 June 2007
QBE Insurance Group
Submission LPP 58
18 June 2007
T Smyth and C Strauch
Submission LPP 12
30 May 2007
Sussex Street Community Law Services Inc
Submission LPP 15
30 May 2007
Submission LPP 3
5 December 2006
Taxation Institute of Australia
Submission LPP 54
15 June 200
Submission LPP 72
19 July 2007
Submission LPP 76
7 September 2007
Submission LPP 18
3 June 2007
Victoria Legal Aid
Submission LPP 55
14 June 2007
Submission LPP 19
4 June 2007
Submission LPP 27
4 June 2007
Appendix 3. List of
Consultations
Academics, Law School, University of Western Australia
Australian Bankers’ Association
Australian Corporate Lawyers Association
Australian Corporate Lawyers Association
Australian Crime Commission
Australian Federal Police
Australian Government Attorney-General’s Department
Australian Quarantine and Inspection Service
Sydney-Canberra (by phone)
Australian Taxation Office
Professor R Baxt, Freehills
Justice P Bergin, Supreme Court of New South Wales
A Black, Mallesons Stephen Jaques
Sydney (by phone)
G Bloomfield, V Holmes, L Honcope, P Spender, College of Law, Australian
National University
A Brown, Law Society of New South Wales
The Hon T Cole
Justice G Eames, Supreme Court of Victoria
Federation of Community Legal Centres (Vic) Inc
G Healy and A Eastwood, Freehills
Institute of Chartered Accountants and representatives of Deloitte Touche
& Tohmatsu, Ernst Young, KPMG and PricewaterhouseCoopers
D Jackson QC, J Sheahan SC, and R Kelly
Law Council of Australia
Law Society of Western Australia
Litigation Law and Practice Committee, Law Society of New South Wales
Professor E Magner, School of Law, University of New England
Sydney-Armidale (by phone)
Chief Justice W Martin, Justice N Owen, Supreme Court of Western
Justice R McDougall, Supreme Court of New South Wales
B McKillop, M Kumar and F Beaupert, Faculty of Law, University of
Members of the Victorian Bar
Members of the Western Australian Bar
New South Wales Bar Association
New South Wales Public Defenders Office
Office of the Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions
Officers from Australian Security Intelligence Organisation and
Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security
C Parker, Law School, University of Melbourne
Regulatory lawyers of Clayton Utz
Appendix 4. List of
Abbreviations
Administrative Appeals Tribunal
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1975
American Bar Association
Office of the Australian Building and Construction Commissioner
Australian Bureau of Statistics
Australian Crime Commission
Australian Crime Commission Act 2002
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission
Australian Corporate Lawyers Association
Australian Commission for Law Enforcement Integrity
Australian Communications and Media Authority
Australian Customs Service
Australian Capital Territory
Alternative dispute resolution
Australian Energy Regulator
Australian Fisheries Management Authority
Australian Federal Police
Australian Federal Police Act
AFP Guidelines
General Guidelines Between the Australian Federal Police and the Law
Council of Australia as to the Execution of Search Warrants on
Premises, Law Societies and Like Institutions Where a Claim of Legal
Professional Privilege is Made
Australian Government Solicitor
Australian Intelligence Community
Australian Institute of Company Directors
Australian Law Reform Commission
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Principled Regulation: Federal Civil
and Administrative Penalties in Australia
, ALRC 95 (2002)
Australian Law Reform Commission, New South Wales Law Reform Commission and
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Uniform Evidence Law
AML/CTF Act
Anti-Money Laundering and Counter-Terrorism Financing Act 2006
Australian Maritime Safety Authority
Australian Maritime Safety Authority Act 1990
AM & S Europe
AM & S Europe Ltd v Commission of the European Communities
[1983] 1 QB 878
Australian Prudential Regulation Authority
Australian Prudential Regulation Authority Act 1998
Australian Pesticides and Veterinary Medicines Authority
Australian Quarantine Inspection Service
Administrative Review Council
Asbestos-Related Claims (Management of Commonwealth Liabilities) Act
Australian Securities Commission (now the Australian Securities and
Investments Commission)
Australian Securities Commission Act 1989
(Cth) (since
Australian Securities and Investments Commission
Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
Australian Taxation Office
ATO Guidelines
Guidelines agreed between the Commissioner of Taxation and the Law Council
of Australia in relation to the exercise of the ATO’s
access powers at
lawyers’ premises in circumstances where a claim of client legal privilege
Australian Taxation Office,
Access and Information Gathering
Australian Transport Safety Bureau
Australian Transaction Reports and Analysis Centre
Australian Wheat Board
AWB Royal Commission
Inquiry into AWB and the Oil-for-Food Programme
British American Tobacco Australasian Services
Building and Construction Industry Improvement Act 2005
Environment Protection Authority v Caltex Refining Co Pty Ltd
[1993] HCA 74
178 CLR 477
Carter v The Managing Partner, Northmore Hale Davy and Leake
183 CLR 121
Civil Aviation Safety Authority
Council of the Bars and Law Societies of the European Union
Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions
Chief Executive Officer
Companies Code
Companies (New South Wales) Code
Child Support Agency
Commonwealth Services Delivery Agency Act
The Daniels Corporation International Pty Ltd v Australian Competition
and Consumer Commission
[2002] HCA 49
(2002) 213 CLR 543
Dawson Review
Review of the Competition Provisions of the
Trade Practices Act
Department of Human Services
Department of Immigration and Citizenship
Department of Transport and Regional Services
Director of Public Prosecutions Act 1983
Defence Signals Directorate
Edward Report
The Professional Secret, Confidentiality and Legal Professional
Privilege in the Nine Member States of the European Community
Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999
ESI Guidelines
Guidelines to cover the resolution of client legal privilege claims in
respect of electronically-stored information
Esso Australia Resources Ltd v Commissioner of Taxation
[1999] HCA 67
European Union
Fish Report
Regulated Legal Professionals and Professional Privilege within the
European Union, the European Economic Area and Switzerland, and
Certain Other
European Jurisdictions
Financial Transaction Reports Act 1988
Genetically modified
Genetically modified organisms
Gene Technology Regulator
Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission
Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission Act 1986
Institute of Chartered Accountants in Australia
Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security
Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security Act 1986
Ingot Capital Investments Pty Ltd v Macquarie Equity Capital Markets Ltd
[2006] NSWSC 530
(2006) 67 NSWLR 91
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Client Legal Privilege and Federal
Investigatory Bodies,
IP 33 (2007)
Internal Revenue Service (US)
Inspector of Transport Security
Insolvency and Trustee Service Australia
Joint Statutory Committee on Corporations and Securities
Law Council
Law Council of Australia
Law Enforcement Integrity Commissioner Act 2006
Migration Agents Registration Authority
McNulty Memorandum
Principles of Federal Prosecution of Business Organizations
Medicare Australia
Morgan Grenfell
R (Morgan Grenfell & Co Ltd) v Special Commissioner of Income Tax
[2003] 1 AC 563
Memorandum of Understanding
National Offshore Petroleum Safety Authority
New South Wales
New South Wales Law Reform Commission
Office of the Gene Technology Regulator
Occupational
Health and Safety Act 1991
Office of the Inspector of Transport Safety
Office of the Privacy Commissioner
Office of Workplace Relations
Pratt Holdings Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Taxation
[2004] FCAFC 122
(2004) 207 ALR
Australian Federal Police v Propend Finance
(1997) 188 CLR 501
Public Transport Authority
PricewaterhouseCoopers
Pyneboard Pty Ltd v Trade Practices Commission
[1983] HCA 9
(1983) 152 CLR
Queensland Law Reform Commission
Royal Commission on Australia’s Security and Intelligence Agencies
(established by Letters Patent on 17 May 1983 and concluded
Standing Committee of Attorneys-General
Safety, Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1998
Therapeutic Goods Administration
Therapeutic Goods Act 1989
Trade Practices Act 1974
United Kingdom
United States
Victorian Law Reform Commission
Westpac Banking Corporation v 789TEN Pty Ltd
[2005] NSWCA 321
Workplace Relations Act 1996
Corporate Affairs Commission of New South Wales v Yuill
[1991] HCA 28
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (32.7 MB)
PDF format (2.07 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter