URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/lawreform/QLRCWP/2006/60.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:47:35
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Confidentiality in the Guardianship System: Public Justice, Private Lives a Discussion Paper [2006] QLRCWP 60
Chapter 1 - Introduction to the review
THE GUARDIANSHIP REVIEW
THE CONSULTATION PROCESS
CALL FOR SUBMISSIONS
Chapter 2 - Overview of the law in Queensland
INTRODUCTION
OVERVIEW OF GUARDIANSHIP IN QUEENSLAND
OVERVIEW OF THE CONFIDENTIALITY PROVISIONS
Chapter 3 - Guardianship and confidentiality
INTRODUCTION
CONCEPTS OF CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY
CONFIDENTIALITY IN THE GUARDIANSHIP SYSTEM
RELATIONSHIPS AND CONFIDENTIALITY
CALL FOR SUBMISSIONS
Chapter 4 - Tribunal hearings
THE LAW IN QUEENSLAND
LEGISLATION IN OTHER JURISDICTIONS
ISSUES FOR CONSIDERATION
BALANCING CONCEPTS
POSSIBLE LEGAL MODELS
CALL FOR SUBMISSIONS
Chapter 5 - Documents before the Tribunal
INTRODUCTION
THE LAW IN QUEENSLAND
LEGISLATION IN OTHER JURISDICTIONS
ISSUES FOR CONSIDERATION
BALANCING CONCEPTS
POSSIBLE LEGAL MODELS
CALL FOR SUBMISSIONS
Chapter 6 - Tribunal decisions and reasons
INTRODUCTION
THE LAW IN QUEENSLAND
LEGISLATION IN OTHER JURISDICTIONS
ISSUES FOR CONSIDERATION
BALANCING CONCEPTS
POSSIBLE LEGAL MODELS
CALL FOR SUBMISSIONS
Chapter 7 - Publication of Tribunal proceedings
THE LAW IN QUEENSLAND
LEGISLATION IN OTHER JURISDICTIONS
ISSUES FOR CONSIDERATION
BALANCING CONCEPTS
POSSIBLE LEGAL MODELS
CALL FOR SUBMISSIONS
Chapter 8 - The general duty of confidentiality
INTRODUCTION
THE LAW IN QUEENSLAND
LEGISLATION IN OTHER JURISDICTIONS
ISSUES FOR CONSIDERATION
BALANCING CONCEPTS
POSSIBLE LEGAL MODELS
CALL FOR SUBMISSIONS
Appendix 1 - Terms of reference
Appendix 2 - Membership of the Reference Group924
Appendix 3 - List of submissions and forums
Appendix 4 - Glossary
Appendix 5 - Register an interest
Confidentiality in the Guardianship System: Public Justice, Private Lives
Discussion Paper
Queensland Law Reform Commission
The short citation for this Discussion Paper is QLRC WP 60.
Published by the Queensland Law Reform Commission, July 2006.
ISBN: 0 7242 7751 X
COMMENTS AND SUBMISSIONS
You are invited to make comments and submissions on the issues and on the
preliminary views in this Discussion Paper.
Written comments and submissions should be sent to:
The Secretary
Queensland Law Reform Commission
PO Box 13312
GEORGE STREET POST SHOP QLD 4003
or by facsimile on: (07) 3247 9045
or by e-mail to: qlrcguardianship@justice.qld.gov.au
Oral submissions may be made by telephoning: (07) 3247 4544
Closing date: 31 October 2006
It would be helpful if comments and submissions address specific issues or
questions in the Discussion Paper.
CONFIDENTIALITY
The Commission may refer to or quote from submissions in future publications.
If you do not want your submission or any part of it
to be used in this way, or
if you do not want to be identified, please indicate this clearly.
The Commission also lists in an appendix the names of those people who have
made a submission. Please indicate clearly if you would
not like your name to
be included in this list.
Unless there is a clear indication from you that you wish your submission, or
part of it, to remain confidential, submissions may
be subject to release under
the provisions of the
Freedom of Information Act 1992
Any information you provide in a submission will only be used for the purpose
of the Commission’s review. It will not be disclosed
to others without
your consent.
COMMISSION MEMBERS
Chairperson:
The Hon Justice R G Atkinson
Full-time member:
Dr B P White
Part-time members:
Mr J K Bond SC
Dr H A Douglas
Mr B J Herd
Mr G W O’Grady
SECRETARIAT
Ms C E Riethmuller
Mrs S Pickett
Principal Legal Officer:
Mrs C A Green
Legal Officers:
Ms C T Arndell
Ms M T Collier
Ms P L Rogers
Administrative Officers:
Mrs J Manthey (part-time)
Address: 7th Floor, 50 Ann Street, Brisbane
Postal address: PO Box 13312, George Street Post Shop QLD 4003
Telephone: (07) 3247 4544
Facsimile: (07) 3247 9045
Email: LawReform.Commission@justice.qld.gov.au
Website: www.qlrc.qld.gov.au
Table of contents
Introduction
to the review
GUARDIANSHIP REVIEW
1.1 The Attorney-General has asked the Queensland Law Reform Commission to
review aspects of the
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
(Qld) and the
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(Qld). This legislation
regulates decision-making by and for adults with impaired decision-making
1.2 Under its terms of
the Commission is to
conduct the review in three stages. The first two stages relate to specific
aspects of the legislation and
the third stage examines the legislation more
1.3 In stage one of the review, the Commission is to consider the
confidentiality provisions of the legislation, and is directed by
its terms of
reference to have regard to the need to balance the protection of people’s
The Commission is to provide
a final report to the Attorney-General on the confidentiality provisions by
March 2007.
1.4 In the second stage of the review, the Commission is to consider the
legislation’s General Principles, and is directed again
by its terms of
reference to have regard to the need to protect the rights and interests of
adults with impaired decision-making
capacity. The Commission is to provide an
interim report on the General Principles to the Attorney-General by September
on this stage of the review will commence before the
Commission’s work on the confidentiality provisions is completed.
1.5 In the third stage of the review, the Commission is to consider the
guardianship legislation more broadly. In undertaking this
Attorney-General has asked the Commission to give specific consideration to:
(a) the law relating to decisions about personal, financial, health matters
and special health matters under the
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
including but not limited to:
• the General Principles;
• the scope of personal matters and financial matters and of the powers
of guardians and administrators;
• the scope of investigative and protective powers of bodies involved
in the administration of the legislation in relation to
allegations of abuse,
neglect and exploitation;
• the extent to which the current powers and functions of bodies
established under the legislation provide a comprehensive investigative
regulatory framework;
• the processes for review of decisions;
• consent to special medical research or experimental health care;
• the law relating to advance health directives and enduring powers of
attorney; and
• the scope of the decision-making power of statutory health attorneys;
• the ability of an adult with impaired capacity to object to receiving
medical treatment; and
• the law relating to the withholding and withdrawal of life-sustaining
(b) the confidentiality provisions of the
Guardianship and Administration
(c) whether there is a need to provide protection for people who make
complaints about the treatment of an adult with impaired capacity;
(d) whether there are circumstances in which the
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
should enable a parent of a person with impaired
capacity to make a binding direction appointing a person as a guardian for a
matter for the adult or as an administrator for a financial matter for
1.6 The Commission is to give the
Attorney-General its final report on stage three of its review by the end of
THIS DISCUSSION PAPER
Methodology
1.7 This Discussion Paper deals exclusively with stage one of the review on
the confidentiality provisions of the guardianship legislation.
It has been
produced to provide information to interested organisations and individuals on
the current law relating to confidentiality
and the issues the Commission
considers will need to be addressed in this stage of the review. It invites
readers to make submissions
so that these views can be considered when the
Commission formulates its recommendations.
1.8 In order to prepare this Discussion Paper, the Commission has obtained
preliminary information and advice from a number of people
and organisations
with experience in the operation of the legislation.
1.9 At the end of 2005, the Commission established an informal Reference
Group to provide expertise and advice on the review. While
the Commission
acknowledges that it is impossible to adequately represent all of the interests
in this area of law, the members of
the Reference Group represent a
cross-section of people who are affected by, administer, or are otherwise
interested in, Queensland’s
guardianship
legislation.
To date, the
Reference Group has met twice: at the beginning of the review, in December 2005,
to identify issues for the Commission
to consider, and prior to the finalisation
of this Discussion Paper, in June 2006. The Reference Group will continue to
meet throughout
all three stages of the Commission’s review.
1.10 The Commission was also pleased to receive 40 submissions from
interested individuals and organisations. Before releasing this
Paper, the Commission had not yet formally called for submissions and so was
encouraged by the level of interest in the
review. The Commission was also
invited to participate in two forums and received views from the people
attending about the guardianship
legislation.
1.11 Finally, as part of informing itself as to how the law is operating in
practice, the Commission requested from the Tribunal,
and was given, empirical
information about how and when confidentiality orders are made. The information
provided covered an eleven
month period from 1 July 2005 to 26 May 2006 and is
referred to where relevant throughout the Discussion
1.12 The Commission is grateful for the assistance provided by these
individuals and organisations and appreciates their valuable
contribution to the
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
(Qld) and the
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
(Qld) contain provisions which protect certain
information as confidential. These provisions deal both with the
confidentiality
of information generally and with the confidentiality of
information generated around proceedings of the Tribunal by:
• imposing a duty on a person who gains confidential information
through their involvement in the administration of the legislation
prohibiting
them from making a record of, or intentionally or recklessly disclosing, that
information;
• prohibiting the publication of information about Tribunal proceedings
and the disclosure of the identity of a person involved
in a Tribunal
proceeding; and
• conferring power on the Guardianship and Administration Tribunal to
make confidentiality orders in a hearing in relation to
the privacy of hearings
and in relation to the confidentiality of documents and information before the
Tribunal, and of the Tribunal’s
decision and reasons.
1.14 The confidentiality provisions in the legislation are brief but operate
in a variety of contexts, each of which is separately
dealt with in the
Discussion Paper.
1.15 Chapter 2 of the Discussion Paper provides a general introduction to the
guardianship system and the relevant confidentiality
provisions that are the
subject of this Discussion Paper.
1.16 Chapter 3 discusses the nature of privacy and confidentiality generally
and considers three important concepts that inform choices
area: the principle of open justice, the requirements of procedural fairness,
and the nature of the guardianship
1.17 Chapters 4 to 7 deal with confidentiality in relation to Tribunal
proceedings. Chapter 4 considers the provisions that permit
the Tribunal to
hold hearings in private or to the exclusion of particular people. Chapter 5
discusses the extent to which the Tribunal
can displace a person’s
statutory right to inspect documents before the Tribunal for a proceeding.
Chapter 6 considers the
Tribunal’s ability to displace a person’s
statutory right to obtain a copy of the Tribunal’s decision and any
for that decision. Chapter 7 discusses the general prohibition against
reporting of Tribunal proceedings.
1.18 Finally, Chapter 8 of the Discussion Paper examines the general duty of
confidentiality imposed on those people who are involved
in the administration
of the guardianship legislation.
1.19 In examining the scope of Queensland’s confidentiality provisions,
the Commission has sought to provide information about
similar provisions that
operate in the guardianship legislation in other Australian States and
Territories. The Discussion Paper
also refers to comparative provisions in the
guardianship legislation of jurisdictions outside Australia where those
provisions are
innovative, unique or may represent best practice.
1.20 In Chapters 4 to 8, hypothetical case studies have been included. These
case studies do not reflect any settled views or opinions
of the Commission.
Rather, their purpose is to help readers understand how the confidentiality
provisions might operate in practice
and some of the challenges that the issues
raise. The Commission is aware that these case studies do not reflect the
majority of
cases that arise in the guardianship system. However, hypothetical
scenarios involving some level of conflict or potential misconduct
most usefully
highlight the tensions generated by the issue of confidentiality.
1.21 Chapters 4 to 8 also contain expressions of the Commission’s
preliminary views on some of the issues which this Discussion
Paper has raised.
This has not been done to seek to persuade or influence people who are reading
this paper. Rather, its purpose,
as part of a transparent process, is to inform
readers what the Commission is currently thinking. It is also intended to
readers in formulating their own views. Of course, the
Commission’s views are only preliminary and may change during our
consultation
process and further research.
1.22 Finally, unless otherwise specified, the law is stated as at 24 July
to read this Discussion Paper
1.23 The Commission realises that for various reasons some people may not
wish to read this Discussion Paper in its
However, the Commission
recommends that readers have particular regard to Chapters 2 and 3 as they
introduce readers to the guardianship
system, the confidentiality provisions and
the principles that underpin the discussion that follows in subsequent chapters.
should also be had to Chapter 4 as it contains some generic issues that
are relevant to subsequent chapters.
1.24 The substantive analysis of the confidentiality provisions is contained
in Chapters 4 to 8. Those chapters deal with discrete
issues and can be read
independently according to the reader’s interest. Each of those chapters
contains questions on which
the Commission is interested in receiving
submissions.
Terminology
1.25 Throughout this Discussion Paper, the following terminology has been
• a reference to ‘the adult’ means the adult with impaired
decision-making capacity;
• the ‘guardianship legislation’ is used to refer to both
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
(Qld) and the
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
• the term ‘Tribunal’ is used to refer to the Guardianship
and Administration Tribunal in Queensland and, unless
otherwise expressed, to
those bodies in other jurisdictions exercising a judicial or quasi-judicial
function under the relevant guardianship
legislation.
Some jurisdictions have Boards (South Australia and Tasmania) whilst others
rely on a Court (Northern Territory). Western Australia
and Victoria do not
have specialised guardianship tribunals and instead each has a generalist
tribunal with jurisdiction for a range
of matters including guardianship (the
State Administrative Tribunal and the Victorian Civil and Administrative
Tribunal respectively).
• The term ‘Adult Guardian’ is used in this Discussion
Paper to refer to Queensland’s Adult Guardian and,
unless otherwise
expressed, the equivalent positions in other Australian
In Victoria,
Western Australia, South Australia and the Australian Capital Territory, the
equivalent of the Adult Guardian is the
Public Advocate. New South Wales,
Tasmania and the Northern Territory have a Public Guardian.
1.26 Some of the other terms used in this Discussion Paper are explained in
the Glossary, which is located in Appendix 4.
CONSULTATION PROCESS
1.27 The Commission undertakes wide community consultation before making
recommendations to the Attorney-General as to how the law
might be improved.
The consultation process in this review will help the Commission in:
• identifying all the key issues for the Commission to consider;
• finding out how the law works in practice, including what is causing
• generating suggestions for how the law could be improved; and
• refining, developing and testing proposed recommendations.
1.28 The Commission is aware of the significant community interest in this
review and is particularly keen to ensure that it hears
from people affected on
a daily basis by the guardianship legislation. The Commission has engaged Ms
Donna McDonald to assist with
this consultation and is grateful for her
assistance and advice on the review to date.
Consultation
on this Discussion Paper
1.29 The Commission will be consulting on this Discussion Paper until the end
of October 2006.
1.30 In order to facilitate wide and inclusive consultation, this Discussion
Paper is supplemented by:
• a shorter and independent guide to the Discussion Paper called
Public Justice, Private Lives: A Companion Paper
• two pamphlets dealing with the key issues in the review called
Confidentiality: Key questions for people who may need help with
decision-making
Confidentiality: Key questions for families, friends
and advocates
• an interactive CD-ROM for people who prefer or need to see and/or
listen to new information called
Public Justice, Private Lives: A CD-ROM
1.31 Copies of these publications are available on the Commission’s
guardianship website.
Readers can
also request a copy of any of these publications by contacting the Commission.
1.32 The Commission will hold a number of public forums in different parts of
the State to promote widespread community participation
in its review. The
Commission will also be holding several focus group discussions with different
groups of people with particular
interests and backgrounds. The Commission also
invites people to make a written submission or to contact the Commission in
or by telephone to share their views on the issues raised in this
Discussion Paper.
1.33 Details of the Commission’s public consultation process, including
information about dates, venues and times for public
forums, will be posted on
the Commission’s guardianship website, and advertised widely.
FOR SUBMISSIONS
1.34 The Commission invites submissions on stage one of the review.
Submissions can relate to issues raised by this Discussion Paper
generally or to
the specific questions posed at the end of each chapter.
1.35 Details on how to make a submission are set out in the beginning of this
Discussion Paper.
The closing date
for submissions is 31 October 2006.
1.36 These submissions will be taken into consideration when the Commission
is formulating its recommendations. At the conclusion
of the review, the
Commission will publish its recommendations in its final report which will be
presented to the Attorney-General
for tabling in Parliament.
of the law in Queensland
INTRODUCTION
2.1 Before examining the law in detail in the chapters that follow, this
chapter provides an overview of two important issues: Queensland’s
of guardianship, and the guardianship legislation’s confidentiality
provisions.
2.2 It begins with an overview of the guardianship system in Queensland.
Although the confidentiality provisions are the subject
of this Discussion
Paper, it is important to consider the wider context and legislative framework
in which these provisions operate.
OF GUARDIANSHIP IN QUEENSLAND
2.3 Queensland’s guardianship legislation is comprised of the
of Attorney Act 1998
(Qld) and the
Guardianship and Administration Act
(Qld). It provides a framework for decision-making by and for adults
with impaired decision-making capacity.
2.4 The guardianship legislation is concerned with the following questions,
which will be considered in turn:
• When is an adult unable to make their own decisions for a matter?
• What decisions can be made for an adult?
• Who can make substitute decisions for an
• How are substitute decisions for an adult to be made?
• What agencies are involved in the guardianship system?
is an adult unable to make their own decisions for a matter?
2.5 One of the ordinary incidents of being an adult (a person 18 years or
is the ability to make
your own decisions. An adult may, however, be unable to make their own
decisions if they have impaired decision-making
capacity. Capacity has been
described as ‘a gatekeeper concept’ in that it is ‘a mechanism
by which individuals
retain or lose authority over and responsibility for
decisions that affect their
Impaired capacity
may result from an intellectual disability, dementia, acquired brain injury,
mental illness, or an inability to
communicate, for example, when a person is in
2.6 In Queensland, an adult will have
‘capacity’ for a matter if they are capable
• understanding the nature and effect of decisions about the
• freely and voluntarily making decisions about the matter; and
• communicating the decisions in some way.
2.7 An adult who does not satisfy these criteria in relation to a matter is
described as having ‘impaired
for that matter.
Under Queensland’s guardianship legislation, the Guardianship and
Administration Tribunal has power to make
a declaration about an adult’s
on the basis of medical
and other evidence.
2.8 There is a presumption, however, that every adult has capacity unless it
is otherwise established.
legislative framework also promotes the right of an adult to make all decisions
to the extent that they are
This includes the
right to make decisions with which others may not
2.9 Impaired capacity is specific to individual decisions about matters. An
adult may have capacity to make decisions about some
matters but not
For example, an adult
with mild dementia may not have sufficient capacity to execute a will but may be
fully capable of making day-to-day
decisions about their accommodation or
decisions can be made for an adult?
2.10 An adult with impaired capacity for a matter may require a substituted
decision-maker for decisions about that matter. The guardianship
legislation
makes provision for a wide range of personal and financial decisions to be made
for an adult with impaired capacity.
The legislation distinguishes between
decisions concerning ‘financial matters’ which involve
administration
and those concerning ‘personal
matters’ which involve
guardianship
. It also differentiates
between ‘health matters’, ‘special health matters’, and
‘special personal
matters’. Each of these matters is discussed in
2.11 All matters relating to an adult’s financial or property matters
are referred to in the guardianship legislation as ‘financial
These include
buying and selling property (including land); paying the adult’s expenses,
rates, insurance, taxes and debts;
conducting a trade or business on the behalf
of the adult; making financial investments; performing the adult’s
and all legal matters relating to the adult’s financial or
property matters.
2.12 All matters (other than ‘special personal matters’ and
‘special health matters’) relating to an adult’s
welfare are referred to as ‘personal
These include
where and with whom the adult lives; the adult’s health care; day-to-day
issues such as diet and dress; the
adult’s employment, education and
training; and legal matters that do not relate to the adult’s financial or
2.13 A type of personal matter, ‘health matters’ concern the
‘health care, other than special health care, of the
care’ is defined in the guardianship legislation
… care or treatment of, or a service or a procedure for, the
(a) to diagnose, maintain, or treat the adult’s physical or mental
condition; and
(b) carried out by, or under the direction or supervision of, a health
health matters
2.14 ‘Special health matters’ are those relating to
‘special health care’. They involve decisions about very
significant health issues. The guardianship legislation defines ‘special
health care’ as:
(a) removal of tissue from the adult while alive for donation to someone
(b) sterilisation of the adult;
(c) termination of a pregnancy of the adult;
(d) participation by the adult in special medical research or experimental
health care;
(e) electroconvulsive therapy or psychosurgery for the adult;
(f) prescribed special health care of the adult.
personal matters
2.15 ‘Special personal matters’ are regarded as being of such an
intimate nature that it would be inappropriate for another
to make such a
decision on behalf of an adult under the guardianship
legislation.
These matters
include voting; consenting to marriage; and making or revoking a
a power of attorney, an
enduring power of attorney, or an advance health
can make substitute decisions for an adult?
2.16 The guardianship legislation provides for substitute decisions for an
adult to be made by several types of decision-makers, depending
on the matter
involved. The legislation
recognises:
• informal decision-makers;
• attorneys appointed in advance by the adult under an enduring
• statutory health attorneys;
• guardians and administrators appointed by the Tribunal; and
• in some limited circumstances, the Tribunal.
2.17 The adult themselves may also be a decision-maker, by completing an
advance health directive before they lose the requisite capacity
for a matter.
In such a document, the adult may give directions about future health matters,
including ‘special health
An adult may
direct, for example, that in particular circumstances, a life-sustaining measure
be withheld or withdrawn.
decision-makers
2.18 The guardianship legislation recognises that substitute decisions for an
adult can be made informally by the adult’s ‘existing
that is, the
adult’s family and close friends, and other people who the Tribunal
decides provide support to the
2.19 If there is doubt about the appropriateness of a decision, the Tribunal
may ratify or approve informal
2.20 However, sometimes situations can arise where the decision-making
process for an adult needs to be formalised. This might be
• the person wishing to make a decision on behalf of the adult does not
have the necessary authority to do so;
• the authority of the person making the decision is disputed;
• there is no appropriate person to make the decision;
• the decision or decisions being made are considered inappropriate;
• a conflict occurs over the decision-making process.
2.21 The remainder of the decision-makers considered in this chapter are part
of the formal decision-making processes established
by the guardianship
legislation.
appointed in advance by the adult
2.22 An adult may formalise future substitute decision-making for themselves
by appointing a person (an attorney) to make particular
decisions on their
behalf in the event they subsequently lose capacity. There are two instruments
that an adult (the principal)
may use to appoint an attorney: an enduring power
of attorney and an advance health
An adult may only
make such a document if they have sufficient
2.23 In an enduring power of attorney, a principal can assign to their
nominated attorney or attorneys decision-making power for some
or all financial
matters and/or personal matters, including health
A principal cannot, however, give power to an attorney for ‘special health
matters’ or ‘special personal
2.24 In an advance health directive, a principal can assign decision-making
power to an attorney or attorneys for some or all health
matters, other than for
‘special health
2.25 An attorney can exercise his or her assigned power with respect to
personal matters only during a period when the principal no
longer has capacity
for the particular matter.
power for financial matters becomes exercisable either at the time or in the
circumstance the principal nominates in the document,
or otherwise, once the
enduring power of attorney is
Power for financial
matters is also exercisable at any time the principal has impaired
2.26 The legislation imposes a range of obligations on attorneys as to how
they exercise their power. For example, an attorney must
act honestly and
and must comply with
the General Principles set out in the legislation and, for decisions about
health matters, the Health Care
Attorneys for
financial matters are also required, for example, to avoid conflict
transactions
and to keep their
property separate from that of the
An attorney is also
regarded as an agent of their principal and so would be subject to the general
law of agency to the extent that
it is not inconsistent with the guardianship
legislation.
health attorneys
2.27 A statutory health attorney is a person in a particular relationship
with the adult who is declared by the legislation to be
a person with authority
to make decisions about health matters for an adult. The legislation lists the
relationships in a hierarchical
order. The first of the following who is
‘readily available and culturally appropriate’ to make the decision
an adult’s statutory health
• the adult’s
if the relationship is
close and continuing;
• a person 18 years or older who is caring for the adult but who is not
a paid carer
of the adult;
• a close friend or relation of the adult 18 years or older and who is
not a paid carer
of the adult.
2.28 If no-one from that list is readily available and culturally
appropriate, the Adult Guardian becomes the adult’s statutory
2.29 A statutory health attorney is authorised by the legislation to make any
decision about an adult’s health matter that the
adult could have made if
he or she had capacity for the
but only during a period
when the adult has impaired capacity for the
A statutory health
attorney must comply with the General Principles and the Health Care Principle
set out in the legislation when
exercising their
and administrators appointed by the Tribunal
2.30 In some circumstances, the Tribunal has power to appoint formal
substitute decision-makers for particular matters for an
A guardian can be
appointed for a personal matter, including a health matter (but not
‘special health
administrator can be appointed for a financial matter. The Tribunal may make
such an appointment, on terms it considers appropriate,
(a) the adult has impaired capacity for the matter; and
(b) there is a need for a decision in relation to the matter or the adult is
likely to do something in relation to the matter that
involves, or is likely to
involve, unreasonable risk to the adult’s health, welfare or property;
(c) without an appointment—
(i) the adult’s needs will not be adequately met; or
(ii) the adult’s interests will not be adequately protected.
2.31 A person may only be appointed as a guardian or administrator for an
adult if they are 18 years or older, they are not a paid
carer or health
provider for the adult, and the Tribunal considers them appropriate for
appointment.
2.32 The Tribunal is required by the guardianship legislation to take into
account several considerations in deciding whether a person
is appropriate for
appointment.
• the extent to which the adult’s and the person’s
interests are likely to conflict;
• whether the adult and the person are compatible including, for
example, whether the person’s communication skills and
cultural or social
experience is appropriate;
• whether the person would be available and accessible to the adult;
• the person’s appropriateness and competence to perform the
functions and exercise the powers conferred by an appointment
2.33 A guardian or administrator is conferred with the authority to do
anything in relation to a personal or financial matter for
which they are
appointed that the adult could have done if they had capacity for that matter
(in accordance with the terms of
appointment).
2.34 Given the breadth of this power, the guardianship legislation imposes
strict requirements on the exercise of authority by a guardian
or administrator.
Such a person must exercise his or her power honestly and
diligently,
must apply the
General Principles contained in the legislation (and the Health Care Principle
if appropriate),
is subject to
regular review,
and, if they are
an administrator, must submit a management
and avoid conflict
transactions.
requirements are reflective of those imposed in respect of the common law of
2.35 The guardianship legislation also empowers
the Tribunal to make substitute decisions for an adult in relation to some types
‘special health
If a special
health matter for an adult is not dealt with by a direction given by the adult
in an advance health directive, the
Tribunal has power to consent to special
health care for an adult, other than electroconvulsive therapy or
psychosurgery.
2.36 The Tribunal’s authority to give consent is limited by several
specific requirements imposed by the legislation. The Tribunal
satisfied, for example, that the special health care involves minimal risk to
the adult and is the only reasonably available
In deciding whether to give consent, the Tribunal
must also apply the General Principles and the Health Care Principle contained
in the legislation.
2.37 The Tribunal may also consent to the withholding or withdrawal of a
life-sustaining measure for an adult with impaired capacity
(if the matter is
not dealt with by a direction given in an advance health
sterilisation of a child with an
impairment.
are substitute decisions for an adult to be made?
2.38 Queensland’s guardianship legislation
contains eleven General Principles, which apply to all decisions for adults, and
an additional Health Care Principle which applies only in relation to decisions
2.39 The General Principles and the Health Care Principle must be applied by
any person or entity performing a function or exercising
a power under the
guardianship legislation in relation to a matter for an
This includes the making
of a decision for an adult by the potential decision-makers already discussed.
The guardianship legislation
also makes specific provision for the application
of these principles to the
and an adult’s
guardian or administrator.
2.40 The legislation also states that the ‘community is encouraged to
apply and promote the general
principles’.
2.41 The General Principles
• the presumption that an adult has capacity to make decisions;
• an adult’s right to basic human rights and the importance of
empowering an adult to exercise those rights;
• an adult’s right to respect for his or her human worth and
• an adult’s right to be a valued member of society and the
importance of encouraging an adult to perform valued social
• the importance of encouraging an adult to participate in community
• the importance of encouraging an adult to become as self-reliant as
• an adult’s right to participate in decision-making as far as
possible and the importance of preserving wherever possible
the adult’s
right to make his or her own decisions;
• the principle of substituted judgment must be used, so that where it
is possible to ascertain from previous actions what an
adult’s views or
wishes would be, those views and wishes are to be taken into account;
• any power under the legislation must be exercised in the way least
restrictive of the adult’s rights;
• the importance of maintaining an adult’s existing supportive
relationships;
• the importance of maintaining the adult’s cultural, linguistic
and religious environment; and
• an adult’s right to confidentiality of information about
2.42 The Health Care Principle provides that power for a health or special
health matter should be exercised in the way least restrictive
adult’s rights
only if the exercise of
• is necessary and appropriate to maintain or promote the adult’s
health or wellbeing; or
• is, in all the circumstances, in the adult’s best interests.
2.43 In deciding whether the exercise of a power
is appropriate, the adult’s views and wishes and information given by the
health provider are to be taken into
In addition, in
deciding whether to consent to special health care, the Tribunal, which is the
only potential decision-maker for
such matters, must take into account the views
of the adult’s guardian, attorney or statutory health
agencies are involved in the guardianship system?
2.44 Queensland’s guardianship legislation confers responsibilities on
several agencies and officials. These include:
• the Tribunal;
• the Adult Guardian;
• the Public Advocate;
• community visitors; and
• the Public Trustee.
2.45 The Guardianship and Administration Tribunal is a quasi-judicial body
established by the
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
The Tribunal has
exclusive jurisdiction for the appointment of guardians and administrators for
subject to the exercise
of the Tribunal’s powers by the Supreme or District Court to make, change,
or revoke the appointment
of a guardian or administrator in particular civil
proceedings.
The Tribunal also
has concurrent jurisdiction with the Supreme Court for matters relating to
enduring documents and attorneys appointed
under enduring
2.46 The Tribunal’s functions
• making declarations about an adult’s capacity for a matter;
• hearing applications for the appointment of guardians and
administrators and appointing, where necessary, guardians and administrators
• making declarations, orders or recommendations, or giving directions
or advice in relation to guardians, administrators, attorneys,
and enduring
• ratifying or approving an exercise of power by an informal
decision-maker for an adult; and
• giving consent to some types of special health care for an adult, to
the withholding or withdrawal of life-sustaining measures,
sterilisation of a child with an
impairment.
2.47 At a hearing, the Tribunal is generally constituted by three members,
unless the President considers it appropriate that a matter
be heard by one or
two members.
To the extent that
it is practicable,
the Tribunal
that is hearing a matter is also to be constituted by either the President, a
Deputy President or a legal
a professional
and a personal
experience member,
although the
composition of the Tribunal will also depend on the nature of the
2.48 Proceedings before the Tribunal are to be conducted as simply and
quickly as practicable.
Tribunal may inform itself on a matter in any way it considers
appropriate,
but it must observe
the rules of procedural
2.49 Tribunal orders are enforceable as if they were orders of a
A person may appeal
against a Tribunal decision to the Supreme
Adult Guardian
2.50 The Adult Guardian is an independent statutory official whose position
is established under the
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
to protect the rights and interests of adults with impaired
2.51 The Adult Guardian’s functions
• protecting adults from neglect, exploitation, or
• conducting investigations of complaints of such allegations, and
investigations into the actions of an adult’s substitute
decision-maker;
• mediating and conciliating disputes between an adult’s
substitute decision-maker and others, such as health providers;
• acting as an attorney for an adult under an enduring document or as
an adult’s statutory health attorney;
• acting as an adult’s guardian if appointed by the Tribunal;
• consenting to the forensic examination of an
• seeking government or organisational assistance for an adult; and
• undertaking educative, advisory, and research activities on the
operation of the guardianship legislation.
2.52 The Adult Guardian is also conferred with significant protective powers
in relation to adults. For example, the Adult Guardian
• temporarily suspend an attorney’s powers if there are
reasonable grounds to suspect that the attorney is not
• apply to the courts to claim and recover possession of property that
the Adult Guardian considers has wrongfully been held
• apply to the Tribunal for a warrant to remove an adult from a place
if there are reasonable grounds to suspect the adult is
at immediate risk of
harm due to neglect, exploitation, or
Public Advocate
2.53 The Public Advocate is an independent statutory official whose position
is established under the
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
to promote and protect the rights of
2.54 The Public Advocate’s other functions
• promoting the protection of adults from neglect, exploitation, or
• encouraging the development of programs that foster and maximise
adults’ autonomy;
• promoting service and facility provision for adults; and
• monitoring and reviewing service and facility delivery to adults.
2.55 Unlike the Adult Guardian, the Public Advocate’s functions are
aimed at systemic advocacy rather than advocacy on behalf
of individual adults.
The Public Advocate seeks to identify issues in the systems that impact on
adults, and works towards influencing
appropriate change. Those systems include
policy, service and legislative systems, across the government and
non-government sectors.
Systemic advocacy may be conducted through a variety of
advocacy strategies including discussions, correspondence, committee
representation,
submissions, discussion and issues papers, forums and
conferences.
2.56 The Public Advocate may do all things necessary and convenient for the
performance of its functions
and may, with leave, intervene in a proceeding involving the protection of the
rights or interests of adults in a court, tribunal,
or official
2.57 Community visitors are appointed by the Queensland Government under the
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(Qld) to safeguard the interests
of ‘consumers’ by regularly visiting ‘visitable
2.58 A ‘consumer’ means any person who lives or receives services
at an authorised mental health service; or an adult
with impaired capacity for a
matter or with a mental or intellectual impairment and who lives or receives
services at a visitable
2.59 A ‘visitable site’ means a place where a consumer lives and
receives services and is prescribed to be such a site
regulation.
This includes
residences and services funded by Disability Services Queensland or the
Department of Health, some hostels and authorised
mental health inpatient
2.60 Community visitors’ functions
• inquiring into and reporting on a range of matters about the
visitable sites such as the adequacy of services for the assessment,
and support of adults; the appropriateness of services for adults’
accommodation, health and wellbeing; the extent
to which adults receive services
in the way that is least restrictive of their rights; and the adequacy of
information given to adults
• inquiring into and seeking to resolve complaints, and referring
complaints to other entities for further investigation or
resolution.
2.61 Community visitors have power to do all things necessary or convenient
in the performance of these
Public Trustee
2.62 The Public Trustee of Queensland is a Queensland Government corporation
established under the
Public Trustee Act 1978
It may be appointed
by the Tribunal as an adult’s
administrator.
If appointed
as an administrator, the Public Trustee has the same obligations as any other
administrator appointed under the guardianship
legislation.
OF THE CONFIDENTIALITY PROVISIONS
Introduction
2.63 There are three main confidentiality provisions contained in
Queensland’s guardianship legislation:
section 249
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(Qld) and its mirror provision in
Powers of Attorney Act
section 112
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
section 109
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
2.64 These provisions deal with the confidentiality of information within the
guardianship system generally, and with the confidentiality
of information
generated by proceedings of the Tribunal.
Section 249
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
(Qld)) impose a
duty on people who receive confidential information through their
involvement in the guardianship system. There are exceptions to
this duty, but
it is the widest of the confidentiality provisions in terms of to whom and to
which information it applies.
Section 112
also imposes a
prohibition, but this time
more narrowly in relation only to information that is disclosed during Tribunal
proceedings. It prohibits
the publication of what occurs during proceedings
those proceedings.
Section 109
also applies only to Tribunal proceedings but its operation
case-by-case
basis with the Tribunal being able to make
confidentiality orders, for example, in relation to a particular hearing or a
document at a hearing. It also differs from
section 112
instead of applying only to the publication of information
Tribunal proceedings,
section 109
may also regulate the conduct of proceedings
by imposing confidentiality on those participating in
proceedings.
2.68 As part of facilitating the flow of information to the Commission for
its consultation process, some minor amendments were made
sections 112
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(Qld) and to
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
These amendments will
not be treated as part of the confidentiality provisions for the purposes of
this Discussion Paper and so
will not be considered further.
249: the general duty of confidentiality
2.69 The duty imposed by section 249 is the widest and most general of the
confidentiality provisions: it prohibits any person who
‘confidential information’ through their involvement in the
administration of the legislation from recording or
disclosing that
information.
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
(Qld) mirrors that duty in relation to
2.70 Together, these provisions apply to such people
• Tribunal members and staff;
• the Adult Guardian and staff;
• the Public Advocate and staff;
• guardians, administrators, and attorneys; and
• community visitors.
2.71 The duty relates to confidential information, including
‘information about a person’s
It does not
apply to information that has already been publicly disclosed (unless further
disclosure is prohibited by law) or to
information that identifies the person to
whom the information
2.72 The provisions also contain a number of exceptions to the duty
including, for example:
• where the person is acting under the
Guardianship and
Administration Act
(Qld) or is discharging a function under
another law;
• where the person to whom the information relates has authorised the
disclosure; or
• where the Tribunal authorises the disclosure in the public interest
because a person’s life or physical safety might
otherwise be endangered.
Section 250
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
also contains an exception to the duty. It relates to the disclosure by the
Adult Guardian of information related to ongoing
investigations. It confers a
wide discretion on the Adult Guardian to disclose information, despite the duty,
if it considers it
is ‘necessary and reasonable in the public
interest’ and if the disclosure is not likely to prejudice the
investigation.
Section 249
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
249 Preservation of confidentiality
(1) If a person gains confidential information because of the person’s
involvement in this Act’s administration, the
person must not make a
record of the information or intentionally or recklessly disclose the
information to anyone other than under
subsection (3).
Maximum penalty—100 penalty units.
(2) A person gains information through involvement in this Act’s
administration if the person gains the information because
of being, or an
opportunity given by being—
(a) the president, a deputy president or another tribunal member; or
(b) the registrar, a member of the tribunal staff or a tribunal expert;
(c) the adult guardian or a member of the adult guardian’s staff;
(d) a professional consulted or employed by the adult guardian or an adult
guardian’s delegate for an investigation; or
(e) the public advocate or a member of the public advocate’s staff;
(f) a guardian or administrator; or
(g) a community visitor
(3) A person may make a record of confidential information, or disclose it
to someone else—
(a) for this Act; or
(b) to discharge a function under another law; or
(c) for a proceeding in a court or relevant tribunal; or
(d) if authorised under a regulation or another law; or
(e) if authorised by the person to whom the information relates; or
(f) if authorised by the tribunal in the public interest because a
person’s life or physical safety could otherwise reasonably
be expected to
be endangered;
(4) In this section—
confidential information
includes information about a
person’s affairs but does not include—
(a) information already publicly disclosed unless further disclosure of the
information is prohibited by law; or
(b) statistical or other information that could not reasonably be expected
to result in the identification of the person to whom
the information relates.
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
(Qld) provides:
74 Preservation of confidentiality
(1) If a person gains confidential information because of being, or an
opportunity given by being, an attorney …, the person
must not make a
record of the information or intentionally or recklessly disclose the
information to anyone other than under subsection
Maximum penalty—200 penalty units.
(2) A person may make a record of confidential information, or disclose it
to someone else—
(a) to discharge a function under this Act or another law; or
(b) for a proceeding in a court or relevant tribunal; or
(c) if authorised under a regulation or another law; or
(d) if authorised by the person to whom the information relates; or
(e) if authorised by the court in the public interest because a
person’s life or physical safety could otherwise reasonably
be expected to
be endangered;
(3) This section also applies to a statutory health attorney.
(4) In this section—
confidential information
includes information about a
person’s affairs but does not include—
(a) information already publicly disclosed unless further disclosure of the
information is prohibited by law; or
(b) statistical or other information that could not reasonably be expected
to result in the identification of the person to whom
the information relates.
2.76 These provisions raise a number of issues for consideration including
what type of information should be protected, what type
of conduct should be
prohibited, to whom the duty should apply, and whether there should be any
exceptions to that duty. Sections
249 and 74 are examined in detail in Chapter
112: a prohibition specific to Tribunal proceedings
2.77 The prohibition in
section 112
Guardianship and Administration
(Qld) is more specific than that contained in
section 249
it applies only to Tribunal proceedings.
Section 112
prohibits any person from
publishing information about a Tribunal proceeding or disclosing the identity of
a person involved in a
proceeding.
However, while
this prohibition relates only to Tribunal proceedings, it is wider in some
respects as it applies to everyone and
not just those people involved in the
administration of the guardianship
legislation.
2.78 The prohibition relates to ‘information about a proceeding’
which includes:
• information given before the Tribunal;
• matters contained in documents filed with, or received by, the
Tribunal; and
• decisions and reasons of the Tribunal.
2.79 It also applies to information that identifies a person ‘involved
in a proceeding’. Such people
• a person who makes an application to the Tribunal;
• a person about whom an application is made;
• the active parties to a
proceeding;
• a person who gives information or documents to a person performing a
function under the legislation for the proceeding; and
• a person who is a witness at a Tribunal hearing of the
proceeding.
section 112
prohibition does not apply, however, if the person has a
reasonable excuse for making the publication or
disclosure.
The Tribunal may
also permit the publication of information about a proceeding or the disclosure
of the identity of a person involved
in a proceeding if it is satisfied that
doing so is in the public
Section 112
112 Publication about proceeding or disclosure of identity
(1) If the tribunal is satisfied publication of information about a
proceeding is in the public interest, the tribunal may, by order,
publication of the information.
(2) If the tribunal is satisfied publication of the identity of a person
involved in a proceeding is in the public interest, the
tribunal may, by order,
permit disclosure of the person’s identity.
(3) A person must not, without reasonable excuse, publish information about
a proceeding, or disclose the identity of a person involved
in a proceeding,
unless the tribunal has, by order, permitted the publication or disclosure.
Maximum penalty—200 penalty units.
(4) In this section—
information
, about a proceeding, includes—
(a) information given before the tribunal; and
(b) matters contained in documents filed with, or received by, the tribunal;
(c) the tribunal’s decision or reasons.
, in a proceeding, includes—
(a) making an application in the proceeding to the tribunal; and
(b) being a person about whom an application is made in a proceeding;
(c) being an active party for the proceeding; and
(d) giving information or documents to a person who is performing a function
under this Act relevant to the proceeding; and
(e) appearing as a witness at the hearing of the proceeding.
2.82 This provision raises a number of issues for consideration including
whether publication of Tribunal proceedings should be prohibited,
people’s identities should be protected, whether the Tribunal should be
able to permit publication in some circumstances,
and whether there should be
any exceptions to the prohibition. Section 112 is examined in detail in Chapter
109: case-by-case confidentiality orders
Section 109
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(Qld), like
section 112
, operates specifically in relation to Tribunal
proceedings. There are, however, two important differences. The first is that
section 112
is a blanket prohibition on publishing information about proceedings
section 109
grants the Tribunal power to make confidentiality orders on
a case-by-case basis.
2.84 The second major difference is that instead of applying only to the
publication of information
Tribunal proceedings,
section 109
permits the imposition of confidentiality in relation to those participating in
the proceedings and so may also regulate the conduct
of proceedings
Section 109(1)
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(Qld) provides that generally, hearings of the Tribunal are to be conducted in
Section 109(2)
, however, empowers the Tribunal to make confidentiality
orders in a proceeding to:
• direct who may or may not be present at a hearing;
• direct that a hearing, or part of a hearing, be held in private;
• prohibit or restrict publication of information given before it or
matters contained in documents before it; or
• prohibit or restrict disclosure to an active party of information
given before it, matters contained in documents before it,
or its decision or
rights might a confidentiality order displace?
2.86 There are three other provisions contained in the
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
(Qld) that are relevant to the Tribunal’s
power to make confidentiality orders under
section 109:
sections 108
2.87 Each of those sections provide that generally, the active parties to a
proceeding, including the adult, must be given access
to or copies of certain
information, namely:
• documents that are before the Tribunal and that are directly relevant
to an issue in the proceeding
(section 108)
• written reports by Tribunal staff that are received in evidence by
the Tribunal in the proceeding
(section 134)
• the Tribunal’s decision and any written reasons for its
decision on an application for a matter
(section 158).
2.88 However, those sections also provide that a party’s right to
receive that information can be displaced by a
section 109(2)
confidentiality
Section 108
108 Procedural fairness
(1) The tribunal must observe the rules of procedural fairness.
(2) Each active party in a proceeding must be given a reasonable opportunity
to present the active party’s case and, in particular,
to inspect a
document before the tribunal directly relevant to an issue in the proceeding and
to make submissions about the document.
(3) However—
(a) the tribunal may displace the right to inspect the document in a
confidentiality order; and
(b) the tribunal rules may prescribe conditions in relation to inspection of
the document. [note omitted]
Section 134
134 Report by tribunal staff
(1) The tribunal may—
(a) receive in evidence in a proceeding a written report by tribunal staff
on a matter in the proceeding; and
(b) have regard to the report.
(2) Generally, if the tribunal receives the report in evidence in a
proceeding, the adult concerned in the proceeding and each other
active party in
the proceeding must be—
(a) advised of the contents of the report; and
(b) upon request, given a copy of the report.
(3) However, the right to be given a copy may be displaced in a
confidentiality order. [note omitted]
Section 158
158 Decision and reasons to the adult and each active party
(1) Generally, the tribunal must give a copy of its decision, and any
written reasons for its decision, on an application about a
(a) the adult concerned in the matter; and
(b) each other active party in the proceeding.
(2) Generally, the tribunal must also give a copy of its decision to each
person given notice of the hearing of the application.
(3) However, a confidentiality order may displace the requirement to give
copies of its decision or reasons.
(4) The tribunal may also give a copy of its decision or reasons to anyone
else as required by a tribunal order. [note omitted]
may a confidentiality order be made?
2.92 The Tribunal may make a confidentiality order under
section 109(2)
its own initiative or on the application of a party to the
proceeding.
2.93 The Tribunal’s power to make confidentiality orders is guided by a
number of criteria.
Section 109(2)
provides that the Tribunal may make a confidentiality order if it ‘is
satisfied it is desirable to do so because of the confidential
particular information or matter or for another reason’. While this power
is worded in very broad terms, it is not
an unfettered discretion. The Tribunal
must exercise its discretion having regard to what is required in its
justice and procedural
2.95 The Tribunal must also apply the General Principles contained in the
guardianship legislation in exercising its power to make
a confidentiality
including General
Principle 11 which provides that the adult’s right to confidentiality of
information be recognised and taken
Section 109(4)
additionally provides that in
a proceeding on an application to obtain the Tribunal’s consent to special
health care,
confidentiality order must not impede the adult’s relevant substitute
decision-maker for health matters from forming and
expressing a view about the
special health care.
may make a confidentiality order
Section 109(2)
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(Qld) gives the Tribunal power to make confidentiality orders. Such an
order may also, at present, be capable of being made by the
2.98 The Registrar has power under the legislation to perform the functions
and exercise the powers of the Tribunal for ‘prescribed
non-contentious
The Tribunal
rules specify matters relating to
section 109(2)
as being such
will a person contravene a confidentiality order?
Section 109(6)
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(Qld) provides that a person must not contravene a confidentiality order
unless the person has a ‘reasonable excuse’.
The question of
whether a person has a reasonable excuse in a particular case is likely to be
assessed in light of the purpose of
legislation
and having regard
to what a reasonable person would accept as
appropriate.
Section 109
(1) Generally, a hearing by the tribunal of a proceeding must be in
(2) However, if the tribunal is satisfied it is desirable to do so because
of the confidential nature of particular information or
matter or for another
reason, the tribunal may, by order (a
confidentiality
(a) give directions about the persons who may or may not be present; and
(b) direct a hearing or part of a hearing take place in private; and
(c) give directions prohibiting or restricting the publication of
information given before the tribunal, whether in public or in
private, or of
matters contained in documents filed with, or received by, the tribunal; and
(d) give directions prohibiting or restricting the disclosure to some or all
of the active parties in a proceeding of—
(i) information given before the tribunal; or
(ii) matters contained in documents filed with, or received by, the
tribunal; or
(iii) subject to subsection (3), the tribunal’s decision or
(3) The tribunal may make a confidentiality order prohibiting or restricting
disclosure of the tribunal’s decision or reasons
to the adult concerned
only if the tribunal considers disclosure to the adult might be prejudicial to
the physical or mental health
or wellbeing of the adult.
(4) In a proceeding to obtain the tribunal’s consent to special health
care for an adult, the tribunal may not make a confidentiality
order that is
likely to affect the ability of any of the following persons to form and express
a considered view about the special
health care—
(a) a guardian for the adult;
(b) an attorney for a health matter for the adult under an enduring
(c) the statutory health attorney for the adult.
(5) The tribunal may make a confidentiality order on its own initiative or
on the application of an active party.
(6) A person must not contravene a confidentiality order, unless the person
has a reasonable excuse.
Maximum penalty—200 penalty units.
2.101 These provisions raise a number of issues for consideration including
whether Tribunal hearings should be held in public or
private, whether the
Tribunal should have power to exclude people from a hearing, and whether the
Tribunal should be able to limit
the disclosure of documents or copies of its
decisions or reasons to parties to a proceeding.
Section 109
is examined in
Chapters 4, 5, and 6.
Confidentiality
orders in proceedings relating to children
2.102 One of the Tribunal’s functions under the
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
(Qld) is consenting to the sterilisation of a child
with an impairment.
matters are dealt with under chapter 5A of the
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
(Qld). The Act contains two provisions dealing with
the confidentiality of proceedings in relation to those matters: sections 80G
and 80N. Those sections mirror the provisions of sections 109 and 158 of the
2.103 Section 80G is substantially identical to section 109. It provides
that proceedings for chapter 5A matters are generally to
be conducted in public
but that the Tribunal has power to make a confidentiality order in a
proceeding.
2.104 The Tribunal’s power to make a confidentiality order under
section 80G is guided by the same criteria as for an order
under section
2.105 Section 80G provides:
(1) Generally, a hearing by the tribunal of a proceeding in relation to a
chapter 5A application must be in public.
(2) However, if the tribunal is satisfied it is desirable to do so because
of the confidential nature of particular information or
matter or for another
reason, the tribunal may, by order (a
confidentiality
(a) give directions about the persons who may or may not be present; and
(b) direct a hearing or part of a hearing take place in private; and
(c) give directions prohibiting or restricting the publication of
information given before the tribunal, whether in public or in
private, or of
matters contained in documents filed with, or received by, the tribunal; and
(d) give directions prohibiting or restricting the disclosure to some or all
of the active parties in a proceeding of—
(i) information given before the tribunal; or
(ii) matters contained in documents filed with, or received by, the
tribunal; or
(iii) subject to subsection (3), the tribunal’s decision or
(3) The tribunal may make a confidentiality order prohibiting or restricting
disclosure of the tribunal’s decision or reasons
to the child only if the
tribunal considers disclosure to the child might be prejudicial to the physical
or mental health or wellbeing
of the child.
(4) The tribunal may not make a confidentiality order that is likely to
affect the ability of an active party to form and express
a considered view
(5) The tribunal may make a confidentiality order on its own initiative or
on the application of an active party.
(6) A person must not contravene a confidentiality order, unless the person
has a reasonable excuse.
Maximum penalty for subsection (6)—200 penalty units.
2.106 Section 80N is substantially identical to section 158. It provides
that generally, the active parties to a proceeding must
be given a copy of the
Tribunal’s decision and any written reasons for the decision. However, it
also provides that a confidentiality
order may displace this
requirement.
2.107 Section 80N provides:
80N Decision and reasons to each active party
(1) Generally, the tribunal must give a copy of its decision, and any
written reasons for its decision, on a chapter 5A application
to each active
party in the proceeding.
(2) Generally, the tribunal must also give a copy of its decision to each
person given notice of the hearing of the application.
(3) However, a confidentiality order may displace the requirement to give
copies of its decision or reasons.
(4) The tribunal may also give a copy of its decision or reasons to anyone
else as required by a tribunal order. [note omitted]
2.108 Because these sections effectively mirror the provisions of sections
109 and 158 of the Act, they are not separately examined
in this Discussion
Paper but are referred to in the following chapters only to the extent necessary
to note any minor differences
in drafting between the provisions. Otherwise,
references in the following chapters to sections 109 and 158 should be taken as
references also to sections 80G and 80N.
Confidentiality
orders in practice
2.109 The Commission was given empirical
information by the Tribunal about how and when confidentiality orders are made.
The information
provided generally covers an eleven month period from 1 July
2005 to 26 May 2006. The information on confidentiality orders made
in relation
to the publication outside Tribunal proceedings of information before the
Tribunal or of matters contained in documents
is more limited,
however, as collection of this information only began in February
2.110 The Commission has been advised that during
the relevant periods, confidentiality orders have been made in relation to 48 of
the 5083 applications made to the
The total number
of orders made in that period was 51, which is due to the fact that two
confidentiality orders were made in three
of the matters. All but two of the
confidentiality orders made during the relevant period related to the inspection
of documents.
This empirical information will be discussed further in each of
the relevant chapters dealing with particular aspects of confidentiality
Guardianship
and confidentiality
INTRODUCTION
3.1 The fundamental question posed by this review is:
what role should
confidentiality play in Queensland’s guardianship system?
3.2 Answering this question will involve the Commission examining not only
whether the extent of confidentiality imposed by the current
legislative
provisions is appropriate, but also tackling the more general question of
whether confidentiality should continue to
play a greater role in the
guardianship system than in the wider legal system. As part of answering this
question, the Commission
will consider the principle of open justice, the
requirements of procedural fairness and the nature of the guardianship system.
3.3 Open justice and procedural fairness are fundamental principles of our
legal system. Their strict application tends to limit
the role of
confidentiality in decision-making. For example, in order to promote
accountability, consistency and predictability
in decision-making, the principle
of open justice will usually require judicial proceedings to be heard in public,
and that the evidence
relied upon and the outcome of the proceeding be made
available to the public. The rules of procedural fairness require
decision-makers
to follow some or all of a number of well-recognised rules aimed
at ensuring fair treatment of people who seek or oppose the making
decision. This may operate to require the disclosure to one person of
information that another person regards as confidential.
3.4 On the other hand, the primary focus of the guardianship system is to
safeguard the rights and interests of the adult, which includes
adult’s right to privacy. This area of law also often involves decisions
medical treatment, the
adult’s financial position, and where and with whom the adult is to live.
For these reasons, it may
be argued that the nature of the guardianship system
itself permits the recognition of a higher degree of confidentiality than is
otherwise allowed in the wider legal system. Conversely, it may also be argued
that the very significance of the decisions made
in the guardianship system is
itself a good reason for the existence of open and transparent
decision-making.
3.5 Open justice and procedural fairness are fundamental principles of legal
systems generally and so represent the Commission’s
starting point.
However, the law concerning the application of both principles does recognise
that a measure of confidentiality
can be appropriate in particular
circumstances. The fundamental question about what role confidentiality should
play is largely
answered by determining whether the particular circumstances of
the guardianship system sufficiently distinguish it from other areas
require a greater level of confidentiality, and if so, to what extent.
3.6 This chapter begins by considering the nature of confidentiality, as well
as the related concept of privacy. Then, and with a
view to providing a
platform for the examination of the specific legislative provisions dealing with
confidentiality which appear
in later chapters, it examines the principle of
open justice, the requirements of procedural fairness, and the nature of the
guardianship
system. A final matter considered is whether different levels of
confidentiality might be appropriate depending on the relationship
that a person
or group of people has with the adult.
OF CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY
‘right’ to privacy
3.7 The Commission’s terms of reference require it to have regard to
the need to protect the privacy of people involved in the
guardianship
The privacy interest
that is relevant here is a person’s claim to privacy of
information
availability and flow of personal information’
been described as ‘perhaps the most significant privacy
Australia’s common law does not recognise a general right to
although the human
right to be free from arbitrary interferences with privacy forms part of
international law.
of commentators have also promoted the importance of privacy, arguing that it is
a key aspect of human dignity, autonomy
3.8 The concept of privacy has proved difficult to
articulate,
but a commonly
cited definition is that:
themselves when, how, and to what extent information
3.9 This is a concept that is distinct from
confidentiality.
the distinction are the circumstances in which the information is communicated.
Information is confidential if it is
received in circumstances that impose a
duty of confidentiality. In contrast, information that is private (and hence
might be protected
by a right to privacy) does not depend on how it came to be
known or disclosed; information is private because of its
3.10 For example, a person may learn of very personal and sensitive
information relating to another’s lifestyle, but not in
circumstances that
impose a duty of
confidentiality.
information is clearly private, in that it deals with personal matters that the
individual may not want disclosed, but it is
not confidential. Accordingly,
while private information is
protected by a duty of
confidentiality, this is not always the
Information considered
private by a person is only confidential and therefore protected from disclosure
if a legal duty is imposed
in relation to
of confidentiality
3.11 A duty of confidentiality may arise in three
ways: in equity, in contract, or in statute.
3.12 An equitable duty of confidence will arise in situations where
confidential information is imparted to another person who promises,
obliged, not to disclose it to a third party because of the special
circumstances in which the communication
Predominantly utilised in the commercial context to
protect trade secrets and business
information,
the duty of
confidence derives from the principle of equity
… he who has received information in confidence shall not take unfair
advantage of it. He must not make use of it to the prejudice
of him who gave it
without obtaining his consent.
3.13 For such a duty to arise, the relevant information must have the
necessary quality of being confidential. Some types of information
generally regarded as confidential, such as information about health and medical
3.14 A duty of confidentiality may also arise as an incident of contract.
For example, the duty may be imposed as an express term
of a contract, such as
an employment contract or commercial
Alternatively,
the nature of a contractual relationship, such as one between doctor and patient
or solicitor and client, may be
such that the duty is imposed by an implied
contractual term.
3.15 A duty of confidentiality may also be
imposed by statute. Examples include the duties imposed on people who serve on
and on people who
receive or deal with complaints from
whistleblowers.
As discussed
earlier, particular people who gain information through their involvement in the
guardianship system are prohibited
by statute from disclosing confidential
information.
CONFIDENTIALITY
IN THE GUARDIANSHIP SYSTEM
3.16 This section of the chapter examines three concepts that need to be
balanced in determining the appropriate role for confidentiality
guardianship system, namely the principle of open justice, the requirements of
procedural fairness and the nature of the guardianship
3.17 As has already been
the current
confidentiality provisions of the guardianship legislation apply to a wide range
of decision-makers, including the Tribunal,
the Adult Guardian and other people
involved in the administration of the legislation. Accordingly, the relevance
and application
of the concepts discussed in this section will vary depending on
the decision-maker and the context in which the decision is being
made. These
variations will be explored in the subsequent chapters that examine specific
aspects of the law governing confidentiality
under the guardianship
legislation.
3.18 One of the two concepts that tends to weigh
against confidentiality, at least in a judicial context, is the principle of
justice. It is a basic tenet of the common law that bodies discharging
judicial functions
their proceedings in public.
The principle that judicial proceedings be held in open court has been described
as ‘the right of the public to be informed
and the corresponding right of
the media to inform
are the elements of open justice?
3.19 The principle of open justice has been described as comprising the
following four elements:
• Access to proceedings – a right of attendance at proceedings by
members of the public and by media
representatives;
• Reporting of proceedings – a derivative right of those in
attendance to report proceedings to others;
• Identification – a requirement that the names of those involved
in a proceeding, such as the parties to the proceedings
and witnesses, be
available to the public; and
• Access to documents – a right of the public to inspect
documents that have come into existence for proceedings.
3.20 Others have also recognised a fifth element:
that the principle of open justice requires reasons for a decision to be
and made available to the
3.21 In practice, the application of the principle of open justice often
results in matters which might otherwise be regarded as very
private being
considered in open court and examined in published decisions. For example,
matters involving personal injuries may
lead to sensitive evidence being given
in public and referred to in reasons for judgment about a person’s
disabilities and
the loss they have experienced, including information about
changes in personal and sexual relationships.
3.22 Although open justice is a central feature of our legal system, it is
clear that it remains a principle and not a
The principle of open justice is a
, it is not a freestanding
right. … As a principle, it is of significance in guiding the court in
determining a range of matters
including, relevantly, when an application for
access should be granted pursuant to an express or implied power to grant
However, it remains a principle and not a right. (original
are the reasons for open justice?
3.23 The rationales for the principle of open
justice may be grouped into three categories: the disciplinary rationale, the
rationale and the investigatory
3.24 Central to the
disciplinary rationale
of open justice is that it acts as a safeguard against judicial
‘partiality, arbitrariness, or
idiosyncrasy’
thus a means of
accountability.
disciplinary rationale also views open justice acting as a check on legal
and against dishonest
3.25 An open court has also been said to fulfil
educative function
by, first, informing the public about the law and
legal process,
and second, by
prompting judicial arbiters to educate themselves in ‘prevailing public
morality and thereby avoid public
criticism’.
justice also promotes predictability and consistency in decision-making in that
both decision-makers and those advising people
previous decisions and can act
accordingly.
3.26 Finally, under the
investigatory rationale
, it has been argued
that an open court facilitates the production of additional
and therefore plays
an important part in securing completeness of
there any exceptions to the principle of open justice?
3.27 At common law, exceptions to the principle
of open justice are limited to those circumstances where the administration of
would be affected.
For example, closure of the court is justified only if a public hearing
‘is likely to lead, directly or indirectly, to a denial
insufficient justification for an infringement of open justice if public
proceedings would cause embarrassment, distress,
ridicule or reputational harm
to a witness or party.
Similarly, the protection of privacy and confidentiality ‘traditionally
take second place to the principle of open
for this is that by choosing to pursue ‘their dispute in the forum of a
court, the parties inevitably place themselves
in a situation in which their
compromised’.
3.28 Examples of where the common law has
recognised that open justice poses a risk to the administration of justice
include proceedings
involving police informers, blackmail or matters of national
3.29 A more relevant example to guardianship is
matters heard under the
parens patriae
inherent jurisdiction of superior courts in relation to people who are unable to
make their own decisions.
Such proceedings have been recognised as an exception to the principle of open
justice and may be held in
One rationale for
this exception recognised by the House of Lords in
Scott v Scott
the court’s paramount duty in such cases is the care of the adult who is
unable to make decisions.
the interests of justice, that duty can override other principles such as the
requirement to hear cases
The House of Lords
also considered that the exception was warranted because such matters are
essentially domestic and private in
nature, and so therefore need not be open to
the public:
The affairs are truly private affairs; the transactions are transactions
truly intra familiam; and it has long been recognised that
an appeal for the
protection of the Court in the case of such persons does not involve the
consequences of placing in the light of
publicity their truly domestic
3.30 In addition to the common law exceptions,
the principle of open justice is frequently curtailed by
These statutory
exceptions customarily relate to proceedings involving juvenile defendants,
adoption proceedings, family law proceedings,
committal hearings, sexual offence
proceedings and coronial
While there is
little consistency between such
provisions,
some underlying
policies have been identified, such as privacy protection and informality of
proceedings.
It has also
been recognised that informal tribunals are commonly granted specific powers to
depart from the principle of open justice
in appropriate
circumstances.
3.31 The second concept that tends to weigh against secrecy in
decision-making is that of procedural fairness. Historically captured
term ‘natural
law requirement of procedural fairness imposes a set of procedural standards on
decision-makers to ensure a fair hearing
and determination for the persons
affected by the decision.
3.32 Unless displaced by statute, the requirement of procedural fairness will
apply, at common law, to the exercise of judicial and
quasi-judicial
It also applies
to administrative decisions that affect a person’s rights, interests or
legitimate expectations.
This is one way in which procedural fairness differs from open justice; open
justice is based on the interests of the public generally
whereas procedural
fairness is concerned with the rights and interests of a particular
3.33 Traditionally, the requirements of procedural fairness are based on two
Audi alteram partem
– that both parties must be given an
adequate opportunity to present their case (the hearing rule); and
Nemo debet esse judex in propria sua causa
decision-maker must be impartial or free from bias (the bias
is the hearing rule?
3.34 While the particular procedural requirements
flowing from the ‘hearing rule’ will vary in each case, the
element’ is
participation.
generally two aspects to the ‘right to be heard’, as it is often
referred to: adequate prior notice and adequate
disclosure with an opportunity
to respond.
3.35 A person must be given adequate prior notice of the date, time and
location at which the matter will be heard and also of the
nature of the issues
that are to be decided.
Notice must be sufficiently detailed and given sufficiently early to allow the
person ‘to make inquiries, to consider his
position, and to prepare his
3.36 The person must also be given adequate
disclosure of the evidence upon which the decision-maker proposes to base its
That is, the
person should be given an opportunity to ‘deal with adverse information
that is credible, relevant or significant
to the decision to be
that, for example, the person should be apprised of the substance of any
documentary
and of any oral evidence that is
and given an opportunity to respond to it.
is the bias rule?
3.37 The second element of procedural fairness is the requirement that the
decision-maker approach the task with an open mind, free
from prejudice and
without any interest, pecuniary or otherwise in the
The question of
bias is resolved by asking ‘whether, in the circumstances, the public,
including the parties, might entertain
a reasonable apprehension of bias in the
sense that the decision-maker is incapable of bringing an impartial and
unprejudiced mind
to the resolution of the
The bias rule
is of lesser relevance to the issues of confidentiality considered in this paper
and so is not discussed further.
are the reasons for procedural fairness?
3.38 There are several arguments why procedural fairness, and in particular,
the notion of participation in decision-making, is important.
3.39 Some are arguments based in principle. Fairness, whether in legal
processes or otherwise, is valued as a quality in its own
Respect and dignity
for others also suggests people should be included in the decision-making
processes that affect them.
Participation is also an important political value in a democratic
3.40 Other rationales for procedural fairness relate to the quality of
decision-making. Minimum guarantees of participation for all
parties are
important in contributing to the completeness of evidence and, therefore, in
going some way to securing accuracy, and
fairness, in
decision-making.
hear opposing views carries ‘notorious
… slender proofs may falsely seem irrefragable, and the scales of
justice may falsely seem to be tipped by the weight of insubstantial
3.41 Another rationale for procedural fairness relates to the legitimacy of
the decision and the decision-maker. Legal authorities,
including judicial
decision-makers, rely to some extent on having fair processes for their
legitimacy.
Research in
social psychology concludes that people tend to assess their satisfaction with
decisions made by third parties in terms
of the fairness of the procedure used
to reach the decision, rather than the favourability of the decision
Critical to that
assessment of the process was whether people were given an opportunity to
participate.
are the requirements of procedural fairness?
3.42 Procedural fairness does not dictate adherence to a precise set of
What it requires will
depend on the circumstances of each case,
• the nature of the proposed decision;
• the likely consequences of the decision for the person whose rights,
interests or legitimate expectations are affected;
• the rules under which the decision is being made;
• the information and resources available to the decision-maker;
• the urgency of the matter.
3.43 Given the importance of the circumstances in which a decision is made,
the requirements of procedural fairness will be less demanding
administrative decision-maker than for a court. However, because of the origins
of procedural fairness (in evaluating judicial
and quasi-judicial
decision-making),
starting point for making judgments about what is appropriate in a particular
case is generally what is required in the judicial
3.44 One of the circumstances that will be
particularly relevant when determining the content of procedural fairness in the
guardianship
context is the nature and purpose of the
If an unqualified application of the principles of natural justice would
frustrate the purpose for which the jurisdiction is conferred,
the application
of those principles would have to be qualified.
3.45 For example, although generally the requirements of procedural fairness
will override considerations of individual
the protective
nature of the guardianship system may warrant varying levels of confidentiality
in some circumstances. A tension
arises between safeguarding an adult’s
information to
parties so that they receive a fair
Conflict between
the protective nature of the system and procedural fairness may also arise in
cases where disclosure of information
to the adult might cause harm to the
3.46 The personal and sensitive nature of the
information in the guardianship system may also affect what is required by way
of procedural
courts have recognised that procedural fairness may permit withholding or
limiting disclosure of adverse material where there
is a compelling need for
confidentiality or secrecy.
Such an issue might arise where a person has provided information to a
guardianship tribunal but has requested that it remain confidential.
cases, there is a need to balance the requirements of procedural fairness
against the policy goal of encouraging continued
disclosure of
information.
3.47 Conversely, however, it may also be argued that the disclosure of
information through the application of the rules of procedural
fairness may
promote the protective nature of the guardianship system. High quality
decision-making is a critical part of safeguarding
an adult’s rights and
interests and this is more likely when decisions are based upon the full
disclosure and discussion of
all of the relevant
of the guardianship system
3.48 The third concept relevant to the role of confidentiality is the nature
of the guardianship system. This system has some features
that distinguish it
from other areas of law
which may affect the extent to which it is appropriate for decision-makers
within the guardianship system to adhere strictly
to the principle of open
justice and the requirements of procedural fairness. The nature of
Queensland’s guardianship system
is discussed generally in Chapter 1, but
there are two features that are important in the context of confidentiality.
3.49 The first relevant feature of the guardianship system is that it
empowers the Tribunal and others to make decisions about fundamental
vulnerable adults. The significance of these decisions may favour openness and
transparency in decision-making rather
than confidentiality. The second
relevant feature is the protective nature of the guardianship system. The
emphasis on safeguarding
the rights and interests of the adult may warrant a
greater recognition of confidentiality.
3.50 Guardianship decisions made by the Tribunal
and others affect the fundamental rights of the adult, and sometimes also of
close to the adult.
For example, the guardianship legislation permits the making of decisions that
remove an adult’s ability to
It also enables
decisions to be made about refusal of medical treatment that is needed to stay
The rights of people
close to the adult can also be affected by decisions made under the legislation,
such as decisions about where
and with whom the adult is to
The more significant a
decision that is being made, the more scrutiny that is
Interestingly,
this view is in stark contrast to a view expressed above in
matters involve only questions of a domestic
3.51 Importantly, these decisions are also made
in relation to a vulnerable group of people who may not be able to advocate on
own behalf. Although some adults may have support, the accountability,
consistency and predictability brought by open decision-making
important safeguard for people who may be unable to champion their rights
effectively and challenge decisions made about
nature of the guardianship system
3.52 The protective
of guardianship has an
ancient history in the English common law where it was originally recognised as
the duty of the monarch as
parens patriae
, or ‘parent of the
country’, to protect vulnerable
A protective
themselves, such as infants and the mentally
A statutory
example is the Family Court’s welfare jurisdiction in relation to
3.53 There are three elements of the protective nature of the guardianship
system that might favour a greater role for confidentiality
than in other
contexts: the primary focus on the adult’s rights and interests; the
consideration of matters personal to the
adult; and the scrutiny given to the
otherwise personal circumstances of others involved in the adult’s life.
adult’s rights and interests
3.54 The primary focus in the guardianship system
is on the adult and safeguarding his or her rights and
fundamental purpose for which the system exists. This focus on the adult may
mean that the rights and interests of others
may need to be modified or adapted
in some circumstances if
3.55 Part of this responsibility to safeguard an
adult’s rights and interests may require the taking of steps in
appropriate
cases to protect an adult’s
During guardianship
proceedings, very private information about an adult is disclosed in a public
forum. Safeguarding an adult’s
information, which is only disclosed for a limited purpose, be treated
confidentially.
It may also
mean, for example, imposing an obligation of confidentiality where disclosure of
certain information would harm the
adult. This safeguarding function may even
involve, in exceptional cases, keeping information from the
personal to the adult
3.56 The second element of the protective system of guardianship is that it
necessarily involves delving into the personal life of
an adult and disclosing
information which would otherwise be kept
are capable of making these personal
decisions in private without exposing intimate details of their lives. It is
only because an
adult has impaired capacity that a wide range of sensitive and
personal information needs to be disclosed in a public
If adults with
impaired capacity are to be accorded the same level of respect for privacy as
other members of the
this may justify
imposing some level of confidentiality on this information.
3.57 Such an approach may be particularly appropriate because only very
rarely will guardianship proceedings be instigated by the
adult. Instead, the
application is generally brought by others concerned about the adult. Hence
guardianship matters can be distinguished
from other types of litigation as the
adult is not making a decision to pursue their rights through the courts, which
has traditionally
been regarded as one of the justifications for permitting open
disclosure of that person’s private
information.
3.58 Some judicial support for this view is found in a second rationale
advanced by members of the House of Lords in
Scott v Scott
recognising the exception to open justice in cases invoking the
domestic and private in nature, and so therefore need not be open
The affairs are truly private affairs; the transactions are transactions
truly intra familiam; and it has long been recognised that
an appeal for the
protection of the Court in the case of such persons does not involve the
consequences of placing in the light of
publicity their truly domestic
personal to others
3.59 This leads to the third element which applies not to the private
information of the adult, but to the information of those parties
involved in
the guardianship system generally. This element is based on the fact that the
guardianship system’s protective
nature does not, like other types of
litigation, involve parties who are pursuing rights for their own
3.60 Instead, proceedings are generally brought by a person who cares about
an adult with a view to safeguarding that adult’s
If the parties to
a proceeding participate on this basis, and are not pursuing personal interest,
it may be inappropriate to suggest
that such action would result in their
private information being made public. One of the concerns may be that if one
the consequences of seeking the assistance of the guardianship system
is seen as undesirable, then this may impair its effective
functioning because
people will be discouraged from using it.
3.61 Similar arguments can be made in relation to the information which is
before the Tribunal during proceedings. It is desirable
that decision-makers
have access to all relevant information needed to decide a matter. However,
because these proceedings raise
such private matters, there are concerns that
people may be reluctant to participate in a frank and genuine way without some
of confidentiality.
These concerns might arise in relation to private assessments of an adult made
by a health professional or in relation to disclosures
by family members of an
adult about relevant conduct or behaviour within that family.
RELATIONSHIPS
AND CONFIDENTIALITY
3.62 In establishing a conceptual framework to
guide the review of the confidentiality provisions, another relevant
consideration
is the relationship that a person or group of people has with the
adult. Although not always the case, it may be that the closer
the relationship
between the adult and the relevant person, the more likely that it is
appropriate to disclose information to that
relevant person.
3.63 For example, these six categories of people
in the guardianship system are likely to have different rights and interests in
to information about the adult:
• the adult him- or herself;
• any person who is empowered to make the relevant decision in question
for the adult;
• those who are actively involved and participating in decision-making
generally for an adult. In the context of a decision
being made by the
Tribunal, this category might be captured by the definition of those who are an
‘active party’
and so have a right to appear before the Tribunal as a
This might include
members of an adult’s family;
• other people not already mentioned but who are close to the adult or
involved in their life. Again, the definition of an
‘interested
person’ might be one way in which this category could be defined, that is
a person who has a ‘sufficient
and continuing interesting’ in the
This category might
include service providers;
• members of the press; and
• everyone else, that is, members of the general public.
3.64 It is not necessarily suggested that any legislative regime needs to
make specific provision for each of these six categories
of people. Indeed,
there is often good reason for legislation to be cast in general terms with the
discretion of a decision-maker
being relied upon to tailor decisions to the
specific circumstances.
3.65 Nevertheless, when establishing a conceptual framework for reviewing the
role of confidentiality in the guardianship system,
it is clear that there are
different interests and responsibilities involved that may vary between the
different categories. For
example, as noted above, it is suggested that it may
be generally more appropriate that those close to an adult receive information
categories and the impact of having a relationship with
the adult are examined
in subsequent chapters.
FOR SUBMISSIONS
3.66 This chapter has identified three concepts that will inform choices
system. The
tension between these competing factors is played out the chapters that follow,
each of which examines a specific aspect
of the confidentiality provisions.
3.67 It is clear that whatever reform options are recommended, all involve
compromise. It is not possible to simultaneously accord
full recognition to the
openness required by open justice and procedural fairness and to the
confidentiality that might be favoured
by the nature of the guardianship system.
3.68 For example, the principle of open justice cannot be applied in full if
some level of the adult’s privacy is to be maintained.
Similarly, if some
information is to be kept confidential, the requirements of procedural fairness
in the guardianship system may
have to be modified. The Commission invites you
to consider this inevitable compromise when reading the subsequent chapters of
Discussion Paper.
3.69 The Commission is interested in receiving submissions in response to the
following questions, or on any other issues respondents
consider relevant to
establishing a conceptual framework for confidentiality in the guardianship
3-1 What concepts are relevant to determining the role of confidentiality
in the guardianship system:
(a) open justice;
(b) procedural fairness;
(c) the nature of the guardianship system;
3-2 If there is conflict between these concepts, how should the balance
between them be struck? Why do you prefer that approach?
(In other words, are
there concepts that are more important than the others and if so, why?)
3-3 Is the relationship that a person or a category of people has with the
adult a relevant consideration for determining confidentiality
guardianship system?
3-4 If so, are there other people who have relationships with the adult
who have been omitted from the list set out at paragraph
LAW IN QUEENSLAND
4.1 As part of its review of the guardianship legislation’s
confidentiality provisions, the Commission is required to consider
provisions that deal with confidentiality in hearings before the Tribunal.
Although hearings are generally required to be
section 109(2)
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(Qld) gives the Tribunal a broad
discretion to impose confidentiality. The Tribunal may, on application by an
active party or on
initiative:
• hold proceedings in
• direct who may or may not be present at a
• prohibit or restrict disclosure of information given at a Tribunal
hearing to some or all of the active parties to a
proceeding.
4.2 These provisions are outlined in turn.
and private hearings
Section 109(1)
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(Qld) provides that Tribunal hearings are generally to be held in public.
Section 109(2)(b)
, however, provides that the Tribunal may make a
confidentiality order directing that a hearing, or part of a hearing, be
in private.
Sections 109(1)
(2)(b) provide:
(1) Generally, a hearing by the tribunal of a proceeding must be in
(2) However, if the tribunal is satisfied it is desirable to do so because
of the confidential nature of particular information or
matter or for another
reason, the tribunal may, by order (a
confidentiality
(b) direct a hearing or part of a hearing take place in private;
a person from a hearing
Section 109(2)(a)
also gives the Tribunal power to direct, in a
confidentiality order, that a particular person may or may not be present at a
The Tribunal may direct, for example, that despite the hearing being
held in public, a particular person must not attend. Alternatively,
confidentiality order might direct that pursuant to
section 109(2)(b)
above) the hearing is to be held in private, but that under
section 109(2)(a)
particular person may nonetheless attend the hearing.
4.6 The legislation does not limit the power to exclude only to particular
categories of people such as members of the public without
an interest in the
proceeding. Neither does the legislation specify particular people who cannot
be excluded from a hearing, such
as active parties to the
proceeding.
4.7 While hearings must generally be in public,
section 109(2)(a)
that the Tribunal may ‘ give directions about the persons who may or may
not be present’.
disclosure to an active party of information given at a hearing
Section 109(2)(d)(i)
Guardianship and Administration Act
(Qld) provides that the Tribunal may make a confidentiality order
directing that disclosure of ‘information given before the
to an active party
prohibited or restricted. Although broadly worded, this appears to refer only
to oral information received by the Tribunal at
a hearing. Other information
given before the Tribunal could be documentary, but the Tribunal’s power
to limit an active party’s
access to documents is dealt with under a
different provision.
4.9 The Tribunal’s power to make an order under
section 109(2)(d)(i)
compliments the Tribunal’s power to make directions about who may and may
not be present at a hearing. For example, in order
to prevent a party from
hearing particular evidence, the Tribunal may need to give a direction excluding
the party from the relevant
part of the hearing, as well as prohibiting the
information being disclosed to that party.
4.10 While hearings must generally be in public,
section 109(2)(d)
that the Tribunal may:
(d) give directions prohibiting or restricting the disclosure to some or all
of the active parties in a proceeding of—
(i) information given before the tribunal; or
(ii) matters contained in documents filed with, or received by, the
… [note added]
for making a confidentiality order
4.11 The Tribunal’s power to make
confidentiality orders under
section 109(2)
is guided by a number of
Section 109(2)
provides that the Tribunal may make a confidentiality order if it ‘is
satisfied it is desirable to do so because of the confidential
particular information or matter or for another reason’. While this power
is worded in very broad terms, the discretion
must be exercised judicially and
in accordance with accepted principles.
4.13 A similarly
worded power is given to the Commonwealth Administrative Appeals
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1975
(Cth) relevantly provides:
Hearings to be in public except in special circumstances
Private hearing etc.
(2) Where the Tribunal
is satisfied that it is desirable to do so by reason of the confidential nature
of any evidence or matter
or for any other reason, the Tribunal
may, by order:
(a) direct that a hearing or part of a hearing shall take place in private
and give directions as to the persons who may be present;
(3) In considering:
(a) whether the hearing of a proceeding
should be held in private;
shall take as the basis of its consideration the principle that it is desirable
that hearings of
proceedings
should be held in public
and that evidence given before the Tribunal
and the contents of documents lodged with the Tribunal
or received in evidence by the
should be made available to the public and to all the parties, but shall pay due
regard to any reasons given to the Tribunal
why the hearing should be held in private or why publication or disclosure of
the evidence or the matter contained in the document
should be prohibited or
restricted. (emphasis added)
4.14 Significantly, that provision includes a specific requirement for the
Tribunal to take the principle of the desirability of public
hearings as the
basis for its considerations as to whether such an order should be
4.15 The Administrative Appeals Tribunal’s power to hold hearings in
private and to exclude people from a hearing was considered
Re Pochi and
Minister for Immigration and Ethnic
case, Brennan J held that the exercise of the Tribunal’s discretion is
informed by the principle of open justice and
the requirements of procedural
Accordingly,
Brennan J proposed certain ‘strict criteria’ that would guide the
exercise of that Tribunal’s
discretion.
4.16 When examining the Tribunal’s
discretion to exclude the
, Brennan J considered that such an order
could be made only if the Tribunal was satisfied
• there is ‘a real possibility of doing injustice to, or
inflicting a serious disadvantage upon, a party, a witness or
a person giving
information if the proceedings were in public’; or
• ‘publication of the proceedings would be contrary to the public
4.17 In relation to the Tribunal’s
discretion to exclude a
Brennan J considered that ‘a further
criterion’ would need to be satisfied, namely, that ‘the information
such importance and cogency that justice is more likely to be done by
receiving the information in confidence, and denying the party
access to it,
than by refusing an order to exclude the
4.18 Similar considerations are likely to inform
the operation of the Guardianship and Administration Tribunal’s
discretion.
It is noted, however, that the requirement in
section 35(3)
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1975
(Cth) expressly tips the balance
in favour of open hearings. At present, the guardianship legislation does not
contain such a provision.
4.19 The Tribunal must also apply the General
Principles contained in the legislation in exercising its power to make a
confidentiality
includes General Principle 11 which provides that the adult’s right to
confidentiality of information be recognised and
4.20 A recent case in which a confidentiality order was made excluding a
person from a Tribunal hearing, who was not an active party,
This order was made
by the Deputy President of the Tribunal prior to the hearing on the grounds that
the person had been declared
a vexatious litigant in the Supreme
At the hearing, the
Tribunal also had regard to the person’s previous behaviour in the
Tribunal and other proceedings, and
was concerned
• the person was likely to disrupt the hearing;
• the person was likely to exert undue influence on the adult at the
• the adult would be likely to answer Tribunal questions according to
how the person would wish her to if the person were present;
• the person would be likely to continually introduce material that was
irrelevant to the hearing.
4.21 A final
criterion must be satisfied in proceedings to obtain the Tribunal’s
consent to ‘special health care’.
Special health care includes such
medical procedures as sterilisation and termination of
In proceedings in
relation to those matters, section 109(4) provides that a confidentiality order
must not impede the adult’s
relevant substitute decision-maker for health
matters from forming and expressing a view about the special health
This might mean in a
particular case that such people should not be excluded from a
4.22 Section 109(4) provides:
(4) In a proceeding to obtain the tribunal’s consent to special health
care for an adult, the tribunal may not make a confidentiality
order that is
likely to affect the ability of any of the following persons to form and express
a considered view about the special
health care—
(a) a guardian for the
(b) an attorney for a health matter for the adult under an enduring
(c) the statutory health attorney for the
[notes added]
may make a confidentiality order
Section 109(2)
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
(Qld) gives the Tribunal power to make
confidentiality orders, including orders in relation to hearings. However, such
an order may
also be made by the Registrar.
Section 99(3)
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(Qld) provides that the Tribunal Rules may specify ‘non-contentious
matters’ under the legislation that may be dealt with
by the Registrar.
Such matters are described as ‘prescribed non-contentious
85(1) of the Act provides that the Registrar may perform the functions and
exercise the powers of the Tribunal in relation
to such prescribed
non-contentious matters.
4.25 Rule 2(1) of the
Guardianship and Administration Tribunal Rule 2004
(Qld) specifies that matters related to a number of provisions in the
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(Qld) are prescribed
non-contentious matters for section 99(3) of the Act. One of those provisions
is section 109(2), which deals
with confidentiality
However, rule 2(2)
provides that such a matter will cease to be a prescribed non-contentious matter
if an active party to the proceeding
advises the Registrar of an objection to
the matter being dealt with by the Registrar.
4.26 The Commission understands that the purpose
of this rule was to permit the Registrar to facilitate the inspection of
in accordance with paragraph six of the Presidential Direction
entitled ‘General Information in relation to the Inspection
of Files and
Confidentiality
However, it
appears the rule also empowers the Registrar to make confidentiality orders.
The Commission understands that no confidentiality
orders have in fact been made
by the Registrar.
for non-compliance with a confidentiality order
Section 109(6)
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(Qld) provides that a person must not contravene a confidentiality order
unless the person has a reasonable excuse. What may constitute
‘reasonable excuse’ has not been considered in the context of the
guardianship legislation.
However, at common law, the phrase ‘reasonable excuse’ has been
given its ordinary meaning.
The question of whether a person has such an excuse in a particular case is to
be determined in the light of the purpose of the
legislation
and having regard
to what a reasonable person would accept as
appropriate.
Confidentiality
orders in practice
4.28 The Tribunal has provided the Commission with empirical information
period from 1 July 2005
to 26 May 2006.
Commission understands that in that period, the Tribunal did not make a
confidentiality order closing a hearing or excluding
people from a
The Tribunal has,
however, made at least one such confidentiality order outside the relevant
4.29 In addition, the Tribunal has in some hearings spoken with the adult in
the absence of some or all of the parties. This was
done with the consent of
the relevant parties, and so the Tribunal was of the view that a confidentiality
order was unnecessary.
After speaking with the adult, the Tribunal would then
inform those parties who were absent of the substance of the adult’s
One question which
arises is whether, in the absence of a confidentiality order being made, the
adoption of such a process is consistent
with the legislative intention
expressed in
section 109(1)
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(Qld) that hearings must be in public.
LEGISLATION
IN OTHER JURISDICTIONS
4.30 The guardianship legislation in other jurisdictions also contains
provisions dealing with closed hearings and the exclusion of
particular people
from hearings. These provisions fall into three general categories that are
discussed below:
• open proceedings with power to hold them in private and/or to exclude
particular people;
• open proceedings with power to hold them in private and/or to exclude
particular people except for specific individuals who
cannot be excluded; and
• closed proceedings with power to permit particular people to attend.
4.31 None of the other jurisdictions in Australia specifically provide for
the prohibition or restriction of disclosure of information
or evidence given at
a hearing to any of the
proceeding. Of course, the access of parties to information and evidence given
at a hearing may be indirectly restricted
by an order excluding that party from
the hearing. However, whether such information can be kept from those active
parties who are
excluded will depend on the rules of procedural fairness at
common law.
hearings with power to close, or to exclude particular people
4.32 In jurisdictions falling into the first category, hearings are required
generally to be held in public but the legislation confers
discretion on the
Tribunal to close a hearing to members of the public, or to exclude particular
people from a hearing.
some of these jurisdictions, the exercise of this discretion is governed by
specific legislative criteria.
4.33 In New South Wales, hearings are to be open
unless the Tribunal determines in a particular case that the hearing shall be
wholly or partly in the absence of the
4.34 In Victoria, hearings must be held in public unless the Tribunal directs
that the hearing or part of it be held in
4.35 In the Australian Capital Territory,
hearings are to be open to the public unless the Tribunal orders
4.36 In Queensland, the Tribunal has power both to exclude the public from a
hearing, or part of a hearing, and to direct that particular
people must not be
present at a hearing. The Tribunal may only exercise its discretion, however,
in certain circumstances which
were discussed
hearings with power to close, or to exclude, but not particular people
4.37 In jurisdictions in this category, hearings are again generally required
to be conducted in public and the Tribunal is empowered
to close a hearing and
to exclude particular people. The additional element though is that the power
to exclude does not apply to
certain categories of people.
4.38 In Western
Australia, while hearings are generally to be held in
the Tribunal may
direct that people shall not be present, unless they are directly interested in
the proceedings or otherwise authorised
by the Tribunal to be
The Tribunal may
make such a direction only if it is in ‘the best interests of the person
to whom the proceedings relate for
the hearing or part of the hearing to be
closed to the public’.
The Tribunal is precluded, however, from excluding the news media from a
4.39 In the Northern Territory and Tasmania, proceedings are required to be
open to the public unless a person directly interested
in the proceedings
requests otherwise. Such a request enlivens a discretion to exclude a person or
people from the hearing.
discretion to exclude people from a hearing does not, however, extend to people
who are directly interested in the proceedings
or who are otherwise authorised
to be present at the
4.40 The legislation in South Australia requires
the Board to hold open hearings, but grants it an ‘absolute
discretion’
to exclude the public or particular
The Board must not,
however, exclude those people involved in the
proceedings.
Additionally,
in proceedings regarding prescribed medical
the Board must
allow the adult’s parents a reasonable opportunity to make submissions to
the Board ‘if it thinks appropriate
to do so’ and unless it does not
consider it to be in the adult’s best
hearings with power to admit people
4.41 In jurisdictions falling into this category,
the general rule is reversed so that proceedings are required to be closed to
public except as otherwise permitted by the court or tribunal. None of the
Australian jurisdictions take this
4.42 By contrast, in
New Zealand, where the guardianship jurisdiction is vested in the Family Court,
legislation provides that hearings
are generally to be closed to the public,
except in respect of certain specified interested parties such as the
adult’s parent
However, the Court
has the power to require the adult’s parent or guardian, or their
representative, to withdraw from the
Court while the adult addresses the
It also has
discretion to permit other people to attend a
FOR CONSIDERATION
4.43 This part of the chapter identifies the following issues for
consideration when examining the Tribunal’s discretion to
hold hearings in
private, to exclude people from a hearing, and to prevent active parties from
accessing information given at a hearing:
• Should hearings generally be conducted in public or in private?
• Should the Tribunal have power to close a hearing or to exclude
particular people from a hearing?
• If the Tribunal should have such power, in what circumstances should
it be exercised?
• Are there particular people who should never be excluded from a
• Should the Tribunal have power to limit disclosure of information
given at a hearing to an active party to the proceeding?
• Should the Tribunal be able to initiate a confidentiality order?
• Who should be able to make a confidentiality order?
• Is ‘reasonable excuse’ an appropriate way to define when
a person is permitted to breach a confidentiality order?
4.44 These last three issues relate to confidentiality orders generally and
so will also be relevant to the discussion of these orders
in Chapter 5
(Documents before the Tribunal), Chapter 6 (Tribunal decisions and reasons), and
Chapter 7 (Publication of Tribunal
proceedings). However, to avoid repetition,
these issues will be examined only in this chapter.
hearings be held in public or private?
4.45 As discussed in Chapter 3, it is a fundamental common law principle that
judicial proceedings be conducted in
The primary reason
for this is that public access to open hearings enhances accountability in
decision-making.
common law and statute, however, provide exceptions to this principle in
recognition of the fact that some circumstances
may demand a level of
confidentiality.
4.46 This may be the case in guardianship proceedings because of the
protective nature of the system and the sensitive and inherently
private nature
of many of the matters under consideration. However, the considerations that
warrant exclusion of the public may
arise only in relation to some hearings
rather than across all hearings. If this is so, the presumption should probably
hearings would normally be open.
the Tribunal have power to close a hearing or exclude particular
4.47 If it is considered preferable for hearings generally to be held in
public, an issue to consider is whether the Tribunal should
have power to
exclude the public by closing a hearing, or to exclude particular people from a
hearing. As mentioned above, it may
be suggested that there are times when this
is appropriate in order to protect the adult from harm, or when highly sensitive
private matters are under discussion. Intimidation or the inability of an
adult to speak freely in the presence of particular people
may also be an
4.48 There may, of course, be other ways in which the adult could be
protected from harm that do not involve the making of a confidentiality
This may be a relevant consideration when examining whether the power to make
such orders should be retained. For example,
concerns about intimidation may be
addressed if parties could be involved in Tribunal proceedings without being
physically present
at the hearing or for part of the hearing. This could be
done through the use of telephone or video link-up
facilities.
should the Tribunal be able to close a hearing or exclude particular
4.49 If the Tribunal has power to exclude the public or other people from a
hearing, a question arises as to the principles that should
guide the exercise
of that power. For example, should a provision similar to
section 35(3)
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act
(Cth), discussed
be included in the
legislation?
4.50 Another issue to consider is whether different criteria should apply to
the power to exclude the
and to the power to exclude a
from a hearing.
relevant to when confidentiality orders should be able to be made is whether a
hearing could be conducted in another way to
avoid particular harm or concerns,
for example, by receiving evidence through the use of telephone or video link-up
facilities.
criteria in Queensland
4.51 At present in Queensland, the Tribunal may direct that a hearing be held
in private or that certain people not be present at
a hearing only in certain
circumstances.
The same test
is applied in relation to both discretions. The Tribunal must be satisfied it
is desirable to do so because of the
confidential nature of information or
matter or for another reason.
What is required to satisfy that criterion is partly to be assessed in light of
the common law’s interpretation of similar
provisions in other legislative
regimes, which will include having regard to the principle of open justice and
the requirements of
The Tribunal would
also need to consider the General Principles, including General Principle 11
which deals with
confidentiality.
criteria in other jurisdictions
4.52 The only other Australian jurisdiction that provides general criteria
for the exercise of the Tribunal’s discretion is
Western Australia. It
provides that the Tribunal may close a hearing only if it is in the best
interests of the person to whom the
proceedings
4.53 A different approach, which focuses on the likelihood of harm, is found
in Ontario. In that jurisdiction, the court may exclude
the public in
guardianship hearings where there is a possibility of serious harm or injustice
to any person which justifies departure
from the general principle that
proceedings be open.
specific to special health care proceedings
4.54 In addition to the general criteria of which
the Tribunal must be satisfied before it may make a confidentiality order under
section 109(2), the Queensland legislation provides an additional criterion in
proceedings relating to consent to special health
care. In such proceedings,
the Tribunal must not make a confidentiality order if it is likely to affect the
adult’s guardian,
attorney, or statutory health attorney from forming and
expressing a view on the proposed special health
This may mean that, in
a particular case, the Tribunal may not exclude the adult’s guardian,
attorney, or statutory health
attorney from a hearing.
4.55 Similarly, in South Australia, the Board must, if it thinks it
appropriate and unless it considers it is not in the adult’s
interest, allow the adult’s parents a reasonable opportunity to make
submissions to the Board in proceedings regarding
prescribed medical
there any people who should never be excluded?
4.56 Such people might include the adult, the parties to the proceeding,
those who are directly interested in the proceeding, and
representatives of the
4.57 In Queensland, there are no legislative limitations on the categories of
people who may be excluded.
4.58 In South Australia, the Northern Territory,
Tasmania, and Western Australia, however, people who are involved or directly
in the proceedings cannot be excluded from the
Additionally, the
legislation in Western Australia specifically provides that members of the press
cannot be excluded from a
the Tribunal have power to limit disclosure of information given at a hearing to
an active party?
4.59 A related issue to consider is whether the Tribunal should have an
additional power to restrict or prohibit disclosure of information
hearing to an active party to the proceeding. Queensland is the only
The same criteria as
must be satisfied in making other confidentiality orders applies in relation to
the exercise of that power.
4.60 It would be difficult to give effect to an order about non-disclosure
unless the party does not attend the relevant part of the
hearing, either by
that person’s choice or because of a direction made to exclude the person
from that part of the hearing.
4.61 It seems likely, therefore, that such an order might be considered in
conjunction with an order to exclude the party from attending
the hearing.
However, the reasons that compel the party’s non-attendance at the hearing
may not additionally justify that
the party be deprived of access to the
information heard in their absence. It may be, for example, that the party is
excluded from
the hearing because their presence would be upsetting to a witness
and would affect the witness’s testimony. There may be
however, to prevent that information later being disclosed to the party.
4.62 A power to prohibit or restrict disclosure of information given at a
hearing is also conferred upon the Mental Health Review
Tribunal of Queensland.
The role of that tribunal is quite
from that of the
Guardianship and Administration Tribunal, and the ability of people to attend
its hearings is significantly more
restrictive.
However, it is
useful to examine this aspect of its power to make confidentiality orders
because of the lack of other comparative
4.63 The Mental Health Review Tribunal has power to make a confidentiality
order prohibiting or restricting disclosure of information
given before it to
the person the subject of the proceeding or the patient the subject of the
application.
It may make
such an order, however, only if it is satisfied the disclosure
• cause serious harm to the health of the person or patient; or
• put the safety of someone else at risk.
4.64 In addition, if the Tribunal makes such an order, it must disclose the
information to the person’s lawyer or agent along
with written reasons for
making the confidentiality
the Tribunal be able to initiate a confidentiality order?
4.65 At present, the Tribunal has power to make a confidentiality order
either on application by an active party or on its own
initiative.
An issue to
consider is whether the Tribunal should be able to make such an order on its own
initiative and in the absence of any
application made by a party and, if so, in
what circumstances.
may make a confidentiality order?
4.66 Another issue for consideration is whether the power to make a
confidentiality order to hold a hearing in private, to direct
who may or may not
be present at a hearing, or to prohibit or restrict disclosure to an active
party of information given at a hearing,
should be capable of being made by the
It would appear
that, given the gravity of these types of orders, the power to make such orders
should reside solely with the Tribunal.
‘reasonable excuse’ an appropriate way to define when a person is
permitted to breach a confidentiality order?
4.67 There are advantages in excusing otherwise unlawful conduct by reference
to the phrase ‘reasonable
The inherent
flexibility of the defence means that liability is not rigidly imposed in
circumstances where it would be unjust to
do so. However, another consequence
of this flexibility is uncertainty about what types of behaviour will be
excused. For example,
a person may contravene a confidentiality order believing
that he or she has a reasonable excuse, only to discover subsequently that
conduct was judged not to be reasonable.
4.68 This part of the chapter briefly considers, in the context of access to
Tribunal hearings, the three concepts examined in Chapter
3 that need to be
balanced when determining the role of confidentiality in the guardianship
system: open justice, procedural fairness,
and the nature of the guardianship
4.69 The right of attendance at proceedings, including the ability to hear
the evidence given at a hearing, by members of the public,
and therefore by
media representatives, is regarded as ‘the very core of the idea of open
fundamental principle of the common law that judicial and quasi-judicial
proceedings be conducted in open
The primary goal of
open justice, to promote accountability in decision-making, depends on the
scrutiny that an open hearing allows.
However, open justice is not an absolute
concept. For example, the traditional recognition that the courts’
parens patriae
exception to the principle of open
4.70 Restrictions on a party’s access to a hearing may also result in a
failure to accord procedural
The hearing rule
requires that evidence upon which a decision-maker intends to rely in making its
decision must be disclosed to
the person whose interests are to be affected and
that the person must be given the opportunity to respond to the
A party may be
denied this opportunity if they are excluded from the
This may not only
be unfair, it may also reduce the quality of
decision-making.
4.71 However, what is required by procedural fairness depends on what is fair
in the circumstances.
be that procedural fairness will still be accorded if a summary of the
information received in a party’s absence is
subsequently provided to that
of the guardianship system
4.72 While open justice and procedural fairness may generally favour
non-exclusion of people from hearings and the disclosure of information
a hearing to the parties, the nature of the guardianship system may weigh in
favour of some measure of confidentiality.
4.73 The guardianship system is a protective one with its primary focus on
safeguarding the rights and interests of the adult. This
may warrant excluding
either the public or particular people because the adult may ‘feel they
cannot speak freely in front
It may also
be appropriate to exclude a person from a hearing ‘to prevent them from
intimidating or embarrassing another by
Safeguarding an adult’s rights and interests might also require steps to
be taken to avoid unnecessary intrusions into the
Finally, it might
also be argued that the private and sensitive nature of the information about
people connected with the adult,
which may be discussed in the guardianship
system, may justify a limitation on who can attend proceedings and hear this
information.
4.74 In contrast, the fact that Tribunal adjudications relate to questions
in matters dealing with
the withdrawal or withholding of life-sustaining measures, may favour open
hearings and the accountability
that openness affords.
LEGAL MODELS
4.75 The Commission has identified four possible models for how the law might
deal with the issue of access to Tribunal hearings.
While these models do not
capture all of the relevant issues that the Commission is examining, they
provide a useful starting point
for considering what general approach the law
should take. A hypothetical case study will be used to illustrate these models
how they might operate.
1: open hearings with no power to close
4.76 Under this model, hearings would be required to be conducted in public
in all cases, with no exceptions. None of the jurisdictions
in Australia adopt
this approach.
2: open hearings with power to close, or to exclude particular people
4.77 Under this model, hearings would generally be required to be conducted
in public but the Tribunal would have power to close proceedings
and hold them
in private and/or to exclude particular people from a hearing. Under this
model, there would be no restriction on
the categories of people who could be
4.78 This is the current position in Queensland. Similarly, in New South
Wales, Victoria, and the Australian Capital Territory, hearings
are generally
open to the public unless otherwise
The legislative
criteria, if any, for when this power can be exercised may be either quite broad
(as it is currently in Queensland)
or more detailed and specific.
4.79 It might additionally be provided, as it currently is in Queensland,
that the Tribunal may prohibit or restrict disclosure of
information given at a
hearing to the parties to a proceeding. None of the other jurisdictions provide
such a power.
3: open hearings with power to close, or to exclude, but not particular
4.80 As with model 2, hearings would generally be required to be conducted in
public but the Tribunal would have power to close proceedings
and/or exclude
particular people from the hearing. However, under this model, the Tribunal
would not be able to exclude particular
categories of people from a hearing,
such as the parties or other people directly interested or involved in the
proceeding.
4.81 This is the approach taken in Western Australia, the Northern Territory,
Tasmania, and South
criteria to guide the exercise of this power will need to be considered.
4: closed hearings with power to admit people
4.82 Under this model, all hearings would be required to be held in private.
Power to permit the public or particular people to attend
a hearing might also
be provided. None of the Australian jurisdictions take this approach, though it
is the model adopted in New
Zealand where guardianship matters are dealt with by
the Family Court.
Marlene is a 31 year old woman with an intellectual disability who lives
with, and is cared for by her mother, Gwen. They live next
Marlene’s cousin, Jim. He is an accountant and was previously appointed
by the Tribunal as Marlene’s administrator
to manage a large sum of money
that she had inherited.
It was recently discovered that Marlene is pregnant. Jim was subsequently
charged with a sexual offence against Marlene (which is
being dealt with in
another court). The police allege that Marlene did not consent to sexual
intercourse. Jim asserts his innocence
and denies he is the person responsible.
Gwen has brought an application before the Tribunal to terminate
Marlene’s pregnancy. She has also applied to the Tribunal
to remove Jim
as administrator on the basis of the criminal charges, but that application is
being heard at a later date.
The active parties before the Tribunal at the hearing of the application to
terminate the pregnancy are Marlene, Gwen and Jim. Also
present at the hearing
are two members of the public who are unconnected with the family and a member
of the press.
Gwen is concerned that Marlene is frightened of Jim and feels intimidated in
his presence. She wants Jim to be excluded from the
hearing while Marlene
answers the Tribunal’s questions. Gwen also feels very embarrassed
talking about Marlene’s pregnancy
in front of so many people. She
doesn’t think members of the public should be allowed at the hearing. Jim
protests and says
that this is the first he has ever heard of Marlene being
frightened of him. He complains that it is not fair to exclude him at
of case study
4.83 Under model 1, the Tribunal would have no authority to exclude Jim, the
attending members of the public or the press from proceedings.
4.84 In contrast, under model 2 (the current law), the Tribunal would be
empowered to exclude any of these people provided certain
criteria is met. At
present in Queensland, the Tribunal would have to be satisfied that exclusion is
desirable because of the confidential
nature of the information or matter or for
another reason, having regard, as discussed above, to the principle of open
justice, what
is required by procedural fairness and the General Principles. If
the Tribunal considered that Jim’s presence at the hearing,
or part of it,
would frighten or intimidate Marlene and compromise her ability to give
evidence, it might be satisfied that Jim should
be excluded from that part of
the hearing. (In that case, the Tribunal would need to take other steps to
inform Jim of what has
occurred in his absence in order to accord him procedural
4.85 However, given the importance of giving Jim an opportunity to respond to
any allegations that might be made against him, the
Tribunal may consider that
he should not be excluded from the hearing. It is also noted that even if Jim
is excluded, the factors
warranting his exclusion may be insufficient to justify
an order that members of the public or the press also be excluded.
4.86 Under model 3, the Tribunal would be empowered to close proceedings to
members of the public. However, it may be precluded from
excluding certain
people, such as active parties. In that case, Jim could not be excluded from
the hearing because, as Marlene’s
administrator, he is an active party to
the proceeding.
4.87 Under model 4, Tribunal proceedings would be closed to both members of
the public and press, unless the Tribunal otherwise permits.
As an active
party, Jim would generally be able to attend but the Tribunal may have
discretion to exclude him. Such discretion
would likely be applied in much the
same way as it would under model 2.
preliminary view
4.88 At this stage of its review, the Commission has a preliminary preference
for a version of model 2: open hearings with power to
close proceedings and hold
them in private and/or to exclude particular people from a hearing, with that
power being guided by specific
legislative criteria. The Commission also
considers a power to prohibit or restrict disclosure of information to a party
some cases, be necessary to give effect to a direction to exclude a
person from part of hearing.
4.89 Open hearings are important because the principle of open justice and
the accountability that it brings is critical in this jurisdiction
significance of the decisions being made. However, a discretion to close
proceedings to the public and to exclude particular
people should be available,
given the protective nature of the system and the private and sensitive
information that is often discussed.
This includes the exclusion of an active
party. Although such a step is a more serious matter than closing proceedings
to the public,
there may be
situations where it is warranted.
4.90 The Commission does not have views at this stage as to what the
legislative criteria that guides this discretion should be.
However, it is
suggested that it would need to be sufficiently broad so as to avoid
constraining what needs to be a relatively flexible
discretion.
The Commission
is conscious that any discretion will need to be exercised having regard to the
principle of open justice, what is
required by procedural fairness and the
General Principles.
FOR SUBMISSIONS
4.91 The Commission is interested in receiving submissions in response to the
following questions, or on any other issues respondents
consider relevant to the
issue of access to Tribunal hearings. You may wish to nominate your preferred
legal model, or provide more
detailed comment on the particular issues that
Possible legal models
Should Queensland’s guardianship legislation reflect one
of the following models in relation to access to Tribunal hearings:
(a) Model 1:
open hearings with no power to close;
(b) Model 2: open hearings with power to close, or to exclude particular
(c) Model 3: open hearings with power to close, or to exclude, but not
particular people;
(d) Model 4: closed hearings with power to admit people; or
(e) other models?
Particular issues
4-2 Should Tribunal hearings generally be required to be held in public or
in private?
4-3 If hearings are generally required to be held in
the Tribunal have power to make an order to close a hearing or part of a hearing
to the public, or to exclude particular
people from a hearing, or part of a
4-4 If so, what legislative criteria, if any, should guide the
Tribunal’s power:
(a) the Tribunal may make an order if it is satisfied it is desirable to
do so because of the confidential nature of particular information
or matter or
for another reason (the current legislative test in Queensland);
(b) the Tribunal may make an order taking into account as the basis for
its consideration the principle that it is desirable that
hearings should be
held in public (the requirement imposed by
section 35(3)
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1975
(c) the Tribunal may make an order if it is satisfied there is a real
possibility of doing injustice to, or inflicting a serious
disadvantage upon, a
party, a witness or a person giving information if the proceedings were in
public (a criterion suggested by
Brennan J in
Re Pochi and Minister for
Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
(d) the Tribunal may make an order if it is satisfied it is in the best
interests of the person to whom the proceedings relate (the
legislative test in
Western Australia);
(e) the Tribunal may make an order if it is satisfied it is necessary to
avoid the possibility of serious harm or injustice to any
person (the
legislative test in Ontario);
(f) other criteria?
4-5 In relation to question 4-4, should different legislative criteria
apply to the exclusion of the public and to the exclusion of
a party, and if so,
what should the criteria be?
4-6 If the Tribunal has power to make an order to close a hearing or part
of a hearing to the public or to exclude particular people,
are there particular
categories of people who should not be excluded:
(a) people who are directly interested in the proceedings or otherwise
authorised by the Tribunal to be present (the legislative
requirement in Western
Australia and the Northern Territory);
(b) people who are involved in the proceedings (the legislative
requirement in South Australia);
(c) for proceedings about special health matters, the adult’s
guardian, attorney, or statutory health attorney (a current legislative
requirement in Queensland);
(d) other people?
4-7 Should the Tribunal have power to make an order to prohibit or
restrict disclosure of information given at a hearing to an active
4-8 If so, what legislative criteria, if any, should guide the
Tribunal’s power to make such an order:
(a) the same criteria as should apply to the power to close a hearing or
part of a hearing to the public or to exclude particular
people (see question
4-4 above);
(b) if the Tribunal is satisfied disclosure would cause serious harm to
the adult’s health or put a person’s safety at
risk (as is provided
in relation to the Mental Health Review Tribunal);
(c) other criteria?
4-9 If the Tribunal prohibits or restricts the disclosure of information
given at a hearing to an active party, should the Tribunal
be required to
disclose the information to a representative of that party?
4-10 If the Tribunal has power to make an order to close a hearing or part
of a hearing to the public or to exclude particular people,
or to prohibit or
restrict disclosure of information given at a hearing to an active party, should
the legislation recognise a ‘reasonable
excuse’ for not complying
with such an order?
4-11 If hearings are generally required to be held in
should the Tribunal have power to make an order to admit the public or
particular people to a hearing, or part of a hearing?
4-12 If so, what legislative criteria, if any, should guide the
Tribunal’s power?
4-13 In relation to question 4-12, should different legislative criteria
apply to the admission of the public and the admission of
particular people and,
if so, what should the criteria be?
4-14 If the Tribunal has power to make an order about who may or may not
attend a hearing, or part of a hearing, or make an order
prohibiting or
restricting disclosure of information given at a hearing to an active party,
should it have power to make such an
order on its own initiative or only on the
application of an active party?
4-15 If the Tribunal has power to make an order about who may or may not
attend a hearing, or part of a hearing, or prohibiting or
restricting disclosure
of information given at a hearing to an active party, who should be able to make
such an order:
(a) the Tribunal;
(b) the Registrar?
before the Tribunal
INTRODUCTION
5.1 Queensland’s guardianship legislation creates a statutory right for
active parties to a proceeding to inspect documents
that are before the
Tribunal. However, that right may be displaced by the Tribunal through a
confidentiality order, which may prohibit
or restrict the disclosure of those
documents. The issue examined in this chapter is whether and, if so, in what
circumstances,
an active party’s
right to inspect documents
before the Tribunal should be capable of being displaced by a confidentiality
LAW IN QUEENSLAND
general right of inspection for active parties
Section 108
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
(Qld) provides that each active party in a
proceeding must be given a reasonable opportunity to present their case. This
inspecting documents before the Tribunal that are directly relevant to
an issue in the proceeding.
The active parties to a proceeding
• the adult;
• the applicant (if not the adult);
• the proposed guardian, administrator or attorney for the adult if the
proceeding is for the appointment or reappointment of
such person;
• any current guardian, administrator or attorney for the adult;
• the Adult Guardian;
• the Public Trustee; and
• any other person joined as a party to the proceeding.
Section 134
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
which deals with written reports prepared by Tribunal staff, provides that each
of the active parties in a proceeding must
be advised of the contents of and,
upon request, be given a copy of any such report that is received in evidence in
a proceeding.
The Commission
understands, however, that Tribunal staff prepare such written reports in only a
very limited category of
5.4 The rights to inspect documents under
section 108
and to receive a copy
of a report under
section 134
are subject to limitations.
Section 108(3)
provides that the Tribunal may displace the right to inspect a document in a
confidentiality order. It also provides that the Tribunal
may make rules to
prescribe conditions in relation to document inspection.
Section 134(3)
similarly provides that the right to be given a copy of a report by Tribunal
staff may be displaced in a confidentiality order.
Sections 108
Guardianship and Administration Act
(Qld) relevantly provide:
108 Procedural fairness
(1) The tribunal must observe the rules of procedural fairness.
(2) Each active party in a proceeding must be given a reasonable opportunity
to present the active party’s case and, in particular,
to inspect a
document before the tribunal directly relevant to an issue in the proceeding and
to make submissions about the document.
(3) However—
(a) the tribunal may displace the right to inspect the document in a
confidentiality order; and
(b) the tribunal rules may prescribe conditions in relation to the
inspection of the document. [note omitted]
134 Report by tribunal staff
(1) The tribunal may—
(a) receive in evidence in a proceeding a written report by tribunal staff on
a matter in the proceeding; and
(b) have regard to the report.
(2) Generally, if the tribunal receives the report in evidence in a
proceeding, the adult concerned in the proceeding and each other
active party in
the proceeding must be—
(a) advised of the contents of the report; and
(b) upon request, given a copy of the report.
(3) However, the right to be given a copy may be displaced in a
confidentiality order.
of right to inspect
5.6 The right to inspect documents under
section 108
is granted to a person
who is an ‘active party in a proceeding’ as part of giving him or
her ‘a reasonable opportunity
to present the active party’s
An issue to
consider is the scope of this right to inspect and to whom it applies.
Section 108(2)
permits the ‘inspection of a document directly
relevant to an issue in the proceeding’. This appears to be a relatively
broad right, particularly if disparate applications are characterised and dealt
with as a single proceeding. For example, if a proceeding
involved separate
applications for guardianship and administration, the provision as currently
worded might allow a person with an
interest in the administration application
to also inspect documents relevant only to the guardianship application.
5.8 This wide interpretation may be read down, however, in that the power to
inspect documents is conferred in order to provide an
active party with a
reasonable opportunity to present his or her case. If, for example, a
party’s application related to an
adult’s health matters,
would not create a right to inspect those documents relevant only to
financial matters.
of the provision may benefit, however, from some clarification.
Non-parties
5.9 The right to inspect documents does not extend to non-parties to a
proceeding. A non-party is not an ‘active party’
and so falls
section 108.
There are no other specific provisions in the guardianship
legislation that grant non-parties a right to inspect
available to a non-party who wishes to acquire such a right is to seek to be
joined as a party.
5.10 Although non-parties do not have a
to inspect documents,
the Tribunal may have power to permit the disclosure of documents to some
non-parties in appropriate cases.
While the Tribunal does not have an inherent
been granted relatively wide statutory powers in relation to the conduct of its
proceedings.
Those powers
may permit some non-party disclosures such as showing to a witness a document
5.11 Those powers would apply, however, only while proceedings were active
and so would not permit disclosure after the Tribunal has
made a decision, which
is the situation considered next.
by parties after a decision and prior to an appeal
5.12 Doubts have been raised about whether such a right to inspect documents
arises in the situation where the Tribunal’s decision
in a proceeding has
It seems that the
right to inspect documents in
section 108
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
(Qld) would not apply in that situation.
5.13 Once a decision has been made by the
Tribunal, there may no longer be a ‘proceeding’ for which a person
an active party.
Where the Tribunal has made its decision, the only avenue of appeal is to the
Supreme Court.
After handing
down its decision, the Tribunal no longer has a role in the matter, which
suggests the ‘proceeding’ has
5.14 Further, the right to inspect documents that is granted in
is framed in terms of allowing a person a reasonable opportunity to
present their case, rather than as a more general right to inspect.
is consistent with the Presidential Direction ‘General Information in
relation to the Inspection of Files and Confidentiality
Orders’ which is
discussed below.
5.15 It has been argued that
section 108(1)
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
(Qld) provides an alternate basis for a right to
inspect documents by a person who was an active party to proceedings in which a
decision has been handed
That provision
requires the Tribunal to observe the rules of procedural fairness. The argument
is that part of the requirement
to observe procedural fairness includes an
obligation to allow inspection of documents after a decision has been
5.16 However, the argument supposes that the fair hearing rule of procedural
fairness requires access to documents
a decision has been made in
the proceeding. It is suggested that the fair hearing limb of procedural
fairness imposes obligations
only in relation to the
so would not require the Tribunal to allow inspection of documents after the
hearing has concluded and a decision has
5.17 It is suggested, therefore, that any rights of active parties to inspect
documents under
section 108
are likely to cease on the determination of the
proceedings before the Tribunal. This would mean that once a decision has been
for a proceeding, a person who was an active party for that proceeding will
not have a right to inspect the relevant documents under
section 108
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
5.18 Such a right may arise, however, once an appeal has been filed with the
Supreme Court. When the Tribunal receives notice that
an appeal has been
lodged, a copy of the Tribunal’s file is transferred to the Supreme Court
This will enliven
the Supreme Court’s processes relating to the inspection of its
5.19 Although no right of inspection exists after
a decision has been made under
section 108
, the Tribunal may potentially be able
to grant a person access to a limited category of documents under
section 249
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
That section imposes
a duty of confidentiality on those involved in the administration of the
but creates an exception
that permits disclosure where it is authorised by the person to whom the
information relates.
may allow the Registry to permit inspection of documents that are on the
Tribunal file which would otherwise be ‘confidential
information’
under the Act.
However, the
category of information released will be narrow as a person can authorise
disclosure of information only to the extent
the information relates to his or
her own personal affairs.
5.20 In this chapter, the Commission will proceed
as outlined above and examine the operation of the confidentiality provisions so
far as they impact upon the right of active parties to a proceeding to inspect
documents where that proceeding has not yet been determined.
As noted above,
the question whether the application of this right should be extended to cover
situations where, firstly, the Tribunal
has made a decision but an appeal has
not yet been lodged, and secondly, to non-parties, will be considered in stage
two of the Commission’s
Confidentiality
5.21 Under section 109(2)(d) of
Guardianship
and Administration Act 2000
(Qld), the Tribunal may give directions in a
confidentiality order to prohibit or restrict disclosure, to an active party, of
contained in documents filed with, or received by, the
The reference to
‘matters contained in documents’ permits the Tribunal to make a
limited order that imposes confidentiality
in relation to particular parts of a
document only.
5.22 In making such an order, the Tribunal must
be ‘satisfied it is desirable to do so because of the confidential nature
particular information or matter or for another
having regard
to what is required in its jurisdiction by open justice and procedural
The Tribunal must
also apply the General Principles, including General Principle 11, which refers
to the adult’s right to
confidentiality of
information.
Finally, if the
matter is one relating to special health care, the Tribunal must ensure that any
confidentiality order does not
impede the adult’s relevant substitute
decision-maker for health matters from forming and expressing a view about the
special health care.
Section 109
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
(Qld) relevantly provides:
(2) … [I]f the tribunal is satisfied it is desirable to do so because
of the confidential nature of particular information
or matter or for another
reason, the tribunal may, by order (a
confidentiality
(d) give directions prohibiting or restricting the disclosure to some or all
of the active parties in a proceeding of—
(ii) matters contained in documents filed with, or received by, the tribunal
5.24 Very similar provisions in other
almost identical
power is conferred on the New South Wales Administrative
Decisions Tribunal,
Appeal Panel of which has jurisdiction to hear appeals of decisions of that
State’s Guardianship
5.25 When considering whether it was ‘desirable’ to make such an
order in relation to an appeal of a decision by the Guardianship
Tribunal, the
Appeal Panel considered that ‘[t]he fundamental principles of open justice
and procedural fairness mean that
[the relevant provision] should be construed
5.26 The Commonwealth Administrative Appeals
Tribunal also has a similarly worded
In relation to that
power, the Federal Court has held that even where a confidentiality order is
made, the Tribunal’s obligation
to accord procedural fairness
The Tribunal must
act as fairly as possible given the existence and content of the confidentiality
order it has made.
Presidential Direction
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(Qld), Tribunal
rules may prescribe conditions in relation to the inspection of a document. At
present, no such rules have been
made. However, the Tribunal has issued a
Presidential Direction entitled ‘General Information in relation to the
of Files and Confidentiality
‘provide information to parties as to the general procedures the Tribunal
has adopted’ in relation to file
inspection.
5.28 The Direction
summarises the position under the legislation for inspection of and access to
filed documents that are directly
relevant to an issue in the proceeding (prior
to and at a hearing) by active parties. It also contains a list of the types of
that are accessible, and outlines the practical arrangements for file
inspection prior to hearings. It also refers to inspection
representatives of active
Tribunal Administration Practice
5.29 The Tribunal has also developed an
Administration Practice for dealing with requests for confidentiality orders in
relation to
documents provided for a proceeding, particularly pre-hearing
Requests for
documents provided to the Tribunal to be treated as confidential are to be made
in writing.
The matter is
then heard in chambers by the President or the presiding
5.30 The person is advised by Registry staff if
their request for confidentiality is denied. Unless the person can provide
information to support their request, they must nominate whether the
document will either be returned to them and not be considered
by the Tribunal
or, alternatively, remain with the Tribunal and be able to be viewed by the
active parties.
5.31 The Administration Practice also includes
three examples of when the Tribunal may be satisfied it is desirable to make a
confidentiality
order, namely, where the inspection or access
• cause serious harm to the health or safety of a person; or
• involve the unreasonable disclosure of information relating to a
person’s personal affairs; or
• breach a confidentiality provision imposed by a person who supplied
the information.
Confidentiality
orders in practice
5.32 The Commission was given empirical information by the Tribunal about how
and when confidentiality orders were made during an
eleven month period from 1
July 2005 to 26 May 2006. All but two of the confidentiality orders made during
that period related to
the non-disclosure of documents. This means that 49 such
orders were made in 46 applications, out of the 5083 applications that
to the Tribunal during that
The vast majority of
those orders (42 out of 49) were made prior to the
is applying for confidentiality orders and what documents are they seeking to
5.33 The Commission understands that the majority of the Tribunal’s
confidentiality orders were sought by health and other professionals
of reports and other documents relating to an adult’s medical and health
Most of the other
orders were sought by the adult’s family
Some orders were
also sought by the Adult Guardian and the Public
is the Tribunal making confidentiality orders?
5.34 The reason most often indicated for the making of a confidentiality
order has been a risk of harm to the adult, being either
a risk to the
therapeutic relationship and associated psychological distress, or a risk of
harm to the adult more
The next most
commonly indicated reason has been the confidential source of the
information.
Several other
reasons have also been cited, including the risk of harm to a third party, and
professional privilege.
5.35 The Commission also understands that, in applying the General
Principles, the Tribunal has, on one occasion, granted a confidentiality
preventing the adult and his or her family from inspecting a medical or related
health report on the ground there was a history
of the family misusing the
adult’s confidential
information.
is the Tribunal precluding from document inspection?
5.36 The Commission understands that most often, confidentiality orders have
been made to prevent disclosure to the
Many other orders
have precluded all of the parties involved in the proceeding from inspecting the
relevant document and some orders
have been made in respect of the adult’s
family members only.
Commission understands that in one case, everyone except for the parties’
legal representatives was precluded from viewing
LEGISLATION
IN OTHER JURISDICTIONS
5.37 Victoria and Western Australia are the only jurisdictions in which
parties to a proceeding for a guardianship matter have a statutory
document inspection.
legislation in those States also permits the discretionary limitation of those
rights. In those jurisdictions without equivalent
legislative provisions, such
as New South Wales, the rights of parties to access documents, and the
circumstances in which those
rights can be displaced, are based on the
requirements of procedural
Section 146
Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
(Vic) establishes statutory rights to
inspect and copy documents filed with the Victorian Civil and Administrative
5.39 It provides that a party in a proceeding may, without charge, inspect
the file of that proceeding,
which contains all documents lodged in the
proceeding.
A party is also
permitted to copy these documents, although this attracts a
Non-parties may also,
on payment of a fee, inspect a file and obtain a copy of any part of the
These rights are,
however, subject to:
• any conditions specified in the Tribunal
• any contrary direction of the
• any order of the Tribunal under section 101 of the
• any certificate under section 53 or 54 of the
5.40 As permitted by
section 146(4)(a)
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
Tribunal’s Rules Committee has made rules that regulate the way in which
these rights may be
Rule 6.23 of the
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Rules 1998
(Vic) deals with
parties to a proceeding and distinguishes between a represented or proposed
represented person and other parties
to a proceeding.
Represented
person (the adult)
5.41 Rule 6.23(a) regulates the right of a
represented or proposed represented person to personally inspect the file. It
that the represented person may inspect or obtain a copy of the file
‘except to the extent’ that a member of the Tribunal
is satisfied
that the person ‘should not be entitled personally to inspect or otherwise
have access to all or any part of the
file’ because the inspection or
access would:
• cause serious harm to the health of the person or to the health or
safety or another person; or
• involve the unreasonable disclosure of information relating to the
personal affairs of any person; or
• breach a confidentiality provision imposed by a person who supplied
information that is contained in that part of the file.
5.42 However, if a represented or proposed
represented person is unable to inspect the file or a document on the file under
the Tribunal may permit a person who is representing that person
before the Tribunal to inspect or obtain a copy of the file or otherwise
access to the document.
5.43 Rules 6.23(c) and (d) impose limits on the right of any other party to
inspect and obtain a copy of the file. Those limitations
differ depending on
the stage of the proceeding at which the inspection is sought.
5.44 Prior to the hearing, such a party may
inspect and obtain a copy of certain limited documents on the file, including
those containing
adverse criticism of him or
However, that
inspection may occur only if a Tribunal member is satisfied the inspection would
• cause serious harm to the health or safety of another person; or
• involve the unreasonable disclosure of information relating to the
personal affairs of any person; or
• breach a confidentiality provision imposed by a person who supplied
information that is contained in the documents or document.
5.45 After the hearing, a party’s right of
inspection applies to all documents that were relied on by the Tribunal in
its decision.
situation, inspection may occur, except where the Tribunal is satisfied that one
of the above outcomes may be caused as
a result of that
inspection.
Non-parties
5.46 Finally, former
rule 6.24 was intended to regulate the right of non-parties to inspect and
obtain copies of a file for a proceeding.
It stated that a non-party must be
specifically authorised by a Tribunal member to inspect and obtain a copy of any
part of a file,
although it did not set out the circumstances in which the
Tribunal may authorise such
inspection.
However, in
Herald and Weekly Times Ltd v
the Victorian
Supreme Court declared that the Tribunal’s Rules Committee did not have
the power to make this rule and so it
had ‘always been void and of no
Rule 6.24 has
now been repealed.
5.47 In Western Australia,
section 112
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1990
(WA) creates a right to inspect documents before the
The legislation
distinguishes between the rights of the adult (or the person representing him or
her), other parties, and non-parties,
but no distinction is made between
inspection before and after a hearing. The Tribunal is also granted a broad
discretion to displace
the rights of
inspection.
Section 112(1)
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1990
(WA) provides that a represented person, a person in
respect of whom an application under the Act is made, or a person representing
any such person in a proceeding is entitled to inspect or otherwise have access
to documents and material lodged with or held by
the Tribunal for the purposes
of the application. The same entitlements apply to any accounts submitted by an
administrator to the
Public Trustee.
5.49 The legislation then confers discretion on the Tribunal to ‘order
otherwise’,
the circumstances in which the Tribunal may exercise that discretion are not
5.50 Section 112(2) of the Act grants a right of inspection to other parties
and their representatives in a proceeding, to documents
and material lodged with
or held by the Tribunal for the proceeding except:
• a document or material that is or contains a medical opinion not
concerning that party; or
• if the Tribunal otherwise orders.
5.51 Again, the circumstances in which the
Tribunal may exercise the discretion to order that a party not inspect or have
certain material are not specified. The Tribunal has said, however,
that in some circumstances, the right of inspection might be
documents ‘commensurate with the nature of their [the party’s]
interest in the
5.52 Finally, section 112(4) gives discretion to the Tribunal to authorise a
non-party, upon application, to inspect or otherwise
have access to documents or
material lodged with or held by the Tribunal for an application. The Tribunal
may authorise such inspection
or access either conditionally or
unconditionally
and may make
any other order ‘contemplated by this
circumstances in which the Tribunal may authorise such inspection are not
fairness at common law: New South Wales
5.53 In the remaining jurisdictions without
legislative provisions dealing with access to documents and when that access can
these matters will be decided by reference to the common law and what
it requires by way of procedural
For example, in
New South Wales, the
Guardianship Act 1987
(NSW) does not specify whether
or when a party to a proceeding should be given access to documents before the
Guardianship Tribunal,
but nevertheless the Tribunal is required at common law
to observe the rules of procedural
5.54 The law in New South Wales in relation to what is required by procedural
fairness in relation to documents relied on by the Guardianship
Tribunal will be
considered further because there are a number of recent decisions of the Appeal
Panel of the Administrative Decisions
Tribunal that examine this
5.55 The most significant decision is
GM v Guardianship
Although that
decision did not deal specifically with access to
the Appeal Panel
established a two-step process of inquiry in determining the Guardianship
Tribunal’s obligation to accord
procedural fairness, and in particular the
hearing rule, which has been applied subsequently to situations involving
rights to inspect
inquiry is whether the particular person is entitled to
be afforded procedural
This involves two
• whether the person’s rights, interests, or legitimate
expectations are affected.
The Appeal Panel found that the making of an order by the Guardianship Tribunal
(for example to appoint a guardian) will always
affect the rights of the adult,
and that the rights, interests or legitimate expectations of others may also be
affected, although
this does not occur simply because a person is a party to the
proceedings.
• whether the requirements of procedural fairness are excluded by the
legislation.
Panel concluded that no intention to exclude the rules of procedural fairness is
demonstrated in the
Guardianship Act 1987
inquiry is, if the rules of procedural fairness do
apply, what steps is the Guardianship Tribunal required to
Guardianship Tribunal
the relevant rule was the hearing rule. In determining the operation of the
hearing rule, the Appeal Panel considered the following
principles:
• The hearing rule will only arise in relation to adverse information
that is ‘credible, relevant and significant to the
• The content of the hearing rule must be ‘appropriate and
adapted to the circumstances of the particular
Panel considered the task ‘is to determine the content of the hearing rule
in light of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction,
the statutory requirements about
how that jurisdiction is to be exercised and judicial statements concerning the
meaning of the obligation
to abide by the rules of natural
• At a minimum, the ‘substance or gravamen’ of the adverse
evidence should be disclosed to the
• However, the general rule that the person be given an opportunity to
respond to adverse information may be displaced in ‘exceptional
circumstances’ such as where there is a ‘need to keep material
confidential, to maintain secrecy or to hear a matter
5.58 One issue raised in some of the decisions of
the Appeal Panel that followed
GM v Guardianship Tribunal
is the role of
procedural fairness in a protective jurisdiction. While some commentators have
suggested that the rights and interests
of the adult may warrant limiting the
strict application of the requirements of procedural
the Appeal Panel
has suggested instead that disclosure of documents to a party whose interests
are affected will ordinarily help
to ensure the best decision for the adult is
A fairer and more transparent approach which accords with the principles of
procedural fairness, is to give parties access to documents
(or communicate the
substance of those documents) so that they can respond to the material and raise
any concerns they may have.
In doing so, the interests of the subject person in
being free from exploitation and abuse, will generally be promoted.
FOR CONSIDERATION
5.59 There are several issues to consider when examining the displacement by
a confidentiality order of an active party’s right
to inspect documents
before the Tribunal:
• Should the Tribunal be able to make a confidentiality order in
relation to documents?
• If so, when should it be able to make a confidentiality order?
• What is the meaning of ‘restricting’ disclosure of
• Should there be an option to disclose documents to a party’s
representative only?
the Tribunal be able to make a confidentiality order in relation to
5.60 A threshold question is whether the Tribunal should have the power to
order that the content of a document, or part of a document,
confidential from some or all of the active parties. It may be thought
appropriate to do so in particular
circumstances.
should the Tribunal be able to make a confidentiality order?
5.61 In Queensland, the Tribunal may make a
confidentiality order only if it is ‘satisfied it is desirable to do so
of the confidential nature of particular information or matter or for
another reason’.
Tribunal must also have regard to what is required in its jurisdiction by open
justice and procedural
and apply the
General Principles, including General Principle 11, which refers to the
adult’s right to confidentiality of
information.
5.62 The criteria in Victoria’s Rules are more detailed and refer
• serious harm to the health or safety of the adult or another
• unreasonable disclosure of information relating to the personal
affairs of any person; and
• breaching a confidentiality provision imposed by a person who
supplied the information contained in the document.
5.63 These three factors are also referred to in the Queensland
Tribunal’s Administration Practice as examples of when confidentiality
orders might be made by the
5.64 A preliminary issue to consider is what criteria should guide the
Tribunal when making a confidentiality order in relation to
the inspection of
documents. Consideration might be given to whether the more detailed Victorian
approach should be adopted, particularly
if those criteria already reflect the
circumstances in which orders are being made. If such an approach is taken, it
may also be
valuable, however, to retain the current reference to making an
order ‘for any other reason’ as there may be circumstances
outside more detailed criteria where it is still appropriate for the Tribunal to
make a confidentiality order.
5.65 Another issue for consideration is whether the harm that might result
from not disclosing information should be considered when
confidentiality order. While this may currently be considered in practice,
there is no express obligation in the legislation
to consider the potentially
harmful implications (for both the adult and others) of withholding the
5.66 A further issue is whether a distinction
should be made between making such an order in relation to the adult and making
in relation to another active party. In Queensland, no such distinction is
made with the Tribunal being given power to displace
the statutory right of
‘some or all of the active parties’ in a proceeding to inspect filed
Similarly, no
distinction is made under the relevant legislation in Western
5.67 The Victorian Rules do distinguish, however, between the adult and other
First, harm to the
person seeking access to documents is only relevant if that person is the
The criterion based
on harm in relation to access by other parties refers only to harm to another
person and so would not include
harm to the party
themselves.
5.68 Second, there is a shift in onus depending on the circumstances of
inspection. If the adult is the person seeking inspection,
then they are
entitled to have access to the documents
the Tribunal is satisfied
that harm, or one of the other listed consequences, would
However, if the
person is a party and they are seeking inspection before a hearing, they must
first show that none of the listed
consequences will result before that right of
inspection will arise.
is the meaning of ‘restricting’ disclosure of documents?
5.69 The Tribunal is empowered to
(in addition to
prohibiting) the disclosure of matters contained in documents before the
Tribunal. The meaning of the word ‘prohibit’
in this context is
relatively clear: disclosure of matters contained in a document to the
particular person or people would not be
permitted at all. However, the scope
of a power to ‘restrict’ such disclosure may allow for
confidentiality orders that
grant some, though limited, access.
5.70 This might occur if a confidentiality order allows conditional
inspection. For example, a person may be granted access to a
document but be
required to keep the information from certain other people who might misuse it.
Another example might be permitting
access to a document, but on the condition
that the person undertakes counselling to minimise any harm that might be caused
the document.
there be an option to disclose to a party’s representative only?
5.71 If a decision is made to withhold a document from a party, it may still
be possible to disclose the document in confidence to
the party’s
representative, for example, their lawyer. This may be regarded as preferable
to not disclosing the document at
5.72 In Victoria, the Tribunal is specifically granted a discretion to allow
a party’s representative to inspect a document,
even if the document is
not disclosed to the actual
5.73 In Queensland, this is referred to in the Presidential
and the Commission
also understands that such an approach has been adopted in cases before the
This raises the
question whether such a practice should be expressly authorised, or required, by
the legislation.
5.74 This part of the chapter briefly considers, in the context of access to
documents, the three concepts examined in Chapter 3 that
need to be balanced
when determining the role of confidentiality in the guardianship system: open
justice, procedural fairness, and
the nature of the guardianship system.
5.75 The principle of open justice requires that members of the public should
be able to inspect documents that have come into existence
for the purpose of
judicial proceedings.
achieve the goals of open justice, namely, accountability of decision-making
through public scrutiny
public education about the law and legal
members of the
public must be able to follow the court or tribunal’s decision-making
process. This is difficult without knowing
what is contained in documents being
considered by the court or tribunal, particularly given that documents are often
read by the
judge prior to a hearing and not discussed in detail during
proceedings.
5.76 These arguments about open justice relate to access by the public at
large, but apply with even greater force in relation to
the parties to a
proceeding. As such, open justice would favour parties to a proceeding being
able to inspect documents that are
before the court or tribunal.
5.77 Restricting a party’s access to documents may breach the rules of
procedural fairness. The hearing rule requires first,
that any evidence upon
which the decision-maker intends to rely be disclosed to the person whose
interests will be affected and second,
that the person be given the opportunity
to respond to that evidence.
That is, the person should be given an opportunity to ‘deal with adverse
information that is credible, relevant or significant
to the decision to be
Precisely what
is required will depend on the circumstances of each
5.78 It may be sufficient that a person be given an opportunity to respond to
the substance of a document,
but the nature of the document itself may be such as to require its actual
production so that a party has a meaningful opportunity
to deal with the
information.
It might also
be necessary to allow the person to ask questions and to adjourn proceedings to
enable them to consider the document
and to obtain further evidence of their
5.79 Although it is possible to make a confidentiality order and still meet
the requirements of procedural
depriving a party
of access to a relevant document sits uncomfortably with the notion of the fair
and transparent decision-making
process favoured by the hearing
Concerns have also
been raised about the quality of decision-making that is not based on complete
and tested evidence.
of the guardianship system
5.80 The protective nature of the guardianship system may call for documents
before the Tribunal to be kept confidential in some circumstances.
concern is the safeguarding of the adult’s rights and interests, and this
includes the adult’s privacy
This issue may be
especially acute in relation to the disclosure of material prior to a hearing
and, therefore, prior to the material’s
relevance and veracity having been
[N]ot all information received by a board or tribunal will necessarily be
relevant to a hearing, nor may it in fact be substantiated.
To distribute it
may cause significant and unnecessary embarrassment to the person with a
disability or to others involved in the
5.81 As such, the nature of the guardianship system may favour non-disclosure
of the private and sensitive information considered
proceedings.
This may be
particularly appropriate in non-contentious proceedings where each of the
parties is already aware of the matters contained
in the document or documents
so further dissemination is
unnecessary.
5.82 The protective nature of the system may also weigh against disclosure of
a document to an adult if such disclosure may be harmful
to the adult. For
example, there may be concerns that disclosure to the adult of a medical report
may damage the therapeutic relationship
the adult has with the health
professional who provided the
5.83 Decisions by the Tribunal, however, affect fundamental rights of the
adult (and other parties).
The Tribunal also deals with claims adverse to particular parties that can
involve serious, and sometimes criminal, misbehaviour.
The significance of
these matters suggests that a party should not be deprived of an opportunity to
respond to a prejudicial document.
It may also be that allowing a person to
respond to a document should be preferred as that may assist the Tribunal to
make a decision
that best meets the adult’s
LEGAL MODELS
5.84 The Commission has identified three possible models, outlined below, for
how the law might deal with the issue of confidentiality
in relation to
documents before the Tribunal. A hypothetical case study will be used to
illustrate these models and how they might
1: No power to limit disclosure of documents to parties
5.85 In this model, the Tribunal would have no power to make an order
prohibiting or restricting disclosure of matters contained in
documents before
the Tribunal. The current statutory entitlement to inspect documents could not
be overridden.
2: Power to limit disclosure of documents to parties but no criteria to guide
5.86 Model 2 reflects the current position in Western Australia. The
relevant tribunal in that State is empowered to limit disclosure
of documents to
parties but there are no legislative criteria specified for the exercise of that
discretion. The legislation provides
that parties may have access to the
documents unless the ‘Tribunal orders
otherwise’.
3: Power to limit disclosure of documents to parties with criteria to guide
5.87 This model reflects the current approach in Queensland and
Tribunal is empowered to limit disclosure of matters contained in documents
before it but the exercise of this discretion
is guided by specific criteria.
If this model is preferred, a further question arises as to what matters should
be included in those
5.88 Under the Queensland legislation, the Tribunal must be satisfied that
matters in a document warrant non-disclosure because of
the ‘confidential
nature of particular information or matter or for another
Edward is 84 years old and lives in an aged care facility. He had been
living independently but he had a stroke a year ago and acquired
brain damage as
a result. He has a son, Peter, and a daughter, Emily. Peter believes Edward
has impaired capacity for decisions
involving a moderate level of complexity and
that his needs are not being met so he brings an application to the Tribunal to
be appointed
as guardian and administrator. Emily wishes to contest
Peter’s application and seeks those appointments for herself. Edward
also experiencing clinical depression and is being treated by Padam, a
psychiatrist.
There are a number of documents before the Tribunal at the hearing and an
issue arises as to whether a confidentiality order should
be made (and to whom
it should apply) in relation to two of them: a statement by Jo, a member of the
nursing staff who looks after
Edward, and a report by Padam.
Jo’s statement says that she has often heard Emily yelling at Edward
and being aggressive and bullying towards him. Jo is worried
that if Emily
finds out about this statement, Emily will try to move Edward out of the aged
care facility. Jo is concerned about
how this might affect Edward’s
In part of her psychiatric report, Padam indicates that Edward has a fixed
delusion that his son, Peter, has been poisoning him.
This is not true, but
Padam notes that Edward refuses to accept that his belief is a delusion. She
suggests that Edward requires
ongoing treatment but is concerned that if Edward
learns of her statement to the Tribunal, he will feel betrayed and angry, and
this may affect their ongoing therapeutic relationship. Accordingly, Padam
has requested that her report be kept confidential.
of case study
5.89 The relevant documents in the case study that might be made subject to a
confidentiality order are the statement from Jo at the
aged care facility and
the psychiatric report by Padam. If such orders are to be made, it is likely
they would be made in relation
to Emily for Jo’s statement and in relation
to Edward for the Padam’s report.
5.90 Under model 1, the Tribunal has no power to displace a right to inspect
documents so both documents would need to be disclosed
to all of the parties,
including Emily and Edward. The Tribunal would be precluded from considering
whether such an outcome is appropriate
in the circumstances.
5.91 Under models 2 and 3, however, the Tribunal would be able to limit the
disclosure of matters contained in the documents to active
parties to the
proceeding, including Emily and Edward. The Tribunal’s discretion to do
so would be wider under model 2 than
model 3 given that its discretion under
model 2 is not bounded by statutory criteria. However, in practice, it is
suggested the
Tribunal would take into account similar factors as those likely
to be considered in relation to the model 3 criteria and that the
result would
probably be similar.
5.92 Model 3 requires the Tribunal to have regard to specific criteria, and
the current Queensland law will be used to illustrate
how this model might
5.93 In relation to allowing Emily access to Jo’s statement, the
Tribunal would be able to make a confidentiality order, if
it considers it
desirable because of the confidential nature of the information or for another
Though it is not
specified in the legislation, the Tribunal is likely to have regard to the
potentially harmful impact that disclosure
may have on Edward. Consideration
would probably be given to the likelihood of that harm occurring and its
seriousness. When making
this assessment, the Tribunal would consider the
assertions that Emily has bullied her father and that she may cause difficulties
for Edward’s care at the aged care facility if she learns of Jo’s
5.94 Also likely to be relevant, although not specifically stated in the
legislation, is the significance of the allegations made
desirability of her having an opportunity to comment on what has been said.
What is required will depend on
the circumstances of the case, but if the
Tribunal decided to make a confidentiality order to refuse to provide access to
statement, it may be required nevertheless to convey to Emily the
substance of the allegations made against
5.95 In relation to allowing Edward to inspect Padam’s report, the
Tribunal may again, in practice, consider the potential harm
to Edward that
might be caused by such disclosure, including the likelihood of harm and its
seriousness. Padam’s request for
confidentiality would also be relevant
to encouraging the ongoing and frank engagement with the Tribunal by health
professionals
who might be reluctant to participate if their views are to be
disclosed to others.
5.96 Again, the Tribunal may decide to make a confidentiality order in
relation to Padam’s report, although it would require
a balancing of these
factors. The option of making such an order but conveying to Edward the
substance of the report would also
preliminary view
5.97 The Commission’s preliminary view is that there may be
circumstances when it is appropriate to withhold information from
particularly in cases where disclosure would result in harm to an adult.
5.98 Accordingly, the Commission has a preliminary preference for model 3:
that the Tribunal should have power to limit disclosure
to parties of matters
contained in documents before it, but that the exercise of this discretion
should be guided by specific criteria.
Although the Tribunal would be likely to
consider similar factors under model 2 to the criteria set out under model 3,
the Commission
prefers that any criteria to be considered when making a
confidentiality order should be expressly set out in the legislation.
5.99 The Commission particularly welcomes comment as to what any such
legislative criteria should be.
FOR SUBMISSIONS
5.100 The Commission is interested in receiving submissions in response to
the following questions, or on any other issues respondents
consider relevant to
limiting the disclosure to parties of matters contained in documents before the
Tribunal. You may wish to nominate
your preferred legal model or provide more
detailed comment on the particular issues that follow.
Possible legal models
5-1 Should Queensland’s guardianship legislation reflect one of the
following models in relation to limiting the disclosure
to an active party of
documents before the Tribunal in a proceeding:
(a) Model 1: No power to limit disclosure of documents to
(b) Model 2: Power to limit disclosure of documents to parties but no
criteria to guide discretion;
(c) Model 3: Power to limit disclosure of documents to parties with
criteria to guide discretion;
(d) other models?
Particular issues
5-2 Should the Tribunal have power to make an order to keep documents (or
matters in documents) before it in a proceeding confidential
from an active
5-3 If so, what legislative criteria, if any, should guide the
Tribunal’s power:
(a) the Tribunal may make an order if it is satisfied it is desirable to
do so because of the confidential nature of particular information
or matter or
for another reason (the current legislative test in Queensland);
(b) the Tribunal may make an order if it is satisfied it is necessary to
(i) causing serious harm to the health or safety of the adult; or
(ii) causing serious harm to the health or safety of another person;
(iii) unreasonable disclosure of information relating to the personal
affairs of any person; or
(iv) breaching a confidentiality provision imposed by a person who
supplied information that is contained in the relevant document;
(the current approach in Victoria);
(c) other criteria?
5-4 In relation to question 5-3, should different legislative criteria
apply to orders limiting disclosure of documents to an adult
and to those
directed at other active parties, and if so, what should the criteria
5-5 If the Tribunal has power to make an order to keep documents (or
matters in documents) before it in a proceeding confidential
in relation to an
active party, should the Tribunal also have power to impose conditions on
inspection (by restricting, rather than
prohibiting, disclosure)?
5-6 If the Tribunal has power to make an order to keep documents (or
matters in documents) before it in a proceeding confidential
in relation to an
active party, should the Tribunal be permitted or required to allow the
party’s representative to inspect
the document?
decisions and reasons
INTRODUCTION
6.1 As part of its review of the confidentiality provisions of the
guardianship legislation, the Commission is required to consider
provisions that permit the Tribunal to prohibit or restrict disclosure of a
decision made in a proceeding, or the reasons for
that decision, from a person
who is otherwise entitled to this information. Generally, Queensland’s
guardianship legislation
creates a statutory right for particular people
involved in a proceeding to receive a copy of the Tribunal’s decision and
However, that right may be displaced by a confidentiality order made
by the Tribunal.
6.2 The focus of this chapter is the question of
whether the Tribunal should be able to displace a person’s
statutory entitlement to receive a copy of the Tribunal’s decision and/or
reasons. In stage three of the review, the Commission
will consider the related
issues of whether and, if so, when the Tribunal should be required to give
reasons for a decision, and
to whom Tribunal decisions and reasons should be
The general
confidentiality of decisions and reasons imposed by the prohibition on
publishing information about Tribunal proceedings
section 112
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(Qld) is examined in Chapter 7
of this Discussion Paper.
LAW IN QUEENSLAND
Section 158
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(Qld) provides that,
generally, the Tribunal must give a copy of its decision and any written reasons
for the decision
to the adult
concerned in the matter and to each other active party in the
proceeding.
Those other active parties
• the applicant (if not the adult);
• the proposed guardian, administrator or attorney for the adult if the
proceeding is for the appointment or reappointment of
such person;
• any current guardian, administrator or attorney for the adult;
• the Adult Guardian;
• the Public Trustee; and
• any other person joined as a party to the proceeding.
6.4 A copy of the Tribunal’s decision
(although not a copy of any written reasons for the decision) must also be given
of the people who were given notice of the
The effect of this
is that, in addition to those who receive the Tribunal’s decision as an
active party listed above, members
of the adult’s family, any primary
carer of the adult, and anyone else the Tribunal considered should have been
notified of
the hearing will also receive a copy of the
6.5 The Tribunal is also empowered to order that anyone else may be given a
copy of its decision or its reasons for a decision in
proceeding.
6.6 The rights which a person might have to the Tribunal’s decisions or
reasons may, however, be displaced.
Section 158(3)
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
(Qld) provides that a requirement to give copies of
a decision or reasons may be displaced by a confidentiality order made by the
Tribunal under
section 109(2)
Guardianship and Administration Act
(Qld), the Tribunal may give directions ‘prohibiting or
restricting the disclosure to some or all of the active parties in
proceeding’ of the Tribunal’s decision or
Before making such
a confidentiality order, the Tribunal must be ‘satisfied it is desirable
to do so because of the confidential
nature of particular information or matter
or for another reason’.
The Tribunal will also need to consider what is required in its jurisdiction by
open justice and procedural
and must also apply
the General Principles.
6.8 If the Tribunal wishes to make such an order in relation to the adult, a
further criterion must be satisfied. The Tribunal may
only take such a step if
it considers the disclosure ‘might be prejudicial to the physical or
mental health or wellbeing of
6.9 Section 109 of the Act relevantly provides:
(2) … [I]f the tribunal is satisfied it is desirable to do so because
of the confidential nature of particular information
or matter or for another
reason, the tribunal may, by order (a
confidentiality
(d) give directions prohibiting or restricting the disclosure to some or all
of the active parties in a proceeding of––
(iii) subject to subsection (3), the tribunal’s decision or
(3) The tribunal may make a confidentiality order prohibiting or restricting
disclosure of the tribunal’s decision or reasons
to the adult concerned
only if the tribunal considers disclosure to the adult might be prejudicial to
the physical or mental health
or wellbeing of the adult.
6.10 The Commission understands that the Tribunal has never displaced an
active party’s right to decisions or reasons by making
a confidentiality
LEGISLATION
IN OTHER JURISDICTIONS
6.11 In all but one Australian jurisdiction, the
guardianship or other relevant legislation creates rights for a party to a
(and sometimes others) to receive (either as of right or by request)
a decision made in that proceeding and the reasons for the decision.
addition to Queensland, such provisions exist in the Australian Capital
and Western
In the remaining
right for people involved in the proceedings
to receive the Court’s order,
but not its reasons.
6.12 Apart from Queensland, none of the other
Australian jurisdictions provide for the displacement of these statutory rights
a tribunal to deny a party (or any other person so entitled) a copy of
the decision and accompanying reasons.
6.13 Apart from Queensland, Western Australia is
the only jurisdiction that makes provision for confidentiality in relation to
or reasons. It is, however, only a limited recognition of
confidentiality in that it applies only to the
of the reasons for
decisions given by the State Administrative Tribunal.
State Administrative Tribunal Act 2004
(WA), the provisions that provide for the giving of reasons must be complied
with in a way that:
• is consistent with any order that was made under
section 61(2)
hold the proceeding in private and in the absence of a particular person;
• gives effect to the Tribunal’s general obligation not to
disclose ‘protected matter’ under
section 160.
6.15 The effect of the first limb of
is that it permits the
exclusion of material considered during non-public proceedings from the reasons
for decision.
However, it is
suggested that this provision does not permit a blanket exclusion of all such
material. The grounds for excluding
a particular person or members of the
public will determine whether the reasons for decision need to be modified to be
with the order to have a non-public hearing. If the order was made
to protect confidential information, then it may be appropriate
that the reasons
for decision reflect that confidentiality. However, if the order was made to
allow the adult to participate in
the hearing free from the influence of a
particular person, and there was no issue of confidentiality, the reasons for
decision may
not need to be modified.
6.16 The second limb of
State Administrative Tribunal
(WA) requires that any reasons given must give effect to the
Tribunal’s obligation under
section 160
not to disclose ‘protected
matter’. ‘Protected matter’
• certain types of information in relation to which the
Attorney-General has certified that disclosure is contrary to the public
interest for reasons such as endangering national security or revealing
information protected by parliamentary
• information that is exempt from disclosure under the freedom of
information legislation.
6.17 The duty in
section 160
prevents disclosure
of such matter other than to a sitting member of the
exception to the duty is that the Tribunal may give a party access to matters
that have been certified by the Attorney-General,
unless the matter is exempt
under freedom of information
legislation.
The effect of
the second limb of
is that the State Administrative Tribunal must
exclude ‘protected matter’ from its reasons for
Health Act 2000
6.18 The Mental Health Review Tribunal was established by the
Health Act 2000
(Qld) to safeguard the rights of people with a mental
illness who are receiving involuntary treatment under that
This Tribunal has quite
a different role from that of the Guardianship and Administration
However, in the
absence of comparable legislative provisions dealing with guardianship
proceedings, and given that some of the people
who fall within its jurisdiction
have impaired capacity, an examination of the Tribunal’s power to make
confidentiality orders
in relation to reasons for decisions may be
instructive.
6.19 Under section 458 of the
Mental Health Act 2000
(Qld), the Mental
Health Review Tribunal may make confidentiality orders prohibiting or
restricting the disclosure of reasons for
a decision (but not the decision
itself) to the adult who is the subject of the
proceeding.
However, the
Tribunal may make such orders only if it is satisfied the disclosure
• cause serious harm to the health of the adult; or
• put the safety of someone else at serious risk.
6.20 Unlike the relevant provision in Queensland’s guardianship
legislation, the
Mental Health Act 2000
(Qld) provides that if such an
order is made, the Tribunal must disclose the information or matters that have
been withheld from
the adult to the adult’s lawyer or agent along with
written reasons for making the confidentiality
FOR CONSIDERATION
6.21 This section raises issues for consideration
when examining the Tribunal’s ability to prohibit or restrict disclosure
its decision or reasons:
• Should the Tribunal be able to make a confidentiality order in
relation to its decisions or reasons?
• Should the legislation distinguish between a decision and its
• From whom should a copy of the Tribunal’s decision or reasons
be able to be withheld?
• What criteria should guide the Tribunal’s discretion to
prohibit or restrict disclosure of its decision or reasons?
• What does it mean to ‘restrict’ disclosure of the
Tribunal’s decision or reasons?
the Tribunal be able to make a confidentiality order in relation to its
decisions or reasons?
6.22 A threshold question to consider is whether the Tribunal should have the
power to order that its decisions and the reasons for
those decisions be kept
confidential from those people who are otherwise entitled to a copy of those
documents. A related issue
is whether the Tribunal should be permitted to
exercise such a power on its own initiative or only on the application of an
the legislation distinguish between decisions and reasons?
6.23 An issue for consideration is whether a distinction should be made
between a decision in relation to a proceeding and the reasons
given for that
decision. Under Queensland’s guardianship legislation, the Tribunal may
not only withhold a copy of its reasons
from an active party but also a copy of
its decision.
This can be
contrasted with the
Mental Health Act 2000
(Qld) which prohibits or
restricts access to the reasons for a decision
whom should decisions or reasons be able to be withheld?
6.24 Those who are currently entitled to a copy
of the Tribunal decision are the adult, any other active
and those people who
were given notice of the
The Tribunal has
power, however, to prohibit or restrict disclosure of decisions only in relation
to active parties. It seems anomalous
that the legislation does not provide a
similar power in respect of those who were not necessarily involved in the
hearing but were
merely given notice of the hearing. It may be thought that
participating as a party gives rise to a greater entitlement to a copy
decision than might arise from simply being notified of the proceedings.
6.25 Another issue to consider is whether, if an adult is being denied a
decision or reasons for a decision, there should be a requirement
information be given to another person on the adult’s behalf. There is a
provision to this effect in the
Mental Health Act 2000
criteria should guide the Tribunal’s discretion?
6.26 Another matter to consider is the criteria
upon which the Tribunal may exercise its discretion to prohibit or restrict the
of its decisions and reasons. Under Queensland’s guardianship
legislation, such a confidentiality order may be made only if
the Tribunal is
‘satisfied it is desirable to do so because of the confidential nature of
particular information or matter
or for another
The Tribunal
would also need to have regard to what is required in its jurisdiction by open
justice and procedural
and to apply the
General Principles.
6.27 In the case of a restriction on the adult’s entitlement to receive
a copy of the decision or reasons, the Tribunal must
additionally consider
whether the disclosure ‘might be prejudicial to the physical or mental
health or wellbeing of the
Mental Health Act 2000
(Qld) contains more demanding criteria
in relation to the adult who is the subject of the proceeding. The Mental
Health Review Tribunal
may make a confidentiality order prohibiting or
restricting disclosure of its reasons to the adult if satisfied the disclosure
‘cause serious harm to the health of the person’ or would
‘put the safety of someone else at serious
6.29 If harm is to be a criterion for the exercise of this discretion (and
there may be others), some other issues should be considered.
One issue is who
must be harmed. Queensland’s guardianship legislation refers to harm to
the adult only whereas the mental
health legislation additionally refers to harm
to other people.
6.30 A second issue is whether such a criterion should include a reference to
the seriousness of the harm and its likelihood of occurring.
The current test
in the guardianship legislation appears to be relatively undemanding. There is
only the need to show harm to the
‘physical or mental health or wellbeing
of the adult’. There is no threshold level of harm that needs to be met;
that some harm may occur. Presumably this could include relatively minor
harm. This test is further weakened because it is only
necessary to show that
the disclosure of decisions or reasons ‘might’ cause this harm.
6.31 This can be contrasted with the approach taken under the
Health Act 2000
(Qld). That legislation requires that the disclosure
‘would’ result in either ‘serious harm’ or
risk’ to safety, rather than a mere possibility of some
harm occurring.
6.32 A further issue to consider in relation to
harm is whether the criteria should include some consideration of any harm that
be caused by failing to disclose the information. There are very
compelling justifications for providing parties to a proceeding
with a decision
and accompanying reasons as is discussed
so a determination not
to disclose this information is significant. Such a decision may cause harm to
the parties in that a person
who is denied reasons cannot decide whether or not
to appeal. It may also cause harm on a wider level to the administration of
by undermining the accountability of decision-makers. It may be
appropriate that any criteria not only require consideration of
why decisions or
reasons should not be disclosed, but also of any corresponding implications of
such a course.
does it mean to ‘restrict’ disclosure?
6.33 Another matter to consider is the implications of empowering the
Tribunal to
(in addition to prohibit) the disclosure of its
decisions and reasons.
6.34 The meaning of the word ‘prohibit’ in this context is
relatively clear: a person will not be permitted to receive
the decisions or
reasons at all. However, the scope of a power to ‘restrict’
disclosure of decisions and reasons may
permit two different types of
confidentiality orders:
• those that impose conditions upon which decisions or reasons are
disclosed; and
• those that restrict access to part of the content of a decision or
Conditional
disclosure of decisions and reasons
6.35 The power of the Tribunal to impose conditions upon which a decision or
its reasons are disclosed might allow a confidentiality
order that says, for
example, that a copy of the reasons may be given to a person on the condition
that the person does not disclose
it to a third party. Another example might be
that access to reasons is only permitted if accompanied by appropriate support
as counselling to minimise any harm that might be caused by learning of the
decision or reasons.
Restrictions
on content of decisions and reasons
6.36 A power to restrict the disclosure of a decision and its reasons might
also permit a copy of these documents to be given to some
or all of the parties
with certain material omitted. This material might be information given before
the Tribunal or matters in
documents received by the Tribunal or findings made
by the Tribunal.
6.37 This appears to be the effect of the Western Australian provisions
discussed above.
State Administrative Tribunal Act 2004
(WA) requires the giving of
reasons to be consistent with provisions that impose confidentiality either
because confidential material
emerged in a non-public hearing or because
information is regarded as ‘protected matter’. To comply with these
provisions,
reference to such material would probably need to be excluded from a
statement of reasons.
6.38 The power to exclude certain material from reasons raises the issue of
how this is best achieved. One option is to produce a
comprehensive set of
reasons that refers to the relevant material which is then deleted where
necessary when giving those reasons
to some, one, or all of the parties. A
disadvantage of such an approach is the confusion that may arise with more than
one version
of reasons being generated.
6.39 Another option is to produce reasons that do
not refer to that material at all, which appears to be the approach of the
Australian provisions. A disadvantage of such an approach is that it
may not be possible to make clear in the reasons that the relevant
influenced the decision.
6.40 A final issue to note is the potential
interaction between this issue and the confidentiality orders discussed in
and 5. These orders can be made by the Tribunal to prohibit or
restrict disclosure to an active party of information given before
the Tribunal
and matters contained in documents filed with or received by the
A question arises
as to how material which is the subject of one of those confidentiality orders
should be treated in the Tribunal’s
reasons for decision.
6.41 This section outlines some of the relevant
issues to consider when examining whether and when the Tribunal should be able
displace a person’s statutory entitlement to decisions and reasons. In
considering these issues, it is useful to examine why
the provision of reasons
is generally regarded as an important feature of judicial and quasi-judicial
decision-making. The obligation
to give reasons has been described as a normal
incident of the judicial
and as being
‘of the essence of the administration of
Some of the
arguments advanced in relation to the giving of reasons generally are helpful in
exploring whether and when it might
be appropriate to displace a person’s
statutory right to this information.
6.42 It is useful to consider these issues by drawing on the three concepts
examined in Chapter 3 that need to be balanced when determining
the role of
confidentiality in the guardianship system: open justice, procedural fairness,
and the nature of the guardianship system.
The impact of reasons on a
party’s ability to appeal a decision is also critical and is considered
and the right of appeal
6.43 Although the obligation to give reasons for
a decision is not limited to those situations where an appeal is
a failure to do so
can defeat a party’s ability to exercise that
The provision of
reasons enables a person ‘to determine whether he has good grounds for an
appeal and will inform him of the
case he will have to meet if he does decide to
This has been
used as the basis for recognising a duty to give reasons in some
and in other cases, it
has been described as ‘[p]erhaps the primary reason’ for the giving
of reasons.
6.44 These arguments would also apply to
provisions that permit confidentiality in relation to reasons, and particularly
in relation
to the decision itself.
6.45 The principle of open justice ‘includes the promulgation of
reasoned decisions’.
This promotes one of the core functions of open justice, that is, to afford a
measure of accountability on decision-makers through
This public
scrutiny of reasons operates as a disincentive against partial, arbitrary
decision-making and instead encourages decision-making
that is careful and
The principle of
open justice also recognises that the provision of reasons can have an educative
function in that it explains to
people how and why particular decisions were
6.46 Although these arguments about open justice relate to the public at
large, they are also compelling in relation to the parties
to a proceeding. For
example, withholding reasons from a party, who is directly interested in the
outcome of the matter and who
may therefore take issue with an inadequately
reasoned decision, would remove the decision from the proper scrutiny of that
Further, a party’s ability to understand how and why the decision
was made will be constrained without reasons. These concerns
become even more
acute if a party is also deprived of the Tribunal’s decision.
6.47 In England
the courts have
recognised that a duty to give reasons may arise if required by procedural
fairness in the circumstances of the particular
In Australia, however,
the law has not yet developed in this
6.48 Nevertheless, it has been argued that without reasons, the right to a
fair hearing is
‘devalued’.
essential feature of the hearing rule is
participation,
been suggested that meaningful participation requires the giving of reasons for
a decision: without reasons, the parties
cannot be confident their cases
‘were duly noted, understood and properly
considered’.
been said that it is:
a fundamental requirement of fair play … that parties should know at
the end of the day why a particular decision has been taken.
6.49 Further, providing reasons for a decision can help a party know and
understand why they did not succeed and avoid the grievance
of feeling that an
injustice has occurred.
6.50 If these arguments are accepted in relation
to the provision of reasons, they would also apply in the context of provisions
permit the imposition of confidentiality in relation to reasons and
decisions. Again, any sense of unfairness would be more significant
were not only denied a copy of the reasons for the decision, but also of the
decision itself.
of the guardianship system
6.51 The nature of the guardianship system,
however, may justify some measure of confidentiality in relation to decisions
and reasons,
in appropriate cases.
6.52 The protective nature of the system might warrant such a discretion for
the Tribunal as it may be necessary to keep reasons or
decisions from the adult
to avoid harming him or her.
Confidentiality in relation to other parties may also be justified as a means of
safeguarding the rights and interests of the adult.
This might arise, for
example, if the reasons contained an adverse finding about a person based on the
adult’s evidence such
that its disclosure is likely to prompt retribution
from the person directed at the adult.
6.53 In contrast, the fact that the decisions
made in the guardianship system affect fundamental rights suggests that
decisions and
reasons ought not to be withheld. The magnitude of the decisions
being made gives importance to accountability of decision-making
and fairness to
the parties.
LEGAL MODELS
6.54 The Commission has identified three possible models, outlined below, for
how the law might deal with the issue of confidentiality
in relation to the
Tribunal’s decisions and reasons. These models do not capture all of the
relevant issues the Commission
is considering, but may provide a useful starting
point for thinking about the general approach the law should take. A
hypothetical
case study is used to illustrate these models and how they might
1: no power to make decisions or reasons confidential
6.55 In this model, the Tribunal has no power to make an order prohibiting or
restricting disclosure of a decision or its reasons.
The current statutory
entitlement to decisions and reasons cannot be overridden. This is the position
in most of the guardianship
systems in Australia, other than
Queensland.
2: power to make reasons confidential, but not decisions
6.56 In this model, the current statutory entitlement to the Tribunal’s
decision remains, but there is discretion to prohibit
or restrict disclosure of
the Tribunal’s reasons for the decision. This is the approach adopted
Mental Health Act 2000
(Qld). It is also reflected, to some
extent, in the Western Australian legislation, which provides for the removal of
information from the reasons for
6.57 Variations of this model will depend on matters such as whether any
distinction is made between different categories of people,
the criteria (if
any) upon which the Tribunal’s discretion can be exercised, and whether
the orders can be made to restrict,
as well as prohibit,
disclosure.
3: power to make both decisions and reasons confidential
6.58 As is currently the law in Queensland, this model permits the Tribunal
to prohibit or restrict the disclosure of both its decisions
and the reasons for
those decisions. Again, the scope of the model will vary depending on whether a
distinction is made between
different people, what criteria (if any) will apply
to the discretion, and whether orders will be able to restrict, as well as to
prohibit, disclosure.
Stephen is a 24 year old man with a mental illness. He lives with his
parents, Carmella and Allan. Stephen’s illness is such
that he is unable
to manage his own finances, so Allan has been managing Stephen’s money
informally. The relationship between
Stephen and Allan is turbulent and has
sometimes resulted in Allan being physically violent. Despite this, Stephen
idolises his
After a number of unhappy years, Carmella and Allan decide to separate. This
was in part because of Carmella’s concerns about
the way in which Allan
has been managing Stephen’s money.
After the separation, Carmella applies to the Tribunal to be appointed as
Stephen’s administrator. Despite Allan’s opposition,
Carmella is
appointed. Stephen is not present at the hearing so is unaware of the decision.
Upon being informed of the decision
at the conclusion of the hearing, Allan
requests written reasons as he intends to appeal the decision.
During the Tribunal hearing, there was conflicting evidence from Carmella and
Allan. In reaching its decision, the Tribunal made
adverse findings about Allan
in relation to his management of Stephen’s money and also found him to be
an untruthful witness.
Carmella has concerns that these findings may upset Stephen and affect his
medical treatment given his admiration for his father.
She also has a concern,
given Allan’s past aggressive behaviour, that giving reasons to Allan may
trigger an assault against
Stephen or, perhaps, her. The issue for the Tribunal
is whether it should make a confidentiality order about its decision or reasons
in relation to Stephen or Allan.
of case study
6.59 Both Stephen and Allan are active parties to the proceeding and would be
entitled under the
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
copy of the decision and
Under model 1,
there is no entitlement to displace the right to this information, regardless of
what impact it may have.
6.60 Under model 2, the Tribunal would continue to be required to provide its
decision to both Stephen and Allan although it would
have discretion to refuse
to provide its reasons. Under model 3, the discretion would widen to allow the
Tribunal to include preventing
Stephen or Allan from having access to the
decision itself.
6.61 The material likely to be of concern in this case is the
Tribunal’s adverse findings about Allan’s conduct. This
means it is
the provision of a copy of the Tribunal’s reasons for the decision that is
the critical issue, rather than of the
decision itself. The concern in
disclosing the reasons to Allan is the potential violence that may ensue in
reaction to the adverse
findings. There is also a concern the disclosure may
adversely affect Stephen’s medical treatment.
6.62 Whether or not the Tribunal decides to exercise its discretion in
relation to disclosure of reasons will depend on the relevant
criteria and what
evidence is received in relation to those matters.
6.63 The question under the current Queensland law in relation to Allan is
whether non-disclosure ‘is desirable … because
of the confidential
nature of particular information or matter or for another
The Tribunal
would also need to have regard to what is required by open justice and
procedural fairness, and apply the General Principles.
6.64 The risk of a violent reaction by Allan to the findings, directed at
Stephen, may be considered sufficient reason. However,
the Tribunal may also
consider the prejudice that non-disclosure may have on Allan’s ability to
appeal the Tribunal’s
6.65 It would be more difficult to refuse to disclose a copy of the reasons
to Stephen (as the adult) than to Allan (as another active
party). This is
because the Tribunal must additionally find that the disclosure of reasons
‘might be prejudicial’ to
Stephen’s physical or mental health
or wellbeing.
6.66 However, that additional test is relatively undemanding. The suggestion
of some damage to Stephen’s medical treatment
may be sufficient to
establish a possibility of prejudice. An alternative and more robust test may
require the Tribunal to be satisfied
the disclosure ‘would cause serious
harm’. Whether this could be shown would depend on the evidence. It
include some consideration of the impact of a failure to disclose the
reasons to Stephen.
6.67 It would be open to the Tribunal under models 2 and 3 to limit
disclosure of the adverse findings to either, or both, Stephen
Depending on the formulation of the legislative provision and whether it
provides for such an approach, the Tribunal
might still be able to give Stephen
and Allan a copy of the reasons with references to the adverse findings
preliminary view
6.68 At this stage of the review, the Commission has a preliminary preference
for model 2: that any statutory entitlement to decisions
is absolute but that
the Tribunal is given discretion to make confidentiality orders in relation to
the reasons for a decision in
appropriate circumstances.
6.69 The Commission has serious reservations about withholding the reasons
for a Tribunal decision from the active parties to a proceeding.
The importance
of reasons was discussed
and the Commission
notes that no other guardianship legislation in Australia contains a provision
empowering the withholding of a
decision or statement of reasons from a person
who is statutorily entitled to that information. (The Western Australian
legislation
permits only the removal of particular material from a statement of
6.70 However, the Commission recognises that there may be some circumstances
in which it is appropriate to withhold certain information
contained in a
statement of reasons from a person otherwise entitled to receive this
information. The Commission considers that
those occasions would be exceptional
and so favours a tightly constrained discretion. The Commission also considers
that it is preferable
that the Tribunal, in exercising its discretion, remove
material from a statement of reasons where possible rather than make an order
for non-disclosure of the entirety of its reasons for the decision.
6.71 The Commission also has serious reservations about not informing an
active party of a Tribunal’s decisions, which is why
its preferred model
moves away from that position under the current law.
6.72 The difficulties where an active party does not receive reasons for a
decision have already been outlined and would be compounded
if the person is
deprived of even knowing the outcome of a matter. A party who is unaware of the
decision is not only unable to
consider whether an appeal might be warranted,
they are also precluded from knowing whether an appeal is even necessary.
FOR SUBMISSIONS
6.73 The Commission is interested in receiving submissions in response to the
following questions, or on any other issues respondents
consider relevant to the
displacement of a person’s current statutory entitlement to decisions and
reasons. You may wish to
nominate your preferred legal model or provide more
detailed comment on the particular issues that follow.
Possible legal models
6-1 Should Queensland’s guardianship legislation reflect one of the
following models in relation to the displacement of a person’s
statutory entitlement to Tribunal decisions and reasons:
(a) Model 1: no power to make decisions or reasons confidential;
(b) Model 2: power to make reasons confidential, but not
(c) Model 3: power to make both decisions and reasons
confidential;
(d) Other models?
Particular issues
6-2 Should the Tribunal have power to make an order to keep its decision
and/or the reasons for its decision (or part of the reasons)
confidential from
the adult, any other active party, or another person who is currently entitled
to a copy of that information?
6-3 In relation to question 6-2, should any such power include both a
Tribunal’s decision and the reasons for that decision,
or only the
6-4 If the Tribunal should have such a power, what legislative criteria,
if any, should guide its exercise:
(a) the Tribunal may make an order if it is satisfied it is desirable to
do so because of the confidential nature of particular information
or matter or
for another reason (the current legislative test in Queensland);
(b) the Tribunal may make an order if it is satisfied it is necessary to
(i) causing serious harm to the health of the adult; or
(ii) putting the safety of a person at serious risk.
(such as the test provided under the
Mental Health Act 2000
(c) the Tribunal may make an order to the extent necessary to give effect
to any other order that has been made by the Tribunal in
the proceeding (such as
the provisions in Western Australia)? That other order could be one to hold a
hearing in private, or to
exclude a person from that hearing, or to limit
disclosure to a person of information or matters contained in documents before
(d) other criteria?
6-5 In relation to question 6-4, should different legislative criteria
apply for orders limiting disclosure to an adult and to those
directed at other
people, and, if so, what should the criteria be? For example:
(a) the Tribunal may make an order in relation to an adult if it is
satisfied the disclosure might be prejudicial to the physical
or mental health
or wellbeing of the adult (the current legislative test in Queensland);
(b) other criteria?
6-6 If the Tribunal has power to make an order to keep its decision and/or
the reasons for that decision (or part of the reasons)
confidential, should the
Tribunal also have power to impose conditions on disclosure (by restricting,
rather than prohibiting, disclosure)?
6-7 If the Tribunal has power to make an order to keep its decision and/or
the reasons for that decision (or part of the reasons)
confidential, should the
Tribunal be permitted or required to allow disclosure of the information to the
party’s representative?
Publication
of Tribunal proceedings
LAW IN QUEENSLAND
7.1 As part of its review of the confidentiality
provisions of the guardianship legislation, the Commission is required to
those provisions that restrict the publication of Tribunal
proceedings.
7.2 There are two provisions that address this issue, namely,
sections 109
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(Qld). It is
convenient to deal with
section 112
first, because it has the wider
Section 112(3)
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
(Qld) contains two prohibitions that restrict the
way in which Tribunal proceedings may be reported. First, it prohibits the
publication
of information about a Tribunal
proceeding.
This includes
information given before the Tribunal, matters contained in documents given to
the Tribunal, and the Tribunal’s
decisions and
prohibits the disclosure of the identity of a person involved in a Tribunal
proceeding.
‘involved in a proceeding’ includes a
• who makes an application to the Tribunal in the proceeding;
• about whom an application is made in the proceeding;
• who is an active party in the
proceeding;
• who gives information or documents to a person performing a function
under the Act relevant to the proceeding; and
• who appears as a witness at the hearing of the proceeding.
7.4 There are exceptions to these prohibitions. The Tribunal may make an
order permitting the publication of information about a
proceeding or the
disclosure of a person’s identity if it is satisfied that to do so would
be in the public interest.
For example, in a small number of cases, the Tribunal has used this provision to
make orders allowing the publication of de-identified
Tribunal decisions on the
will also be permitted to publish this information, or to disclose a
person’s identity, if he or she has a reasonable
7.5 Section 112
relevantly provides:
112 Publication about proceeding or disclosure of identity
(1) If the tribunal is satisfied publication of information about a
proceeding is in the public interest, the tribunal may, by order,
publication of the information.
(2) If the tribunal is satisfied publication of the identity of a person
involved in a proceeding is in the public interest, the
tribunal may, by order,
permit disclosure of the person’s identity.
(3) A person must not, without reasonable excuse, publish information about
a proceeding, or disclose the identity of a person involved
in a proceeding,
unless the tribunal has, by order, permitted the publication or disclosure.
Maximum penalty—200 penalty units.
(4) In this section—
information
, about a proceeding, includes—
(a) information given before the tribunal; and
(b) matters contained in documents filed with, or received by, the tribunal;
(c) the tribunal’s decision or reasons.
, in a proceeding, includes—
(a) making an application in the proceeding to the tribunal; and
(b) being a person about whom an application is made in a proceeding;
(c) being an active party for the proceeding; and
(d) giving information or documents to a person who is performing a function
under this Act relevant to the proceeding; and
(e) appearing as a witness at the hearing of the proceeding.
7.6 A recent case in which the issue arose of
making an order permitting the wider publication of information in the public
Although there was no
formal application before the Tribunal on that occasion, the issue was raised by
the parties.
The Tribunal
commented, after considering
section 112
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
(Qld) and the General Principles (particularly
General Principle 11),
… there were insufficient reasons advanced to convince it that it was
in the public interest to agree to any other means to
publish information
related to this matter other than via Austlii. It is accepted that publication
on Austlii in a de-identified
format allows public scrutiny of Tribunal
processes, yet respects the confidentiality of the adult.
7.7 The Tribunal did, however, make such an order
that the circumstances of that case meant that some level of public disclosure
was in the public interest. It
… there had already been wide publicity about MHE, and his family.
Some of the published information, particularly quotes attributed
politicians were incorrect, misleading and confusing to the public. It is in
the public interest for citizens to know how
decisions around ‘end of
life’ can be made.
7.8 The Tribunal also made an order permitting
wider publication in
In that case, the
Tribunal considered that it was in the public interest for those people and
bodies with responsibility for reviewing
the relevant area of law to be
permitted to receive information about the proceeding, including the identity of
the parties.
7.9 The second provision of the
Guardianship
and Administration Act 2000
(Qld) that may restrict the reporting of
Tribunal proceedings is
section 109(2)(c).
This provision gives the Tribunal
power to make directions prohibiting or restricting the publication of
information given before
the Tribunal or of matters contained in documents filed
with or received by the
The reference to
‘restricting’ would permit the Tribunal to impose conditions upon
publication, such as limiting the
people to whom the information can be
7.10 As with other confidentiality orders, the test employed by the Tribunal
is whether ‘it is satisfied it is desirable to
do so because of the
confidential nature of the information or matter or for another
The Tribunal
would also need to have regard to what is required in its jurisdiction by open
justice and procedural
and to apply the
General Principles contained in the
legislation.
A person must
comply with a confidentiality order unless they have a reasonable
Section 109
relevantly provides:
(1) Generally, a hearing by the tribunal of a proceeding must be in
(2) However, if the tribunal is satisfied it is desirable to do so because
of the confidential nature of particular information or
matter or for another
reason, the tribunal may, by order (a
confidentiality
(c) give directions prohibiting or restricting the publication of
information given before the tribunal, whether in public or in
private, or of
matters contained in documents filed with, or received by, the tribunal;
7.12 Two recent cases in which confidentiality orders were made under
, the Tribunal made a confidentiality order so that MLI’s matter
could ‘be determined without MLI attracting the media
notoriety he
attracted in his home
, which involved decisions in relation to withdrawing life-sustaining
measures, the Tribunal made a limited confidentiality order
having regard to
‘the intensely private nature of the matters before the
7.13 The Commission has been informed that in the
period between 1 July 2005 and 26 May 2006, the Tribunal has made only these two
confidentiality orders in relation to the publication of information about a
proceeding under
interaction between sections 109 and 112
7.14 As the law currently stands, it appears that
section 109(2)(c)
unnecessary. This provision permits the Tribunal to make a confidentiality
order in relation to information about a proceeding,
but such information is
already prohibited from being published by
In other words, the
discretion to prohibit information from being published is superfluous if the
publication of that information
prohibited.
7.15 As such, any recommendations in relation to
the operation of
section 112
may affect the extent to which
section 109(2)(c)
considered necessary or desirable. This chapter will therefore consider both
provisions.
7.16 The Commission also notes some inconsistency or tension in the policy
that underpins
section 109(1)
(that proceedings are to be held in public,
although there is a power to change that position) and that which underpins
section 112
(that information about proceedings is not to be published, although
there is a power to change that position). The primary objectives
in permitting
people to attend hearings are to improve accountability in decision-making and
to enhance community understanding of
the law. The tension in policy between
the two provisions arises because those objectives are then undermined by the
of strict limits on what people can do with the information they
receive during those open hearings.
LEGISLATION
IN OTHER JURISDICTIONS
7.17 The relevant statutes in all of the
Australian jurisdictions impose various prohibitions or restrictions on the
publication of
information about guardianship proceedings. These prohibitions
and restrictions can be categorised into three broad approaches that
considered in this section:
• A general prohibition on publication of information about proceedings
with power given to the Tribunal to allow publication
of de-identified
information.
• A general prohibition on publication of information about proceedings
with power given to the Tribunal to allow the publication
of both de-identified
and other information.
• A general prohibition on publication of information about proceedings
that would identify people (with publication of de-identified
information
otherwise permitted) and with power given to the Tribunal to allow the
publication of identifying information.
7.18 This section also considers those jurisdictions in which the Tribunal is
conferred with discretion to make an order prohibiting
publication of
information in particular cases, in addition to any general legislative
prohibition or restriction on the publication
of information.
prohibition with power to permit publication of de-identified
information
7.19 The guardianship legislation in both South Australia and the Northern
Territory prohibits the publication of information about
proceedings, subject to
the Tribunal’s discretion to permit the publication of information in a
de-identified form. This limited
discretion permits publication only if it does
not contain ‘particulars calculated to lead to the identification’
the adult or others concerned in the
proceedings
or if it does not
contain material that ‘identifies or could tend to identify’ the
7.20 In the Northern Territory, this discretion may be exercised only if
publication is in the public
There are no
criteria specified for the exercise of the discretion in South
prohibition with power to permit publication of all information
7.21 Whilst the guardianship legislation in Queensland imposes a blanket
prohibition on the publication of information about
proceedings,
the Tribunal has
a wide discretion to permit not only publication of de-identified information
but also the publication of information
This is similarly
the position in New Zealand.
In Queensland, the Tribunal can exercise its discretion where it is satisfied
that publication is in the public
whilst in New
Zealand there is no express test, only the requirement that the court grant
The law in Queensland
is discussed in more detail
Prohibition
on publication of identity with power to permit
7.22 The relevant legislation in the Australian Capital Territory, New South
Wales, Tasmania, Victoria and Western Australia have
taken the third approach:
the only information that is prohibited from publication is information that
would identify relevant people,
but the Tribunal is granted discretion to
override that prohibition in appropriate
The provisions in
these jurisdictions generally contain two common elements, which are outlined
briefly here to illustrate the operation
of this approach, but are considered in
more detail in the next section ‘Issues for
Consideration’.
7.23 First, all jurisdictions begin by imposing a
prohibition on the publication of information that will identify certain
The people whose identity must not be published vary in each jurisdiction and
include the adult only,
parties to the proceedings,
or people generally involved or concerned in the
proceedings.
7.24 There are varying approaches taken to the
question of what will be sufficient to identify a person. Some legislation,
that in Victoria, contains a generic test where the prohibition relates
to information that ‘identifies, or could reasonably
lead to the
identification’ of a
Other jurisdictions
go further and expressly state some of the ways in which a person may be
identified. The most comprehensive
example of this is in Western Australia
where the legislation refers to matters such as a person’s name or alias,
their voice,
their address, their physical description, their occupation, or
their relationships or associations with
7.25 Second, having prohibited the publication of information that would
identify a person, the respective Tribunals are then granted
discretion to
permit the publication of such
information.
Victoria and
Tasmania are the only jurisdictions in which a criterion for the exercise of
that discretion, that of the ‘public
interest’, is
discretion to prohibit the publication of information
7.26 In addition to a legislative prohibition or
restriction on the publication of certain types of information, some
grant the Tribunal a further discretion to prohibit the
publication of information in particular cases. This is the position in
Queensland where, as discussed
the Tribunal may make
a confidentiality order in relation to the publication of information in
addition to the legislative prohibition
on the reporting of
proceedings.
7.27 The Tribunals in Western Australia and
Victoria are granted a similar discretion and may order that specific evidence
or documents
must not be published except in the manner and to the people
specified by the
The criteria for the exercise of this discretion include whether such an order
is necessary to avoid, for example, endangering national
security, prejudicing
the administration of justice, endangering a person’s safety, offending
public decency or morality, the
publication of confidential information, or
‘for any other reason in the interests of
7.28 The effect of these provisions is to grant the Tribunal the power to
extend the prohibition on material that cannot be published.
The publication of
information that identifies a person is already prohibited in Western Australia
and Victoria. This discretion
further allows the Tribunal to order that
specific evidence or documents not be published, even if they do not identify a
7.29 The discretion in Victoria, so far as it
relates to identifying information, may also be wider than the legislative
prohibition
because it relates to ‘information that might enable a person
who has appeared before [the Tribunal] to be
identified’.
wider than the wording of the legislative prohibition, which refers only to a
‘party to the
proceedings’.
discretion is wide enough, for example, to allow suppression of identifying
information about witnesses as well.
FOR CONSIDERATION
7.30 The discussion of the legislation in
different jurisdictions above raises several issues to consider when examining
any potential
prohibitions on what can be published about Tribunal
proceedings:
• Should there be a prohibition on publishing information about a
proceeding or publishing the identity of people involved proceedings?
• If there should be a prohibition in relation to people involved in
proceedings, whose identity should be protected?
• In terms of prohibitions generally, to whom should the publication of
information be prohibited?
• What discretion should there be to permit publication?
• Should there be any exceptions or defences to the prohibition?
• Should there be any additional discretion to prohibit the publication
of information in particular cases?
7.31 First, however, a threshold question arises
as to the purpose of prohibiting the publication of Tribunal proceedings. Is
prohibition designed to prevent only widespread discussion and reporting of
Tribunal proceedings, such as in the media, or is it
designed to apply more
widely to prevent general discussion of proceedings?
7.32 Both approaches are considered below when examining the meaning of
specific aspects of the various statutes. However, the issue
is raised at the
outset as the answer to this question (which involves a policy choice as to the
appropriate balance to be struck
between open justice and confidentiality) will
inform how the specific issues considered below might be resolved.
there be a prohibition on publishing information about a proceeding?
7.33 The first issue to consider is what, if anything, should be prohibited
from being published. The guardianship legislation in
all Australian
information about
proceedings.
A threshold
issue to consider is whether there should be such a prohibition. Generally,
proceedings in court, including any evidence
given and the identity of those
people involved, are capable of being reported and publicly discussed, unless a
specific suppression
order has been
Although there are
reasons why the guardianship system might be treated differently from some other
legal settings,
threshold issue that should be
considered.
7.34 If it is considered appropriate for the legislation to contain some
prohibition on the publication of information, the issue
then arises as to what
information should be the subject of a prohibition. The major question revealed
by the comparison of legislation
in other jurisdictions is whether the
prohibition should apply to proceedings generally, or whether it should be
limited to information
that would identify relevant people.
7.35 Another issue that arises in relation to the scope of any prohibition is
whether it should also extend to guardianship matters
heard before the Supreme
Court. Such a matter may be before the Court at first
or it may come
before the Court on appeal from the
Currently, there
is no prohibition on the publication of information in guardianship proceedings
before the Supreme Court, although
some cases have been reported in a
de-identified format.
might be regarded as anomalous if a matter cannot be reported upon or discussed
while it is before the Tribunal, but may be freely
reported on appeal.
identity should be protected?
7.36 If the prohibition on the publication of
information about guardianship proceedings is to be limited to information that
identify a relevant person, an issue to consider is who those people should
be. There are three categories of people whose identity
might be protected,
each of which builds cumulatively to include the previous categories.
7.37 The first is the adult. This is the position in the Australian Capital
and New South
7.38 The second category is the parties to the proceeding, as is the case in
7.39 The third category is the widest as it captures all people who are
involved in the proceedings. In addition to the adult and
the parties to the
proceeding, this would include any person who gives information or documents to
the Tribunal and any witnesses.
This represents the law in the
Queensland,
the Northern
7.40 In practice, the difference between these categories may be less
distinct than first appears because, for example, a restriction
disclosure of an adult’s identity may have the practical consequence of
restricting disclosure of other people’s
identities, particularly family
members, given that such information may indirectly identify the adult.
7.41 This raises the question, however, of what information will be
sufficient to identify a person.
information will identify a person?
7.42 The guardianship legislation in all
Australian jurisdictions refers to the identification of a person. A threshold
resolve is what it means ‘to identify’ a person. Some
guidance may be afforded by the law of defamation. One of the
elements of an
action for defamation is that the defamatory material ‘must reasonably be
taken to refer to the
plaintiff’.
defamation cases, a reference to the plaintiff’s name or inclusion of the
plaintiff’s picture will be sufficient,
but is not necessary, to satisfy
7.43 The legislation of the various Australian jurisdictions deals with the
issue of identification differently. An issue for consideration
is what test
should be adopted in the Queensland legislation as to when a person is regarded
as having been identified.
7.44 All of the Australian jurisdictions have a generic test of some kind
that outlines when information will be sufficient to identify
a person. There
are three such tests within the different jurisdictions. The first refers to
information that would actually identify
a person. In the Australian Capital
Territory, the legislation refers to information that would ‘enable a
person to be
identified’,
Western Australian Act applies to information ‘being particulars that are
sufficient to identify that
Queensland, the legislation forbids a person to ‘disclose the
identity’ of
7.45 The second test is a little broader as it refers, in addition to
information that
result in identification, to a
probability
of the information being sufficient to identify a person.
The South Australian and Victorian legislation respectively prohibit the
disclosure of ‘any information … that identifies, or could tend to
identify, the person’
and information that ‘identifies or could reasonably lead to the
identification of a party to
proceedings’.
legislation in New South Wales prohibits the publication of a person’s
and goes on to state
that a reference to a person’s name includes a reference to any
information that ‘identifies the
person or is likely to lead to the
identification of the
7.46 The third type of test is found in Tasmania and the Northern Territory,
where identification occurs with the publication of any
‘particulars
calculated to lead to the identification of any
This shares
with the second category the notion of probability of identification, but
differs in that the word ‘calculated’
may be interpreted as
requiring some element of
7.47 In addition to these generic tests for identification, some of the
statutes list specific ways in which a person may be identified.
Most of these
centre on the publication of a person’s picture on television or in the
print media. This is specified to amount
to identification in Western
and is the subject
of specific prohibitions in the Australian Capital
In Victoria, the
Tribunal is required to specify, if exercising its discretion to permit
publication about proceedings, that pictures
of the relevant people must not be
7.48 The Western Australian legislation goes further and sets out a detailed
list of examples of the ways in which a person may be
identified. In
determining whether the information is sufficient to identify a person,
reference may be had to matters such as the
person’s name or alias, their
their home or work
address, a physical description of the person or their dress, their occupation
or their relationships or associations
7.49 In considering the framing of the
identification test, a final issue to consider is whether
section 112
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(Qld) should be consistent with
section 249
of that Act and
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
Section 112
states that people must not ‘disclose the identity’ of a person,
whereas sections 249 and
exclude a duty of confidentiality in relation to
statistical or other information ‘that could not reasonably be expected to
result in the identification of the person to whom the information
Commission favours a consistent approach in how the legislation deals with the
issue of identification.
must be able to identify the person?
7.50 Having examined the various legislative
formulations for what it means for information to identify a person, a further
to consider is who must be capable of making that identification. In
other words, who needs to be able to identify the person from
that information
for the prohibition to be breached?
7.51 There are broadly two categories of people, at either end of a spectrum,
who may be able to identify a person. The first is
private individuals, such as
family members and close friends, who may be able to identify the person from
minimal and non-specific
information. The second category is members of the
public or of a section of the public who could only identify the person from
reasonably specific information. In between these two ends of the spectrum are
a range of other people, such as service providers,
work colleagues, neighbours,
and members of the person’s local community, who would require varying
levels of detail in order
to identify the person.
7.52 An issue for consideration is whether identification by
those people, including people in intimate relationships with the person, is
sufficient for the information to identify the person
for the purpose of the
prohibition. If so, it would be relatively easy for identification to occur and
for a publication to breach
the prohibition, even when common identifying
particulars, such as the person’s name or address, have not been
7.53 At present, the Queensland legislation does
not specify the people to whom someone’s identity must be apparent for the
disclosure to breach the prohibition. The only guardianship legislation in
Australia that does address this issue is that in Western
Australia, which
refers to particulars being ‘sufficient to identify that person to a
member of the public, or to a member
of the section of the public to which the
account is disseminated, as the case
provision has not been judicially considered. Nor have the prohibitions
contained in the guardianship legislation of the other
Australian jurisdictions,
including Queensland, been judicially considered in relation to this
7.54 Similar legislative provisions that apply in other protective legal
regimes, however, have received some, though limited, judicial
consideration.
7.55 One is
section 121
Family Law Act
(Cth) which
prohibits publication of an account of proceedings if it contains particulars
that are ‘sufficient to identify
that person to a member of the public, or
to a member of the section of the public to which the account is disseminated,
as the case
This uses identical wording to that of the Western Australian provision referred
The prohibition is
aimed at preventing ‘ridicule or curiosity or some kind of
notoriety’ attaching to the parties and
7.56 This raises the issue of who constitutes a
‘section of the public’. It appears that for the purposes of the
prohibition
section 121
, any group of people can constitute a ‘section
of the public’, although this is a matter to be determined in the
circumstances
of each case.
If the special characteristics of a group give its members a ‘significant
and legitimate interest’ above that of other
sections of the public in
receiving the particular information, the group, for that purpose, is isolated
in a private capacity and
is no longer considered a section of the
7.57 For example, child welfare authorities have a legitimate interest, not
shared by other sections of the public, in receiving copies
of Family Court
judgments insofar as they relate to matters of child protection with which those
authorities are concerned.
section 121
does not apply to ‘conversations between a party to
Family Court proceedings and a close personal
By contrast,
the Family Court has held that residents of the parties’ small semi-rural
township were a section of the public
for the purpose of the
prohibition.
7.58 Another provision in a protective jurisdiction that imposes a
prohibition on identification that has been judicially considered
is section 36A
Children’s Court of Western Australian Act 1998
prohibits publication of ‘any particulars or other matter likely to lead
to the identification of a child concerned
in proceedings’ as an accused,
victim or witness and is aimed at preventing ‘the victimisation,
humiliation and harassment’
This provision is
more likely than the law surrounding the
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) to be
of assistance in ascertaining the current Queensland prohibition, as this
provision does not specify the audience whose
identification is relevant.
7.59 In interpreting this provision, the Western Australian Court of Appeal
considered that the relevant capacity for identification
is that by the public,
including those members of the public in the child’s community, such as
neighbours, ‘whose identification
would be most likely to have practical
consequences for the
The Court of
Appeal distinguished between people ‘closely and intimately connected with
the child or the child’s family’
whose capacity for identification
be relevant, and the ‘ordinary general reader’ who
‘may be a person who lives in the same small town as the child,
attends or teaches at, or is the parent of a child who attends, the
child’s school’ whose capacity for identification
7.60 This test is very similar to that which
applies to the prohibition under the
Family Law Act 1975
Court of Appeal referred only once to the words ‘section of the
public’, but its treatment of identification
could comfortably sit with
the definition of that phrase in the family law context.
7.61 The issue for consideration raised by this
discussion is who must be capable of identifying a person. The spectrum of
discussed above started with those very close to the adult and ranged
through to the public, or a section of the public. Although
Queensland is unclear, based on the cases discussed above, it seems that
identification will only occur if a member of
the public, or of a section of the
public, is capable of identifying the relevant person. If such an approach is
to be preferred,
there may be some advantage in making this clear with a
specific reference in the legislation.
whom should publication be prohibited?
7.62 Another issue to consider is to whom the publication of information
issue from the one
previously considered and arises regardless of whether the prohibition applies
absolutely to all information about
proceedings or only to information that
identifies a person.
7.63 The statutes in the various jurisdictions take two approaches to this
issue: one is to specify the people who shall not receive
the relevant
information; the other is to impose a prohibition without reference to the
people who shall not receive the relevant
information.
people are specified
7.64 The first approach in relation to the people in respect of whom the
prohibition should apply, is to specify those people. This
is the position in
the Australian Capital Territory, where a person must not ‘publish’
or ‘broadcast or play’
information ‘to the public, or to a
section of the public’.
It is also the position in Western Australia. The prohibition in that State is
drafted in very similar terms to the relevant prohibition
Law Act 1975
(Qld) and refers to ‘publishes in a newspaper or
periodical publication or by radio broadcast or television, or otherwise
disseminates
to the public or to a section of the public by any
The meaning of
the phrase ‘public or to a section of the public’ was discussed
people are not specified
7.65 The second approach is to impose a prohibition without specifying the
people to whom the relevant information must not be published.
This is the
approach taken in most jurisdictions with the legislation simply forbidding a
person to ‘publish’ information,
and in some cases, additionally
prohibiting its
‘broadcast’.
Queensland legislation also refers to ‘publish’ in terms of
information, but uses the term ‘disclose’
in relation to a
person’s identity.
7.66 Where it is not stipulated in the legislation, the question arises
whether communication of information to a single person, rather
than to the
public or a section of the public, would be covered by the prohibition. This is
the position under defamation law where
publication occurs even if information
is only disclosed to one
7.67 Such an interpretation in relation to the prohibition in the
guardianship legislation may be problematic, however, because of
its potential
breadth. If the prohibition applies to all communications to a single
individual, the current law in Queensland could
potentially forbid a wide range
of publications that might otherwise be regarded as appropriate. For example,
it could prohibit
a person from informing their spouse about guardianship
proceedings in relation to their child (if the spouse was unable to attend
hearing and so did not know what occurred). It could also prohibit a person
from seeking legal advice about appealing a Tribunal
decision, as this would
involve publication of information about proceedings to the lawyer.
Section 112
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
does contain the defence of a reasonable excuse, which may cover the above
examples. However, as is discussed
uncertainty as to what
will be a reasonable excuse may mean that it is preferable to clarify the scope
of the intended prohibition.
7.69 Given these difficulties, it could be argued that a more limited
interpretation of ‘publish’ should be adopted.
There is some
authority for such an approach in relation to legislative prohibitions in other
legal systems with a similar protective
focus. When considering the scope of a
prohibition on the publication of information about victims of sexual offences,
the Victorian
Court of Appeal has concluded that to ‘publish’ under
that legislation means ‘to make public, to make generally
disseminate to the public at large’, despite the provisions themselves
being silent about the people to whom publication
The Court’s
reasoning was informed by similar considerations to those outlined above,
namely, to avoid a number of absurd
outcomes, one of which was that a person
could not tell their spouse of a sexual assault on their
7.70 A similar interpretation has also been suggested in respect of wardship
proceedings in the United Kingdom so that the relevant
prohibition is limited to
communications ‘addressed to the public at large or any section of the
public’, which would
exclude communications within the family and to
7.71 The foregoing discussion raises for consideration the issue of whether
the legislation should specify the people to whom publication
is prohibited.
Although the meaning of the phrase ‘a section of the public’ is
relatively amorphous, it may give greater
certainty than not specifying who is
forbidden to receive information about proceedings.
7.72 Another issue to consider is the matter raised above about who must be
capable of identifying a
Decisions made in
relation to this issue are related to those made about the breadth of any
prohibition on publication. For example,
if the decision is made to impose a
prohibition on publication only to the public or a section of the public (and
not individuals),
then it may be unnecessary to address the issue whether a
close family member is capable of piecing together information that would
identify the adult.
7.73 A final issue to consider is whether the Queensland prohibition in
relation to a person’s identity should continue to refer
‘disclose’ rather than ‘publish’ as is the case in
relation to information about proceedings. The word
‘disclose’ has
been judicially defined as revealing information that is previously unknown to
the person receiving that
information.
This current
wording may be regarded as undesirable if it allows a person to reveal the
identity of another person simply because
the information is already known
publicly or to particular individuals.
discretion should there be to permit publication that is otherwise
prohibited?
7.74 In all Australian jurisdictions, the various Tribunals are conferred
with discretion to override the general prohibition against
publication of
information.
7.75 An issue to consider, if such a power is to continue, is the criteria,
if any, upon which such discretion must be exercised.
In some jurisdictions,
including Queensland, the test applied is whether disclosure is in the
its discretion.
7.76 A further issue to consider is the
information to which the discretion should relate. In South Australia and the
Northern Territory,
where there is a blanket prohibition on publication of
information, the Tribunal has discretion to allow the publication only of
de-identified information.
blanket prohibition also operates in Queensland, but the Tribunal is afforded a
wider discretion to permit the publication not
only of information generally but
also of identifying
information.
In all other
information, there is discretion to
permit publication of that
information.
there be any exceptions or defences?
7.77 Having considered in detail the prohibition on publishing information
there should be any
exceptions to this prohibition.
7.78 In Queensland, the defence of a ‘reasonable excuse’ is
available in relation to a breach of the relevant prohibition
section 112(3)
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
‘reasonable excuse’ has been given its ordinary
and the issue of
whether a person has such an excuse in a particular case is determined in light
of the purpose of the
legislation
and having regard
to what a reasonable person would accept as
appropriate.
7.79 There are advantages in excluding conduct
that involves a ‘reasonable excuse’ from the prohibition. The
flexibility of the defence means that liability is not rigidly imposed
when it would be unjust to do so. However, this flexibility
also gives rise to
uncertainty. A person may breach the prohibition believing he or she has a
reasonable excuse, only to find out
subsequently that their conduct was not
judged to be reasonable. An issue for consideration is whether reasonable
excuse should
remain in the legislation.
7.80 If there is a desire for greater certainty as to when the prohibition
will be breached, a further issue for consideration is
whether the legislation
should include a list of specific exceptions. This is the position in Western
Australia where, in equivalent
terms to the prohibition in
section 121
Family Law Act 1975
its guardianship
legislation includes the following
exceptions:
• the communication of a transcript of evidence or other document to
people concerned in court proceedings for use in connection
proceedings;
• the communication of a transcript of evidence or other document to a
body responsible for disciplining members of the legal
or medical professions or
to people concerned in proceedings before such disciplinary bodies;
• the communication of a transcript of evidence or other document to a
body that grants legal aid assistance in order to facilitate
a decision whether
such assistance should be provided;
• the bona fide publication of any material intended primarily for use
by any profession being a law report or any other publication
of a technical
nature; and
• the publication or other dissemination of an account of proceedings
to a member of a profession in connection with the person’s
practice of
that profession or in the course of professional training, or to a person who is
a student in connection with the person’s
7.81 The guardianship legislation in New South Wales also provides a specific
exception for the publication or broadcast of identifying
material contained in
an official report of the proceedings of the
Similarly, in New
Zealand, the prohibition on publication of information about proceedings does
not apply in respect of a publication
of a bona fide professional or technical
nature intended for circulation amongst members of the legal or medical
profession.
7.82 If such a list of exceptions should be included, a further issue to
consider is what exceptions should be included, and whether
such a list should
be exhaustive. One exception not mentioned above that might be considered is
whether a person should be able
to authorise publication of proceedings that
involve them, so long as that publication does not identify others (without
their additional
authorisation). A provision analogous to that contained in
section 249
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
discussed in Chapter 8 might be
appropriate.
discretion to prohibit the publication of information
7.83 As was discussed
in addition to the
general prohibitions on publishing information about guardianship proceedings,
the Tribunals in Queensland, Victoria
and Western Australia also have a further
discretion to prohibit the publication of information. One issue for
consideration is
the interaction between the prohibition and this further
discretion. Currently, the prohibition on publishing information in Queensland
is sufficiently broad that the additional discretion to prohibit publication is
probably unnecessary. Whether such a provision serves
a useful function will
depend on what form the general prohibition takes.
7.84 A further issue for consideration is the
criteria upon which any discretion should be exercised. In Queensland, the
are quite broad as the Tribunal may make a confidentiality order where
‘it is desirable to do so because of the confidential
nature of particular
information or matter or for any other
The Tribunal
will also need to consider what is required in its jurisdiction by open justice
and procedural fairness,
must also apply the General
Principles.
7.85 The criteria guiding the discretion in
Western Australia and Victoria are even broader, partly because the Tribunals in
States have jurisdiction for a range of matters other than guardianship.
Those criteria include having regard to matters such as
national security, the
administration of justice, a person’s safety, public decency or morality,
the protection of confidential
information, and ‘the interests of
7.86 This part of the chapter briefly considers
the three concepts examined in Chapter 3 that need to be balanced when
determining
the role of confidentiality in the guardianship system in the
context of publication of information about Tribunal proceedings: open
procedural fairness, and the nature of the guardianship system.
7.87 Open justice is a fundamental principle of the common law aimed at
holding decision-makers accountable through public scrutiny.
It also promotes
consistency and predictability of decision-making. The right of public, and
therefore media, attendance at judicial
proceedings is a core requirement of
open justice.
Derivative of
that right are a right to report proceedings and a requirement that the names of
those involved in proceedings, such
as the parties and witnesses, be available
to the public.
7.88 While the principle of open justice favours open reporting of
proceedings, it is not an absolute
There are many
either at common law or by statutory
provisions. One modification that is
sometimes adopted is to permit the publication of information about proceedings
but only if
it does not identify particular
An example of this
is the prohibition in family law proceedings of an account that identifies a
party or witness.
7.89 It should also be recognised that the nature of open justice as it
relates to publication of information about proceedings has
changed with the
advent of the internet. For example, in relation to the publication of court
and tribunal decisions, the internet
has resulted in their wide dissemination,
accessibility and searchability to the public at
This is in stark
contrast to the ‘practical
afforded by paper records which were difficult to search and not widely
This has led some
to suggest that judges, being aware of the potential dissemination of their
judgments, should adopt a cautious
approach and avoid ‘unnecessary
personal identifiers’
to reduce disclosure of personal
information.
The breadth of
possible publication may also be relevant when considering any prohibitions on
how that information should be treated
outside proceedings.
7.90 Prohibitions on a party’s ability to discuss proceedings could
also potentially lead to a failure to accord procedural
fairness, depending on
the scope of those prohibitions. An inability to discuss a proceeding may, for
example, inhibit an active
party from seeking to join another party who has not
previously attended any hearings, or from discussing matters with others as
of preparing for an appeal.
of the guardianship system
7.91 The nature of the guardianship system may
weigh against an absolute right to open reporting. The guardianship system is a
one in which the primary concern is the safeguarding of the rights
and interests of adults with impaired capacity, and this includes
adult’s privacy
widespread publication of information about an adult’s private life, which
is only disclosed for a limited purpose,
may infringe those privacy interests.
Such publication may also cause other harm to the adult, for example, in
relation to employment
opportunities if people make assumptions about the
adult’s abilities based on a finding of impaired capacity for a particular
7.92 It may also be that future participation in the Tribunal’s
proceedings will be facilitated by an assurance that the information
to the Tribunal will not be the subject of public
discussion.
7.93 That decisions made in the guardianship system often affect the
fundamental legal rights of an adult and people close to the
adult may, however,
weigh in favour of adherence to the principle of open justice. Transparency of
decision-making processes enhances
accountability, and a proceeding may also
raise issues of wider importance to the community. For example, it may be in
interest to allow publication about a proceeding that ‘reveals
information of systemic abuse of persons with a decision-making
… so as to assist in preventing further
LEGAL MODELS
7.94 The Commission has identified a number of possible models, outlined
below, for how the law might deal with the issue of open
reporting of Tribunal
proceedings and the identification of people appearing before the Tribunal.
These models do not capture all
of the relevant issues the Commission is
considering, but may provide a useful starting point for thinking about the
general approach
the law should
A hypothetical case
study is used to illustrate these models and how they might operate.
1: no prohibition but power to order that information or identity not be
7.95 One model is to provide that reporting about proceedings, including
disclosure of identifying information, is generally permissible,
Tribunal orders that information must not be published. None of the
2: general prohibition with power to permit publication of de-identified
information
7.96 Another model is the one adopted in the Northern Territory and South
Australia. In those jurisdictions, there is a prohibition
on publication of
information about a proceeding but the Tribunal is conferred with discretion to
permit publication on the condition
that it does not identify the people
concerned in the proceeding.
Under this model, the most that may ever be published is a de-identified report
of proceedings.
3: general prohibition with power to permit publication of all
information
7.97 At present,
section 112
Guardianship and Administration Act
(Qld) provides that neither information about a proceeding nor the
identity of a person involved in a proceeding may be disclosed,
reasonable excuse, unless the Tribunal is satisfied the disclosure is in the
public interest and permits the disclosure by
7.98 This reflects a further model, namely, that there is a general
prohibition on publication of any information about a proceeding,
including the
identity of a person involved in a proceeding, but that the Tribunal has
discretion to permit publication.
4: prohibition on publication of identity with power to permit
publication
7.99 A final model is to allow reporting of proceedings but prohibit the
publication of identifying information, except as permitted
by the Tribunal.
This model would allow, without the need for an order from the Tribunal, the
reporting and disclosure of de-identified
information about proceedings.
7.100 This represents the position in the Australian Capital Territory, New
South Wales, Tasmania, and Western Australia where there
is a general
prohibition on publication of identifying information unless the Tribunal
otherwise permits it.
Li is a 54 year old man with Alzheimer’s disease who is now unable to
manage his own financial affairs. He lives with his 42
year old wife, Justine,
who helps him with some day-to-day decisions and also decisions about financial
matters. A dispute has arisen
between Mei-Ching, Li’s daughter from his
first marriage, and Justine as to how Li’s money is being spent.
believes Justine is living off Li’s wealth and is using his
money for her own purposes. Justine denies this and believes Mei-Ching’s
only interest in her father is the inheritance she will receive from Li.
Both Justine and Mei-Ching seek to be appointed as Li’s administrator
by the Tribunal. After hearing the evidence, the Tribunal
decides to appoint
Mei-Ching is upset about the decision and wants to seek legal advice about an
appeal. She also decides to approach a reporter with
a television station. She
gives an interview which is subsequently broadcast on television although the
station decides to obscure
Mei-Ching’s face and omit any references to the
names of the people involved.
The reporter then approaches Justine who refuses to give an interview, saying
that it would infringe Li’s privacy and that family
disputes should not be
aired in public. Justine does, however, tell her sister and her neighbour about
of case study
7.101 The relevant disclosures in the case study that might be made the
subject of a legislative or discretionary prohibition are:
• Mei-Ching’s disclosures to her lawyer and to the reporter;
• Justine’s disclosure to her sister and neighbour; and
• the television station’s disclosure to the public.
7.102 The permissibility of those disclosures would differ under each of the
7.103 Under model 1, there would be no impediment to any of the disclosures,
even with identifying information, unless the Tribunal
made a specific order
that information must not be published.
7.104 The effect of models 2 and 3 will depend on whether the relevant
prohibition applies to all disclosures or only to those made
to the public or to
a section of the public.
7.105 If the prohibition were limited to disclosures made to the public or to
a section of the public, the only prohibited disclosure
requiring Tribunal
permission would be the airing of the television report. Mei-Ching’s and
Justine’s disclosures, being
made privately and to individuals, would be
unlikely to fall within the scope of the prohibition.
7.106 If, however, the prohibition under models 2 or 3 were not limited to
disclosures made to the public or to a section of the public,
each of the
disclosures would be prohibited and would require the Tribunal’s
permission.
7.107 If the prohibition under models 2 or 3 applies, it will prohibit the
publication of any information, even that information which
does not identify
people. This means the television station’s report of proceedings will be
unlawful, even if no-one can identify
the people involved.
7.108 Of course, the Tribunal has the power to permit the publication of such
a report and it is this power that distinguishes model
2 and model 3. Under
model 2, the Tribunal may only permit the publication of information that will
not identify the people involved.
Model 3 is wider in that it permits the
Tribunal to authorise publication of identifying information as well. This
would mean,
for example, the television station could be authorised by the
Tribunal to air its story and show pictures of Li, Mei-Ching and Justine.
7.109 Under model 4, there would be no impediment to any of the disclosures
provided the information is de-identified. This means
that the television
report, assuming that it conceals the identities of those people involved, could
be aired without the need to
seek the Tribunal’s authorisation. If the
television station wanted the report to include identifying information, it
approach the Tribunal to exercise its discretion to permit the publication
of that information.
7.110 Mei-Ching’s and Justine’s private disclosures are not in
de-identified form, but there are doubts (discussed above)
as to whether those
disclosures would be covered by the prohibition as they are not made to the
public or a section of the public.
If the disclosures do fall within the
prohibition, both would require Tribunal authorisation before they would be
preliminary view
7.111 At this stage of the review, the Commission’s preliminary
preference is for model 4: that publication of Tribunal proceedings
ordinarily occur but only in a way that does not identify the people involved.
This is the position in most jurisdictions
and appears to strike a reasonable
balance between respecting the privacy of those involved in proceedings and
promoting the transparency
and accountability favoured by open justice.
FOR SUBMISSIONS
7.112 The Commission is seeking submissions in response to the following
questions, or on any other issues respondents consider relevant
publication of Tribunal proceedings. You may wish to nominate your preferred
legal model or provide more detailed comment
on the particular issues that
Possible legal models
7-1 Should the guardianship legislation in Queensland reflect one of the
following models in relation to the reporting of Tribunal
proceedings:
(a) Model 1: no prohibition but power to order that information or
identity not be published;
(b) Model 2: general prohibition with power to permit publication of
de-identified information;
(c) Model 3: general prohibition with power to permit publication of all
information;
(d) Model 4: prohibition on publication of identity with power to permit
publication;
(e) Other models?
Particular issues
7-2 Should publication of information about Tribunal proceedings
generally be permitted or prohibited?
7-3 If publication of information about Tribunal proceedings should
generally be
, should a publication that
person involved in a proceeding be permitted or prohibited?
7-4 If publication of a person’s identity should be
, which people should not be identified:
(a) the adult;
(b) the active parties to the proceeding;
(c) any person involved in the proceeding including any witnesses and any
person who has given information or documents to the Tribunal
proceeding;
(d) other people?
7-5 If publication of a person’s
prohibited, should the legislation establish criteria for when identification
will be taken to have occurred, or specify
what kinds of information will be
taken to identify a person? If so, what criteria or what kinds of information
should determine
when a person has been identified:
(a) information that will identify the person;
(b) information that could reasonably, or is likely to, lead to the
identification of the person;
(c) particulars calculated to lead to the identification of the
(d) the person’s name, address, or physical description;
(e) a picture or photograph of the person;
(f) a voice recording of the person;
(g) other criteria or information?
7-6 If publication of a person’s
prohibited, should the prohibition relate to when identification is capable by
any person or only by a member of the public
or a section of the public to whom
the publication is disseminated?
7-7 If publication of information about Tribunal proceedings generally, or
of identifying information, should be
, should the Tribunal
have power to make an order to permit the publication of information about a
particular proceeding? If so,
should that power permit the publication of
information generally, or only permit publication of information that would not
7-8 If the Tribunal should have power to make an order to permit the
publication of information about a proceeding, what legislative
criteria, if
any, should guide the Tribunal’s power:
(a) the Tribunal may make an order if it is satisfied the publication is
in the public interest (the current legislative test in
Queensland);
(b) other criteria?
7-9 Whether or not publication of information about a Tribunal proceeding
is prohibited, should the Tribunal have an
make an order to prohibit publication of information about a particular
proceeding?
7-10 If so, what legislative criteria, if any, should guide the
Tribunal’s power:
(a) the Tribunal may make an order if it is satisfied it is desirable to
do so because of the confidential nature of particular information
or matter or
for another reason (the current legislative test in Queensland);
(b) the Tribunal may make an order if it is satisfied it is necessary for
reasons such as:
(i) that it is in the interests of justice;
(ii) to avoid endangering the safety of a person;
(iii) for the protection of confidential information
(some of the criteria set out in the legislation in Western Australian
and Victoria);
(c) other criteria?
7-11 If publication of information about Tribunal proceedings is
prohibited in any way, should the prohibition relate to all discussions
proceeding or only to publications that are made to the public or to a section
of the public?
7-12 Should the legislation recognise a ‘reasonable excuse’
for not complying with any prohibition or Tribunal order against
publication of
information about a Tribunal proceeding?
7-13 Should the legislation contain any other exceptions to any
prohibition or Tribunal order against publication of information about
Tribunal proceeding and, if so, what should those exceptions be:
(a) the bona fide publication of any material intended primarily for use
by any profession being a law report or any other publication
of a technical
nature (such as the exceptions provided in New South Wales, Western Australia,
and New Zealand);
(b) the communication of a transcript of evidence or other document
(i) people concerned in court proceedings for use in connection with
those proceedings;
(ii) a body responsible for disciplining members of the legal or medical
professions or to people concerned in proceedings before
such disciplinary
(iii) a body that grants legal aid assistance in order to facilitate a
decision whether such assistance should be provided
(such as the exceptions provided in the Western Australian
legislation);
(c) the publication of information that is authorised by the person to
whom the information about a proceeding relates;
(d) other exceptions?
7-14 Should any legislative prohibition on publication of information
information about
proceedings under the guardianship legislation that are conducted in the Supreme
general duty of confidentiality
INTRODUCTION
8.1 In the course of performing relevant roles under the legislation, many
people will gain information about an adult and other people
who are involved in
the adult’s life. Much of this information will be private, sensitive, or
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
impose a duty on a
number of people, such as attorneys, guardians and administrators, Tribunal
members and staff, and the Adult Guardian
and his or her staff, as to how they
deal with this personal information. The legislation also contains a number of
exceptions to
the duty, including
section 250
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
(Qld) which specifically qualifies the Adult
Guardian’s confidentiality obligations.
8.3 As part of its review of the guardianship legislation’s
confidentiality provisions, the Commission is required to consider
provisions, which regulate how people who act under the legislation may deal
with confidential information about a person that
they gain in the course of
those actions. Throughout this chapter, the phrases ‘confidential
information’ and ‘information
will be used to refer to the type of information that is the subject of those
provisions.
8.4 It is noted that
there are also other ways in which the law protects certain types of private and
personal information from disclosure
to other people. In certain circumstances,
the general law will impose an obligation of confidence on a person to whom
confidential
information has been
Dealings with personal information by Commonwealth Government agencies, private
sector health service providers, and some other private
sector entities are
regulated by the federal
Queensland Government agencies are not regulated by the federal privacy
legislation but are required to protect personal information
administrative standard containing a number of information privacy
principles.
8.5 Depending on the circumstances, the
guardianship legislation may impose additional confidentiality obligations. To
of any inconsistency, the relevant provisions of the guardianship
legislation will prevail over any general law or administrative
obligations,
while any applicable provisions of the federal privacy legislation will prevail
over those of the guardianship legislation.
LAW IN QUEENSLAND
section of the chapter outlines the general duty of confidentiality imposed by
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
section 249
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(Qld). It also outlines the
exceptions to this duty, including the exception for the Adult Guardian in
section 250
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
general duty of confidentiality
8.7 Both the
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
(Qld) and the
Guardianship
and Administration Act 2000
(Qld) impose a duty on certain people acting
under those statutes to preserve the confidentiality of particular
information.
The legislation
generally provides that information about a person’s affairs obtained as a
consequence of a person’s
role under the guardianship legislation must not
be disclosed. The provisions are discussed in this section under the following
three headings:
• the people who are subject to the duty;
• the information that is protected by the duty; and
• the type of conduct the duty prohibits.
people who are subject to the duty
Powers of Attorney Act
(Qld) applies to confidential information that is gained by a person
because of being, or an opportunity given by being, an attorney
or statutory
health attorney.
Subsections 74(1)
and (3) of the
Attorney Act 1998
(Qld) relevantly provide:
74 Preservation of confidentiality
(1) If a person gains confidential information because of being, or an
opportunity given by being, an attorney …, the person
must not make a
record of the information or intentionally or recklessly disclose the
information to anyone other than under subsection
Maximum penalty—200 penalty units.
(3) This section also applies to a statutory health attorney.
Section 249(1)
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(Qld) provides that the duty imposed by that section applies to ‘a person
[who] gains confidential information because of the
person’s involvement
in this Act’s administration’. Section 249(2) then appears to set
out an exhaustive list
of those people. It provides that a person gains
confidential information through involvement in the Act’s administration
if the person gains the information because of being, or an opportunity given by
• a Tribunal member, a member of the Tribunal’s staff, or an
expert engaged by the Tribunal;
• the Adult Guardian and his or her staff, including consultants and
those delegated by him or her to conduct investigations;
• the Public Advocate and his or her staff;
• a guardian or administrator; or
• a community visitor.
Subsections 249(1)
and (2) of the
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(Qld) relevantly provide:
249 Preservation of confidentiality
(1) If a person gains confidential information because of the person’s
involvement in this Act’s administration, the
person must not make a
record of the information or intentionally or recklessly disclose the
information to anyone other than under
subsection (3).
Maximum penalty—100 penalty units.
(2) A person gains information through involvement in this Act’s
administration if the person gains the information because
of being, or an
opportunity given by being—
(a) the president, a deputy president or another tribunal member; or
(b) the registrar, a member of the tribunal staff or a tribunal expert;
(c) the adult guardian or a member of the adult guardian’s staff;
(d) a professional consulted or employed by the adult guardian or an adult
guardian’s delegate for an investigation; or
(e) the public advocate or a member of the public advocate’s staff;
(f) a guardian or administrator; or
(g) a community visitor;
information that is protected by the duty
8.12 The duty imposed by
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
section 249
Guardianship
and Administration Act 2000
(Qld) applies to ‘confidential
information’. For both statutes, ‘confidential information’
is defined as
including ‘information about a person’s
‘confidential information’ does not include information that is
already publicly disclosed (unless further publication
is prohibited by law) or
statistical or other information that is not reasonably expected to reveal a
person’s identity.
Sections 74(4)
Powers of Attorney
(Qld) and 249(4) of the
Guardianship and Administration Act
(Qld) relevantly provide:
confidential information
includes information about a
person’s affairs but does not include—
(a) information already publicly disclosed unless further disclosure of the
information is prohibited by law; or
(b) statistical or other information that could not reasonably be expected
to result in the identification of the person to whom
the information
Powers of Attorney
section 249
Guardianship and Administration Act
(Qld) prohibit:
• the making of a record of confidential information; and
• the intentional or reckless disclosure of the confidential
information to any person.
Section 74(1)
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
(Qld) relevantly
74 Preservation of confidentiality
(1) If a person gains confidential information because of being, or an
opportunity given by being, an attorney …, the person
must not make a
record of the information or intentionally or recklessly disclose the
information to anyone other than under subsection
Section 249(1)
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
(Qld) provides:
249 Preservation of confidentiality
(1) If a person gains confidential information because of the person’s
involvement in this Act’s administration, the
person must not make a
record of the information or intentionally or recklessly disclose the
information to anyone other than under
subsection (3).
to the duty
8.17 This part of the chapter outlines the general exceptions to the duty
contained in
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
section 249
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
the exceptions that apply in respect of the Adult Guardian contained in
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
general exceptions
Powers of Attorney Act
section 249
Guardianship and Administration Act
(Qld) permit a person to make a record of or disclose confidential
information, which would otherwise be prohibited, in a range of
circumstances:
• if acting under the
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
• if discharging a function under another law (including the
of Attorney Act 1998
• during a proceeding in a court or relevant tribunal;
• if authorised under a regulation or another law;
• if authorised by the person to whom the information relates; or
• if authorised by the
in the public
interest because a person’s life or physical safety could otherwise
reasonably be expected to be endangered.
8.19 There are some drafting differences in the
exceptions provided in the
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
(Qld) and the
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(Qld). For example, the
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
(Qld) provides an exception for disclosures
made ‘to discharge a function under this Act or another
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(Qld), however, provides two
separate exceptions for disclosures made ‘for this Act’ or ‘to
discharge a function
under another
Section 74(2)
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
(Qld) relevantly
74 Preservation of confidentiality
(2) A person may make a record of confidential information, or disclose it to
someone else—
(a) to discharge a function under this Act or another law; or
(b) for a proceeding in a court or relevant tribunal; or
(c) if authorised under a regulation or another law; or
(d) if authorised by the person to whom the information relates; or
(e) if authorised by the court in the public interest because a
person’s life or physical safety could otherwise reasonably
be expected to
be endangered;
Section 249(3)
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
(Qld) relevantly provides:
249 Preservation of confidentiality
(3) A person may make a record of confidential information, or disclose it to
someone else—
(a) for this Act; or
(b) to discharge a function under another law; or
(c) for a proceeding in a court or relevant tribunal; or
(d) if authorised under a regulation or another law; or
(e) if authorised by the person to whom the information relates; or
(f) if authorised by the tribunal in the public interest because a
person’s life or physical safety could otherwise reasonably
be expected to
be endangered;
that apply to the Adult Guardian
8.22 The Adult
Guardian has a range of functions under the
Guardianship and Administration
(Qld), including the investigation of complaints and allegations
He or she also has
power to investigate complaints or allegations of neglect, exploitation, or
abuse of an adult, or of inappropriate
or inadequate decision-making
arrangements for an adult.
If the Adult Guardian is appointed as a guardian for an adult, he or she will
also have the functions and powers that are conferred
on guardians under the
guardianship legislation.
8.23 In carrying out these functions and
exercising these powers, the Adult Guardian is subject to the duty imposed by
section 249.
Guardian may, however, disclose confidential information under one or more of
the general exceptions to the duty. For
example, one of those general
exceptions permits disclosures made ‘for this Act’, that is, the
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
In addition,
expressly permits the Adult Guardian to disclose confidential information
exceptions are
considered in turn.
Disclosures
made ‘for this Act’
Section 249(3)(a)
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
(Qld) provides that confidential information may be
disclosed (or recorded) ‘for this Act’. A disclosure by the Adult
Guardian may be made ‘for [the] Act’ in a number of circumstances,
which are described further below:
• where the disclosure is required or compelled under the Act;
• where the disclosure is necessary to carry out a function or power
under the Act; and
• where the disclosure is a ‘matter’ for an adult for which
the Adult Guardian has power to decide as the appointed
8.25 The Adult Guardian would be disclosing
information ‘for [the] Act’ if its disclosure is required or
compelled under
the legislation. This would include, for example, disclosure of
information that the Adult Guardian is compelled to give to the
Tribunal under
section 130,
or as part of a
written report of an investigation or audit that is required to be given under
section 193.
8.26 It is also likely that the Adult Guardian
would be disclosing information ‘for [the] Act’ if the disclosure is
necessary incident of the Adult Guardian’s other functions or powers
under the Act, such as in the exercise of protective
or in the course of
conducting an investigation. In determining whether a disclosure is necessary,
the Adult Guardian would be required
to apply the General Principles, including
General Principle 11 about the adult’s right to confidentiality of
information.
8.27 Finally, if the Adult Guardian is appointed
as guardian for an adult, he or she may also disclose otherwise confidential
information
‘for [the] Act’ by deciding to do so as a matter for
which he or she has power. It is likely that a guardian has power
to disclose
confidential information in relation to matters for which the guardian has been
appointed. For example, a guardian appointed
for health matters may be able to
make a decision to disclose confidential information about health care as a
matter for which they
have power. If the Adult Guardian was to consider such a
disclosure as guardian, he or she would also need to apply the General
Principles, including General Principle 11 on confidentiality, in making such
This issue is
considered further below.
Disclosures
during the course of an investigation
Section 250
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
(Qld) provides a specific exception for the Adult
Guardian in relation to the duty of confidentiality imposed by
section 249.
provides that, despite
section 249
, the Adult Guardian may disclose information
and reasonable in the public
8.29 However, the exception provided by
section 250
is limited. First, a
disclosure must not be made if it ‘is likely to prejudice the
investigation’.
Second, a disclosure may only express a criticism of an entity if the entity has
been given an opportunity to answer the
disclosure may only identify the complainant if it is ‘necessary and
reasonable’ to do
Section 250
250 Disclosure of information about investigations
Section 249
does not prevent the adult guardian from disclosing
information to a person or to members of the public about an issue the subject
of an investigation by the adult guardian if the adult guardian is satisfied the
disclosure is necessary and reasonable in the public
(2) However, the adult guardian must not make the disclosure if it is likely
to prejudice the investigation.
(3) In a disclosure under subsection (1), the adult guardian—
(a) may express an opinion expressly or impliedly critical of an entity only
if the adult guardian has given the entity an opportunity
to answer the
criticism; and
(b) may identify the complainant, directly or indirectly, only if it is
necessary and reasonable.
LEGISLATION
IN OTHER JURISDICTIONS
section of the chapter outlines the general duty of confidentiality imposed by
the guardianship legislation of other Australian
exceptions to that duty, including exceptions specifically for the ‘Adult
Guardian’ equivalents
general duty of confidentiality
8.32 Provisions similar to
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
section 249
Guardianship
and Administration Act 2000
(Qld) exist in all of the other Australian
guardianship legislation, apart from the Northern
In each of those
certain information gained by
particular people in the performance of actions
under the legislation. The various statutes also create a number of exceptions
that duty. The following aspects of the different jurisdictions are
discussed below:
• the people who are subject to the duty;
• the information that is protected by the duty; and
• the type of conduct the duty prohibits.
people who are subject to the duty
8.33 The provisions in other jurisdictions generally follow one of two
approaches in specifying the people who are subject to the
The first is to refer
broadly to any people who perform functions under, or act in connection with the
administration or execution
of, the particular
legislation.
For example,
Guardianship and Administration Act 1993
(SA) applies
to ‘[a] person engaged in the administration of this
section 101
Guardianship Act 1987
(NSW) applies to ‘[a] person’ who
obtains information ‘in connection with the administration or execution of
8.34 The second approach is to refer, alternatively or additionally, to
specific people to whom the provision applies, such as members
of the relevant
Tribunal’s staff.
Queensland provisions adopt this course by specifying the particular people to
whom the provisions apply.
8.35 The Western Australian provisions, which are spread across two statutes,
apply both to any ‘person performing any function’
guardianship legislation
more specifically, to ‘any person who is or has been’ a member of
the Tribunal, the executive officer or any other
member of staff of the
Tribunal, or a person acting under the authority of the
8.36 In Tasmania, the duty applies to the Board
and the Public Guardian.
the Australian Capital Territory, the duty in the guardianship legislation
applies to the Tribunal, its staff, and other people
authorised to act in
relation to the Tribunal.
separate duty of similar effect is contained in that Territory’s Public
Advocate legislation, which applies to the Public
Advocate and his or her staff
in the exercise of the Public Advocate’s functions, including those
functions under the guardianship
legislation.
Similarly, in Victoria, the legislation governing the Tribunal imposes a duty on
the Tribunal, its staff, and other people acting
under the Tribunal’s
guardianship legislation imposes a duty on the Public
8.37 In both Western Australia and Victoria, the legislation governing the
Tribunals additionally extends the application of the duty
to any person who
receives information from a person under an exception to the general
information that is protected by the duty
8.38 The legislation of other jurisdictions
specifies the type of information that is protected from disclosure and/or
recording with
varying degrees of particularity. At one end of the spectrum,
the legislation in New South Wales refers simply to ‘any information
obtained in connection with the administration or execution of this
8.39 Of more particularity are the provisions
that apply to the Tribunals in Victoria and the Australian Capital Territory.
In Victoria,
the duty applies to ‘any information
acquired in the performance of functions under or in connection
with this Act or an enabling enactment’ (emphasis
Similarly, the duty
in the Australian Capital Territory applies to ‘information
that is disclosed to, or obtained by, a person … because of the
exercise of a function or power under this Act in relation
tribunal’ (emphasis
8.40 Finally, the duties in the South Australian,
Tasmanian, and the Western Australian guardianship legislation apply with even
particularity (and therefore more narrowly) to personal information of a
particular person,
namely the adult
, that is obtained through involvement
in the legislation.
section 80(1)
Guardianship and Administration Act 1993
(SA) prohibits a person from divulging ‘any personal information relating
to a person in respect of whom any proceedings under
this Act have been
taken’ that is obtained in the course of administration of the Act.
8.41 The duties imposed by the legislation of
other jurisdictions fall into three categories. Statutes in the first category
the person from disclosing or divulging the particular
information.
For example,
section 101
Guardianship Act 1987
(NSW) provides that a person
‘shall not disclose’ certain information and
section 80(1)
Guardianship and Administration Act 1993
(SA) provides that it is an
offence to ‘divulge’ particular information.
8.42 Statutes in the second category prohibit a
person from disclosing or divulging the information and also from making a
information.
That is the approach adopted in the Queensland provisions, which prohibit the
making of a record of the information and the ‘intentional
or reckless
disclosure’ of the
information.
For example,
section 66D(2) of the
Guardianship and Management of Property Act 1991
(ACT) provides:
66D Secrecy
(2) A person to whom this section applies must not—
(a) make a record of protected information; or
(b) directly or indirectly, divulge or communicate to a person protected
information about someone else.
8.43 Statutes in the third category additionally
prohibit ‘secondary disclosure’ of the particular
information.
For example,
section 35(1)
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
(Vic) provides:
35 Prohibition on secondary disclosures
(1) A person to whom information referred to in
is disclosed, and any
employee of that person, is subject to the same obligations and liabilities with
respect to the recording or
disclosure of the information as they would be if
they were a person referred to in
section 34(1)
who had acquired the information
in the performance of functions under this Act or an enabling enactment.
… [note added]
to the duty
8.44 This section of the chapter outlines the
general exceptions to the duty imposed by the legislation of other Australian
and the exceptions that apply specifically to the Adult Guardian
equivalents of those jurisdictions.
general exceptions
8.45 The statutes in other jurisdictions contain
a number of exceptions that permit the disclosure and/or recording of otherwise
confidential
information, and they are outlined below. Many of the exceptions
are similar across jurisdictions, though there are some differences.
Disclosures
made in the performance of functions under legislation
8.46 All of the jurisdictions include an
exception for disclosures made (or the making of records) ‘in connection
with the performance
of functions’ under the legislation, or a similarly
worded circumstance.
section 101(b)
Guardianship Act 1987
(NSW) provides an
exception for disclosures made ‘in connection with the administration or
execution of this Act’. In
Queensland,
section 249(3)(a)
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(Qld) includes an exception for
disclosures or records made ‘for this Act’. Similarly,
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
(Qld) includes an exception
for disclosures or records made ‘to discharge a function under this Act or
another law’.
Disclosures
required or authorised by law
8.47 In addition, many of the jurisdictions contain an exception for
disclosing (or making a record of) information if authorised
or required by
The Western Australian
guardianship legislation, for example, permits otherwise prohibited disclosures
if they are ‘authorised
or required … by this Act or any other
Australia, an exception is provided for divulging information ‘if
authorised or required to do so by
8.48 In Queensland, an exception for disclosures or records made ‘if
authorised under a regulation or another law’ is
contained in both the
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
Guardianship and Administration
Disclosures
made with consent
8.49 Several jurisdictions also include an
exception for disclosures (or records) made with the consent of the person to
information relates. In New South Wales and the Australian Capital
Territory, disclosure is permitted ‘with the consent of
In Victoria,
disclosure by the Tribunal and its staff may be made with the person’s
written consent.
8.50 In Queensland, both the
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
(Qld) and the
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(Qld) contain an exception for
disclosures or making of records ‘if authorised by the person to whom the
information
Statistical
information that does not identify the person
8.51 As noted earlier, in Queensland, statistical or other information that
could not reasonably identify the person to whom the information
specifically excluded from the duty of confidentiality. This is done by
exempting such information from the definition
of ‘confidential
information’.
8.52 Two other Australian jurisdictions also exclude de-identified
information from the duty of confidentiality, although this is
done by way of an
to the duty. Under the Victorian Tribunal legislation, a
person may disclose information ‘for statistical purposes …
the information does not identify any person to whom it
An identical
provision applies to the Tribunal in Western
8.53 Additionally, the guardianship legislation in Western Australia permits
a person performing a function under that legislation
to disclose
‘statistical or other information that could not reasonably be expected to
lead to the identification of any person
Disclosures
at a hearing or proceeding under the legislation
8.54 Some of the other jurisdictions also provide that the duty in relation
to disclosure and/or the making of a record of confidential
information does not
apply in respect of proceedings or hearings conducted under the legislation.
8.55 In Tasmania, disclosure is permitted ‘at a hearing under this
and in New South
Wales, disclosure is permitted ‘for the purposes of any legal proceedings
arising out of this Act or of any
report of any such
proceedings’.
8.56 In Queensland, the legislation provides exceptions for disclosures and
records of information made ‘for a proceeding in
a court or relevant
8.57 In the Australian Capital Territory, by contrast, the legislation
provides that a person to whom the duty applies cannot be required
protected information or to produce a document containing protected information
to a court, ‘unless it is necessary
to do so’ for the guardianship
legislation or another Act.
Only those disclosures that are
to be made under legislation may
be made in a court proceeding. This is narrower than the exception in
Queensland which would allow
disclosures made for a court or Tribunal
proceeding to be made.
8.58 A few other exceptions are also included in the various jurisdictions.
8.59 Under the Victorian Tribunal legislation, for example, a person may
disclose personal information ‘to a member of the police
force for the
purposes of reporting a suspected offence or assisting in the investigation of a
suspected offence’.
identical provision is contained in the
State Administrative Tribunal Act
8.60 In Tasmania, a
much broader exception is provided to permit disclosure ‘where in the
opinion of the Board or the Public
Guardian it is in the best interests of the
represented person to disclose the
information’.
exception of this type is considered further
8.61 In Queensland, a disclosure of, or the making of a record of,
confidential information is permitted ‘if authorised by the
tribunal [or
the court] in the public interest because a person’s life or physical
safety could otherwise be expected to be
endangered’.
exceptions for the Adult Guardian
8.62 Many of the other Australian jurisdictions have Adult Guardian
equivalents conferred with similar investigatory functions to
the Queensland
Adult Guardian.
duty of confidentiality may fall under
one of the general exceptions to that
duty. Like Queensland, one such exception is where a disclosure is made in the
performance
of legislative
To the extent
that disclosure of otherwise confidential information is a necessary incident of
the performance of a function, the
disclosure would probably be
8.63 In addition, the Australian Capital Territory and Tasmania provide
specific exceptions for their Adult Guardian equivalents.
8.64 The Australian Capital Territory’s
Public Advocate is prohibited from recklessly recording or divulging protected
information
except in certain
circumstances.
Section 17 of
Public Advocate Act 2005
(ACT), however, provides an exemption from
that duty of confidentiality in relation to information about
investigations
substantially the same terms as
section 250
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
(Qld). It provides:
17 Disclosure of information about investigations
does not prevent the public advocate from disclosing
information to a person (including members of the public) about an investigation
by the public advocate if the public advocate is satisfied that the disclosure
is necessary and reasonable in the public interest.
(2) The public advocate must not make a disclosure mentioned in subsection
(1) that is likely to prejudice the investigation.
(3) In a disclosure mentioned in subsection (1), the public advocate must
(a) express an opinion that is (expressly or impliedly) critical of a person
or body unless the public advocate has given the person,
or the principal
officer of the body, an opportunity to answer the criticism; or
(b) identify the complainant (directly or indirectly) unless it is necessary
and reasonable to do so.
8.65 In Tasmania, a discretion to disclose
confidential information is also conferred on the Public Guardian, although it
is not specific
to information about
investigations.
Guardian is generally subject to a duty not to disclose the personal history or
records of a represented or proposed
represented
However, he or she
has a general discretion under
section 86(1)
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
(Tas) to disclose such information ‘where in
the opinion of the … Public Guardian it is in the best interests of the
represented person to disclose the
information’.
FOR CONSIDERATION
8.66 This section of the chapter raises several
issues to consider when examining the duty in relation to confidential
information
gained in the course of a person’s involvement in the
administration of the guardianship legislation:
• Should there be a general duty of confidentiality under the
guardianship legislation?
• If so, who should be subject to the duty?
• What information should be protected by the duty?
• What sort of conduct should the duty prohibit?
• Should there be any exceptions to the duty, and, if so, what should
there be a general duty of confidentiality under the guardianship
legislation?
8.67 A threshold question is whether the guardianship legislation should
impose any general duty that imposes confidentiality on those
involved in the
administration of the legislation. Except for the Northern Territory, the
guardianship legislation of all Australian
confidentiality in some
should be subject to the duty?
8.68 There may be a
range of people who acquire different information about an adult with impaired
capacity (or information about
other persons’ affairs) in a number of
At present, however, the duty imposed by the guardianship legislation applies
only to certain people who are involved in the administration
legislation. The duty does not apply to other people who may gain confidential
information in other ways, such as service
providers, informal decision-makers,
or family members. An issue for consideration is whether the duty should also
apply more widely
to any of those people.
involved in the administration of the legislation
Section 249
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
imposes a duty to maintain the confidentiality of particular information, but
only to the extent that the information is generated
or received as a
consequence of involvement with the legislation itself. It therefore applies
only to those people who gain information
in the course of their involvement in
the Act’s administration. Section 249(2) of the Act appears to set out an
list of those people.
8.70 Apart from the people included in the list in
section 249(2)
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(Qld), however, there are other
people involved in the Act’s administration, and who may thereby gain
confidential information,
but who are not specifically referred to in that
8.71 First, while section 249(2) refers to ‘community visitors’,
it does not refer to
staff of the community visitor program who are
not themselves ‘community visitors’, such as the coordinator of the
8.72 Second, section 249(2) does not refer to police officers or occupiers
who may assist in the exercise of the Adult Guardian’s
powers under a
warrant to remove an adult from a
8.73 Despite not being specifically referred to in section 249, such people
should observe General Principle 11 which
11 Confidentiality
An adult’s right to confidentiality of information about the adult must
be recognised and taken into account.
8.74 In addition, the information privacy principles contained in Information
Standard 42, which govern the collection, storage, use,
and disclosure of
personal information by public sector agencies, apply to the operations of both
the staff of the community visitor
program and members of the police
Information
disclosed to such people might also be subject to an equitable obligation of
confidence.
8.75 An issue for consideration is whether the duty in
section 249
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(Qld) should also specifically
apply to those people.
people, including service providers
8.76 While a range of people may gain confidential information about an
the duty contained in
the legislation does not apply to people who are
involved in its
administration. Therefore, unless they gain information in this way as one of
the people listed in the provision,
people such as service providers, informal
decision-makers, carers, family, and friends of an adult are not covered by the
8.77 This raises a much broader question about the circumstances in which
people should be required to protect the privacy of information
they obtain
of information in Australia.
A certain amount of idle conversation and curiosity about others’ personal
affairs is an ordinary incident of day-to-day life
and is not unique to people
who are subject to decision-making regimes or to people with impaired
As such, the law
protects the confidentiality of information about a person in only limited
circumstances.
8.78 In some circumstances, the general law may
impose an obligation of confidence preventing a person from disclosing
confidential
information that is in their hands. As discussed in Chapter 3, an
obligation of confidence may arise as an incident of
This ordinarily
arises in the context of professional and commercial
relationships.
8.79 In addition, members of the community are ‘encouraged to apply and
promote the general principles’ contained in the
guardianship legislation,
including General Principle 11, which deals with an adult’s right to
confidentiality of
information.
8.80 Further, the operations of any Queensland
public sector service providers, such as Disability Services Queensland, are
to the information privacy principles contained in the Queensland
Government’s administrative standard, Information Standard
Finally, some private
sector organisations, including health service providers, must comply with the
requirements of the
8.81 An issue for consideration is whether the duty in
section 249
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(Qld) should also apply to
service providers, informal decision-makers, carers, family, and friends of an
adult, who are not currently
covered by the duty. The Commission notes that
imposing a duty on such people would substantially widen its scope. It also
that disclosures of confidential information by these groups of people
occur frequently outside of regimes such as this and that
enforcement of the
duty may be very difficult.
information should be protected by the duty?
8.82 For both
Attorney Act 1998
section 249
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
(Qld), ‘confidential information’ is
defined as including ‘information about a person’s affairs’,
not information that is either already publicly disclosed (unless further
publication is prohibited by law), or statistical or other
information that is
not reasonably expected to reveal a person’s
Information
8.83 A question arises as to what information
will be regarded as ‘information about a person’s affairs’
This phrase is not defined in the guardianship legislation and has not
received judicial consideration. However, ‘personal
information refers in freedom of information legislation to information that
affects an individual or that is of private
concern to a
For example,
information about a person’s financial affairs, state of health, personal
relationships, or personal attributes
might be considered personal affairs
information.
meaning is likely to be ascribed to the phrase ‘information about a
person’s affairs’ under the guardianship
legislation.
8.84 It is also noted that information may relate to the affairs of more than
one person.
For example, a
document produced by one person may contain details of an opinion expressed by a
second person about a third person.
Information about a person’s affairs
will be confidential, however, only if it could reasonably identify ‘the
to whom the information
issue is of particular significance in relation to the disclosure of information
and is discussed below in relation to the exceptions
8.85 Another issue for consideration is whether the duty should apply to
information about a person’s affairs and/or to some
other information. As
noted above, the legislation in other Australian jurisdictions refers to
different types of information.
In New South Wales,
information that
is gained in connection with the administration of the legislation is
In Queensland,
confidential information
information about a person’s
affairs, but presumably can also include other information
8.86 In other jurisdictions, the only information that is captured by the
duty is that which deals with a person’s
In some other
affairs that must be kept
confidential.
An issue for
consideration is whether the duty should apply to all information, information
Information
that is not publicly disclosed
8.87 A further issue for consideration is whether information that is known
to some people, but not to others, is ‘publicly
disclosed’ and
therefore not confidential. Information about a person’s affairs will
only be treated as confidential
under the guardianship legislation if it has not
already been publicly disclosed (unless further disclosure is prohibited by
This is consistent
with the equitable doctrine of confidence which provides that once information
has entered the public domain,
it no longer has the necessary quality of
confidentiality.
8.88 It is not clear, however, what is required
for information to be ‘publicly disclosed’ under the guardianship
legislation.
In other contexts, information has been regarded as being publicly
disclosed only if it is disclosed to the public at
to a substantial
number of people,
wide audience.
If a similar
interpretation is adopted for the guardianship legislation, limited disclosures,
made under an exception to the duty
for example, would be unlikely to affect the
continued confidentiality of the information. However, a disclosure made to a
audience, for example, in breach of the duty or by a person who is not
subject to the duty (such as a journalist), may mean that
the information
subsequently loses its protection.
8.89 This raises the appropriateness of excluding information that has
already been publicly disclosed from the application of the
duty. The duty of
confidentiality is imposed because the information is personal; that may not
change if the information is
It may seem
unreasonable, for example, for a fleeting or inconspicuous publication of such
information, particularly one that is
made in breach of the duty, to remove any
subsequent protection and allow future, and possibly more enduring forms of,
disclosure.
Identifying
information
Section 74(4)
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
section 249(4)
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
provide that ‘confidential information’ does not include
‘statistical or other information that could not
reasonably be expected to
result in the identification of the person to whom it relates’. It is
noted, however, that the same
formulation is not adopted for
section 112
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(Qld) which prohibits the
disclosure of ‘the identity of a person involved in a
proceeding’.
for consideration is whether the references to identifying information under
each of these provisions should be consistent.
sort of conduct should the duty prohibit?
8.91 Another issue for consideration is the type
of conduct that should be prohibited by the legislation.
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
section 249
Guardianship
and Administration Act 2000
(Qld) prohibit both the making of a record of
confidential information and the intentional or reckless disclosure of
confidential
information.
Intentional
and reckless disclosures
8.92 The duty not to disclose confidential information is currently limited
to intentional or reckless disclosures. ‘Intentional’
disclosures
are those made for the purpose of disclosing the
information
‘reckless’ disclosures are those where there is foresight of the
probable consequences of actions but a person displays
indifference as to
whether or not those consequences
An issue for
consideration is whether the duty should also prohibit the disclosure of
information that occurs in circumstances where
foreseen that the disclosure was likely to occur as a consequence of their
actions. In other words, it may be that the duty
should also prohibit negligent
disclosures.
8.93 There is also an inconsistency between the duty not to disclose
information, which is prohibited if it occurs intentionally or
recklessly, and
the duty not to make a record, which is not subject to those qualifications, and
so is stricter in its
application.
The rationale
for such a distinction may be that a person has greater control over when they
make a record as that is usually a
deliberate act, and so the duty imposed can
be stricter.
disclosures
8.94 Whether the duty should also prohibit secondary disclosures as it does
in some other jurisdictions is another issue to
information may, under an exception to the duty, be disclosed to a person who is
not subsequently required by the legislation
to keep the information
confidential. It may seem incongruous with the intent of the duty not to
prevent that third party from further
disclosing information that they received
under one of the limited exceptions permitted by the legislation.
8.95 However, a prohibition on secondary disclosures would have significant
implications for the scope of the duty as it could involve
legislative duty on people beyond those involved in the administration of the
legislation. It may catch, for example,
people who receive information casually
or inadvertently. It may also lead to the unintended situation that information
a court during proceedings, which is a disclosure already permitted by
the guardianship legislation, may then be prohibited from
being further
disclosed in that court’s reasons for judgment.
8.96 One issue to consider is whether the duty of
confidentiality should continue to include the making of a record of
confidential
information. It could be argued a general duty not to make a
record of information (unless one of the legislation’s exceptions
may undermine a person’s ability to properly undertake the tasks for which
they have received the information. Another
consideration is whether the harm
of widespread dissemination of confidential information is sufficiently
addressed by prohibiting
the disclosure of that information.
8.97 However, privacy legislation has recognised
the importance of regulating the collection, storage, and use of personal
information
as part of protecting information
For example, one of
the concerns that arises with recording information, particularly on centralised
computerised storage systems,
is that it gives rise to a risk of unauthorised
disclosure or misuse
prolonged the longer the record is
there be any exceptions to the duty, and what should they be?
8.98 Although
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
section 249
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(Qld) impose a duty of
confidentiality upon certain people, those provisions also recognise a number of
exceptions to that duty.
This section of the chapter outlines some issues to consider in relation to the
general exceptions to the duty (those that apply
generally) and the exceptions
that apply specifically to the Adult Guardian:
• disclosures authorised by the person to whom the information
• disclosures made for the Act;
• disclosures in the adult’s interests;
• other potentially reasonable disclosures;
• consistency within the guardianship legislation; and
• specific exceptions for the Adult Guardian.
Disclosures
authorised by the person to whom the information relates
8.99 One of the general exceptions to the duty is
where the disclosure is authorised ‘by the person to whom the information
An issue for
consideration is how that exception might operate when the information relates
to more than one person.
8.100 Under federal freedom of information
legislation, information about the personal affairs of both the person seeking
the information (the applicant) and of a third person is known as
‘mixed personal
information.’
regime, information can be released to the applicant only to the extent that it
can be separated from information about
the affairs of the third person, unless
the third person consents to the release of information about their personal
While freedom of
information legislation is not directly concerned with personal information but
with access to government information,
the approach of that regime to the
release of personal information that would otherwise be exempt from disclosure
may be instructive
for the guardianship legislation.
8.101 As such, it seems likely that to the extent
that information about one person is separable from information about another,
person may authorise its disclosure. It would follow that if the
information cannot be separated, it could be disclosed only with
authorisation of the other person to whom it also relates.
8.102 This may cause particular difficulties in
relation to information about an adult who does not have capacity to consent to
disclosure.
It is likely that much of the confidential information which is
gained by a person in the administration of the guardianship legislation
relate, at least indirectly, to an adult with impaired capacity. Such
information will often be difficult, if not impossible,
to disentangle from
information about the other person to whom the information may also relate. For
example, information about a
person’s actions in caring for an adult may
simultaneously comprise information about the carer and the adult. In such
it is suggested that a substitute decision-maker for the adult will have
power to provide authorisation on the adult’s
This is considered
Disclosures
made for the Act
8.103 Another general exception to the duty of confidentiality is where the
disclosure or record is made ‘for this Act’,
which includes both the
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
(Qld) and the
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
As discussed earlier
in relation to the Adult
information may be
disclosed ‘for [the] Act’ in a number of circumstances.
8.104 For example, a person compelled to give information to the
or to the Adult
legislation would be a disclosure ‘for [the] Act’.
8.105 It would also be a disclosure ‘for [the] Act’ if it was
necessary to carry out functions or powers under the legislation.
discussed in relation to the Adult
but this can also
arise in relation to other people. For example, in making decisions about the
adult’s health care, a guardian
may need to disclose otherwise
confidential information about the adult’s medical history in the course
of seeking medical
8.106 One issue for consideration that arises in relation to disclosures
‘for [the] Act’ is the power of a substitute
decision-maker to make
a decision for a ‘matter’ when that ‘matter’ is the
disclosure of otherwise confidential
information about the adult.
as a decision about a ‘matter’
8.107 It is likely
that a decision whether or not to disclose confidential information about an
adult will itself be a decision for
a matter for which a person may have power
and, therefore, such disclosure may be one made for the Act.
8.108 Substitute decision-makers for an adult are given power for particular
matters under the guardianship legislation. A guardian
or attorney (under an
enduring power of attorney) appointed for personal matters, including health
matters, has power to do anything
in relation to those matters that the adult
could have done if they had
An administrator
or attorney (under an enduring power of attorney) appointed for financial
matters, has power to do anything in
relation to those matters that the adult
could have done if they had
A statutory health
attorney or an attorney under an advance health directive has power to make
decisions about health matters for
8.109 A matter for which a substitute decision-maker has power is defined
under the legislation as one ‘relating to’ particular
issues. For
example, a health matter, which is a type of personal matter, is ‘a matter
relating to health
Similarly, a
financial matter is ‘a matter relating to the adult’s financial or
property matters’.
words ‘relating to’ are probably wide enough to mean that a matter
will include decisions about whether or not information
be disclosed.
This means,
for example, that a decision whether or not to disclose information about the
adult’s health care will itself
probably be a decision for a health
matter. Indeed, unless it is a matter on which a substitute decision-maker can
decide, no other
person would have the power to disclose this information on
behalf of the adult.
8.110 Like any other exercise of power for a matter under the legislation, a
decision about disclosure would need to be made in compliance
with the General
Principles. In particular, General Principle 11 requires that the adult’s
right to confidentiality of information
be recognised and taken into
8.111 In determining the circumstances in which a
substitute decision-maker (or other person) should be permitted to disclose
confidential
information about an adult, the Commission notes there is a fine
balance to consider. On the one hand, excessive weight given to
confidentiality
of information may inappropriately or unreasonably exclude family members or
close friends from participating in
the adult’s life. For example, where
the adult’s capacity is impaired due to an acquired brain injury and the
previous conduct indicates they would have wanted certain family
members to know the information, it may be unreasonable to prevent
disclosure of
that information to those family members, particularly if the disclosure would
not harm the adult.
8.112 On the other hand, if insufficient weight
is given to confidentiality of information, disclosures that are inappropriate
disrespectful of the adult’s privacy may result. For example,
disclosing the contents of the adult’s will to family
members merely to
satisfy the family’s interest or curiosity, rather than any need to know
the information, may be considered
by some to be unreasonable and
insensitive.
Disclosures
in the adult’s interests
8.113 Another issue for consideration is whether
the guardianship legislation should permit disclosures to family members,
or carers made in the adult’s interest. There may be
circumstances where such a disclosure would benefit the adult, but none
current exceptions to the duty of confidentiality apply.
8.114 There is currently power for the Supreme
Court or the Tribunal to authorise disclosure if the adult’s life or
safety may be
endangered.
However, the
scope of that power is quite limited. By contrast, in Tasmania, a disclosure is
excused if, in the opinion of the
Tribunal or the Public Guardian, ‘it is
in the best interests of the represented person to disclose the
information’.
for consideration is whether a similar provision should be included in
Queensland’s legislation.
8.115 Alternatively, another issue is whether the Tribunal should be
empowered to authorise disclosures in the public interest generally,
rather than
being limited to circumstances involving harm, or where the disclosure is in the
adult’s interests.
This would be similar to the power granted to the Tribunal in
section 112
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
potentially reasonable disclosures
8.116 There may be other disclosures made by a person that might be
appropriate for the guardianship legislation to recognise in certain
circumstances. For example, if a guardian or an attorney for an adult needs to
seek counselling or treatment for any stress
or anxiety that might arise from
their experiences in their role acting for the adult, it may be reasonable that
they disclose that
information in the course of that treatment.
8.117 Despite the disclosure in such a scenario being legitimate and being
made in the context of a confidential professional relationship,
it does not
currently fall within any of the exceptions to the duty and would not be
captured under any exception for disclosures
made in the adult’s interest.
This may be an unintended consequence of the duty which perhaps should be
remedied. It may be
that disclosures made in such circumstances would be
considered to have been made with a ‘reasonable excuse’, though
is not currently provided for in the legislation.
Consistency
within the guardianship legislation
8.118 A further issue for consideration is whether the general exceptions
provided in the
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
(Qld) and the
Guardianship
and Administration Act 2000
(Qld) should be consistent with each other and
with the other confidentiality provisions in the legislation.
8.119 There are some drafting differences between
the two statutes in relation to the general exceptions that are
For example, while
each of the other confidentiality provisions in the guardianship legislation
provides that disclosures may be
made with a ‘reasonable
there is no
equivalent excuse under
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
section 249
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(Qld). An issue for consideration is whether such an excuse should be
exceptions for the Adult Guardian
8.120 As discussed
earlier, the Adult Guardian may disclose otherwise confidential information
under any of the general exceptions
to the duty or, where the information
relates to an ongoing investigation, under the specific exception provided in
section 250
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
8.121 An issue for consideration is the extent to which
section 250
necessary. That provision permits the Adult Guardian to disclose confidential
information about an issue that is the subject
of an investigation in certain
limited circumstances. As discussed earlier, to the extent that disclosure of
otherwise confidential
information is necessary for the conduct of an
investigation, it would fall within the general exception for disclosures made
It could be argued therefore that the provision is unnecessary.
8.122 However, there may be some value in having a provision such as section
250 for clarifying the existing law, or in going further
and establishing a
statutory framework for when these decisions can be made. When it previously
examined this issue in the 1990s,
the Commission considered that safeguards on
the disclosure of information during investigations by the Adult Guardian should
included ‘to ensure fairness to both those who make complaints and
those against whom complaints are
It noted that
‘although in some situations it may be in the public interest for
information about investigations to be disclosed,
the information may be highly
sensitive and disclosure may have serious
consequences’.
8.123 Section 250(3) incorporates some such safeguards. It provides that a
complainant can be identified in a disclosure only if
it is necessary and
reasonable.
It also ensures
that before an opinion that is critical of an entity is disclosed, the entity
has been given a chance to answer
Subsections
250(1) and (2) also contribute to the statutory framework by establishing some
criteria for such disclosures, stating
that it is permitted only if it will not
prejudice the investigation and if it is ‘necessary and reasonable in the
public interest’.
8.124 One issue for consideration in relation to
section 250 is whether its safeguards and criteria are appropriate. Another is
the provision should also include a specific reference to permitting the
Adult Guardian to disclose critical or adverse information
that person. Although the current wording of section 250(1) is currently wide
enough to permit such disclosure,
as it refers to ‘disclosing information
to a person’, it may be useful to place the matter beyond doubt.
8.125 This part of the chapter briefly considers, in the context of the
confidentiality of information gained by a person in the course
administration of the guardianship legislation, the three concepts examined in
Chapter 3: open justice, procedural fairness,
and the nature of the guardianship
8.126 The principle of open justice applies to the conduct of judicial or
quasi-judicial proceedings
and so is of limited application in this chapter. Nevertheless, the factors
that underpin open justice, such as accountability and
transparency, should
inform decision-making generally and so may suggest a more limited duty of
confidentiality for those involved
in the administration of the guardianship
legislation.
8.127 Procedural fairness generally militates against strict confidentiality
of information that should, in fairness, be made available
to people with an
interest in the matter. One of the requirements of the ‘fair hearing
rule’, for example, is that a
person about whom a decision is being made
must be apprised of the substance of the evidence upon which the decision-maker
to rely and be given a reasonable opportunity to respond to
Such an obligation may
arise, for example, in relation to decisions made by the Adult Guardian, such as
to suspend the operation
of an attorney’s
and also in relation
to investigations conducted by the Adult
8.128 Procedural fairness, with its commitment to open decision-making, may
therefore prefer a constrained duty of confidentiality.
At a minimum, it would
require that any duty include sufficient exceptions to permit appropriate
disclosures so that any decision
made is both fair and based on accurate and
complete evidence.
of the guardianship system
8.129 The nature of the guardianship system may favour the confidentiality of
personal information that is gained through being involved
with the legislation.
8.130 The guardianship system is a protective one in which personal and
sensitive information about an adult and people close to the
adult is received
by many different people and
Of primary concern
is the avoidance of harm to the adult, including harm to the adult’s
is of particular concern in this system given that much of the personal
information gained as a consequence of the legislation
relates to matters that
would, but for the adult’s impaired capacity, be dealt with in
confidentiality may help protect the adult’s privacy interests by limiting
disclosures of confidential information.
8.131 However, decisions made within the guardianship system by the Adult
Guardian, for example, may have a significant and serious
impact on an adult and
on other people involved with the adult. The desire for accountability and
transparency in decision-making
within the guardianship system may favour
disclosure of otherwise confidential information in certain
circumstances,
particularly
to the person to whom the information
8.132 There is also an argument that the protective nature of the
guardianship system may favour, in appropriate cases, the disclosure
information about an adult. An adult’s interest in their privacy is only
one of an adult’s rights and interests and
it may be that, on balance, a
better decision for the adult may be made if otherwise confidential information
is disclosed and tested
during the decision-making process.
LEGAL MODELS
8.133 The Commission has identified four possible models, outlined below, for
how the law might deal with the issue of confidentiality
of information gained
by a person through involvement in the administration of the guardianship
legislation. These models do not
capture all of the relevant issues the
Commission is considering, but may provide a useful starting point for thinking
general approach the law should
A hypothetical case
study is used to illustrate these models and how they might operate.
1: no general duty of confidentiality
8.134 In this model, there would be no general duty of confidentiality in the
guardianship legislation in relation to confidential
information gained through
the administration of the legislation. This is the position under the
Guardianship Act
(NT). Under this model, information may still be subject
to duties imposed by other legislation, the general law obligations of
or, where it is
collected and held by a public sector agency, obligations under the Queensland
Government’s information privacy
principles.
2: a general duty of confidentiality but with no exceptions
8.135 In this model, the duty of confidentiality would be absolute in that
there would be no exceptions that permit the disclosure
of information gained
through involvement in the administration of the legislation. None of the
guardianship systems in Australia
currently adopt this approach.
3: a general duty of confidentiality with general exceptions
8.136 In this model, there would be a duty of confidentiality imposed but
with any number of general exceptions to the duty. This
approach is reflected
in New South Wales, Victoria, South Australia, and Western
4: a general duty of confidentiality with specific exceptions for the Adult
Guardian (with or without other general exceptions)
8.137 In this model, the duty of confidentiality will be subject to specific
exceptions that permit the Adult Guardian to disclose
information in certain
circumstances. There may also be a range of general statutory exceptions to the
duty as in model 3. This
is the current position in Queensland and is also
reflected in the Australian Capital Territory and
Olga is a 78 year old woman with dementia. She lives with her adult
daughter, Laura and has another adult daughter, Sue.
Laura has been Olga’s primary carer for many years. Olga’s
children generally have always cooperated in decisions involving
their mother
and this has pleased Olga who had always encouraged an open approach to family
Recently, a disagreement between Olga’s children has arisen in relation
to a proposed change her to medication, which eventually
resulted in the Adult
Guardian being appointed as Olga’s guardian (by agreement of the
The Adult Guardian has advised the children that she will make a decision
that it will be based
on advice that she has received from Olga’s GP and from a specialist
doctor. The children wish to see
this information.
Olga’s estranged brother, Bastian, is also curious about Olga’s
health and has asked to see this medical information.
He and Olga have not been
close since a falling out twenty years ago.
Now that the Adult Guardian has been appointed, Laura and Sue are also unsure
whether they are allowed to tell anyone (including Bastian
if he asks)
information they already have about Olga’s medical history.
of case study
8.138 Unless otherwise noted, under the models below, the Adult Guardian, as
Olga’s appointed guardian, will probably have the
power to disclose
information by making a decision for such a
In considering
whether or not to make such a decision, the Adult Guardian would apply the
General Principles, including General
Principle 11 on
confidentiality.
Guardian may conclude that given Bastian’s distant relationship with Olga,
disclosure of her medical information
to him would not be appropriate. The
position is likely to be different in relation to Laura and Sue to whom
disclosure may be appropriate.
8.139 Under model 1, there would be no statutory duty in the guardianship
legislation requiring the Adult Guardian not to disclose
the information
provided by Olga’s GP and by the specialist doctor to Olga’s
children. As there is no such duty, the
Adult Guardian could consider whether
to disclose the information as discussed above without having to identify an
exception to that
8.140 Under model 2, it is likely that the Adult Guardian would be unable to
make disclosures about the doctors’ advice. There
would be an absolute
statutory duty of confidentiality without exceptions so the information could
not be shared with Laura, Sue
or Bastian.
8.141 Under model 3, disclosure of the doctors’ advices by the Adult
Guardian would be prevented unless they fell within one
of the general
exceptions. One of those exceptions might be where the disclosure is made
‘for [the] Act’. This may
permit the Adult Guardian to make a
decision for that matter as discussed above and authorise the disclosure of the
information.
8.142 The position would be the same under model 4 as for model 3 except that
the Adult Guardian may be able to disclose the information
under a specific
exception to the duty.
Section 250
Guardianship and Administration
(Qld), however, is currently limited to disclosures of information
advices by the Adult Guardian in this case study.
8.143 The case study also raises the issue of whether or not Laura or Sue
should be subject to a duty of confidentiality in relation
to the information
that they know. Currently, they would not be covered by the duty as neither is
listed as a person involved in
the administration of the guardianship
legislation, although they would be encouraged to apply the General
Principles.
preliminary view
8.144 The Commission’s preliminary view is that confidential
information received as a consequence of a person’s involvement
administration of the legislation should remain confidential, although there are
circumstances in which it is appropriate
that the information be disclosed or
recorded. The Commission also sees some advantages in providing a statutory
framework for disclosures
during investigations by the Adult Guardian.
8.145 Accordingly, the Commission has a preliminary preference for model 4: a
statutory duty with general exceptions to the duty as
well as specific
exceptions for the Adult Guardian. The Commission does not have views at this
stage as to what should be the precise
content or extent of the duty or its
exceptions.
FOR SUBMISSIONS
8.146 The Commission is interested in receiving submissions in response to
the following questions, or on any other issues respondents
consider relevant to
the confidentiality of information gained because of a person’s
involvement in the administration of the
legislation. You may wish to nominate
your preferred legal model or provide more detailed comment on the particular
issues that
Possible legal models
8-1 Should Queensland’s guardianship legislation reflect one of the
following models in relation to the duty of confidentiality
information gained through a person’s involvement in the administration of
the legislation:
(a) Model 1: no general duty of confidentiality;
(b) Model 2: a general duty of confidentiality but with no
exceptions;
(c) Model 3: a general duty of confidentiality with general
exceptions;
(d) Model 4: a general duty of confidentiality with specific exceptions
for the Adult Guardian (with or without other general exceptions);
(e) Other models?
Particular issues
8-2 Should a person be subject to a duty of confidentiality in relation to
information gained through their involvement in the administration
guardianship legislation?
8-3 If so, to whom should the duty apply:
(a) specific people who gain information through their involvement in the
administration of the legislation such as:
(i) Tribunal members and staff;
(ii) the Adult Guardian and his or her staff;
(iii) the Public Advocate and his or her staff;
(iv) community visitors and other staff of the community visitor
(v) guardians, administrators, and attorneys for an adult;
(b) all people who gain information through their involvement in the
administration of the legislation;
(c) other people?
8-4 If yes to question 8-2, what information should the duty
(a) any information gained through a person’s involvement in the
administration of the legislation;
(b) information about any person’s affairs;
(c) information about an adult’s affairs only;
(d) only information that has not already been publicly
(e) only information that could reasonably be expected to identify a
(f) other information?
8-5 If yes to question 8-2, what type of conduct should the duty
(a) intentional or reckless disclosure of the information;
(b) negligent disclosure of the information;
(c) making a record of the information;
(d) secondary disclosure of the information;
(e) other conduct?
8-6 If yes to question 8-2, should there be any general exceptions to the
duty and, if so, what should they be:
(a) exceptions currently provided for under the guardianship
legislation:
(i) if acting under the guardianship legislation;
(ii) to discharge a function under another law;
(iii) for a proceeding in a court or relevant tribunal;
(iv) if authorised under a regulation or another law;
(v) if authorised by the person to whom the information relates;
(vi) if authorised by the Tribunal in the public interest because a
person’s life or physical safety could otherwise be endangered;
(b) if it is in the adult’s interests;
(c) if the person has a reasonable excuse;
(d) other exceptions?
8-7 If yes to question 8-2, should there be any exceptions to the duty
specific to the Adult Guardian and, if so, what should they
(a) if the disclosure is made about an issue the subject of an
investigation;
(b) other exceptions?
8-8 If there should be an exception specific to the Adult Guardian for
disclosures of information about an issue the subject of an
investigation, what
criteria should govern that disclosure:
(a) the Adult Guardian must first be satisfied the disclosure is
necessary and reasonable in the public interest;
(b) the disclosure must not be likely to prejudice the
investigation;
(c) the complainant must not be identified except where the
identification is necessary and reasonable;
(d) a critical opinion expressed about an entity to another person may
occur only if the entity has been given an opportunity to
(e) other criteria?
8-9 If there should be an exception specific to the Adult Guardian for
disclosures of information about an issue the subject of an
investigation,
should that exception specifically permit the Adult Guardian to disclose
critical or adverse information about a person
to that person?
of reference
A review of the law in relation to the General Principles, the scope of
substituted decision-making, the role of the support network,
adequacy of
investigative powers, health and special health matters, and other miscellaneous
matters, under the
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
1. I, LINDA LAVARCH, Attorney-General and Minister for Justice, having regard
• the need to ensure that the General Principles continue to provide an
appropriate balance of relevant factors to protect the
interests of an adult
with impaired capacity;
• the need to ensure that the powers of guardians, administrators and
other officers or bodies established by the legislation
are sufficiently
extensive to protect the interests of an adult with impaired capacity;
• the need to ensure that there are adequate and accessible procedures
for review of decisions made under the Acts;
• the need to ensure that adults are not deprived of necessary health
care because they have impaired capacity;
• the need to ensure that adults with impaired capacity receive only
treatment that is necessary and appropriate to maintain
or promote their health
or wellbeing, or that is in their best interests;
• the need to ensure that the confidentiality provisions that apply to
the proceedings and decisions of the Guardianship and
Administration Tribunal
and other decisions under the
Guardianship and Administration Act
the appropriate balance between protecting the privacy of persons affected by
the Tribunal’s proceedings and decisions
and promoting accountability of
the Tribunal;
• the fact that some parents of a person with impaired capacity
(whether or not an adult), may wish to make a binding direction,
appointing a
guardian or administrator for a matter for the adult, that applies if the
parents are no longer alive or are no longer
capable of exercising a power for a
relevant matter for the adult;
refer to the Queensland Law Reform Commission (the Commission), for review
pursuant to
Law Reform Commission Act 1968
(a) the law relating to decisions about personal, financial, health matters
and special health matters under the
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
including but not limited to:
• the General Principles;
• the scope of personal matters and financial matters and of the powers
of guardians and administrators;
• the scope of investigative and protective powers of bodies involved
in the administration of the legislation in relation to
allegations of abuse,
neglect and exploitation;
• the extent to which the current powers and functions of bodies
established under the legislation provide a comprehensive investigative
regulatory framework;
• the processes for review of decisions;
• consent to special medical research or experimental health care;
• the law relating to advance health directives and enduring powers of
attorney; and
• the scope of the decision-making power of statutory health attorneys;
• the ability of an adult with impaired capacity to object to receiving
medical treatment; and
• the law relating to the withholding and withdrawal of life-sustaining
(b) the confidentiality provisions of the
Guardianship and Administration
(c) whether there is a need to provide protection for people who make
complaints about the treatment of an adult with impaired capacity;
(d) whether there are circumstances in which the
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
should enable a parent of a person with impaired
capacity to make a binding direction appointing a person as a guardian for a
matter for the adult or as an administrator for a financial matter for
2. In performing its functions under this reference, the Commission is asked
to prepare, if relevant, draft legislation based on the
Commission’s
recommendations.
3. The Commission is to provide a final report to the Attorney-General and
Minister for Justice on the confidentiality provisions
by March 2007, an interim
report on the General Principles by September 2007, and a final report on all
other matters by the end
The Hon Linda Lavarch MP
Attorney-General and Minister for Justice
of the Reference
Ms Paige Armstrong, Manager, Community Advocacy and Support, Endeavour
(nominee of ACROD)
Ms Pam Bridges, Residential Care Manager, Aged Care Queensland
Mrs Pat Cartwright, Coordinator, Community Visitor Program
Mr Mark Crofton, Official Solicitor to the Public Trustee
Ms Madonna Cuthbert, Director, Policy and Legislation, Queensland Health
Dr Chris Davis, Director, Geriatric Medicine and Rehabilitation, The Prince
Charles Hospital (nominee of Australian Medical Association
(Queensland))
Ms Margaret Deane, Manager, Queensland Aged and Disability Advocacy Inc
Mr David Deans, Chief Executive, National Seniors
Mr John Dickinson, Chief Executive Officer, Brain Injury Association of
Ms Marianne Gevers, Vice-President, Alzheimer’s Australia (Qld) Inc
Mr Cameron Gledhill, Communications Officer, Queensland Alliance
Ms Katie Holm, Director, Disability Strategic Policy, Disability Services
Ms Michelle Howard, Public Advocate
Mrs Bronwyn Jerrard, Principal Legal Consultant, Strategic Policy, Department
of Justice and Attorney-General
Ms Ann Lyons, President, Guardianship and Administration
Ms Dianne Pendergast, Adult Guardian
Mr Julian Porter, Systems Legal Advocacy, Queensland Advocacy Inc
Mr Graham Schlecht, Executive Director, Carers Queensland
Mr Phil Tomkinson, President, Queensland Parents for People with a Disability
Professor Lindy Willmott, Faculty of Law, QUT
of submissions and forums
SUBMISSIONS
Prior to the publication of this Discussion Paper, the Commission received 40
submissions from the following interested individuals
and organisations:
Mr Stephen Graham Brown
Mr Trevor Croll
Ms Gwenyth Cutler
Mr Rob Davis, President, Queensland Law Society
Mr Ross Davis
Mr Graham Douglas
Mr Brien Dunne and Mr Michael Dunne
Ms Libby Eichmann with Mr Andrew Willis
Guardianship and Administration Reform Drivers (GARD)
Ms Ann Handyside
Ms Jo Hobbs
Mr Neil Hollingsworth
Ms Michelle Howard
Mr Farne Hunt
Ms Bogita Jazazienvski
Ms Norma Kawak
Ms Gabriel Killin
Mr Bob Lee, Sunshine Coast Citizen Advocacy
Ms Felicity Maddison AM
Ms Dianne Moore
Mr Paul Morrison
Mr Doug Peterson
Ms Marion Reid
Mr Neil Reynolds
Ms Angelina Roper
Ms Paula Scully, former Adult Guardian
Mr Harley Sims
Ms Eugenia Slinko
Mrs Jean Tincknell
Dr Laurence Trappett
Ms Katrina Turnbull
Mr Darcy Tyrrell
Uni Research
Mr Matthaus von Schrader
Ms Judy Walker
Ms Mary Walsh OAM
Mr JJ Williams
Ms Karen Williams with Mr Stephen Keim SC
Mrs Beverley Williamson
Mr Mark Wurth
The Commission was also invited to participate in two forums at which it
received views from the people attending.
Carers Queensland, ‘Maintaining a family focus in guardianship
reform’ (Brisbane, 7 March 2006)
Endeavour, ‘Review of Queensland’s guardianship laws’
(Brisbane, 23 May 2006)
Active party
An active party for a Tribunal proceeding may appear at a hearing before
the Tribunal
and receive a
copy of the Tribunal’s decision and any written reasons for the
The active parties
for a proceeding are:
• the adult;
• the applicant (if this is not the adult);
• the proposed guardian, administrator, or attorney for the adult if
the proceeding is for the appointment or reappointment
of such person;
• any current guardian, administrator, or attorney for the
• the Adult Guardian;
• the Public Trustee; and
• any person joined as a party to the proceeding.
Administrator
A person appointed by the Tribunal as a substitute decision-maker for an
adult for a financial
A person may be
appointed as an administrator only if they are 18 years or older, they are not a
paid carer or health provider for
the adult, and the Tribunal considers them
appropriate for appointment.
A person 18 years or older who has impaired capacity for a matter.
Adult Guardian
An independent statutory official whose role is to protect the rights and
interests of adults with impaired
Guardian’s functions are wide-ranging and
• investigating complaints or allegations of neglect, exploitation,
or abuse of an adult;
• acting as an attorney for an adult under an enduring document or as
an adult’s statutory health attorney; and
• acting as an adult’s guardian if appointed by the
The Adult Guardian also has a number of protective powers in relation to
Advance health directive
A document made under the
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
principal (18 years or older)
• give directions about a health matter(s) or a special health
matter(s) for the principal’s future health care; and/or
• appoint an attorney(s) to make decisions about a health matter(s),
but not about a special health matter(s), in the event
those directions prove
inadequate.
An advance health directive may only be made while the principal has
sufficient capacity to do so
and operates only during a period when the principal no longer has capacity for
the matter(s).
A person appointed by a principal to exercise decision-making power under a
power of attorney, an enduring power of attorney, or an
advance health directive
for an adult for a matter(s).
An attorney may also be a ‘statutory health attorney’ (also defined
in this glossary).
Every adult is presumed to have capacity unless it is otherwise
established.
An adult will
have ‘capacity’ for a matter if they are capable
• understanding the nature and effect of decisions about the
• freely and voluntarily making decisions about the matter; and
• communicating the decisions in some way.
An adult who does not satisfy this criteria in relation to a matter is
described as having ‘impaired
Community visitors
Community visitors are appointed to safeguard the interests of persons who
live or receive services at particular visitable
Those sites include
residences and services funded by Disability Services Queensland or the
Department of Health, some hostels and
authorised mental health inpatient
Community visitors
regularly visit those sites and have inquiry and complaint
Confidentiality order
An order made by the Tribunal under
section 109
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
• direct who may or may not be present at a hearing;
• direct that a hearing, or part of a hearing, be held in
• prohibit or restrict publication of information given before it, or
of matters contained in documents before it; or
• prohibit or restrict the disclosure to some or all of the active
parties for a proceeding of information given before it,
matters contained in
documents before it, or the Tribunal’s decision or reasons.
De-identified information
Information that has been modified to prevent disclosure of a
person’s identity.
Enduring power of attorney
A document made under the
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
principal (18 years or older) to appoint an attorney(s) to make decisions about
a financial or personal matter(s), including
An enduring power
of attorney may only be made while the principal has sufficient capacity to do
For personal matters, an enduring power of attorney will operate only
during a period when the principal no longer has capacity for
the particular
For financial
matters, an enduring power of attorney will operate from the time it is made,
unless a different time is
and will operate
at any time the principal has impaired
This is different from a
power of attorney by which a
principal can appoint an attorney(s) to make decisions about a financial or
legal matter(s), but not
A general power
of attorney will operate from the time it is made, unless another time is
and will be
automatically revoked if the principal no longer has
Financial matter
A matter relating to an adult’s finances or
General Principles
Eleven principles contained in the guardianship
legislation,
which must be
applied by any person or entity performing a function or exercising a power
under the guardianship legislation in relation
to a matter for an
The community is also
encouraged to apply and promote the
principles.
The General
Principles include:
• the presumption that an adult has capacity to make decisions;
• an adult’s right to basic human rights and the importance of
empowering an adult to exercise those rights;
• an adult’s right to respect for his or her human worth and
• an adult’s right to be a valued member of society and the
importance of encouraging an adult to perform valued social
• the importance of encouraging an adult to participate in community
• the importance of encouraging an adult to become as self-reliant as
• an adult’s right to participate in decision-making as far as
possible and the importance of preserving wherever possible
the adult’s
right to make his or her own decisions;
• the principle of substituted judgment must be used, so that where
it is possible to ascertain from previous actions what an
adult’s views or
wishes would be, those views and wishes are to be taken into account;
• any power under the legislation must be exercised in the way least
restrictive of the adult’s rights;
• the importance of maintaining an adult’s existing supportive
relationships;
• the importance of maintaining the adult’s cultural,
linguistic and religious environment; and
• an adult’s right to confidentiality of information about
A person appointed by the Tribunal as a substitute decision-maker for an
adult for a personal matter(s), including a health matter(s)
but not a special
health matter(s).
may only be appointed as a guardian if they are 18 years or older, they are not
a paid carer or health provider for the
adult, and the Tribunal considers them
appropriate for
appointment.
Guardianship and Administration Tribunal (the Tribunal)
The Guardianship and Administration Tribunal is a quasi-judicial body whose
functions include:
• making declarations about an adult’s capacity for a matter;
• hearing applications for the appointment of guardians and
administrators and appointing, where necessary, guardians and administrators
• making declarations, orders or recommendations, or giving
directions or advice in relation to guardians, administrators, attorneys,
enduring documents;
• ratifying or approving an exercise of power by an informal
decision-maker for an adult; and
• giving consent to some types of special health care for an adult
and to the withholding or withdrawal of life-sustaining measures.
Health Care Principle
A principle contained in the guardianship legislation that must be applied
by any person or entity performing a function or exercising
a power under the
guardianship legislation in relation to a health matter(s) or a special health
matter(s) for an adult.
Health Care Principle provides that power for a health or special health matter
should be exercised in the way least restrictive
of the adult’s
only if the exercise of power
• is necessary and appropriate to maintain or promote the
adult’s health or wellbeing, having regard to the adult’s
wishes and information provided by the adult’s health provider; or
• is, in all the circumstances, in the adult’s best interests.
Health matters
A type of personal matter concerning the adult’s health care, other
than special health care,
including care, treatment, services or procedures for the adult’s physical
or mental condition carried out or supervised by
Impaired capacity
When an adult does not have capacity for a matter.
Parens patriae jurisdiction
The jurisdiction of superior courts, of ancient origin, deriving from the
monarch’s obligation to act as
parens patriae
(parent of the
people) to protect vulnerable citizens. The jurisdiction allows the court to
make a decision on behalf of a person
who is incapable of making the decision
themselves.
Personal matter
A matter (other than a ‘special personal matter’ or a
‘special health matter’) relating to an adult’s
welfare. This includes matters about where and with whom an adult lives, health
care, diet and
Public Advocate
An independent statutory official whose role is to promote and protect the
rights of adults.
Advocate’s other functions
• promoting the protection of adults from neglect, exploitation, or
• encouraging the development of programs that foster and maximise
adults’ autonomy;
• promoting service and facility provision for adults; and
• monitoring and reviewing service and facility delivery to adults.
The Public Advocate’s functions are aimed at systemic advocacy rather
than advocacy on behalf of individual adults.
Public Trustee
The Public Trustee of Queensland is a Queensland Government corporation
established under the
Public Trustee Act 1978
and may be appointed
by the Tribunal as an adult’s
administrator.
Special health matter
A matter relating to an adult’s ‘special health care’
which involves very significant health issues such
• removal of tissue from the adult while alive for donation to
someone else;
• sterilisation;
• termination of a pregnancy;
• participation in special medical research or experimental health
• electroconvulsive therapy or psychosurgery.
Special personal matter
A matter regarded as being of such an intimate nature that it would
generally be inappropriate for another person to make decisions
behalf of an adult. These include voting; consenting to marriage; and making or
revoking a will, a power of attorney,
an enduring power of attorney, or an
advance health directive.
Statutory health attorney
A person in a particular relationship with the adult who is declared by the
guardianship legislation to be a person with authority
to make decisions about
health matters for an adult during a period when the adult has impaired capacity
for the matter.
legislation lists the relationships in a hierarchical order. The first of the
following who is ‘readily available and
culturally appropriate’ to
make the decision will be an adult’s statutory health
• the adult’s spouse, if the relationship is close and
continuing;
• a person 18 years or older who is caring for the adult but who is
not a paid carer of the adult; or
• a close friend or relation of the adult 18 years or older and who
is not a paid carer for the adult.
If no-one from that list is readily available and culturally appropriate,
the Adult Guardian becomes the adult’s statutory health
an interest
QUEENSLAND LAW REFORM COMMISSION
GUARDIANSHIP REVIEW
Name Mr/Ms/Mrs
Organisation and position
(if appropriate)
Postal Address
Telephone Number
Email Address
Please tick here
if you would prefer to be sent information
and material via email rather than post
Interest in review (optional)
eg, person with a decision-making disability, family, friend, carer,
interest group.
Please return to:
Queensland Law Reform Commission
PO Box 13312
GEORGE STREET POST SHOP QLD 4003
Fax: (07) 3247 9045
Email: qlrcguardianship@justice.qld.gov.au
Any personal information collected on this form will only be used to
fulfil this request. It will not be disclosed to others without
The Commission’s terms
of reference are set out in Appendix 1.
Membership of the Reference
Group is set out in Appendix 2.
The names of people who have
made submissions and the forums that the Commission participated in are listed
in Appendix 3.
Note that the information
available in relation to confidentiality orders made under
s 109(2)(c)
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(Qld) is more limited: see para
2.109 in Chapter 2 (Overview of the law in Queensland).
If this is the case, readers
may prefer to read the Commission’s shorter paper, written as a
stand-alone guide to this Discussion
Public Justice, Private Lives: A
Companion Paper
Note that the functions and
powers of the Adult Guardian equivalents vary from jurisdiction to jurisdiction.
http://www.qlrc.qld.gov.au/guardianship
There is also information
In addition to specifying who
may make substitute decisions for an adult, the legislation also facilitates an
adult making decisions
for him or herself in advance of having impaired
Acts Interpretation Act
(definition of ‘adult’).
P Bartlett and R Sandland,
Mental Health Law Policy and Practice
(2000) [10.5.1].
These terms are
illustrative of the different causes and effects of damage, disease or impaired
development of the brain that can
bring about a decision-making incapacity.
Powers of Attorney Act
sch 3 (definition of ‘capacity’);
Guardianship
and Administration Act 2000
sch 4 (definition of
‘capacity’).
Powers of Attorney Act
sch 3 (definition of ‘impaired capacity’);
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(definition of ‘impaired capacity’). For other discussions of the
concept of capacity, see R Creyke,
Who Can Decide? Legal Decision-Making for
(1995) 3–4; R Lewis,
Elder Law in Australia
[11.69]–[11.73]. Also see
Gibbons v Wright
[1954] HCA 17
(1954) 91 CLR 423
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
See, for example,
[2005] QGAAT 46.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
(Qld) sch 1
(General principles)
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
[2001] 1 Qd R 574.
In particular, see
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
The definition of
‘capacity’ is tied to the decision that needs to be made as it
refers specifically to having capacity
‘for a matter’:
Attorney Act 1998
sch 3 (definition of ‘capacity’);
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(definition of ‘capacity’). Note also that
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(Qld) provides that the Act
acknowledges that ‘the capacity of an adult with impaired capacity to make
decisions may differ
according to … the type of decision to be made,
including, for example, the complexity of the decision to be made’.
See, for example,
[2005] QGAAT 50
, [46] where the Tribunal held: ‘he [FHW] has capacity
for simple and complex personal matters and simple financial matters
impaired capacity for complex financial matters’.
Powers of Attorney Act
sch 3, sch 2
(definition of ‘financial
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(definition of ‘financial matter’).
Powers of Attorney Act
sch 3, sch 2
(definition of ‘personal
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(definition of ‘personal matter’). This definition has
been given a wide interpretation by the Tribunal. It was held
[2003] QGAAT 14
that ‘… [A] guardian who is appointed to make
decisions in relation to all personal matters can essentially make all
decisions in relation to a very broad range of matters and should not be read in
a restricted or limited way’: [27].
Powers of Attorney Act
sch 3, sch 2
(definition of ‘health matter’);
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
sch 4, sch 2
(definition of ‘health matter’).
Powers of Attorney Act
sch 3, sch 2
(definition of ‘health care’);
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
sch 4, sch 2
(definition of ‘health care’). ‘Health care’ can
include the withholding or withdrawal of life-sustaining
measures in some
circumstances, but it excludes first aid treatment, non-intrusive examinations
made for diagnostic purposes and
the administration of non-prescription
medication which would normally be self-administered:
Powers of Attorney Act
(Qld) sch 2
Guardianship and Administration Act
(Qld) sch 2
Powers of Attorney Act
sch 3, sch 2
(definition of ‘special health
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(definition of ‘special health care’).
The power to make decisions
for an adult about special personal matters cannot be assigned in an enduring
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
s 32(1)(a).
Nor can it be
granted to a substitute decision-maker by order of the Tribunal:
Guardianship
and Administration Act 2000
Further, there are no other
provisions in the guardianship legislation empowering other decision-makers in
relation to special personal
Note, however, that the
Supreme Court now has jurisdiction to make an order authorising a will to be
made or altered, in the terms
stated by the Court, for a person who lacks
testamentary capacity, and to revoke a will or part of a will of a person who
lacks testamentary
capacity: see
Succession Act 1981
, which commenced on 1 April 2006. An application for a grant of
probate is not a special personal matter:
[2002] QSC 200
[2003] 1 Qd R 459
Powers of Attorney Act
sch 3, sch 2
(definition of ‘special personal
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(definition of ‘special personal matter’).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
That provision also refers to the
Supreme Court as a decision-maker:
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
sch 3 (definition of ‘court’);
Guardianship and Administration
s 9(2)(vii)
sch 4 (definition of ‘court’).
However, the Supreme Court’s role as a decision-maker for an adult under
the guardianship
legislation (as opposed to its appeal role) is not considered
further in this brief overview of the guardianship system given that
such a role
is infrequently performed.
Powers of Attorney Act
Powers of Attorney Act
s 35(2)(b).
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
(Qld) for the conditions that must apply for a direction to withdraw or
withhold life-sustaining measures to operate.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
sch 4 (definition of ‘support
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
s 82(1)(e).
Note there are particular
formal requirements for the execution of such instruments:
Powers of Attorney
An adult may also appoint an attorney for
financial matters in a general power of attorney although this operates only
adult has capacity:
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
as to the general definition of capacity
that applies under the guardianship legislation. In relation to the capacity
make an enduring power of attorney, see also
Attorney Act 1998
(Qld). In relation to the capacity needed to make an
advance health directive, see also
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
Powers of Attorney Act
s 32(1)(a).
Powers of Attorney Act
s 32(1)(a).
Powers of Attorney Act
s 35(1)(c).
Powers of Attorney Act
Powers of Attorney Act
Powers of Attorney Act
Powers of Attorney Act
Powers of Attorney Act
(Qld) s 76. The General Principles and the Health Care Principle are
discussed at para
Powers of Attorney Act
A conflict transaction is one in which there may be
conflict, or which results in conflict, between the attorney’s duty to
adult and either the interests of the attorney or a person in a close personal
or business relationship with the attorney, or
another duty of the attorney:
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
Powers of Attorney Act
(2000) [12.2.1], [12.2.5]; R Creyke,
Who Can Decide? Legal Decision-Making
Powers of Attorney Act
includes a person’s de facto partner:
Acts Interpretation Act 1954
A reference in an Act to a ‘de facto partner’ is a
reference to one of two persons who are living together as a couple
(in either a
heterosexual or same sex partnership) on a genuine domestic basis but who are
not married to each other or related by
Acts Interpretation Act
A ‘paid carer’
for an adult is someone who performs services for the adult’s care and who
receives remuneration
for those services from any source other than a
Commonwealth or State government carer payment or benefit for the provision of
care, or remuneration based on damages that may be awarded for voluntary
services for the adult’s care:
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
sch 3 (definition of ‘paid carer’);
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
sch 4 (definition of ‘paid
A ‘paid carer’
for an adult is someone who performs services for the adult’s care and who
receives remuneration
for those services from any source other than a
Commonwealth or State government carer payment or benefit for the provision of
care, or remuneration based on damages that may be awarded for voluntary
services for the adult’s care:
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
sch 3 (definition of ‘paid carer’);
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
sch 4 (definition of ‘paid
Powers of Attorney Act
Powers of Attorney Act
Powers of Attorney Act
Powers of Attorney Act
(Qld) s 76. The General Principles and the Health Care Principle are
discussed at para
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Attorney Act 1998
sch 3, sch 2
(definitions of
‘health matter’ and ‘special health matter’);
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
sch 4, sch 2
(definitions of ‘health matter’ and ‘special health
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
s 14(1)(a)(i)
, (b)(i), (c). Note that the
Adult Guardian is eligible for appointment as a guardian for an adult and the
Public Trustee is eligible
for appointment as an adult’s administrator:
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
s 14(1)(a)(ii)
Also note that a person who is bankrupt ‘or taking advantage of the laws
of bankruptcy as a debtor’ is ineligible
for appointment as an
adult’s administrator:
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
s 14(1)(b)(i)
and also see
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
s 15(4)(c).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
–(2). The General Principles and
the Health Care Principle are discussed at para
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
A conflict transaction is one in
which there may be conflict, or which results in conflict, between the
administrator’s duty
to the adult and either the interests of the
administrator or a person in a close personal or business relationship with the
administrator,
or another duty of the administrator:
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
For other functions and powers of
administrators, see also
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
See S Fisher,
(2000) [7.2.1]–[7.5.6].
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
. Electroconvulsive therapy and
psychosurgery fall within the jurisdiction of the Mental Health Review Tribunal:
Mental Health Act 2000
(Qld) ch 6 pt 6.
See, for example,
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
ss 69(1)(a)
, (d) (Donation
of tissue); 70(1)(a)(i), (3) (Sterilisation); 72(1)(b), (d), (2)(b), (d)
(Special medical research or experimental
health care).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
The General Principles and the Health
Care Principle are discussed at para
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
(1)(f). See also
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(Qld), which provides that this
consent cannot operate unless the adult’s health provider reasonably
considers the commencement
or continuation of the measure for the adult would be
inconsistent with good medical practice.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
(Qld) ch 5A,
s 82(1)(h).
Powers of Attorney Act
s 76 (although note the different terminology of
‘must be complied with’ rather than ‘must apply’);
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
There is a specific
requirement for the Tribunal to consider the General Principles (and Health Care
Principle if appropriate) when
deciding whether a person is appropriate for
appointment as an adult’s guardian or administrator:
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
(Qld) s 174(3).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Powers of Attorney Act
(Qld) sch 1
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
More than eleven issues are included in this list because some of
the General Principles include a number of elements.
Powers of Attorney Act
(Qld) sch 1
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(Qld) sch 1
Powers of Attorney Act
(Qld) sch 1
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(Qld) sch 1
Powers of Attorney Act
(Qld) sch 1
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(Qld) sch 1
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
(Qld) s 84(1).
Section 245
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(Qld) provides that the Supreme
or District Court may exercise the Tribunal’s powers to make, change, or
revoke an appointment
of a guardian or administrator for an adult if the Court
sanctions a settlement between an adult and another person or orders payment
an adult by another person in a civil proceeding and the Court considers the
adult has impaired capacity for a matter. See
Willett v Futcher
[2005] HCA 47
221 CLR 627.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
(Qld) s 84(2).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
ss 82(1)(f)
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
A legal member must be a
lawyer of at least five years standing and possess relevant knowledge and skills
in the jurisdiction:
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
A professional member must
possess extensive professional knowledge or experience with people with impaired
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(Qld) s 90(4)(b).
A personal experience
member is a person who has had experience of a person with impaired capacity for
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(Qld) s 90(4)(c).
Information provided by the
President of the Guardianship and Administration Tribunal, 25 July 2006.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
(Qld) s 172(3).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Leave to appeal from the Supreme
Court is required, except in relation to appeals on questions of law only:
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
(Qld) ss 173, 174(1), 176.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
(Qld) s 174(2).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
(Qld) s 174(2)(a).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
(Qld) ss 174(2)(b), 180.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
(Qld) s 198A. A ‘forensic examination’
means a medical or dental procedure carried out for forensic purposes other than
because the adult is suspected of having committed a criminal offence:
of Attorney Act 1998
sch 3 (definition of ‘forensic
examination’);
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
sch 4 (definition of ‘forensic examination’).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
(Qld) s 195(1).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
(Qld) s 194.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
(Qld) s 197.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Information provided by
the Public Advocate, 20 July 2006.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
(Qld) s 223(1).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
(Qld) s 222.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
(Qld) s 222.
Guardianship and
Administration Regulation 2000
(Qld) s 8 sch 2.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
(Qld) s 224(2).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
(Qld) s 227(1).
Public Trustee Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
s 14(1)(b)(ii).
There is no obligation
on the Tribunal, however, to review the appointment of the Public Trustee (or a
trustee company) as administrator
as there is for other administrators:
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
ss 249(2)(h)
, (3)(g), (4),
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
, (2)(f), (4). The Commission
has prepared a document called
Confidentiality in Consultation Protocol
to assist people to comply with the confidentiality provisions of the
guardianship legislation when participating in the Commission’s
consultation process. The
can be viewed at the
Commission’s website
http://www.qlrc.qld.gov.au/guardianship/protocol.htm
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Powers of Attorney
, (3). An attorney means an attorney under a power of
attorney, enduring power of attorney or advance health directive, or a statutory
health attorney:
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
sch 3 (definition
of ‘attorney’).
Powers of Attorney
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
Powers of Attorney
(definition of ‘confidential
information’);
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(definition of ‘confidential information’).
Powers of Attorney
(definition of ‘confidential
information’);
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(definition of ‘confidential information’).
Powers of Attorney
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
Note also that
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
that the Adult Guardian may disclose an opinion that is critical of an entity
only if it has given the entity an opportunity
to answer the criticism, and may
identify a complainant only if it is necessary and reasonable.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
(definition of ‘information,
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
(definition of ‘involved, in a
proceeding’).
Section 119
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(Qld) provides that the active
parties to a proceeding are:
• the adult;
• the applicant (if not the adult);
• any proposed guardian, administrator or attorney for the adult if the
proceeding is for the appointment or reappointment of
such person;
• any current guardian, administrator or attorney for the adult;
• the Adult Guardian;
• the Public Trustee; and
• any other person joined as a party to the proceeding.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
ss 108(3)(a)
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Re Pochi and Minister
for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
[1979] AATA 64
(1979) 26 ALR 247
, 270–3. See para
4.15–4.18 in Chapter 4 (Tribunal hearings).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
–(2). See, for example,
[2005] QGAAT 4
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
(Qld) sch 1
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
, sch 4, sch 2
provides that
‘special health care’ means:
• removal of tissue from the adult while the adult is alive for
donation to someone else;
• sterilisation of the adult;
• termination of a pregnancy of the adult;
• participation by the adult in special medical research or
experimental health care;
• electroconvulsive therapy or psychosurgery for the adult; and
• any special health care of the adult prescribed by regulation.
in Chapter 4 (Tribunal hearings).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
(Qld) s 85(1).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Guardianship and Administration
Tribunal Rule 2004
(Qld) r 2(1), sch. Note that r 2(2) provides that
such a matter will cease to be a prescribed non-contentious matter if an active
party to the proceeding advises the Registrar of an objection to the matter
being dealt with by the Registrar.
Taikato v The
[1996] HCA 28
(1996) 186 CLR 454
, 464–6 (Brennan CJ, Toohey, McHugh and Gummow
Bank of Valletta v
National Crime Authority
[1999] FCA 791
(1999) 164 ALR 45
, 55 (Hely J). This case was
cited with approval in
Callanan v Bush
[2004] QSC 88.
See para 4.27 in
Chapter 4 (Tribunal hearings).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
s 82(1)(h).
Note that the criteria
for matters involving consent to special health care provided in s 80G(4) of the
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(Qld) is, though worded
differently, substantially similar to that in
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
(Qld) s 80N(3).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
s 109(2)(c).
Information provided by
the President of the Guardianship and Administration Tribunal, 25 July 2006.
Information provided by
the President of the Guardianship and Administration Tribunal, 26 May 2006.
The Commission’s
terms of reference are set out in Appendix 1.
C Doyle and M Bagaric,
(2005) 115. Three other categories of privacy
are also generally recognised: physical and bodily privacy; privacy of space and
and privacy of communications: see C Doyle and M Bagaric,
Law in Australia
(2005) ch 4; Australian Privacy Charter Council,
Australian Privacy Charter
http://www.privacy.org.au/About/PrivacyCharter.html
at 24 July 2006;
Legal, Constitutional and Administrative Review Committee, Legislative Assembly
of Queensland,
, Report No 9 (1998) [2.1]. See also
Personal Information Privacy and the Law
(1989) 15–6 in
which the base components of privacy are described as secrecy (information known
(attention paid to an individual) and solitude
(physical access to an individual).
Kalaba v Commonwealth
of Australia
[2004] FCA 763
, [6] (Heerey J):
Turning to the first defendant, the Commonwealth of Australia, I accept the
submission of counsel that in Australia at the moment
there is no tort of
Australian Broadcasting Corporation v Lenah Game Meats
(2001) 208 CLR 199
at [132] Gummow and Hayne JJ, with whom Gaudron J
at [58] agreed, left open that possibility. In a Victorian Supreme Court case,
Giller v Procopets
[2004] VSC 113
to [189], Gillard J held that
the law had not developed to the point where an action for breach of privacy was
recognised in Australia.
Senior Judge Skoien of the District Court of
Queensland was prepared to find that there is such a tort:
[2003] QDC 151
, but I think the weight of authority at the moment is
against that proposition.
See also P Mallam, S Dawson and J Moriarty,
Media and Internet Law and
(revised ed, 2005) [12.99]; C Doyle and M Bagaric,
in Australia
(2005) [3.2], citing
Victoria Park Racing and Recreation
Grounds Co Ltd v Taylor
[1937] HCA 45
(1937) 58 CLR 479
; N Suzor ‘Privacy v
Intellectual Property Litigation: preliminary third party discovery on the
Australian Bar Review
, 234–5. Note,
however, that privacy-related interests may be protected peripherally by the
general law, for example, through
the torts of nuisance and trespass, and the
equitable doctrine of confidence.
Universal Declaration
of Human Rights
(1948) Art 12;
International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights
(1966) Art 17;
Convention on the Rights of the Child
(1989) Art 16. See also Australian Privacy Charter Council,
http://www.privacy.org.au/About/PrivacyCharter.html
at 24 July 2006,
which states, in part, that ‘[p]rivacy is a basic human right and the
reasonable expectation of every
C Doyle and M Bagaric,
(2005) 26–50; LL Weinreb, ‘The Right
to Privacy’ in EF Paul, FD Miller and J Paul (eds),
The Right to
(2000) 34–42, citing J Rachels, ‘Why Privacy is
Important’ 4 (1975)
Philosophy and Public Affairs
323; C Fried,
Yale Law Journal
; and JH Reiman,
‘Privacy, Intimacy, and Personhood’ (1976) 6
Philosophy and
Public Affairs
32. It is argued that interferences with privacy violate a
person’s sense of self, that privacy is a necessary function of
development of intimate relationships and that at least some measure of privacy
is a necessary condition of individual autonomy.
Note, however, criticism of
these arguments as pointing to the existence of a right to privacy: C Doyle
and M Bagaric,
(2005) 26–50; LL Weinreb,
‘The Right to Privacy’ in EF Paul, FD Miller and J Paul (eds),
The Right to Privacy
(2000) 41–2.
Information Privacy and the Law
(1989) 13–4; GB Melton, ‘Privacy
Issues in Child Mental Health Services’ in JJ Gates and BS Arons (eds),
(2000) 48. See also
C Doyle and M Bagaric,
and Freedom
Sometimes the
relationship between the two has been blurred by commentators: C Munro,
‘Confidence in Government’ in
L Clarke (ed),
Confidentiality and
(1990) 1, 3. See also M Tugendhat, M Nicklin and G Busuttil,
‘Publication of Personal Information’ in M Tugendhat and
The Law of Privacy and the Media
(2002) 119, [4.17]–[4.18],
citing recent examples of where the courts have used the term
‘confidential’ but the
context indicated a reference to
M Tugendhat, M Nicklin
and G Busuttil, ‘Publication of Personal Information’ in M Tugendhat
and I Christie (eds),
The Law of Privacy and the Media
(2002) 119,
[4.15]–[4.16], citing Law Commission,
Breach of Confidence
No 110 (1981) [2.1]; G Tucker,
Information Privacy Law in Australia
For an example of how
this might occur, see M Tugendhat, M Nicklin and G Busuttil, ‘Publication
of Personal Information’
in M Tugendhat and I Christie (eds),
of Privacy and the Media
(2002) 119, [4.16], citing Law Commission,
Breach of Confidence
, Law Com No 110 (1981) [2.1].
‘Confidence in Government’ in L Clarke (ed),
Confidentiality and
(1990) 1, 2; M Tugendhat, M Nicklin and G Busuttil,
‘Publication of Personal Information’ in M Tugendhat and I Christie
The Law of Privacy and the Media
(2002) 119, [4.15]; Australian
Law Reform Commission,
, Report No 22 (1983) Vol 1, [69].
See Chapter 2 (Overview
of the law in Queensland) as to when legal duties of confidentiality arise in
the guardianship system.
P Mallam, S Dawson and J
Media and Internet Law and Practice
(revised ed, 2005)
[12.1750]; M Warby et al, ‘Privacy and Confidentiality’ in M
Tugendhat and I Christie (eds),
The Law of Privacy and the Media
195, [6.11]. There are three elements to the equitable action for breach of
confidence:
• That the information was objectively confidential or secret and not a
matter of common knowledge or public disclosure;
• That the information was received, either by the first or a later
person, in circumstances importing an obligation of confidence;
• That there was an actual or threatened unauthorised use (or misuse)
of the information.
See RP Meagher, WMC Gummow and JRF Lehane,
Equity Doctrines and
(3rd ed, 1992) [4110]; D Butler and S Rodrick,
Australian Media
(2nd ed, 2004) [6.30], [6.55]–[6.60], citing
Coco v A N Clark
(Engineers) Ltd
[1969] RPC 41
M Warby et al,
‘Privacy and Confidentiality’ in M Tugendhat and I Christie (eds),
The Law of Privacy and the Media
(2002) 195, [6.07]; M Thompson,
‘Breach of Confidentiality and Privacy’ in L Clarke (ed),
Confidentiality and the Law
(1990) 65, 68.
Seager v Copydex
[1967] 1 WLR 923
, 931 (Lord Denning MR), cited in M Warby et al,
‘Privacy and Confidentiality’ in M Tugendhat and I Christie (eds),
The Law of Privacy and the Media
(2002) 195, [6.09].
RG Toulson and CM
Confidentiality
(1996) [13‑02]; M Warby et al,
‘Privacy and Confidentiality’ in M Tugendhat and I Christie
The Law of Privacy and the Media
(2002) 195, [6.12],
[6.43]–[6.44].
RP Meagher, WMC Gummow
and JRF Lehane,
Equity Doctrines and Remedies
(3rd ed, 1992) [4.103]; M
Warby et al, ‘Privacy and Confidentiality’ in M Tugendhat and I
Christie (eds),
The Law of Privacy and the Media
(2002) 195, [6.08],
[6.105]; M Thompson, ‘Breach of Confidentiality and Privacy’ in L
Clarke (ed),
Confidentiality and the Law
(1990) 65, 66.
RP Meagher, WMC Gummow
and JRF Lehane,
Equity Doctrines and Remedies
(3rd ed, 1992) [4.103]; M
Warby et al, ‘Privacy and Confidentiality’ in M Tugendhat and I
Christie (eds),
The Law of Privacy and the Media
(2002) 195, [6.08],
[6.115]; M Thompson, ‘Breach of Confidentiality and Privacy’ in L
Clarke (ed),
Confidentiality and the Law
(1990) 65, 66.
Jury Act 1995
Whistleblowers
Protection Act 1994
(Qld) s 55.
Powers of Attorney
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
See Chapter 2 (Overview
of the law in Queensland).
functions are typified by the exercise of power to determine liability or
otherwise affect a person’s
legal rights by the application of law to
particular facts and circumstances: Jowitt (ed),
The Dictionary of English
(1959) (definition of ‘judicial’).
W Holdsworth,
History of English Law
(1964) Vol XIV, 181; J Jaconelli,
Open Justice: A
Critique of the Public Trial
(2002) 1; P Mallam, S Dawson and J Moriarty,
Media and Internet Law and Practice
(revised ed, 2005) [15.60];
[1913] AC 417;
Russell v Russell
(1976) 134 CLR 495.
the history of the principle of open justice see
Raybos Australia Pty Ltd v
(1985) 2 NSWLR 47.
International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights
(1966) Art 14(1).
J Jaconelli,
Justice: A Critique of the Public Trial
Ibid 2–3. See
also S Walker,
The Law of Journalism
(1989) [1.2.01].
This is said to be the
‘very core of the idea of open justice’: J Jaconelli,
Justice: A Critique of the Public Trial
(2002) 3. See also
Director of
Public Prosecutions (Cth) v Thomas (Ruling No 7)
[2006] VSC 18
Chief Justice JJ
Spigelman, ‘Seen to be Done: The Principle of Open Justice –
Australian Law Journal
290, 294; Chief Justice JJ
Spigelman, ‘The Principle of Open Justice: A Comparative
Perspective’ (Paper presented at the
Media Law Resource Centre Conference,
London, 20 September 2005) 7; Chief Justice JJ Spigelman, ‘Open Justice
and the Internet’
(Paper presented at the Law via the Internet Conference,
Sydney, 28 November 2003) 5; Chief Justice JJ Spigelman, ‘Reasons
Judgment and the Rule of Law’ (Speech delivered at the National Judicial
College, Beijing, 10 November 2003); Committee
on Administrative Tribunals and
Enquiries, UK House of Commons,
Report of the Committee on Administrative
Tribunals and Enquiries
(1957, Cmnd 218) [76]. See also
Government Insurance Office of NSW
(1997) 48 NSWLR 430
, 442 (Meagher JA);
Soulemezis v Dudley (Holdings) Pty Ltd
(1987) 10 NSWLR 247
278–9 (McHugh JA):
… [W]ithout the articulation of reasons, a judicial decision cannot be
distinguished from an arbitrary decision. In my opinion
the giving of reasons
is correctly perceived as ‘a necessary incident of the judicial
process’ because it enables the
basis of the decision to be seen and
understood both for the instant case and for the future direction of the law.
[note omitted]
That the principle of open justice requires the public availability of
reasons for decisions was also recognised by the New Zealand
Court of Appeal in
Lewis v Wilson & Horton Ltd
[2000] NZCA 175
[2000] 3 NZLR 546
John Fairfax
Publications Pty Ltd v Ryde Local Court
[2005] NSWCA 101
(2005) 62 NSWLR 512
, 521 (Spigelman
CJ). Also see
Seven Network Ltd v News Ltd (No 9)
[2005] FCA 1394
(Sackville J).
J Jaconelli,
Justice: A Critique of the Public Trial
(2002) 34–45. Although
Jaconelli only has headings referring to the disciplinary and investigatory
rationales, he also discusses
the educative effect of open justice: 39.
D Butler and S Rodrick,
Australian Media Law
(2nd ed, 2004) [4.15]; J Jaconelli,
Open Justice:
A Critique of the Public Trial
(2002) 36. Note the ubiquitous phrase of
Jeremy Bentham,
Judicial Evidence
Publicity is the very soul of justice. It is the keenest spur to exertion
and the surest of all guards against improbity. It keeps
the judge himself,
while trying, under trial.
P Mallam, S Dawson and J
Media and Internet Law and Practice
(revised ed, 2005) [15.60],
[1995] FCA 1321
(1995) 57 FCR 512
, 513–4. Also see GA Flick,
Natural Justice: Principles and Practical Application
(2nd ed, 1984) 10,
citing KC Davis,
Discretionary Justice: A Preliminary Inquiry
in which it is argued that one of the keys to controlling the manner in which
discretionary power is exercised is by:
… open plans, open policy statements, open rules, open findings, open
reasons, open precedents, and a fair informal procedure.
J Jaconelli,
Justice: A Critique of the Public Trial
Ibid 36–8; D
Butler and S Rodrick,
Australian Media Law
(2nd ed, 2004) [4.15]; JH
in Trials at Common Law
, Vol 6 (Chadbourn rev
1976) §1834. Note, however, Jaconelli’s criticism of this view,
particularly in relation to ‘particularly
sensitive witnesses’ who
may be less inclined to testify at all in open court: J Jaconelli,
Justice: A Critique of the Public Trial
J Jaconelli,
Justice: A Critique of the Public Trial
(2002) 39; P Mallam, S Dawson and J
Media and Internet Law and Practice
(revised ed, 2005) [15.60],
John Fairfax & Sons v Police Tribunal (NSW)
(1986) 5 NSWLR
, 481 (McHugh JA); D Butler and S Rodrick,
Australian Media Law
ed, 2004) [4.15].
C Davis, ‘The
Injustice of Open Justice’
James Cook University Law
See, for example, RA
Hughes, GWG Leane, A Clarke,
Australian Legal Institutions: Principles,
Structure and Organisation
(2nd ed, 2003) 196, citing L Waller,
Maher and Waller, An Introduction to Law
(8th ed, 2000) ch 7 in which
it is posited that one of the reasons for consistency of decision-making by the
courts is that it allows
citizens to plan their affairs against a developed and
predictable framework of legal rules.
J Jaconelli,
Justice: A Critique of the Public Trial
(2002) 40; D Butler and S Rodrick,
Australian Media Law
(2nd ed, 2004) [4.15].
JH Wigmore,
in Trials at Common Law
, Vol 6 (Chadbourn rev. 1976)
§1834. A recent example, albeit one not in a judicial context, where
potential witnesses were
identified due to publicity surrounding an
investigation was in relation to the conduct of Jayant Patel in Bundaberg.
W Holdsworth,
History of English Law,
Vol XIV (1964) 182; C Davis, ‘The Injustice of
Open Justice’
James Cook University Law Review
Mallam, S Dawson and J Moriarty,
Media and Internet Law and Practice
(revised ed, 2005) [15.60], [15.150], citing
Johnston v Cameron
[2002] FCAFC 251
195 ALR 300.
C Davis, ‘The
Injustice of Open Justice’
James Cook University Law
, 104, citing
R v Chief Registrar of Friendly Societies, Ex
parte New Cross Building
[1984] 1 QB 227
C Davis, ‘The
Injustice of Open Justice’
James Cook University Law
, 104, citing
J v L & A Services Pty Ltd (No 2)
Raybos Australia Pty Ltd v Jones
(1985) 2 NSWLR 47
John Fairfax Group Pty Ltd (Receivers and Managers appointed) v Local
Court of New South Wales
(1991) 26 NSWLR 131
, 143. Also see P Mallam, S
Dawson and J Moriarty,
Media and Internet Law and Practice
(revised ed,
2005) [15.195].
P Mallam, S Dawson and J
Media and Internet Law and Practice
(revised ed, 2005) [15.60],
John Fairfax Group Pty Ltd v Local Court (NSW)
(1991) 26 NSWLR
, 142 (Kirby P); Australian Law Reform Commission,
, Report No
22 (1983) Vol 1, [961].
J Jaconelli,
Justice: A Critique of the Public Trial
(2002) 160.
C Davis, ‘The
Injustice of Open Justice’
James Cook University Law
, 104. Also see C Puplick, ‘How Far Should the Courts be
Exempted From Privacy Regulation?’
Law Society Journal
Open justice serves definite functions, ensuring the law is publicly
declared, preventing secret courts or publicising public disapproval
anti-social and illegal acts. However, there is also recognition that
circumstances may arise where open justice may give way,
for example to protect
children or victims or the judicial process itself.
Scott v Scott
[1913] AC 417, 437 (Viscount Haldane), 445 (Earl Loreburn), 462 (Lord Atkinson),
483 (Lord Shaw of Dumferline);
Raybos Australia Pty Ltd v Jones
, 54; D Butler and S Rodrick,
Australian Media Law
(2nd ed, 2004)
Scott v Scott
[1913] AC 417, 437 (Viscount Haldane).
Ibid 483 (Lord Shaw of
Dumferline). Lord Atkinson also referred to the jurisdiction as
‘quasi-domestic’: 462. However,
such an analysis has been the
subject of some criticism: J Jaconelli,
Open Justice: A Critique of the
Public Trial
(2002) 159.
P Mallam, S Dawson and J
Media and Internet Law and Practice
(revised ed, 2005) [15.60];
M Armstrong, D Lindsay and R Watterson,
Media Law in Australia
ed, 1995) 129, 130.
(1989) [1.2.08], [1.2.22]; M Armstrong, D Lindsay and R
Media Law in Australia
(3rd ed, 1995) 129, 130.
M Armstrong, D Lindsay
and R Watterson,
Media Law in Australia
(3rd ed, 1995) 129, 130.
(1989) [1.2.08], [1.2.22].
D Butler and S Rodrick,
Australian Media Law
(2nd ed, 2004) [4.230]; Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, Report No 22 (1983) Vol 1, [961]. See also M
Armstrong, D Lindsay and R Watterson,
Media Law in Australia
W Holdsworth,
History of English Law
(1964) Vol XIV, 199; WB Lane and S Young,
Administrative Law in Queensland
WB Lane and S Young,
Administrative Law in Queensland
W Holdsworth,
History of English Law
(1964) Vol XIV, 199; JRS Forbes,
(2002) [7.5]. All tribunals, including guardianship tribunals,
are required at common law to observe procedural fairness: J Blackwood,
‘Fairness v Privacy: Disclosure of Documents by Guardianship
Psychiatry, Psychology and Law
Forbes, Justice in Tribunals (2002) [7.5]. A number of jurisdictions have also
specifically imposed this obligation on
their guardianship tribunals through
Guardianship and Management of Property Act 1991
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
State Administrative Tribunal Act 2004
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
JRS Forbes,
in Tribunals
(2002) [7.5].
For a discussion of the
distinction between procedural fairness and open justice, see J Jaconelli,
Open Justice: A Critique of the Public Trial
(2002) 31, 33.
WB Lane and S Young,
Administrative Law in Queensland
(2001) 56–7; EI Sykes et al,
General Principles of Administrative Law
(4th ed, 1997) [1501]. They are
commonly referred to as the ‘twin pillars’ of procedural fairness:
JRS Forbes,
Justice in Tribunals
(2002) [7.4], citing
Government of Malaya
[1962] UKPC 2
[1962] AC 322
, 337 (Lord Denning).
There is conflicting
authority as to whether procedural fairness imposes other obligations upon
decision-makers. For example, Creyke
and McMillan note suggestions that
procedural fairness should also include a ‘probative evidence rule’
and a ‘duty
of inquiry’, but concludes that neither have been
authoritatively endorsed by the High Court: R Creyke and J McMillan,
Control of Government Action: Text, Cases and Commentary
(2005) [10.1.4].
In relation to the existence of a probative evidence rule, see also M Aronson, B
Dyer and M Groves,
Judicial Review of Administrative Action
2004) 372–5 and WB Lane and S Young,
Administrative Law in
(2001) 59 (the latter considers the issue of probative evidence
as part of the hearing rule). See also the recent High Court case
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs
which held that a breach of procedural fairness can occur through delay in
the decision-making process.
DJ Galligan,
Discretionary Powers: A Legal Study of Official Discretion
WB Lane and S Young,
Administrative Law in Queensland
JRS Forbes,
in Tribunals
(2002) [10.1], citing
Johnson v Miller
[1937] HCA 77
(1937) 59 CLR
Etherton v Public Service Board of NSW
(1983) 3 NSWLR 297
WB Lane and S Young,
Administrative Law in Queensland
(2001) 57–8.
Kioa v West
[1985] HCA 81
(1985) 159 CLR 550
, 629 (Brennan J). See also
Applicant Veal of 2002 v
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs
However, procedural
fairness may not necessarily require that the person be given a copy of the
document itself as it may be sufficient
that the substance of the information is
brought to the person’s attention. See J Blackwood, ‘Fairness v
of Documents by Guardianship Tribunals’
Psychiatry, Psychology and Law
, 122, 123, 128–9, citing
Gaming Board for Great Britain; Ex parte Benaim and Khaida
[1970] EWCA Civ 7
[1970] 2 QB 417
Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs v
(1990) 21 FCR 193, 197, 205, 223;
Gilson v Minister for
Immigration and Multicultural Affairs
(Unreported, Federal Court of
Australia, Lehane J, 21 July 1997) 8–9;
Pilbara Aboriginal Land Council
Aboriginal Corp Inc v Minister for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
[2000] FCA 1113
(2000) 103 FCR 539
Applicant Veal of 2002 v Minister
for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs
[2003] FCA 437
(2003) 197 ALR 741
748–9 (which was subsequently appealed to the High Court:
Veal of 2002 v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous
[2005] HCA 72).
See also JRS Forbes,
Justice in Tribunals
(2002) [12.31]. Compare, however, in the guardianship context,
Guardianship and Administration Board
[1990] VicRp 80
[1990] VR 902
, 912 (Gobbo J) where it
was held that the nature of the document required that it actually be produced,
preferably before the hearing.
JRS Forbes,
in Tribunals
(2002) [12.30]. Note that provided that other parties are not
preferentially treated, the oral evidence need not be received in
person’s presence if its substance is subsequently communicated: see for
example, in the guardianship context,
(Unreported, Supreme Court of
NSW Equity Division, Windeyer J, 17 September 2001).
WB Lane and S Young,
Administrative Law in Queensland
Ibid, citing
v New South Wales Bar Association
[1983] HCA 17
(1983) 151 CLR 288
[1994] HCA 30
(1994) 181 CLR 41
, 47, 51–2, 67–8, 87. See also
Keating v Morris; Leck v Morris
[2005] QSC 243.
EA Lind and TR Tyler,
The Social Psychology of Procedural Justice
(1988) 63–4.
DJ Galligan,
Discretionary Powers: A Legal Study of Official Discretion
333–4; LB Solum, ‘Procedural Justice’
California Law Review
DJ Galligan,
Discretionary Powers: A Legal Study of Official Discretion
(1986) 334:
‘[Participation in decision-making] is one of the universally acclaimed
values against which it is hard to find
a voice of dissent’. Also see EA
Lind and TR Tyler,
The Social Psychology of Procedural Justice
DJ Galligan,
Discretionary Powers: A Legal Study of Official Discretion
(1986) 328; LB
Solum, ‘Procedural Justice’
Southern California Law
, 244–52; TR Tyler et al,
Social Justice in a Diverse
Re Pochi and Minister
for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
[1979] AATA 64
(1979) 26 ALR 247
, 274 (Brennan J). Also
see GA Flick,
Natural Justice: Principles and Practical Application
ed, 1984) 69–70.
Obey the Law
(1990) 106; EA Lind and TR Tyler,
The Social Psychology of
Procedural Justice
(1988) 64; RA Hughes, GWG Leane and A Clarke,
Australian Legal Institutions: Principles, Structure and Organisation
(2nd ed, 2003) 195; P Cane,
An Introduction to Administrative Law
ed, 1992) 160–1. Indeed, legal philosophers argue that meaningful
participation is a precondition of legitimate adjudication:
see, for example, LL
Fuller, ‘The Forms and Limits of Adjudication’
, 364; and LB Solum, ‘Procedural Justice’
Southern California Law Review
, 274: ‘[p]rocedures that
purport to bind without affording meaningful rights of participation are
fundamentally illegitimate’.
Obey the Law
(1990) 101–4; TR Tyler et al,
Social Justice in a
Diverse Society
(1997) 83; EA Lind and TR Tyler,
Psychology of Procedural Justice
Obey the Law
(1990) 163; TR Tyler and HJ Smith, ‘Social justice and
social movements’ in DT Gilbert, ST Fiske and G Lindzey (eds),
Handbook of Social Psychology
(4th ed, 1998) Vol II, 604. Note also that
participation by the affected parties in adjudicative processes is also valued
it is essential to people’s dignity and respect: see LB Solum,
‘Procedural Justice’
Southern California Law Review
WB Lane and S Young,
Administrative Law in Queensland
(2001) 53; JRS Forbes,
(2002) [7.1].
JRS Forbes,
in Tribunals
(2002) [7.1]; WB Lane and S Young,
Administrative Law in
Kioa v West
[1985] HCA 81
(1985) 159 CLR 550
(Mason J). See also J Blackwood, ‘Fairness v Privacy: Disclosure of
Documents by Guardianship Tribunals’
Psychiatry, Psychology
, 122, citing
National Companies and Securities Commission v
News Corporation Ltd
[1984] HCA 29
(1984) 156 CLR 296
, 312 (Gibbs CJ) and
Re Minister
for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs; Ex parte Miah
(2001) 206 CLR 57,
98 (McHugh J). It has been suggested that in determining what is required in a
particular case involves a balancing
of the interest of the person whose rights
or expectations may be affected on the one hand, and the cost of providing
procedural safeguards on the other: EI Sykes et al,
Principles of Administrative Law
(4th ed, 1997) [1513].
W Holdsworth,
History of English Law
(1964) Vol XIV, 199.
EI Sykes et al,
General Principles of Administrative Law
(4th ed, 1997) [1513]; DJ
Discretionary Powers: A Legal Study of Official Discretion
(1986) 326.
J v Lieschke
(1986) 162 CLR 477
, 456–7 (Brennan J, Mason, Wilson, Deane and Dawson JJ
concurring), cited in J Blackwood, ‘Fairness v Privacy: Disclosure
Documents by Guardianship Tribunals’
Psychiatry, Psychology
, 123. See also, T Henning and J Blackwood,
‘Tribunals’ Power to Control Their Own Procedures and the
Requirements of
Procedural Fairness: Some Issues’ (Paper presented at the
Sixth Annual AIJA Tribunals Conference
, Sydney, 5–6 June 2003)
To over-judicialise an inquiry by insisting on the procedures of a court of
justice which professional lawyers alone are competent
to operate effectively in
the interests of their clients would not be fair and in considering whether a
Tribunal has a duty to disclose
documents it is desirable to avoid imposing an
obligation on decision making bodies akin to the required pre-trial procedures
litigation in the court. A balance must be pursued between the proper
requirements of procedural fairness and imposing undue burdens
on administrative
bodies. [notes omitted]
Although note the cautionary comments in
Moore v Guardianship and
Administration Board
[1990] VicRp 80
[1990] VR 902
, 913 (Gobbo J). See also
TC v Public
Guardian & Ors
[2006] NSWADTAP 15
, [34]–[35];
QJ v Public
Guardian & Ors
[2005] NSWADTAP 45
LA v Protective Commissioner
[2004] NSWADTAP 39
, [18]–[20] and
KV v Protective
Commissioner & Ors; KW & Ors v KV & Ors (No 2)
[2004] NSWADTAP
RD Nicholson,
‘Balancing Privacy and Natural Justice in Informal Tribunals: The Case of
the Guardianship Boards’
Public Law Review
J Blackwood,
‘Fairness v Privacy: Disclosure of Documents by Guardianship
Psychiatry, Psychology and Law
Henning and J Blackwood, ‘The rules of evidence and the right to
procedural fairness in proceedings of four Tasmanian
Quasi-Judicial
Australian Journal of Administrative Law
T Henning and J
Blackwood, ‘The rules of evidence and the right to procedural fairness in
proceedings of four Tasmanian Quasi-Judicial
Australian Journal of Administrative Law
J Blackwood, ‘Fairness v Privacy: Disclosure of Documents by
Guardianship Tribunals’
Psychiatry, Psychology and Law
J Blackwood,
‘Fairness v Privacy: Disclosure of Documents by Guardianship
Psychiatry, Psychology and Law
, 123, 130,
Re Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs; Ex parte
(2001) 206 CLR 57, 116 (Kirby J), 100, (McHugh J) and
[1985] HCA 81
(1985) 159 CLR 550
, 629 (Brennan J).
J Blackwood,
‘Fairness v Privacy: Disclosure of Documents by Guardianship
Psychiatry, Psychology and Law
Applicant Veal of 2002 v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and
Indigenous Affairs
[2005] HCA 72
, [24]–[29].
See, for example,
v Public Guardian
[2006] NSWADTAP 15
KA v Public Guardian
[2004] NSWADTAP 25
T Carney and D Tait,
The Adult Guardianship Experiment: Tribunals and Popular Justice
Ibid 5–6; RM
Smith, ‘Australian Guardianship and Financial Management Boards and
Tribunals: are they Fully Accountable
in their Decision-making?’
Australian Journal of Administrative Law
, 23, citing
Guardianship and Administration Board
[1993] VicRp 36
[1993] 1 VR 521.
Protective Commissioner
[2004] NSWADTAP 39
The ‘special
health care’ regulated by the guardianship legislation is defined to
include ‘sterilisation of the
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
sch 3, sch 2
(definition of ‘special health
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(definition of ‘special health care’). See also ch 5A
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(Qld) in relation to the
sterilisation of children.
The withholding or
withdrawal of a life-sustaining measure can fall within the definition of
‘health care’ which is
regulated by the guardianship legislation:
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
sch 3, sch 2
(definition of
‘health care’);
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
sch 4, sch 2
(definition of ‘health care’).
Such decisions are
‘personal matters’ and so fall within the decisions regulated by the
guardianship legislation:
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
–(b) (definition of ‘personal matter’);
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
sch 4, sch 2
–(b) (definition of ‘personal matter’).
EI Sykes et al,
General Principles of Administrative Law
(4th ed, 1997) [1505]; JRS
Justice in Tribunals
(2002) [7.7].
[1913] AC 417.
Carney and Tait classify
judicial bodies into four general categories: constitutional, criminal, civil
and protective: T Carney
and D Tait,
The Adult Guardianship Experiment:
Tribunals and Popular Justice
(1997) 5. See also J Blackwood,
‘Fairness v Privacy: Disclosure of Documents by Guardianship
Psychiatry, Psychology and Law
T Carney and D Tait,
The Adult Guardianship Experiment: Tribunals and Popular Justice
10. For a history of the development of the guardianship jurisdiction in
Australia, see T Carney and D Tait,
The Adult Guardianship Experiment:
Tribunals and Popular Justice
(1997) ch 2. In Queensland, the
was specifically preserved by
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
[2005] QSC 68.
Department of Health and Community Services v JWB (Marion’s Case
[1992] HCA 15
(1992) 175 CLR 218
, 258–9 (Mason CJ, Dawson, Toohey and Gaudron
Re S (a child)
[2003] EWCA Civ 963
, [20] (Lady Justice Hale).
Family Law Act
See HA Finlay, RJ Bailey-Harris and MRA Otlowski,
Family Law in Australia
(5th ed, 1997) [7.267].
The long title of the
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(Qld) provides in part:
‘An Act to consolidate, amend and reform the law relating to the
appointment of guardians and administrators
to manage the personal and financial
affairs of adults with impaired capacity …’. Section 6 of the Act
states the purpose
of the Act is to ‘strike an appropriate balance
between–– (a) the right of an adult with impaired capacity to the
greatest possible degree of autonomy in decision making; and (b) the
adult’s right to adequate and appropriate support for
making’. See also
Scott v Scott
[1913] AC 417, 437 (Viscount
Haldane); and
TC v Public Guardian
[2006] NSWADTAP 15
Guardianship Tribunal
[2003] NSWADTAP 59
, [40] in relation to the New South
Wales Guardianship Tribunal.
Scott v Scott
[1913] AC 417, 437 (Viscount Haldane).
Powers of Attorney
(Qld) sch 1
Guardianship and Administration Act
(Qld) sch 1
See generally, J
Blackwood, ‘Fairness v Privacy: Disclosure of Documents by Guardianship
Psychiatry, Psychology and Law
Henning and J Blackwood, ‘The rules of evidence and the right to
procedural fairness in proceedings of four Tasmanian
Quasi-Judicial
Australian Journal of Administrative Law
T Henning and J
Blackwood, ‘The rules of evidence and the right to procedural fairness in
proceedings of four Tasmanian Quasi-Judicial
Australian Journal of Administrative Law
See, for example,
Korp (Guardianship)
[2005] VCAT 779
, [6] (Morris J):
It is only in recent years that privacy has become a matter of greater focus,
although I would hazard to say it has always been important.
Matters in which a
person seeks an administrator or guardian under the
Guardianship and
Administration Act
often involve the disclosure of personal and sensitive
information. The revelation of that information can significantly infringe
legitimate rights to privacy, even when it occurs in the context of a tribunal
proceeding.
There have been some criticisms about the misuse of guardianship proceedings
as a way of obtaining information about the adult that
the adult, if they had
capacity, would not have shared with those people. For example, the New South
Wales Guardianship Tribunal
referred to its proceedings being used a
‘fishing expedition’ by a nephew wishing to obtain financial
information about
his aunt: the Tribunal’s reasons for its decision are
quoted in the appeal of that decision in
TC v Public Guardian
NSWADTAP 15
, [21]. Note, however, that the Appeal Panel of the Administrative
Decisions Tribunal overturned the Guardianship Tribunal’s
decision and
held that the nephew was entitled to procedural fairness whether he was on a
‘fishing expedition’ or not:
TC v Public Guardian
NSWADTAP 15
J Blackwood,
‘Fairness v Privacy: Disclosure of Documents by Guardianship
Psychiatry, Psychology and Law
Henning and J Blackwood, ‘The rules of evidence and the right to
procedural fairness in proceedings of four Tasmanian
Quasi-Judicial
Australian Journal of Administrative Law
[2004] WAGAB 25
, [34]–[35].
Office of the Public Advocate,
Private Lives? An Initial Investigation of
(1993) 5, 12. This is the combined effect of
General Principles 2 and 11 of the
Guardianship and Administration Act
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
J Jaconelli,
Justice: A Critique of the Public Trial
(2002) 160. The Commission notes
some limitations of this argument. It could not be argued, for example, that a
catastrophically
injured person seeking compensation to provide for their future
care genuinely has a ‘choice’ as to whether to pursue
their rights
through litigation or not.
Scott v Scott
[1913] AC 417, 483 (Lord Shaw of Dumferline). Lord Atkinson also referred to
the jurisdiction as ‘quasi-domestic’: 462.
However, such an
analysis has been the subject of some criticism: J Jaconelli,
Open Justice: A
Critique of the Public Trial
(2002) 159.
T Henning and J
Blackwood, ‘The rules of evidence and the right to procedural fairness in
proceedings of four Tasmanian Quasi-Judicial
Australian Journal of Administrative Law
, 100–1. Also see
J Jaconelli,
Open Justice: A Critique of the Public Trial
The Commission is aware,
however, that this is not always the case as some guardianship hearings involve
people seeking to advance
personal interests rather than those of the adult.
See, for example, n
LT (Deceased) and
[2005] WASAT 264
, [26], [28];
(2001) 28 SR (WA) 320
Natural Justice and
(1995) 4. In
LT (Deceased) and JTW
[2005] WASAT 264
, [28] (albeit in the slightly
different context of a refusal to allow a party to inspect documents in relation
to a concluded proceeding
of the State Administrative Tribunal), Mr Mansveld
[T]his is important in maintaining the integrity of the processes of the
Tribunal, to ensure that people continue to feel confident
to provide candid
information to the Tribunal without fear that the information will, as a matter
of course, find its way into other
Guardians and
administrators are entitled to all of the information that an adult would have
been entitled to if he or she had capacity
and which is necessary to be able to
make an informed exercise of a power:
Guardianship and Administration Act
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
creates a similar right for attorneys.
In addition to the
adult, an ‘active party’ may be: the applicant; a person proposed
for appointment or reappointment
as guardian, administrator or attorney (if that
is what the proceeding is for); any current guardian, administrator or attorney;
the Adult Guardian; the Public Trustee; or any person joined to the proceeding
by the Tribunal:
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Powers of Attorney
sch 3 (definition of ‘interested person’);
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
sch 4 (definition of
‘interested person’).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
s 109(2)(b).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
s 109(2)(a).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
s 109(2)(d)(i).
Note, however, that the
Tribunal may be prevented in a particular case from excluding certain persons in
proceedings related to
special health care. This is discussed at para
. In South Australia, the Northern
Territory, Tasmania, and Western Australia, however, certain persons, such as
those involved in
the proceedings, cannot be excluded from a hearing: see para
Section 119
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(Qld) provides that the active
parties to a proceeding are:
• the adult;
• the applicant (if not the adult);
• any proposed guardian, administrator or attorney for the adult if the
proceeding is for the appointment or reappointment of
such person;
• any current guardian, administrator or attorney for the adult;
• the Adult Guardian;
• the Public Trustee; and
• any other person joined as a party to the proceeding.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
s 109(2)(d)(ii).
That provision is discussed
in Chapter 5 (Documents before the Tribunal).
This is examined in
Chapter 5 (Documents before the Tribunal).
Administrative
Appeals Tribunal Act
s 35(2)(a).
Administrative
Appeals Tribunal Act
[1979] AATA 64
(1979) 26 ALR 247.
Re Pochi and Minister
for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
[1979] AATA 64
(1979) 26 ALR 247
Ibid 272–3. See
Re An Applicant and Australian Prudential Regulation Authority
[2005] AATA 1294
(2005) 89 ALD 643
Re Pochi and Minister
for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
[1979] AATA 64
(1979) 26 ALR 247
, 273. Brennan J also
considered that the Administrative Appeals Tribunal could exclude the public
from a hearing if the information
to be given in the proceedings was of the kind
described in s 36 of
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1975
(Cth): 273.
That section provides that the Attorney-General may certify that disclosure of
particular material (that would prejudice
national security, defence or
international relations, disclose Cabinet deliberations or decisions, or that
could form the basis
of a claim for Crown privilege) would be contrary to the
public interest.
Re Pochi and Minister
for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
[1979] AATA 64
(1979) 26 ALR 247
, 273. Note that this
criterion is derived from Brennan’s J interpretation of the Administrative
Appeals Tribunal’s discretion
being one that is intended to facilitate the
flow of information to it while preserving the confidentiality of that
information:
Re Pochi and Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
[1979] AATA 64
(1979) 26 ALR 247
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
–(2). See, for example,
[2005] QGAAT 4
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
(Qld) sch 1
Note that none of the equivalent
‘General Principles’ contained in the guardianship legislation of
other Australian
confidentiality.
, [10]. The decision to make a confidentiality order excluding the
person from the hearing was upheld on appeal:
Rickleman v Public Trustee
[2005] QSC 336
, [23] (Douglas J). See also
Bird v Public Trustee of
[2005] QSC 054
Lohe v Bird
[2004] QSC 023.
Ibid. The Tribunal also
noted its reliance on the General Principles, particularly General Principle 7,
as the ‘Tribunal
was keen to hear the adult’s views if
possible’: [10].
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
, sch 4, sch 2
provides that
‘special health care’ means:
• removal of tissue from the adult while the adult is alive for
donation to someone else;
• sterilisation of the adult;
• termination of a pregnancy of the adult;
• participation by the adult in special medical research or
experimental health care;
• electroconvulsive therapy or psychosurgery for the adult; and
• any special health care of the adult prescribed by regulation.
Note that s 80G(4) of
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(Qld), which applies in
relation to proceedings for consent to sterilisation of a child with an
impairment, provides that the Tribunal
may not make a confidentiality order that
is likely to affect the ability of any active party to form and express a
considered view
matters are the child, the applicant, the child’s parent or guardian,
child’s primary carer (if the child’s parent or guardian is not the
child’s primary carer), the child’s
treating doctor, the child
representative for the child, and any person joined as a party by the Tribunal:
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
There is also a similar
provision in South Australia:
Guardianship and Administration Act 1993
A ‘guardian’
means a person appointed as a guardian for a personal matter for an adult under
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
sch 4 (definition of
‘guardian’).
‘attorney’ means an attorney appointed by an adult under an enduring
power of attorney or an advance health directive:
Powers of Attorney Act
sch 3 (definition of ‘attorney’);
Guardianship
and Administration Act 2000
sch 4 (definition of ‘enduring
document’).
A ‘statutory
health attorney’ for an adult means the first of the following who is
readily available and culturally
appropriate to exercise power for a health
• the adult’s spouse, if the relationship is close and
continuing;
• a person 18 years or older who is caring for the adult but who is not
a paid carer of the adult; or
• a close friend or relation of the adult 18 years or older and who is
not a paid carer of the adult.
If no-one from that list is readily available and culturally appropriate, the
Adult Guardian becomes the adult’s statutory health
attorney. See
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Section 85 of the
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(Qld) also addresses other
matters relating to the Registrar’s power to deal with prescribed
non-contentious matters. For example,
the Tribunal may direct the Registrar to
refer a particular matter to the Tribunal and the Registrar may also refer such
if he or she considers it more appropriate for the Tribunal to deal
with that matter:
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
Guardianship and
Administration Tribunal Rule 2004
(Qld) r 2, sch.
Guardianship and
Administration Tribunal, Presidential Direction No 1 of 2005, ‘General
Information in Relation to the Inspection
of Files and Confidentiality
Orders’ (formerly ‘Conditions for File Inspection’, amended 29
May 2006); Information
provided by the President of the Guardianship and
Administration Tribunal, 29 March 2006. The Presidential Direction is discussed
in Chapter 5 (Documents before the
Information provided by
the President of the Guardianship and Administration Tribunal, 24 May 2006. See
also Guardianship and Administration
Tribunal, Presidential Direction No 1 of
2005, ‘General Information in Relation to the Inspection of Files and
Confidentiality
Orders’ in which no reference is made to the
Registrar’s power to make a confidentiality order.
None of the Tribunal
decisions published on the AustLII website provide a detailed discussion of what
might amount to a ‘reasonable
http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/qld/QGAAT/
at 24 July 2006. The
phrase is referred to very briefly in
[2004] QGAAT 19
Tribunal revoked the appointment of an administrator, but there was no need to
discuss its meaning.
Ganin v New South
Wales Crime Commission
(1993) 32 NSWLR 423
, 436 (Kirby P);
Nominal Defendant
[2005] QCA 118
, [7] (McPherson JA).
Taikato v The Queen
[1996] HCA 28
(1996) 186 CLR 454
, 464–6 (Brennan CJ, Toohey, McHugh and Gummow
Bank of Valletta v
National Crime Authority
[1999] FCA 791
(1999) 164 ALR 45
, 55 (Hely J). This case was
cited with approval in
Callanan v Bush
[2004] QSC 88.
in Chapter 2 (Overview of the law in
Queensland).
Information provided by
the President of the Guardianship and Administration Tribunal, 31 May 2006.
Information provided by
the President of the Guardianship and Administration Tribunal, 31 May 2006.
This approach was adopted on
the basis of the decision of
(Unreported, Supreme Court of NSW Equity Division, Windeyer J, September 2001,
[17]) which held that in New South Wales such a course
did not breach the rules
of procedural fairness.
The prohibition on
publishing information about Tribunal proceedings under
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(Qld) applies to people
rather than to the parties. That provision is the subject of
Chapter 7 (Publication of Tribunal proceedings).
GM v Guardianship
[2003] NSWADTAP 59.
See also, for example,
Coroners Act 2003
(1): inquests must be held in open court
except when the coroner orders otherwise ‘while particular evidence is
and the Court may exclude a person from an inquest ‘if the
court considers it is in the interests of justice, the public or
a particular
person to do so’;
Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
hearings shall be in open court but the Court may exclude the public or
specified persons ‘where the Court is satisfied that
the presence of the
public or of those persons, as the case may be, would be contrary to the
interests of justice’; and
Family Law Act 1975
shall be in open court but the Court may exclude a specified person, a specified
class of persons, or all persons other
than the parties, their legal
representatives and any other specified persons from a hearing or part of a
Guardianship Act
(NSW) s 56.
Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
(Vic) s 101(1)–(2).
Guardianship and
Management of Property Act 1991
State Administrative
Tribunal Act 2004
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1990
, sch 1 pt B cl 11(2). Note that
State Administrative Tribunal Act 2004
(WA) also grants the
Tribunal a power to make orders in relation to who may be present at a hearing.
That provision, however, is
inconsistent with the relevant provision of the
Guardianship and Administration Act 1990
(WA) because it sets out
different criteria, and so will not apply:
State Administrative Tribunal Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1990
, sch 1 pt B cl 11(2).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1990
, sch 1 pt B cl 11(3): ‘Any person
bona fide engaged in reporting or commenting upon the proceedings of the State
Administrative
Tribunal commenced under this Act for dissemination through a
public news medium shall not be excluded from the place where the hearings
being held’. This provision is unique among the Australian guardianship
Adult Guardianship
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
The Northern Territory provision adds the words ‘if the court thinks
fit’ when granting the discretion to exclude:
Adult Guardianship Act
(NT) s 25(3).
Adult Guardianship
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1993
(SA) s 14(10)–(11).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1993
(SA) s 14(10)–(11).
‘Prescribed
medical treatment’ is analogous to ‘special health care’ under
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
Guardianship
and Administration Act 1993
(definition of ‘prescribed
medical treatment’).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1993
See, however, the
approach taken under the
Mental Health Act 2000
(Qld) for proceedings of
the Mental Health Review Tribunal which are to be held in private unless the
Tribunal otherwise orders.
The Act imposes conditions upon when the Tribunal
may exercise its discretion to open proceedings:
Mental Health Act 2000
(Qld) s 460. See also, for example,
Justices Act 1886
which provides that committal hearings are not to be held in open court and
persons may be excluded from a hearing if it appears
‘that the ends of
justice’ require it. Also see
Childrens Court Act 1992
Adoption of Children Act 1964
(Qld) s 58;
Criminal Law (Sexual
Offences) Act 1978
Protection of
Personal and Property Rights Act 1988
(NZ) s 79(1). See also
, RSNS 1989, c 159 (Nova Scotia) s 10(3).
Protection of
Personal and Property Rights Act 1988
(NZ) s 75(2).
Protection of
Personal and Property Rights Act 1988
(NZ) ss 79(1)(f), 63(3).
Scott v Scott
[1913] AC 417, 438 (Lord Haldane LC). See para 3.18 in Chapter 3 (Guardianship
and confidentiality).
in Chapter 3 (Guardianship and
confidentiality).
in Chapter 3 (Guardianship and
confidentiality).
The Tribunal has wide
powers as to how it conducts its hearings. For example, the Tribunal is not
bound by the rules of evidence
and may inform itself as it considers
appropriate, and it is expressly permitted to utilise technology to allow people
to participate
in its hearings or to give evidence:
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1990
, sch 1 pt B cl 11(2).
Courts of Justice
RSO 1990 c 43 s 135(1)–(2).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1993
But see para
in relation to proceedings regarding
consent to special health care.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1993
(SA) s 14(10)–(11);
Adult Guardianship
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
Guardianship and Administration Act 1990
, sch 1 pt B cl
11(2)–(3). See para
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1990
, sch 1 pt B cl 11(2)–(3).
. Note that what it means to
‘restrict’ disclosure of information is considered in Chapter 5
(Documents before the Tribunal).
The role of the Mental
Health Review Tribunal includes reviewing whether a person should continue to be
subject to involuntary treatment
or detention (or both) and reviewing a
person’s fitness for trial if previously found to be unfit. For the
Mental Health Act 2000
Proceedings of the
Mental Health Review Tribunal are to be held in private unless the Tribunal
orders otherwise and there are conditions
upon when the Tribunal may exercise
its discretion to open proceedings:
Mental Health Act 2000
(Qld) s 460.
Section 460A of the Act deals with the attendance of an ‘observer’
at a hearing. See also ss 450–455
Mental Health Act 2000
(Qld) regarding rights of appearance. Only the patient (or person subject to a
treatment order) and the applicant have a right of
appearance in treatment
applications and applications for notification orders:
Mental Health Act
(Qld) ss 451, 453. For appeals against decisions to exclude a visitor,
rights of appearance are limited to the appellant and the
administrator of a
mental health service:
Mental Health Act 2000
(Qld) s 454. For reviews
and applications to move a patient out of Queensland, the right of appearance is
slightly broader, to include,
for example sometimes the Attorney-General: ss
450, 452. In most instances, a person who appears may be represented by a
or with the Tribunal’s leave, an agent: ss 450–452, 454.
However, note that s 453 requires an applicant to have the
leave to be represented by either a lawyer or agent. Section 455 of the
Mental Health Act
2000 (Qld) also provides that an allied person or
someone else to whom the Tribunal grants leave, may attend a hearing to help an
involuntary patient express their views, wishes and interests.
Mental Health Act
(Qld) s 458(1)(a).
Mental Health Act
(Qld) s 458(2).
Mental Health Act
(Qld) s 458(3).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
This issue relates to
confidentiality orders generally and so will also be relevant to the discussion
of these orders in Chapter
5 (Documents before the Tribunal), Chapter 6
(Tribunal decisions and reasons), and Chapter 7 (Publication of Tribunal
proceedings).
. This issue relates to confidentiality
orders generally and so will also be relevant to the discussion of these orders
5 (Documents before the Tribunal), Chapter 6 (Tribunal decisions and
reasons), and Chapter 7 (Publication of Tribunal proceedings).
This issue relates to
confidentiality orders generally and so will also be relevant to the discussion
of these orders in Chapter
5 (Documents before the Tribunal), Chapter 6
(Tribunal decisions and reasons), and Chapter 7 (Publication of Tribunal
proceedings).
J Jaconelli,
Justice: A Critique of the Public Trial
(2002) 2. See also A Monson,
‘Privacy and the Administration of Justice’ in M Tugendhat and I
Christie (eds),
The Law of Privacy and the Media
(2002) 477, [12.10]; M
Armstrong, D Lindsay and R Watterson,
Media Law in Australia
ed, 1995) 128. However, note the discussion of some of the limitations of
achieving open justice through open hearings in PW
Young, ‘Open
Courts’ (2006) 80
Australian Law Journal
R v Hamilton
[1930] NSWStRp 21
(1930) 30 SR (NSW) 277
Russell v Russell
(1976) 134 CLR 495
, 520 (Gibbs
D Butler and S Rodrick,
Australian Media Law
(2nd ed, 2004) [4.40];
Scott v Scott
AC 417, 437 (Viscount Haldane), 445 (Earl Loreburn). See para 3.29 in Chapter 3
(Guardianship and confidentiality).
Re Pochi and Minister
for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
[1979] AATA 64
(1979) 26 ALR 247
, 270–3 (Brennan
J). See also M Aronson, B Dyer and M Groves,
Judicial Review of
Administrative Action
(2004) 529 for a discussion as to whether procedural
fairness should play a role in determining whether a hearing should be public
WB Lane and S Young,
Administrative Law in Queensland
(2001) 57–8; J Blackwood,
‘Fairness v Privacy: Disclosure of Documents by Guardianship
Psychiatry, Psychology and Law
Kioa v West
[1985] HCA 81
(1985) 159 CLR 550
, 587 (Mason J), 629 (Brennan J);
Refugee Review Tribunal
(2002) 190 ALR 601, 653 (Kirby J).
See, for example,
v Guardianship Tribunal
[2003] NSWADTAP 59
, [51], [63] in which it was held
that the Tribunal breached the requirements of procedural fairness by failing to
disclose to the
applicant certain adverse evidence received in the
applicant’s absence and by failing to give the applicant an opportunity
respond to that evidence. Also see
PRA v MA & VCAT
[2004] VSCA 20
[39] in which it was held that the parties’ failure to attend the hearing
was a result of inadequate prior notice of the hearing
and meant that the
parties were denied the opportunity to put their case, in breach of the rules of
procedural fairness. Compare
PS v Public Guardian
[2005] NSWADTAP
RJ v Public Guardian
[2005] NSWADTAP 70
, [8], [11]; and
v Guardianship Board
[1997] SADC 3603
, in which it was held that adequate
prior notice of the hearing and the opportunity to participate were given. It
is also possible
that a party’s exclusion from a hearing may result in a
lack of procedural fairness through a breach of the bias rule: M Aronson,
B Dyer and M Groves,
Judicial Review of Administrative Action
529, n 458.
Re Pochi and Minister
for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
[1979] AATA 64
(1979) 26 ALR 247
, 274 (Brennan J). Also
see GA Flick,
Natural Justice: Principles and Practical Application
ed, 1984) 69–70.
WB Lane and S Young,
Administrative Law in Queensland
(2001) 53; JRS Forbes,
(2002) [7.1].
See, for example,
(Unreported, Supreme Court of NSW Equity Division, Windeyer J, 17
September 2001), [17]–[18] in which it was held that the
New South Wales
Guardianship Tribunal had acted properly in receiving evidence in the
parties’ absence and later conveying
the substance of that evidence to the
parties. See also JRS Forbes,
Justice in Tribunals
(2002) [12.30]; T
Henning and J Blackwood, ‘The rules of evidence and the right to
procedural fairness in proceedings of four
Tasmanian Quasi-Judicial
Australian Journal of Administrative Law
99, n 79; J Blackwood, ‘Fairness v Privacy: Disclosure of Documents
by Guardianship Tribunals’
Psychiatry, Psychology and Law
, 128; Privacy Commissioner and Office of the Public Advocate,
Justice and Privacy: Policy and Procedures of Boards and Tribunals
Office of the Public Advocate,
Natural Justice and Privacy: Policy and
Procedures of Boards and Tribunals
[2005] QGAAT 4
Office of the Public Advocate,
Natural Justice and Privacy: Policy and
Procedures of Boards and Tribunals
(1995) 5. See also General Principle 11
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
Attorney Act 1998
(Qld) sch 1
Re Pochi and Minister
for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
[1979] AATA 64
(1979) 26 ALR 247
The Commission also
notes that unlike some tribunals in other jurisdictions, the Queensland Tribunal
does not have a specific power
to exclude people on the basis of misconduct
other than the general power contained in
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
(Qld). (Compare, for example,
Guardianship Act
(NSW) s 70 and
Guardianship and Management of Property Act 1991
(ACT) s 48.) This may be another reason to avoid unduly constraining this
discretion.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
–(2). See also s 76 of the
Protection of Personal and Property Rights Act 1988
(NZ) which provides
that the Court may request any person it considers
qualified to do so to prepare a medical, psychiatric, psychological, or other
on the person in respect of whom the application is made:
of Personal and Property Rights Act 1988
(NZ) s 76(1). A copy of any report
obtained is to be given either to each of the adult’s and other
parties’ legal representatives
or, if the adult or party is unrepresented,
to the adult or party themselves:
Protection of Personal and Property Rights
(NZ) s 76(3). The Court may also order that a report given to a
legal representative must not be given or shown to the party for
representative is acting:
Protection of Personal and Property Rights Act 1988
(NZ) s 76(4).
The Commission has been
advised that virtually the only situation where Tribunal staff would prepare a
report is when the Registry’s
Financial Assessment Officer prepares
financial summary reports in matters where there are limited assets: Information
provided by
the President of the Guardianship and Administration Tribunal, 24
May 2006 and 16 June 2006.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
The Commission
understands that, in practice, applications for an adult’s personal
matters and financial matters are to some
extent dealt with separately by the
Tribunal permitting some quarantining of financial and personal documents:
Information provided
by the President of the Guardianship and Administration
Tribunal, 24 May 2006. However, separating personal and financial matters
not always be possible or appropriate. There are some issues that are relevant
to both matters, such as capacity. Further,
decisions about one type of matter
may need to be informed by information that arises in the other. For example,
what decisions
are made in relation to health matters may depend on the
adult’s financial situation.
Such a right of access
is also unlikely to be implied under the test of necessity: see the discussion
John Fairfax Publications Pty Ltd v Ryde Local Court
(2005) NSWLR 512
522–3 (Spigelman CJ), and, in particular, the statement that while the
test may be approached as one of ‘reasonable
necessity’, more is
required than the implication of a right or power being ‘merely desirable
or useful’. Given
the overall approach to confidentiality taken by the
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(Qld), noting, for example, the
prohibition in
on publication of Tribunal proceedings, it would be
difficult to argue that a right of non-party access to Tribunal files should
implied as ‘reasonably necessary’. See also Guardianship and
Administration Tribunal, Presidential Direction No 1
of 2005, ‘General
Information in relation to the Inspection of Files and Confidentiality
Orders’ (formerly ‘Conditions
for File Inspection’, amended 29
May 2006), heading ‘Access to File Information and Document Inspection:
General Conditions – Non Active and Interested Parties
Section 110(2)(a)
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(Qld) provides that a procedural
direction by the President or the presiding member of the Tribunal may include a
direction joining
a person as a party to proceedings. A person so joined
becomes an active party:
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
The Tribunal is a
creature of statute and as such only has that jurisdiction which is expressly or
impliedly granted by statute:
see, for example,
John Fairfax Publications Pty
Ltd v District Court of New South Wales
[2004] NSWCA 324
(2004) 61 NSWLR 344
, 353 (Spigelman
CJ). See also
Herald and Weekly Times Ltd v Psychologists' Registration
Board of Victoria
[1998] VSC 141
, [54] (Warren J), citing
R v Hickman; Ex
parte Fox and Clinton
[1945] HCA 53
(1945) 70 CLR 598
, 606 (Latham CJ). In contrast, the
inherent jurisdiction of superior courts includes the power to allow non-party
access to court
files in appropriate cases:
Dobson v Hastings
Hammond v Scheinberg
[2001] NSWSC 568
(2001) 52 NSWLR 49
Competition and Consumer Commission v ABB Transmission and Distribution Ltd (No
[2002] FCA 609
, [6] (Finkelstein J). Most superior courts have rules
that govern such inspection: see, for example, in relation to the Queensland
Supreme Court,
Uniform Civil Procedures Rules 1999
(Qld) r 981.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
(Tribunal’s business and approval
of forms), 104 (Way procedure to be decided), 107 (Informal) and 110 (Procedural
directions).
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
which confers the Tribunal with power to do all things necessary or
convenient to perform the Tribunal’s functions.
Guardianship and
Administration Reform Drivers (GARD),
Review of Guardianship Laws and
Associated Practices in Queensland
http://www.qai.org.au/documents/doc_180.pdf
http://www.carersqld.asn.au/gard_submission.pdf
at 24 July 2006.
‘proceeding’ is not defined in the
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
(Qld) and the definition contained in
Acts Interpretation Act 1954
(Qld) (‘a legal or other action or
proceeding’) is of little assistance in resolving this issue. Compare
Supreme Court Act
(Qld) which specifically defines
‘proceeding’ to include an appeal:
Supreme Court Act
(Qld) s 2 sch 2 (definition of ‘proceeding’).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Guardianship and
Administration Tribunal, Presidential Direction No 1 of 2005, ‘General
Information in relation to the Inspection
of Files and Confidentiality
Orders’. See para
. Note, however, the interpretation of
Guardianship and Administration Act 1990
(WA) which gives a
represented person a right to inspect documents ‘held by the Board for the
purposes of any application in
respect of that person’. In
[2004] WAGAB 25
, [39] the Western Australian Guardianship and Administration
Board found that ‘any application’ included potential appeals
On its proper construction, the right given by
to relevant persons
to inspect relevant documents and materials, unless the Board in any case
otherwise orders, is exercisable in
the course of pending proceedings and is no
longer relevant once proceedings have been determined
and a matter is not
subject to review or appeal
. It is a right given to facilitate a proper
hearing of an application before the Board. (emphasis added)
Guardianship and
Administration Reform Drivers (GARD),
Review of Guardianship Laws and
Associated Practices in Queensland
http://www.qai.org.au/documents/doc_180.pdf
http://www.carersqld.asn.au/gard_submission.pdf
at 24 July 2006.
Applicant Veal of
2002 v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs
[2005] HCA 72
Public Service Board of New South Wales v Osmond
(1986) 159 CLR 656
, 670 (Gibbs CJ). See also M Aronson, B Dyer and M Groves,
Judicial Review of Administrative Action
(3rd ed, 2004) 561;
County Court of Victoria
[2000] VSCA 171
[2000] 2 VR 246
, 272 (Buchanan JA).
Uniform Civil
Procedures Rules 1999
(Qld) r 784. The Commission understands that when the
Tribunal Registry forwards a copy of the file to the Supreme Court Registry,
places any confidential information (such as documents subject to a
confidentiality order) in a sealed envelope with a direction
that it is not to
be opened except by order of the Court: Information provided by the President of
the Guardianship and Administration
Tribunal, 24 May 2006.
Uniform Civil
Procedures Rules 1999
(Qld) r 981.
There may be, however,
concerns about breaching the prohibition on the publication of information about
Tribunal proceedings contained
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
(Qld), depending on how widely that provision is
interpreted and what information is disclosed. This prohibition is discussed in
Chapter 7 (Publication of Tribunal proceedings).
This duty is considered
in detail in Chapter 8 (The general duty of confidentiality).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
s 249(3)(e).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
(definition of ‘confidential
information’).
The issue of
‘mixed personal information’ is discussed at para
in Chapter 8 (The general duty of
confidentiality).
The Commission’s
terms of reference and the timelines for the three stages of this review are
discussed at para
in Chapter 1 (Introduction to the
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
s 109(2)(d)(ii).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
in Chapter 4 (Tribunal hearings).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Administrative
Decisions Tribunal Act 1997
(NSW) s 75(2).
Note the Appeal
Panel’s jurisdiction does not include decisions of the Guardianship
Tribunal made under pt 4A (Adoption information
directions) and pt 5 (Medical
and dental treatment) div 4 (Consents given by the Tribunal) or div 4A (Clinical
trials) of the
Guardianship Act 1987
Administrative
Decisions Tribunal Act 1997
Guardianship Act 1987
, [6]. Accordingly, it made a non-disclosure order in relation to
those documents that contained ‘highly sensitive personal
information
… not relevant to any issue that was before the Guardianship
Tribunal’: [8]. It did not, however, make such
an order in relation to
other documents relevant to an issue in the proceeding and for which it
considered there was no compelling
reason for non-disclosure that outweighed the
public interest in open justice and procedural fairness: [11]–[13]. Note
the Tribunal also made a non-disclosure order in relation to other
documents to which the relevant party consented: [7].
Administrative
Appeals Tribunal Act 1975
ss 35(2)(c)
Applicant S214 of
2002 v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs
[2004] FCAFC 66
(2004) 38 AAR 425
Ibid 446, 458.
Guardianship and
Administration Tribunal, Presidential Direction No 1 of 2005, ‘General
Information in relation to the Inspection
of Files and Confidentiality
To ensure the
‘quick and efficient discharge of the tribunal’s business’,
the Tribunal President may give directions
of general application about the
Tribunal’s procedure:
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
For the powers of courts to make practice directions generally,
see E Campbell,
Rules of Court
(1985) 40–4.
Guardianship and
Administration Tribunal, Presidential Direction No 1 of 2005, ‘General
Information in relation to the Inspection
of Files and Confidentiality
Orders’, headings ‘Inspection Conditions Prior to Hearing’ and
‘At the Hearing’.
Guardianship and
Administration Tribunal, Administration Practice 7 of 2005,
‘Confidentiality Orders’.
Ibid heading 2.
Ibid heading 2.2.
Ibid heading 1. Note
that these examples are very similar to the criteria set out in the
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Rules 1998
(Vic) for non-disclosure of
documents in Victoria: see para
Information provided by
the President of the Guardianship and Administration Tribunal, 26 May 2006.
This difference between the
number of confidentiality orders made in relation to
documents and the number of applications is due to the fact that in three of
applications, two confidentiality orders were made.
Five confidentiality
orders were made at the hearing and the timing of two orders is unknown:
Information provided by the President
of the Guardianship and Administration
Tribunal, 26 May 2006 and 31 May 2006.
Information provided by
the President of the Guardianship and Administration Tribunal, 31 May 2006.
Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1990
The ‘hearing
rule’ of procedural fairness requires that a party be apprised of the
substance of matters to be relied
on in any documentary evidence and given an
opportunity to respond to those matters: WB Lane and S Young,
Administrative Law in Queensland
(2001) 57–8. All tribunals,
including guardianship tribunals, are required at common law to observe
procedural fairness: J
Blackwood, ‘Fairness v Privacy: Disclosure of
Documents by Guardianship Tribunals’
Psychiatry, Psychology
, 122; JRS Forbes,
Justice in Tribunals
(2002) [7.5]. A
number of jurisdictions have also specifically imposed this obligation on their
guardianship tribunals through statute:
Guardianship and Management of
Property Act 1991
Victorian Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Act 1998
Guardianship and Administration Act
State Administrative Tribunal Act 2004
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
the discussion of the position in other States in J Blackwood,
‘Fairness v Privacy: Disclosure of Documents by Guardianship
Psychiatry, Psychology and Law
Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
There is no specific
provision in relation to parties copying documents, but this would fall under
general provisions regulating
copying by any person.
Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
The power granted to the
Rules Committee of the Tribunal to make those rules is limited to the regulation
of ‘practice and
procedure’:
Victorian Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Act 1998
As to the scope of this power, see
Herald and Weekly Times Pty Ltd v Victorian Civil and Administrative
[2005] VSC 44
, which is discussed at para
For a discussion of the
scope of the Tribunal’s power to make a ‘contrary direction’,
Herald and Weekly Times Pty Ltd v Victorian Civil and Administrative
[2006] VSCA 7.
Under s 101 of the
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
(Vic), the Tribunal
may, in certain circumstances, order that any evidence given before it, the
contents of any documents produced
to it, or any information that might enable a
person who has appeared before it to be identified must not be published except
the manner and to the people (if any) specified by the Tribunal:
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
(Vic) s 101(3). Section 101(3)
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
discussed at para
in Chapter 7 (Publication of Tribunal
proceedings).
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
(Vic), disclosure of
information or a matter contained in a document may be certified by the Premier
as being contrary to the public
interest because it would involve disclosure of
Cabinet deliberations.
Victorian Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Act 1998
(Vic) makes provision for similar certification by the
Attorney-General in relation to Crown privilege. The Tribunal must ensure
information to which such a certificate applies is not disclosed to any person
other than a Tribunal member:
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act
In relation to the power
of the Rules Committee of the Tribunal, see
Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Rules 1998
(Vic) r 6.23(a).
Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Rules 1998
(Vic) r 6.23(b).
Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Rules 1998
(Vic) r 6.23(c). The other documents
specified are the application form, any report from the Public Advocate, and any
report from
an administrator.
Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Rules 1998
(Vic) r 6.23(c).
Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Rules 1998
(Vic) r 6.23(d).
Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Rules 1998
(Vic) r 6.23(d).
Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Rules 1998
(Vic) r 6.24, repealed by
Civil and Administrative Tribunal (Amendment No. 16) Rules 2006
[2005] VSC 44.
Ibid [26]. While the
Tribunal’s Rules Committee had the power to make rules regulating
‘practice and procedure’
under s 157 of
Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
(Vic), the Supreme Court found that the
rule had granted the Tribunal a discretion to determine whether inspection could
occur, rather
than simply
regulating the method
through which it could
occur, and was therefore
ultra vires
. Non-party inspection remains
capable of being regulated, however, by a ‘contrary direction’ under
s 147(4)(b):
Herald and Weekly Times Pty Ltd v Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal
[2006] VSCA 7
Herald and Weekly Times Pty Ltd v
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal
[2005] VSC 44
Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal (Amendment No. 16) Rules 2006
(Vic) r 5, commenced
on 1 June 2006.
Unless authorised by the
Tribunal, inspection of or other access to a document other than in accordance
Guardianship and Administration Act 1990
Guardianship and Administration Act 1990
The power to displace
these rights of inspection ‘reinforce[s] two important policies: firstly,
the protection of the privacy
of the person involved in the proceedings before
the Board and in particular a proposed represented or a represented person; and
secondly, the public interest in the integrity of the Board processes which
relies on the ability to obtain sensitive information
from a variety of
[2004] WAGAB 25
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1990
, [54]. This statement was made with reference to the wide definition
of who is a ‘party’, which includes any person
with a proper
interest in the proceedings who is heard by the Board:
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1990
, sch 1 pt B cl 13(2)(a). In
[2004] WAGAB 25
, the Board considered that where a person is a party but they
have been given only a limited right to be heard in the proceedings,
within the Board’s power to limit that person’s right to access
documents ‘on a need to know basis’.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1990
s 112(14)(a).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1990
s 112(4)(b).
Note that unlike
Guardianship and Administration Act 1990
(WA) gives the Tribunal a wide discretion to permit inspection or access to
documents after the conclusion of the proceeding and for
purposes other than
proceedings before the Tribunal:
[2004] WAGAB 25
[59]–[60]. In such circumstances, the person seeking inspection must
demonstrate a ‘cogent’ reason for
the disclosure and ‘a
reasonable relationship between the purpose to which the requested information
is to be put and [the]
intentions and objectives’ of the legislation:
[2004] WAGAB 25
[2005] WASAT 111
(deceased) and JTW
[2005] WASAT 264
, [32]. In relation to
Guardianship and Administration Act 1990
(WA), see also
Public Trustee
[2005] WASAT 199.
Guardianship Act 1987
(NSW) does not contain a provision to this effect,
the obligation to accord procedural fairness will apply unless a contrary
is clearly expressed in the legislation:
Kioa v West
[1985] HCA 81
, 609 (Brennan J). It has been held that no such intention is manifest
Guardianship Act 1987
(NSW) and that it must, accordingly, comply
with the rules of procedural fairness:
GM v Guardianship Tribunal
NSWADTAP 59
KV v Protective (No 2)
[2004] NSWADTAP 48
, [22]; and
TC v Public Guardian
[2006] NSWADTAP 15
The Appeal Panel of the
Administrative Decisions Tribunal has jurisdiction to hear appeals of certain
decisions of the Guardianship
Tribunal including guardianship and financial
administration orders:
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act 1997
Guardianship Act 1987
(NSW) s 67A. See n
[2003] NSWADTAP 59.
The grounds of appeal
instead included being given insufficient time to instruct a solicitor or
prepare for the hearing, and a failure
to disclose evidence given in the absence
of a person seeking an appointment as guardian and financial manager:
Guardianship Tribunal
[2003] NSWADTAP 59
KA v Public
[2004] NSWADTAP 25
KV v Protective (No 2)
[2004] NSWADTAP
NG v Protective Commissioner
[2005] NSWADTAP 11
Protective Commissioner
[2005] NSWADTAP 13
Cachia v Public Guardian
[2005] NSWADTAP 16
QJ v Public Guardian
[2005] NSWADTAP 45
Public Guardian
[2006] NSWADTAP 15
NSWADTAP 12
VP v Public Guardian
[2006] NSWADTAP 30.
GM v Guardianship
[2003] NSWADTAP 59
Ibid [27], citing
Kioa v West
[1985] HCA 81
(1985) 159 CLR 550
, 584 (Mason J).
Ibid [36], citing
Kioa v West
[1985] HCA 81
(1985) 159 CLR 550
, 584 (Mason J).
[2003] NSWADTAP 59.
Ibid [39], citing
Kioa v West
[1985] HCA 81
(1985) 159 CLR 550
, 585 (Mason J).
Ibid [39]. In
considering the protective nature of the Guardianship Tribunal’s
TC v Public Guardian
NSWADTAP 15
The Guardianship Tribunal’s jurisdiction is a protective one. That
means that one of its primary aims is to protect vulnerable
people from neglect,
abuse and exploitation. … But that is not its only obligation. The
Guardianship Tribunal is also obliged
to ensure that people who are parties to
applications receive a fair hearing from an impartial decision-maker.
GM v Guardianship
[2003] NSWADTAP 59
, [57], citing
Re Pochi and Minister for
Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
[1979] AATA 64
(1979) 26 ALR 247
Re Pergamon Press Ltd
[1971] CH 388
Ansell v Wells
[1982] FCA 186
(1982) 43 ALR 41.
GM v Guardianship
[2003] NSWADTAP 59
, [62], citing
Re Minister for Immigration and
Multicultural Affairs; Ex parte Miah
(2001) 206 CLR 57, 116 (Kirby J), 100
(McHugh J);
Muin v Refugee Review Tribunal
(2002) 190 ALR 601,
633–4 (McHugh J); and
Kioa v West
[1985] HCA 81
(1985) 159 CLR 550
, 629 (Brennan
in Chapter 3 (Guardianship and
confidentiality).
TC v Public
[2006] NSWADTAP 15
, [37]. See also
KA v Public Guardian
[2004] NSWADTAP 25
It is the duty of everyone exercising functions under the
Guardianship Act
to observe the principle that ‘the welfare and interests’ of the
person who is the subject of the application should be
given ‘paramount
consideration’. Affording procedural fairness to KA does not elevate his
interests beyond those of his
son, KC. On the contrary, acknowledging that KA
has an interest in the decision and allowing him the opportunity to address any
material ensures that the Guardianship Tribunal will make the best
informed decision possible as to KA’s suitability to be
guardian or financial manager. Without KA’s input on relevant issues, the
Guardianship Tribunal would have only
one side of the story. KC’s interest
in having the most suitable guardian or financial manager making decisions for
therefore enhanced by giving KA the opportunity to be heard, and in
particular to address any adverse material.
It has been suggested,
for example, that it may be appropriate that particularly sensitive information
contained in an adult’s
will, that would normally be available only after
the adult’s death, and that is not relevant to a party’s interest in
the proceeding, be withheld from that party: Information provided by the
President of the Guardianship and Administration Tribunal,
24 May 2006.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Note also that if the matter is one
relating to special health care, the Tribunal must ensure that any
confidentiality order does
not impede the adult’s relevant substitute
decision-maker for health matters from forming and expressing a view about the
special health care:
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(Qld) 109(4).
in Chapter 4 (Tribunal hearings).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Guardianship and
Administration Tribunal, Administration Practice 7 of 2005,
‘Confidentiality Orders’, heading 1. See
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
s 109(2)(d)(ii).
Although the adult has
wider rights to
documents than the other parties, the power given
to the Tribunal to refuse the adult and those other parties such access is the
Guardianship and Administration Act 1990
This is in addition to,
as is the case in Western Australia, granting the adult wider rights to inspect
documents than the other
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal
(Vic) r 6.23. See para
Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Rules 1998
(Vic) r 6.23(a).
Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Rules 1998
(Vic) r 6.23(c)–(d).
Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Rules 1998
(Vic) r 6.23(a). The situation is
similar in relation to a party seeking inspection
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Rules 1998
Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Rules 1998
(Vic) r 6.23(c). See para
Another way in which
restricting disclosure might allow for a limited confidentiality order is by
permitting access to part of the
document only. However, being able to
‘restrict’ disclosure is not necessary to achieve this because the
phrasing of
the criteria refers to ‘matters contained in a document’
and so already would allow for limited inspection. Compare
the position of
confidentiality orders made in relation to the Tribunal’s decisions and
reasons which is discussed in Chapter
6 (Tribunal decisions and reasons).
Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Rules 1998
(Vic) r 6.23(b). See para
; Guardianship and Administration
Tribunal, Presidential Direction No 1 of 2005, ‘General Information in
relation to the Inspection
of Files and Confidentiality Orders’, headings
‘Inspection Conditions Prior to Hearing’ and ‘At the
Information provided by
the President of the Guardianship and Administration Tribunal, 24 May 2006 and
16 June 2006. An example
mentioned was where the adult objected to their
children and others being able to see the contents of the adult’s will:
Information
provided by the President of the Guardianship and Administration
Tribunal, 16 June 2006.
It could be argued that
such a practice could already be permitted as part of giving a party a
‘reasonable opportunity’
to inspect under
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
J Jaconelli,
Justice: A Critique of the Public Trial
(2002) 2–3. Also see S
The Law of Journalism
(1989) [1.2.01]; PW Young, ‘Open
Courts’ (2006) 80
Australian Law Journal
P Mallam, S Dawson and J
Media and Internet Law and Practice
(revised ed, 2005) [15.60],
[1995] FCA 1321
(1995) 57 FCR 512
J Jaconelli,
Justice: A Critique of the Public Trial
(2002) 39; D Butler and S Rodrick,
Australian Media Law
(2nd ed, 2004) [4.15]; JH Wigmore,
Evidence in
Trials at Common Law
, Vol 6 (Chadbourn rev 1976) §1834.
PW Young, ‘Open
Courts’ (2006) 80
Australian Law Journal
WB Lane and S Young,
Administrative Law in Queensland
(2001) 57–8; J Blackwood,
‘Fairness v Privacy: Disclosure of Documents by Guardianship
Psychiatry, Psychology and Law
Kioa v West
[1985] HCA 81
(1985) 159 CLR 550
, 587 (Mason J), 629 (Brennan J);
Refugee Review Tribunal
(2002) 190 ALR 601, 653 (Kirby J). Also see, for
Raymond Matthew Canham
[2002] SADC 88
, [16] in which it was held
that the Guardianship Board had denied the adult procedural fairness by failing
to inform him of certain
evidence upon which it relied and by failing to give
him an opportunity to respond to that evidence.
Kioa v West
[1985] HCA 81
(1985) 159 CLR 550
, 629 (Brennan J). See also
Applicant Veal of 2002 v
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs
JRS Forbes,
in Tribunals
(2002) [7.1]; WB Lane and S Young,
Administrative Law in
Kioa v West
[1985] HCA 81
(1985) 159 CLR 550
Procedural fairness may
not necessarily require that the person be given a copy of the document itself
as it may be sufficient that
the substance of its contents be brought to the
person’s attention: J Blackwood, ‘Fairness v Privacy: Disclosure of
by Guardianship Tribunals’
Psychiatry, Psychology
, 122, 123, 128–9, citing
R v Gaming Board for Great
Britain; Ex parte Benaim and Khaida
[1970] EWCA Civ 7
[1970] 2 QB 417
Minister for
Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs v Kurtovic
(1990) 21 FCR
193, 197, 205, 223;
Gilson v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural
(Unreported, Federal Court of Australia, Lehane J, 21 July 1997)
Pilbara Aboriginal Land Council Aboriginal Corp Inc v Minister for
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Affairs
[2000] FCA 1113
(2000) 103 FCR 539
Applicant Veal of 2002 v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and
Indigenous Affairs
[2003] FCA 437
(2003) 197 ALR 741
, 748–9 (which was subsequently
appealed to the High Court:
Applicant Veal of 2002 v Minister for Immigration
and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs
[2005] HCA 72).
See also JRS
Justice in Tribunals
(2002) [12.31].
This was the finding in
Guardianship and Administration Board
[1990] VicRp 80
[1990] VR 902.
that case, Gobbo J held that more than a ‘limited invitation’ to
view the document was required given the particular
nature of the document,
namely, that much of the material contained in the document constituted
unsubstantiated allegations and was
highly prejudicial, but of minimal probative
Moore v Guardianship and Administration Board
[1990] VicRp 80
[1990] VR 902
(Gobbo J). See the discussion in T Henning and J Blackwood, ‘The rules of
evidence and the right to procedural fairness
in proceedings of four Tasmanian
quasi-judicial tribunals’
Australian Journal of
Administrative Law
, 102–3; and R Kune and G Kune, ‘Expert
medico-scientific evidence before tribunals: Approaches to proof, expertise and
conflicting opinions’
Australian Journal of Administrative
, 76. Also see
KV v Protective
[2004] NSWADTAP 48
, [27], [30]
in which it was held that the New South Wales Guardianship Tribunal breached the
hearing rule of procedural fairness
by failing to give a full copy of the
medical report, upon which it relied, to the party in order to give him an
adequate opportunity
to obtain expert evidence responding to the report:
…there are times when a party will need to respond to a document and
cannot realistically do so unless they have access to a
copy of the whole
document. … Unless there is a persuasive reason for not disclosing a
medical report, a copy of the whole
report should be disclosed if the content is
Cachia v Public Guardian
[2005] NSWADTAP 16
See, for example,
v Protective (No 2)
[2004] NSWADTAP 48
NG v Protective
Commissioner
[2005] NSWADTAP 11
Cachia v Public
[2005] NSWADTAP 16
, [34]; and
TP v TR (No 2)
[2006] NSWADTAP
, [28], [30]–[31].
Hess v Public Guardian
NSWADTAP 43
, [28]–[29]. In that case, the person, who was unrepresented,
did not read English. He was given a copy of an expert report
at the hearing,
upon which the Tribunal relied, but it was not interpreted. In addition, the
person was not made aware that he could
seek an adjournment in order to consider
the expert evidence and to obtain expert evidence of his own. The Appeal Panel
South Wales Administrative Decisions Tribunal held that the
Guardianship Tribunal had accordingly failed to afford the person procedural
Indeed, the making of a
confidentiality order does not exempt a court or tribunal from according parties
procedural fairness: see
See, for example,
v Public Guardian
[2006] NSWADTAP 15
, [33]–[35]:
Contrary to the Tribunal’s approach of balancing the right to privacy
of a person against the right to procedural fairness,
the correct approach is
that the rules of procedural fairness prevail unless there are exceptional
circumstances which override those
rules. … the acceptance of secret
evidence should be an exceptional rather than a routine event.
In making these comments, the Appeal Panel of the New South Wales
Administrative Decisions Tribunal specifically noted that the Guardianship
Tribunal does not have an express statutory power to withhold evidence from a
party: [34]. See para
. This is different from
Queensland’s Tribunal which has been granted such a power.
Re Pochi and Minister
for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
[1979] AATA 64
(1979) 26 ALR 247
, 274 (Brennan J). Also
see GA Flick,
Natural Justice: Principles and Practical Application
ed, 1984) 69–70.
In the context of
information generally causing harm to an adult, see T Henning and J Blackwood,
‘The rules of evidence and
the right to procedural fairness in proceedings
of four Tasmanian quasi-judicial tribunals’
Journal of Administrative Law
Office of the Public Advocate,
Natural Justice and Privacy: Policy and
Procedures of Boards and Tribunals
T Henning and J
Blackwood, ‘The rules of evidence and the right to procedural fairness in
proceedings of four Tasmanian quasi-judicial
Australian Journal of Administrative Law
See generally, Privacy
Commissioner and Office of the Public Advocate,
Natural Justice and Privacy:
Policy and Procedures of Boards and Tribunals
(1995) 4 and J Blackwood,
‘Fairness v Privacy: Disclosure of Documents by Guardianship
Psychiatry, Psychology and Law
T Carney and D Tait,
The Adult Guardianship Experiment: Tribunals and Popular Justice
TC v Public
[2006] NSWADTAP 15
, [23], [37]; and
KA v Public Guardian
[2004] NSWADTAP 25
, [13]. See para
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1990
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
The Tribunal must also
have regard to the principle of open justice, the requirements of procedural
fairness and the General Principles:
Indeed, the requirements
of procedural fairness may dictate such disclosure if Emily is not to receive an
actual copy of the document.
Again, the requirements
of procedural fairness may in fact dictate such disclosure if Edward is not to
receive an actual copy of
the document.
The Commission’s
terms of reference and the timelines for the three stages of this review are
discussed at para
in Chapter 1 (Introduction to the
The Tribunal is required
to give written reasons for a decision within 28 days after giving the decision
if directed by the President
of the Tribunal:
Guardianship and Administration
Written reasons are also required if, within 28
days of notification of the decision, a person aggrieved by the decision makes a
written request for reasons. In such a case, reasons must be given within 28
days from that request:
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
, (3), (5).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Note also that s 80N(1) of the
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(Qld), which applies in relation
to proceedings for consent to the sterilisation of a child with an impairment,
provides that the
Tribunal is generally required to give a copy of its decision
and any written reasons for its decision to each active party in the
proceeding.
The active parties in such matters are the child, the applicant, the
child’s parent or guardian, the child’s
primary carer (if the
child’s parent or guardian is not the child’s primary carer), the
child’s treating doctor,
the child representative for the child, and any
person joined as a party by the Tribunal:
Guardianship and Administration Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
The same is required for
proceedings in relation to consent to the sterilisation of a child with an
impairment:
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(Qld) s 80N(2).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
This also applies in proceedings in
relation to consent to the sterilisation of a child with an impairment:
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(Qld) s 80N(4).
This also applies in
proceedings in relation to consent to the sterilisation of a child with an
impairment:
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(Qld) s 80N(3).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
s 109(2)(d)(iii).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
See the discussion of
this issue at para
in Chapter 4 (Tribunal hearings).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Note that the same restriction
applies in relation to the child in proceedings in relation to consent to the
sterilisation of a
child with an impairment:
Guardianship and Administration
(Qld) s 80G(3).
Information provided by
the President of the Guardianship and Administration Tribunal, 24 May 2006.
In the Australian
Capital Territory, a statement of reasons must be given within 28 days after a
request from a person entitled
to appeal the decision:
Guardianship and
Management of Property Act 1991
(ACT) s 45(2). People entitled to appeal a
decision are the parties and any of the people who were entitled to notice of
the proceeding:
Guardianship and Management of Property Act 1991
In New South Wales, each
party must be furnished with a copy of the decision and reasons as soon as is
practicable:
Guardianship Act 1987
(NSW) s 68(1A)(b)–(1B).
In South Australia, a
written statement of reasons must be given to people with a right of appeal or
who have a proper interest
in the matter upon a request being made within three
months of the decision:
Guardianship and Administration Act 1993
14(13). A statement of the effect of the decision or order must also be given
to a person when a decision or order is made
in relation to the person:
Guardianship and Administration Act 1993
The people with a
right of appeal against a decision of the Board are the applicant, the person to
whom the proceeding relates,
any person who gave evidence or made submissions,
the Public Advocate and any other person the Board is satisfied has a proper
Guardianship and Administration Act 1993
In Tasmania, a statement
of reasons must be given to a person aggrieved by the decision within 21 days
after the person has requested
the statement (if that request is made within 21
days of the decision):
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
In Victoria, each party
and each of the people who were entitled to notice of the proceeding must be
furnished with a copy of the
decision and reasons:
Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
(1), (6). This must
generally be done within 60 days of making the decision:
Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
In Western Australia,
the State Administrative Tribunal must give all final decisions (and some other
and provide a copy of the decision to each party,
each person entitled to notice of the proceedings, and anyone else prescribed
State Administrative Tribunal Act 2004
(1). The Tribunal must also give reasons for all final decisions:
Administrative Tribunal Act 2004
Requests for these reasons
to be in writing may be made by a party within 28 days of the decision and the
Tribunal must give those
reasons within 90 days of that request:
Administrative Tribunal Act 2004
Adult Guardianship
(NT) s 15(3).
The power of the State
Administrative Tribunal to hold a guardianship proceeding in private or in the
absence of a particular person
was discussed at para
in Chapter 4 (Tribunal hearings).
State Administrative
Tribunal Act 2004
(definition of ‘protected
State Administrative
Tribunal Act 2004
(definition of ‘protected matter’),
State Administrative
Tribunal Act 2004
(definitions of ‘protected matter’
and ‘exempt matter’);
Freedom of Information Act 1992
, sch 1 (definition of ‘exempt matter’). Exempt matter includes,
for example, certain types of personal information.
State Administrative
Tribunal Act 2004
State Administrative
Tribunal Act 2004
There is perhaps one
exception to this. The relevant duty to keep protected matter confidential may
still be met if all parties
have already been given access to particular
certified material and the reasons will not be available to people other than
the parties.
Mental Health Review
Annual Report
Mental Health
(Qld) ch 12 pt 1.
The role of the Mental
Health Review Tribunal includes reviewing whether a person should continue to be
subject to involuntary treatment
or detention (or both) and reviewing a
person’s fitness for trial if previously found to be unfit. For the
Mental Health Act 2000
Mental Health Act
(Qld) s 458(1)(c).
Mental Health Act
(Qld) s 458(2).
Mental Health Act
(Qld) s 458(3).
Section 109(5)
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(Qld) currently provides that
‘[t]he Tribunal may make a confidentiality order on its own initiative or
on the application of
an active party’.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
s 109(2)(d)(iii).
Mental Health Act
(Qld) s 458(1)(c).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
As discussed above, the adult and
any other active parties are also entitled to be given reasons for the decision.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Mental Health Act
(Qld) s 458(3).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
in Chapter 4 (Tribunal hearings).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Mental Health Act
(Qld) s 458(2).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
s 109(2)(d)(i)
Public Service Board
of NSW v Osmond
(1986) 159 CLR 656
, 667 (Gibbs CJ); Justice MD Kirby,
‘Ex Tempore Judgments’ (1995) 25
Western Australian Law
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Sentencing of Federal Offenders
, Discussion Paper No 70
(2005) [19.3], citing H Gibbs, ‘Judgment Writing’
Australian Law Journal
There is not, however, an
absolute rule that a judge must give reasons for decisions. The statement of
Gibbs CJ quoted above included
the qualification that the provision of reasons
is a normal ‘but not a universal’ incident of the judicial process:
Public Service Board of NSW v Osmond
(1986) 159 CLR 656
limited exceptions include situations such as the making of procedural decisions
where the reasons are clear because of
the context or the foregoing exchanges
between the parties: Australian Law Reform Commission,
Sentencing of Federal
, Discussion Paper No 70 (2005) [19.3], citing Justice MD Kirby,
‘On the Writing of Judgments’
Australian Law
, 694. See also
Perkins v County Court of Victoria
[2000] VSCA 171
, 272 (Buchanan JA);
Brittingham v Williams
[1932] ArgusLawRp 14
[1932] VLR 237
Soulemezis v Dudley
(Holdings) Pty Ltd
(1987) 10 NSWLR 247
, 269 (Mahoney JA). Also see
Tam Anh Le and Secretary, Department of Education, Science and Training
[2006] AATA 208
, [28]–[29].
See P Cane,
Introduction to Administrative Law
(2nd ed, 1992) 189. See also
Soulemezis v Dudley (Holdings) Pty Ltd
(1987) 10 NSWLR 247
(Mahoney JA), citing
Housing Commission of New South Wales v Tatmar Pastoral
[1983] 3 NSWLR 378
, 385–6 (Mahoney JA);
Government Insurance Office of NSW
(1997) 48 NSWLR 430
, 444 (Meagher
Justice: Principles and Practical Application
(2nd ed, 1984) 118. See also
M Aronson, B Dyer and M Groves,
Judicial Review of Administrative Action
(3rd ed, 2004) 560.
[1971] NSWLR 376
King Ranch Australia Pty Ltd v Cardwell Shire
[1985] 2 Qd R 182
Adamson v Queensland Law Society Inc
[1990] 1 Qd R 498
, 508 (Thomas J).
Beale v Government
Insurance Office of NSW
(1997) 48 NSWLR 430
, 441 (Meagher JA).
Committee on
Administrative Tribunals and Enquiries, UK House of Commons,
Report of the
Committee on Administrative Tribunals and Enquiries
(1957, Cmnd 218) [76].
Also see Chief Justice JJ Spigelman, ‘The Principle of Open Justice: A
Comparative Perspective’
(Paper presented at the Media Law Resource Centre
Conference, London, 20 September 2005) 7; Chief Justice JJ Spigelman,
to be Done: The Principle of Open Justice:
Australian Law Journal
290, 294; Chief Justice JJ Spigelman, ‘Open
Justice and the Internet’ (Paper presented at the Law via the Internet
Conference,
Sydney, 28 November 2003) 5; Chief Justice JJ Spigelman,
‘Reasons for Judgment and the Rule of Law’ (Speech delivered
National Judicial College, Beijing, 10 November 2003);
Beale v Government
Insurance Office of NSW
(1997) 48 NSWLR 430
, 442 (Meagher JA);
v Dudley (Holdings) Pty Ltd
(1987) 10 NSWLR 247
, 278–9 (McHugh JA);
Lewis v Wilson & Horton Ltd
[2000] NZCA 175
[2000] 3 NZLR 546
, 565–6. See
in Chapter 3 (Guardianship
and confidentiality).
P Mallam, S Dawson and J
Media and Internet Law and Practice
(revised ed, 2005) [15.60];
Natural Justice: Principles and Practical Application
1984) 118–9; J Bannister, ‘The public/private divide: personal
information in the public domain’ [2002]
in Chapter 3
(Guardianship and confidentiality).
M Aronson, B Dyer and M
Judicial Review of Administrative Action
(3rd ed, 2004) 554; GA
Natural Justice: Principles and Practical Application
1984) 118–9; D Foulkes,
Administrative Law
(8th ed, 1995) 324;
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Sentencing of Federal Offenders
Discussion Paper No 70 (2005) [19.9]. See, for example,
Soulemezis v Dudley
(Holdings) Pty Ltd
(1987) 10 NSWLR 247
, 278–9 (McHugh JA):
… [W]ithout the articulation of reasons, a judicial decision cannot be
distinguished from an arbitrary decision. In my opinion
the giving of reasons
is correctly perceived as ‘a necessary incident of the judicial
process’ because it enables the
basis of the decision to be seen and
understood both for the instant case and for the future direction of the law.
[note omitted]
D Butler and S Rodrick,
Australian Media Law
(2nd ed, 2004) [4.15]. Traditionally, judges read
reasons in open court ‘so that the parties, the profession and the public
could understand the outcome of the case and follow it from beginning to
end’: Justice MD Kirby, ‘Ex Tempore Judgments’
Western Australian Law Review
M Aronson, B Dyer and M
Judicial Review of Administrative Action
(3rd ed, 2004) 556;
Halsbury’s Laws of England,
Vol 1(1) ‘Administrative
Law’ [113]. See
R v Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex
Parte Doody
[1993] UKHL 8
[1994] 1 AC 531
R v DPP; Ex parte Manning
M Aronson, B Dyer and M
Judicial Review of Administrative Action
(3rd ed, 2004) 558,
Baker v Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration)
174 DLR (4th) 193
Suresh v Canada (Minister of Citizenship and
Immigration)
(2002) 208 DLR (4th) 1
Re Sheppard
(2002) 210 DLR
(4th) 608 (SCC).
Laws of England
, Vol 1(1) ‘Administrative Law’ [113], n 3:
[T]he obligation to provide a reasoned decision will exist when general
considerations of procedural fairness require it. On this
basis it is relevant
to consider factors such as the need for reasons to give substance to a right of
appeal; to explain an otherwise
aberrant outcome; to demonstrate that issues had
been properly addressed; the nature of the interest affected by the decision and
the extent to which the interest is affected by the decision; the need to
promote transparency in the decision making process; whether
the duty would
impose an undue burden on the decision maker; and the extent to which the
judgments made were capable of being reasoned,
or whether they were simply
matters of academic or other evaluation. This list is not exhaustive. What is
relevant will depend
on the particular context concerned.
There has been some
limited recognition of such a development (for example,
Cypressvale Pty Ltd v
Retail Shop Lease Tribunal
[1995] QCA 187
[1996] 2 Qd R 462
, 476 (Fitzgerald P,
dissenting)), but others have suggested otherwise: for example, R Creyke and J
Control of Government Action: Text, Cases and Commentary
[18.2.1], [18.2.4], citing
Public Service Board of New South Wales v
(1986) 159 CLR 656
, and particularly 670 (Gibbs CJ), albeit in the
context of an administrative decision:
The rules of natural justice are designed to ensure fairness in the making of
a decision and it is difficult to see how the fairness
of an administrative
decision can be affected by what is done after the decision has been made.
Perkins v County Court of Victoria
[2000] VSCA 171
[2000] 2 VR 246
271–2 (Buchanan JA).
JRS Forbes,
in Tribunals
(2002) [13.2].
DJ Galligan,
Discretionary Powers: A Legal Study of Official Discretion
(1986) 333.
in Chapter 3 (Guardianship
and confidentiality).
JRS Forbes,
in Tribunals
(2002) [13.2]. Also see P Cane,
An Introduction to
Administrative Law
(2nd ed, 1992) 190.
Administrative Law
(8th ed, 1995) 324. See also Committee on
Administrative Tribunals and Enquiries, UK House of Commons,
Report of the
Committee on Administrative Tribunals and Enquiries
(1957, Cmnd 218)
[98]–[99]; GA Flick,
Natural Justice: Principles and Practical
Application
(2nd ed, 1984) 119.
Beale v Government
Insurance Office of NSW
(1997) 48 NSWLR 430
, 442 (Meagher JA);
v Dudley (Holdings) Pty Ltd
(1987) 10 NSWLR 247
, 279 (McHugh JA).
In the context of the
provision of information (other than decisions and reasons) causing harm to an
adult, see T Henning and J
Blackwood, ‘The rules of evidence and the right
to procedural fairness in proceedings of four Tasmanian quasi-judicial
Australian Journal of Administrative Law
101. Foulkes has also recognised that one of the situations where the provision
of reasons might not be appropriate is if it may
cause distress to a person with
a mental illness during mental health proceedings: D Foulkes,
Administrative
(8th ed, 1995) 326.
. The only other jurisdiction that seeks
to impose some confidentiality on reasons for decisions is Western Australia,
although that
is only in relation to the content of those reasons: see para
State Administrative
Tribunal Act 2004
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
(definition of ‘active
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Section 119
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(Qld) provides that the
following people are an active party for a proceeding:
• the adult;
• the applicant (if not the adult);
• any proposed guardian, administrator or attorney for the adult if the
proceeding is for the appointment or reappointment of
such person;
• any current guardian, administrator or attorney for the adult;
• the Adult Guardian;
• the Public Trustee; and
• any other person joined as a party to the proceeding.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
These decisions can be
accessed at the AustLII website
http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/qld/QGAAT
at 24 July 2006.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Section 112
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(Qld) also provides a limited
exception for disclosure of information about a proceeding, including a
person’s identity, to
a member of this Commission or to its staff or
consultants in order to facilitate the Commission’s review of the
guardianship
legislation:
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
–(6). The Commission has prepared a document called
Confidentiality in Consultation Protocol
to assist people to comply with
the confidentiality provisions of the guardianship legislation when
participating in the Commission’s
consultation process. The
can be viewed at the Commission’s website:
http://www.qlrc.qld.gov.au/guardianship/protocol.htm
[2005] QGAAT 25.
Ibid [78], [107].
Ibid [106].
[2006] QGAAT 9.
[2006] QGAAT 31.
, the Tribunal made orders permitting the publication of information
Honourable Bill
Carter QC, and the Attorney-General and Minister for Justice: [91]–[92].
Such an order was also made in relation
to the Public Advocate, given the
systemic issues that this case involved: [92].
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
s 109(2)(c).
Note that a similarly worded
power granted to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal by
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1975
(Cth) has been held to include
the power to suppress the name of a party contained in such documents and to
use, instead, a pseudonym:
Re An Applicant and Australian Prudential
Regulation Authority
[2005] AATA 1294
(2005) 89 ALD 643
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
in Chapter 4 (Tribunal hearings).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
(Qld) sch 1
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
[2006] QGAAT 31.
[2006] QGAAT 9.
[2006] QGAAT 31
[2006] QGAAT 9
[75]–[76]. In this case, the Tribunal did, however, also make an order
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
permitting the publication of certain information about the proceeding due
to the public interest: see para
Information provided by
the President of the Guardianship and Administration Tribunal, 26 May 2006. The
Commission notes, however,
that the formal collection of information by the
Tribunal in relation to confidentiality orders under
s 109(2)(c)
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(Qld) only began in February
One explanation for this
may be a shift in the Commission’s recommendations during its first
Guardianship Review in the 1990s.
The Commission had originally proposed in its
draft report that proceedings would be open to reporting, but that the Tribunal
have power to give directions prohibiting or restricting the publication
of information about proceedings in particular cases: Queensland
Commission,
Assisted and Substituted Decisions: Decision-making by and for
people with a decision-making disability
, Draft Report No 43 (1995) cl
163(2)(b). However, after further consideration and in light of submissions
received in response to
that draft report, the Commission instead proposed in
its final report to reverse the position and impose a prohibition on publication
but grant the Tribunal a discretion to waive that prohibition: Queensland Law
Reform Commission,
Assisted and Substituted Decisions: Decision-making by and
for people with a decision-making disability
, Report No 49 (1996) cl 202,
206. This rendered unnecessary the Tribunal’s discretion to restrict or
prohibit publication
which was originally recommended, although the provision
was not removed.
Note, however, that the
making of a confidentiality order specifically directed at an active party may
be more effective in practice
than the generally worded prohibition in
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
Adult Guardianship
(NT) s 26(2).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1993
The South Australian legislation
expressly defines the term ‘person to whom proceedings relate’ as an
individual with
a mental incapacity, mental illness or who is subject to a
guardianship or administration order made under the Act:
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1993
This definition includes reference to
‘protected persons’ defined as the person the subject of a
guardianship or administration
order (or both) under the Act:
Guardianship
and Administration Act 1993
Adult Guardianship
(NT) s 26(2).
Section 81(2)
Guardianship and Administration Act 1993
(SA) states that the
Guardianship Board may exercise a discretion to enable publication upon
application of a person who has a proper
interest in the matter. However, this
requirement relates to the issue of standing, and not to the exercise of the
discretion.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
The legislation also specifically
prohibits the identification of people involved in the proceedings:
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Protection of
Personal and Property Rights Act 1988
(NZ) s 80(1). Note, however, that
there is no express reference in this jurisdiction to ‘identifying
information’.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Protection of
Personal and Property Rights Act 1988
(NZ) s 80(1).
Guardianship and
Management of Property Act 1991
(ACT) s 49(1);
Guardianship Act 1987
(NSW) s 57(1);
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
(Vic) sch 1 cl
Guardianship and Administration Act 1990
(WA) sch 1 pt B cl 12(1).
In Western Australia, there is also a separate prohibition on the publication of
a list of the names of
people involved in guardianship proceedings, with an
exception for a notice on display on the Tribunal’s premises:
Guardianship and Administration Act 1990
(WA) sch 1 pt B cl 12(2). The
State Administrative Tribunal Act 2004
(WA) also imposes a prohibition on
the publication of ‘protected matter’ in that State. This is matter
the disclosure
of which has been certified as contrary to the public interest by
the Attorney-General under
State Administrative Tribunal Act
(WA) or an exempt matter or document under the
Information Act 1992
State Administrative Tribunal Act 2004
(definitions of ‘protected matter’, ‘exempt
document’ and ‘exempt’). This prohibition on the
publication
of protected matter is one that applies to all matters before the State
Administrative Tribunal (not just those involving
issues of guardianship) and so
is not considered further.
Guardianship and
Management of Property Act 1991
(ACT) s 49(1). In New South Wales,
reference is made to a ‘prescribed person’ which means a person
under guardianship,
a person whose estate is subject to a financial management
order, a child, or a person to whom an application relates:
Guardianship Act
(NSW) s 57(4).
Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
(Vic) sch 1 cl 37(1). See also
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
(Vic) which
outlines who are the parties to a proceeding.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
Guardianship and Administration
(WA) sch 1 pt B cl 12(1).
Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
(Vic) sch 1 cl 37(1).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1990
(WA) sch 1 pt B cl 12(3).
Guardianship and
Management of Property Act 1991
(ACT) s 49(1);
Guardianship Act 1987
(NSW) s 57(1);
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
(Vic) sch 1 cl
Guardianship and Administration Act 1990
(WA) sch 1 pt B cl
12(8)(d), although note that the provision in this Act is worded as an exception
to the prohibition, rather than
as a discretion of the Tribunal.
Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
(Vic) sch 1 cl 37(2);
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
Korp (Guardianship)
, [7] the Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal stated that
something more than a general claim to ‘open justice’
is required to
override the general rule that publication of identifying information is
prohibited:
Clause 37 of the
provides in guardianship cases what the
Parliament regards as a proper balance between the competing considerations;
that is, without
order, it prohibits the publication or broadcasting of a report
of such proceedings that identifies, or could reasonably lead to
identification of, a party to the proceeding. Because this is the general rule
that the parliament has applied to guardianship
matters, no argument based upon
a principle of “open justice” is sufficient in itself to override
that general rule.
Clearly the Parliament knew of that principle when it
enacted clause 37. It deliberately chose that matters under the
Guardianship
and Administration Act
be regarded as an exception to that principle, unless
having regard to the public interest the tribunal makes an order allowing such
publication.
In that case, the Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal found that
there were three ‘special features’ that set
it apart and, together,
warranted permitting publication in the public interest (although subject to
conditions). Those were, first,
that the purpose of the proceeding was to seek
appointment of a guardian for Mrs Korp, a ‘severely disabled’
to facilitate decisions about medical treatment that could include
refusal of life-sustaining medical treatment; second, that Mrs
circumstances had already received ‘saturation publicity’; and
third, that two people had been charged with
criminal offences in relation to
how Mrs Korp acquired her brain injury. See
Korp (Guardianship)
, [9]–[11].
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
s 109(2)(c).
State Administrative
Tribunal Act 2004
Victorian Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Act 1998
(Vic) s 101(3). These Tribunals are also granted
power to make such an order in relation to ‘information that might enable
a person who has appeared before [the Tribunal] to be identified’:
State Administrative Tribunal Act 2004
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
(Vic) s 101(3)(c). However, it
appears that in the context of the guardianship jurisdiction that such a power
is unnecessary because
of the prohibitions that already exist in relation to
identifying material: see para
Note also that the exercise of this discretion is limited to either a legally
qualified member of the Tribunal or otherwise the presiding
Administrative Tribunal Act 2004
; or the presiding member:
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
(Vic) s 101(5). For
an example of when such an order has been made under the Victorian legislation,
Korp (Guardianship)
[2005] VCAT 779.
State Administrative
Tribunal Act 2004
Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
(Vic) s 101(4).
Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
(Vic) s 101(3).
Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
(Vic) sch 1 cl 37(1).
D Butler and S Rodrick,
Australian Media Law
(2nd ed, 2004) [4.05]–[4.230]. While the
power of courts to make a suppression order pursuant to a statutory provision is
clear, there is some doubt as to whether a court, in its inherent jurisdiction,
can do so. In relation to the courts’ inherent
Raybos Australia Pty Ltd v Jones
(1985) 2 NSWLR 47
, 53–8 where
Kirby J said that ‘the principles which support and justify the open doors
of our courts likewise require
that what passes in court should be capable of
being reported’: 55. Kirby J also concluded in that case that:
apart, it is doubtful on the authorities, that courts have the
power to make an order, operating outside the court, which suppresses
publication of anything said in open court’: 55. See also
John Fairfax
& Sons Ltd v Police Tribunal of New South Wales and Another
, 477–80. A slightly wider approach seems to have been suggested
Ex parte the Queensland Law Society Incorporated
[1984] 1 Qd R 166.
In that case, McPherson J examined the authorities in other common law
R v Clement
(1821) 4 B & Ald 218
Taylor v Attorney General
[1975] 2 NZLR 675
, stating (at 170):
The result of these authorities seems to me to be that, apart from specific
statutory provisions, the power of the court under general
law to prohibit
publication of proceedings conducted in open court has been recognised and does
exist as an aspect of the inherent
power. That does not mean that it is an
unlimited power. The only inherent power that a court possesses is power to
regulate its
own proceedings for the purpose of administering justice; and,
apart from securing that purpose in proceedings before it, there is
no power to
prohibit publication of an accurate report of those proceedings if they are
conducted in open court, as in all but exceptional
cases they must be.
Brennan v State of New South Wales
[2006] NSWSC 167 (Hall
For examples of statutory provisions which empower the court to make suppression
orders in relation to publication, see
Penalties and
Sentences Act 1992
Drugs Misuse Act
See the discussion of
open justice at para
in Chapter 3 (Guardianship and
confidentiality).
Section 84(1) of the
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(Qld) states that subject to
, the Tribunal has exclusive jurisdiction for the appointment of guardians
and administrators for adults with impaired capacity.
Section 245
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(Qld) provides that the Supreme
Court may exercise the Tribunal’s exclusive jurisdiction where, in a civil
proceeding, the
Court sanctions a settlement or orders an amount to be paid to
an adult it considers is a person with impaired capacity. The Tribunal
Supreme Court have concurrent jurisdiction for enduring documents and attorneys
under enduring documents:
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
s 84(2). See also
[2001] QSC 393
Thompson and Suncorp General Insurance Ltd
[2001] QSC 287
as examples of
matters that the Supreme Court heard at first instance.
Section 80O
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(Qld) allows an active party to
appeal a Tribunal decision relating to sterilisation of a child with impairment
to the Supreme Court;
Guardianship and Administration Act
(Qld) allows appeals against other Tribunal decisions to be made to the
Supreme Court.
See, for example,
& Anor v RFHR & Ors
[2003] QCA 276
[2005] QSC 68.
Compare with
[2005] QSC 127
Adult Guardian v Hunt
[2003] QSC 297
Rickleman v Public Trustee & Ors
Guardianship and
Management of Property Act 1991
(ACT) s 49(1).
Section 81(3)
Guardianship and Administration Act 1993
(SA) refers to ‘the person
to whom the proceedings relate’. This is an individual with a mental
incapacity, mental illness
or who is subject to a guardianship or administration
order made under the Act:
Guardianship and Administration Act 1993
(definitions of ‘persons to whom proceedings relate’ and
‘protected person’).
The test in New South
Wales includes any adult with impaired capacity who participates in the
proceeding, not just the adult to
whom the proceeding relates. Section 57 of
Guardianship Act 1987
(NSW) refers to a ‘prescribed
person’, which means a person under guardianship, a person whose estate is
subject to a
financial management order, a child, or a person to whom an
application relates:
Guardianship Act 1987
(NSW) s 57(4). All prescribed
persons who are witnesses before the Tribunal, to whom the proceedings relate,
or who are mentioned
or otherwise involved in the proceedings fall within the
prohibition on publication:
Guardianship Act 1987
(NSW) s 57(1).
Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
(Vic) sch 1 cl 37(1). See also
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
(Vic) which
outlines who are the parties to a proceeding.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Adult Guardianship
(NT) s 26(2).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1990
(WA) sch 1 pt B cl 12(1).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
D Butler and S Rodrick,
Australian Media Law
(2nd ed, 2004) [2.190], citing
Bjelke-Petersen v
Warburton & Burns
[1987] 2 Qd R 465
D Butler and S Rodrick,
Australian Media Law
(2nd ed, 2004) [2.195], citing
Morgan v Odhams
[1971] 1 WLR 1239
Knupffer v London Express Newspaper
[1944] UKHL 1
[1944] AC 116
Cassidy v Daily Mirror Newspapers Ltd
[1929] 2 KB 331
Steele v Mirror Newspapers Ltd
[1974] 2 NSWLR 348
Guardianship and
Management of Property Act 1991
(ACT) s 49(1). See also the similar wording
of s 101(3)(c) of the
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act
(Vic), although this provision relates to that Tribunal’s power
to impose a further prohibition on publishing information about
proceedings
rather than the general prohibition on publication: see para
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1990
(WA) sch 1 pt B cl 12(3)(a).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1993
Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
(Vic) sch 1 cl 37(1).
Guardianship Act
(NSW) s 57(1).
Guardianship Act
(NSW) s 57(3).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
Adult Guardianship Act
Australian courts have
recognised that the term ‘calculated’ has two distinct meanings: an
objective meaning of ‘likely’
and a subjective meaning of
‘intended or designed’. The meaning attributed to the term in a
particular statute is determined
by reference to the context in which it is
O’Sullivan v Lunnon
[1986] HCA 57
(1986) 163 CLR 545
, 549 (Gibbs CJ) and
R v Lansbury
[1988] 2 Qd R 180
, 182, 184 (Macrossan J). For cases where
‘calculated’ has been interpreted objectively as meaning
Thurley v Hayes
[1920] HCA 28
(1920) 27 CLR 548
(1988) 85 ALR 496 and
R v Lansbury
[1988] 2 Qd R 180
and McPherson JJ). For examples of when courts have construed the
term subjectively as meaning ‘intended or designed’,
v Webster and Guscott
(1980) 23 SASR 321
O’Sullivan v
[1986] HCA 57
(1986) 163 CLR 545
R v Lansbury
[1988] 2 Qd R 180
184–8 (Derrington J) and
Adlam v Noack
[1999] ACL Rep
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1990
(WA) sch 1 pt B cl 12(3)(b). In contrast, the New
South Wales legislation provides that the publication or broadcast of a picture
be prohibited if it ‘identifies the person or is likely to
result in the identification of the person’:
Guardianship Act 1987
(NSW) s 57(3).
Guardianship and
Management of Property Act 1991
(ACT) s 49(2). See also the definition of
‘photograph’ in s 49(3) of the
Guardianship and Management of
Property Act 1991
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
(Tas) 13(1)(b).
Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
(Vic) sch 1 cl 37(3).
Section 49(1)(b) of the
Guardianship and Management of Property Act 1991
(ACT) also refers to a
sound recording of an inquiry that would enable a person to be identified.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1990
(WA) sch 1 pt B cl 12(3)(a), (c). This provision is
drafted in similar terms to
Family Law Act 1975
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
(Qld) prohibit any person who gains
‘confidential information’ through their involvement in the
administration of the
legislation from recording or disclosing the information.
Those provisions are considered in Chapter 8 (The general duty of
confidentiality).
Powers of Attorney
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1900
(WA) sch 1 pt B cl 12(3)(a), (c). Some
publication:
Guardianship and Management of Property Act 1991
Family Law Act
s 121(3)(a).
Re South Australian
Telecasters Ltd
[1998] FamCA 117
(1998) 23 Fam LR 692
, [35] (Nicholson CJ). Also see
W: Publication Application
(1997) 21 Fam LR 788
, 801–8 (Fogarty, Baker
JJ) as to the history and policy behind
Family Law Act 1975
Re W: Publication
Application
(1997) 21 Fam LR 788
, 809 (Fogarty and Baker JJ), citing
Corporate Affairs Commission (SA) v Australian Central Credit Union
(1985) 157 CLR 201
, 208 (Mason ACJ, Wilson, Deane and Dawson JJ) where, in
relation to a prohibition on the offer of any prescribed interest by a company
to the public or to any section of the public, it was stated:
The question whether a particular group of persons constitutes a section of
the public … cannot be answered in the abstract.
For some purposes and in
some circumstances, each citizen is a member of the public and any group of
persons can constitute a section
of the public. For other purposes and in other
circumstances, the same person or the same group can be seen as identified by
special characteristic which isolates him or them in a private capacity and
places him or them in a position of contrast with a member
or section of the
Re W: Publication
Application
(1997) 21 Fam LR 788
, 810 (Fogarty and Baker JJ), applying
Corporate Affairs Commission (SA) v Australian Central Credit Union
(1985) 157 CLR 201
, 208 (Mason ACJ, Wilson, Deane and Dawson JJ).
Re W: Publication
Application
(1997) 21 Fam LR 788
, 810, 812 (Fogarty and Baker JJ). Although
the meaning of ‘section of the public’ in this case (and some of the
in this area) was considered in relation to who was precluded from
receiving information about proceedings, rather than who was capable
identifying a person from particular information.
Re Edelsten; Ex parte
(1988) 80 ALR 704
, 706 (Morling J). See also
Hinchcliffe v
Commissioner of Police of the Australian Federal Police
[2001] FCA 1747
(2001) 118 FCR 308
324–5 (Kenny J) where it was held that communications by one party to
Family Court proceedings to ‘associates’
of another party were held
to fall outside the prohibition as they were ‘essentially personal, ie, as
being made … in
a private way’.
Re South Australian
Telecasters Ltd
[1998] FamCA 117
(1998) 23 Fam LR 692
, 697 (Nicholson CJ).
Western Australia v
West Australian Newspapers Ltd; Ex parte A-G (WA)
[2005] WASCA 161
(2005) 30 WAR 434
Ibid 440–1.
Guardianship and
Management of Property Act 1991
(ACT) s 49(1)–(2).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1990
(WA) sch 1 pt B cl 12(1)–(2).
Adult Guardianship
(NT) s 26(1) ‘publish or broadcast’;
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1993
Guardianship
(NSW) s 57(1) ‘publish or broadcast’;
Guardianship
and Administration Act 1995
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
(Vic) sch 1 cl 37(1)
‘publish or broadcast’.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Encyclopaedic Australian
Legal Dictionary
, ‘publish’;
Pullman v Walter Hill &
[1890] UKLawRpKQB 193
[1891] 1 QB 524.
Note that while communication to one person, other than
the plaintiff, is sufficient to constitute publication, the size of the
people to whom the defamatory material is published may be relevant in the
determination of any award of damages to the
plaintiff: D Butler and S Rodrick,
Australian Media Law
(2nd ed, 2004) [2.230].
Hinch v Director of
Public Prosecutions
[1996] VICSC 1
[1996] 1 VR 683
NV Lowe and RAH White,
Wards of Court
(2nd ed, 1986) 169–70. The authors argue, in the
context of contempt proceedings in wardship, that if the term
‘publication’
in s 12(1) of the
Administration of Justice Act
(UK) meant communication in
form then it would
‘cast the contempt net too widely’ and capture communication within
families and disclosure of information
to experts. They prefer instead to adopt
an approach consistent with s 21(1) of the
Contempt of Court Act
(UK), which refers to publication as being to ‘the public at
large or any section of the public’. See also
Re M (a child) (children
and family reporter: disclosure)
[2002] EWCA Civ 1199
[2002] 4 All ER 401
, which takes a similar
approach to Lowe and White in relation to the meaning of
‘publication’ in s 12(1) of the
Administration of Justice Act
(UK). See now r 10.20A of the
Family Proceedings Rules 1991
(UK) which provides exceptions to the prohibition on publication contained in s
Administration of Justice Act
communications made, for example, to a party’s legal representative,
adviser, or expert, to the party’s spouse,
or to a health care or
counselling service for the child or the family. See also
[2006] EWCA Civ 878
, [31]–[33] (Potter P).
Foster v Federal
Commissioner of Taxation
[1951] HCA 18
(1951) 82 CLR 606
, 614–5 (Latham CJ)
(disclosing material facts in a tax return);
[1983] 2 Qd R
, 559 (Connolly J) (disclosing illegal conduct as a defence in criminal law);
Dun & Bradstreet v Lyle
(1977) 15 SASR 297
, 299 (Mitchell J)
(disclosure in relation to credit reporting). Compare, however, with the
suggestion in
that ‘disclose’ may mean the same as
‘inform’, although the possibility of the alternative interpretation
discussed above was also acknowledged:
(1996) 137 ALR 347
, 352–4 (Doyle
CJ) (disclosure of bankruptcy).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1993
Adult Guardianship Act
(NT) s 26(2);
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
Guardianship Act 1987
Guardianship and
Management of Property Act 1991
(ACT) s 49(1);
Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
(Vic) sch 1 cl 37(2);
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1990
(WA) sch 1 pt B cl 12(8)(d) (although note
that the provision in this Act is worded as an exception to the prohibition,
rather than
as a discretion).
Adult Guardianship
(NT) s 26(2);
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
(Vic) sch 1 cl 37(2);
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
Guardianship Act 1987
Guardianship and Administration Act 1990
sch 1 pt B cl 12(8)(d).
Section 81(2)
Guardianship and Administration
(SA) states that the Guardianship Board may exercise a discretion
to enable publication upon application of a person who has a proper
interest in
the matter. This requirement relates to the issue of standing rather than
establishing a criterion to be taken into
account when deciding whether to
exercise the discretion.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1993
Adult Guardianship
(NT) s 26(2).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
–(2). See also
Protection of
Personal and Property Rights Act 1988
(NZ) s 80(1).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
Guardianship Act 1987
Guardianship and Management of Property Act 1991
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
(Vic) sch 1
cl 37(2) (note, however, that the legislation does not allow the Tribunal
to use its discretion to allow the taking or
publication of pictures of
‘any party to proceedings’).
None of the Tribunal
decisions published on the AustLII website provide a detailed discussion of what
might amount to a ‘reasonable
http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/qld/QGAAT/
at 24 July 2006. The
phrase is referred to very briefly in
[2004] QGAAT 19
Tribunal revoked the appointment of an administrator, but there was no need to
discuss its meaning.
An additional exception to the prohibition in
Guardianship
and Administration Act 2000
(Qld) permits the Queensland Law Reform
Commission to conduct its review of the guardianship legislation: see
Guardianship and Administration Act
Ganin v New South
Wales Crime Commission
(1993) 32 NSWLR 423
, 436 (Kirby P);
Nominal Defendant
[2005] QCA 118
, [7] (McPherson JA).
Taikato v The Queen
[1996] HCA 28
(1996) 186 CLR 454
, 464–6 (Brennan CJ, Toohey, McHugh and Gummow
Bank of Valletta v
National Crime Authority
[1999] FCA 791
(1999) 164 ALR 45
, 55 (Hely J). This case was
cited with approval in
Callanan v Bush
[2004] QSC 88.
Family Law Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1990
(WA) sch 1 pt B cl 12(8).
Guardianship Act
(NSW) s 57(2).
Protection of
Personal and Property Rights Act 1988
(NZ) s 80(4).
in Chapter 8 (The general duty of
confidentiality).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
in Chapter 4 (Tribunal hearings).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
State Administrative
Tribunal Act 2004
Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
(Vic) s 101(4).
J Jaconelli,
Justice: A Critique of the Public Trial
Brennan v State of
New South Wales
[2006] NSWSC 167
, [31]; J Jaconelli,
Open Justice: A
Critique of the Public Trial
(2002) 3; D Butler and S Rodrick,
(2nd ed, 2004) [4.90].
See, for example,
Korp (Guardianship)
[2005] VCAT 779
This principle [open justice] is important as the public has a proper
interest in knowing how the system of justice operates. However
it is not a
principle that requires proceedings to be open in every case, as there are other
legitimate matters of public interest
that sometimes operate in the other
direction. One such other public interest is the interest in privacy. It is
only in recent
years that privacy has become a matter of greater focus, although
I would hazard to say it has always been important. Matters in
which a person
seeks an administrator or guardian under the
Guardianship and Administration
often involve the disclosure of personal and sensitive information. The
revelation of that information can significantly infringe
legitimate rights to
This has been described
as a ‘minimalist interference with open justice’:
[2000] NSWCA 52
, [144] (Heydon JA);
[2005] NSWCCA
, [29] (Hodgson JA), [39] (Howie J). Others have gone further and expressed
doubt as to whether there is even a public interest in
knowing the identities of
people involved in court proceedings: C Davis, ‘The Injustice of Open
James Cook University Law Review
Family Law Act
Other examples include
Child Protection Act 1999
Mental Health Act 2000
(Qld) ss 524–7;
Criminal Law (Sexual Offences) Act 1978
of Children Act 1964
(Qld) s 45. See also D Butler and S Rodrick,
Australian Media Law
(2nd ed, 2004) [4.170], [4.230].
See Justice DA Mullins,
‘Judicial Writing in the Electronic Age’ (Paper presented at Supreme
and Federal Courts Judges’
Conference, Darwin, 23–27 January 2005);
Chief Justice JJ Spigelman, ‘Open Justice and the Internet’ (Paper
at The Law via the Internet 2003 Conference, Sydney, 28 November
2003); and K Curtis, ‘Access and Privacy: Getting the Balance
(Paper presented at Australian Courts Administrators Group: Courts and Tribunals
Annual Conference, Homebush Bay, 25
November 2005).
See Justice DA Mullins,
‘Judicial Writing in the Electronic Age’ (Paper presented at Supreme
and Federal Courts Judges’
Conference, Darwin, 23–27 January 2005)
1–2, citing
United States Department of Justice et al Petitioners v
Reporters Committee for Freedom of the Press et al
[1989] USSC 52
(1989) 489 US 749
See also Chief Justice JJ Spigelman, ‘Open Justice and the Internet’
(Paper presented at the Law via the Internet
2003 Conference, Sydney, 28
November 2003) and K Curtis, ‘Access and Privacy: Getting the Balance
Right’ (Paper presented
at the Australian Courts Administrators Group:
Courts and Tribunals Annual Conference, Homebush Bay, 25 November 2005).
See Justice DA Mullins,
‘Judicial Writing in the Electronic Age’ (Paper presented at Supreme
and Federal Courts Judges’
Conference, Darwin, 23–27 January 2005);
Chief Justice JJ Spigelman, ‘Open Justice and the Internet’ (Paper
at the Law via the Internet 2003 Conference, Sydney, 28 November
2003); and K Curtis, ‘Access and Privacy: Getting the Balance
(Paper presented at the Australian Courts Administrators Group: Courts and
Tribunals Annual Conference, Homebush Bay,
25 November 2005).
Personal identifiers
include a date and place of birth, residential address, financial details and
family members’ names:
Justice DA Mullins, ‘Judicial Writing in the
Electronic Age’ (Paper presented at Supreme and Federal Courts
Conference, Darwin, 23–27 January 2005) 3.
Chief Justice JJ
Spigelman, ‘Open Justice and the Internet’ (Paper presented at the
Law via the Internet 2003 Conference,
Sydney, 28 November 2003).
In the context of
information generally causing harm to an adult, see T Henning and J Blackwood,
‘The rules of evidence and
the right to procedural fairness in proceedings
of four Tasmanian quasi-judicial tribunals’
Journal of Administrative Law
It has been suggested,
for example, that in the case of sexual offence proceedings, a prohibition on
publication of a complainant’s
identity is justified on the basis that
protection of anonymity will encourage complainants to come forward and to
testify in court:
C Davis, ‘The Injustice of Open Justice’
James Cook University Law Review
Queensland Law Reform
Commission,
Assisted and Substituted Decisions: Decision-making by and for
people with a decision-making disability,
Report 49 (1996) Vol 1, 249.
See the detailed
discussion of issues for consideration at para
Adult Guardian
(NT) s 26(2);
Guardianship and Administration Act 1993
Guardianship and
Management of Property Act 1991
(ACT) s 49;
Guardianship Act 1987
(NSW) s 57;
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
Guardianship and Administration Act 1990
(WA) sch 1 pt B cl 12.
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
(Qld) is set out at para
Section 249
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
(Qld) is set out at para
confidentiality may arise in contract or in equity. See para
in Chapter 3 (Guardianship and
confidentiality). This duty may also attach to government departments and
Smith Kline & French Laboratories (Australia) Ltd v Department
of Community Services
[1989] FCA 384
(1990) 22 FCR 73
Heinemann Publishers Australia Pty Ltd
(1987) 10 NSWLR 86
, 187 (McHugh
(Cth) contains 11 Information Privacy Principles that apply to
Commonwealth and Australian Capital Territory Government agencies
National Privacy Principles that apply to all private health service providers,
and to private sector organisations with an
annual turnover of more than $3
(Cth) ss 16, 16A(2), 6C(1) (definition of
‘organisation’). The National Privacy Principles must also be
complied with
by some small businesses (with an annual turnover of $3 million or
less) such as those that disclose personal information about another
to anyone else for a benefit, service or advantage: see
(Cth) s 6D(4)(c)–(e).
Information Standard 42
Information Privacy, issued under
Financial Management Standard 1997
(Qld) ss 22(2), 56(1),
http://www.governmentict.qld.gov.au//02_infostand/standards.htm
July 2006. Information Standard 42 requires that Queensland Government agencies
comply with 11 information privacy principles,
modelled on those in the
(Cth), governing the collection, storage, use, and
disclosure of personal information: Information Standard 42 Information Privacy,
7. Courts and tribunals, however, are exempt from the application of the
Information Standard to the extent of their judicial and
quasi-judicial
functions: Information Standard 42 Information Privacy, 4.
Powers of Attorney
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
Powers of Attorney
Powers of Attorney
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
Powers of Attorney
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
Powers of Attorney
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
Powers of Attorney
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
Note also the limited exception for disclosure of confidential
information to a member of this Commission or to its staff or consultants
order to facilitate the Commission’s review of the guardianship
legislation:
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
s 249(3)(g).
Commission has prepared a document called
Confidentiality in Consultation
to assist people to comply with the confidentiality provisions of
the guardianship legislation when participating in the Commission’s
consultation process. The
can be viewed at the
Commission’s website:
http://www.qlrc.qld.gov.au/guardianship/protocol.htm
This provision does not
specifically appear in
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
However, acting under the
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
would fall within the exception provided in
of Attorney Act 1998
(Qld): ‘if authorised under a regulation or
another law’.
Section 74(2)(a)
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
(Qld) makes specific reference to that Act,
whereas the
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(Qld) refers
generally to ‘another law’, which would include the
Attorney Act 1998
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
s 249(3)(b).
Section 74(2)(e)
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
(Qld) refers to ‘court’ rather
than Tribunal, which is defined to mean the Supreme Court:
Powers of Attorney
sch 3 (definition of ‘court’). Note,
however, that
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
(Qld) provides
that ‘this Act applies … as if references to the Supreme Court were
references to the tribunal’.
Powers of Attorney
s 74(2)(a).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
s 249(3)(a)
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
(Qld) s 174(2)(b).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
(Qld) s 180.
The Adult Guardian may
be appointed as an adult’s guardian under
s 14(1)(a)(ii)
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(Qld). The functions and powers
of guardians are set out in ch 4,
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
(Qld) and include the obligations to apply the
General Principles
and to consult with the adult’s other substitute
decision-makers
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
s 249(3)(a).
Section 130
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(Qld) provides that the Tribunal
may order a person to give information or material to the Tribunal and that a
person must comply
with such an order unless the person has a reasonable excuse.
That section overrides any legislative or common law restriction on
of the information:
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
Section 193 of the
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(Qld) provides that the Adult
Guardian must make a written report after an investigation or audit and give a
copy to every attorney
(appointed under a power of attorney or an advance health
directive), guardian, or administrator for the adult and, upon request
the person’s expense, to any interested person.
The Adult Guardian has a
range of protective powers under ch 8
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
(Qld). He or she has power, in certain
circumstances, to take action to recover possession of an adult’s
property, to suspend
the operation of an attorney’s power, and to apply to
the Tribunal for a warrant to remove an adult from a place:
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
(Qld) ss 194(a), 195(1), 197.
Every person who
performs a function or exercises a power for a matter for an adult under the
legislation must apply the General
Principles:
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
s 250(3)(a).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
s 250(3)(b).
In Victoria, Western
Australia, South Australia and the Australian Capital Territory, the equivalent
of the Adult Guardian is the
Public Advocate. New South Wales, Tasmania and the
Northern Territory have a Public Guardian. The functions and powers of the
Guardian equivalents vary from jurisdiction to jurisdiction.
Guardianship and
Management of Property Act 1991
(ACT) s 66D;
Public Advocate Act 2005
(ACT) s 16;
Guardianship Act 1987
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1993
Guardianship and Administration Act
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
Guardianship and Administration Act 1986
14(1), sch 3 cl 3(b);
Guardianship and Administration Act 1990
State Administrative Tribunal Act 2004
Dependent Adults Act
RSA 2000 c D–11 (Alberta) s 68;
Guardianship and Trusteeship Act
SNWT 1994 c 29 (Northwest Territories) s
Guardianship Act
RSBC 1996 c 6 (Supplement) (British
Note also that similar provisions apply in respect of a number
of other tribunals and commissions. See, for example,
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
which applies to the
Administrative Appeals Tribunal;
Industrial Relations Act 1999
Mental Health Act 2000
(Qld) ss 528, 529; and
Children Services
Tribunal Act 2000
(Qld) s 142.
Note that this chapter
deals only with specific statutory duties of confidentiality and is not
concerned with, for example, the
range of general duties imposed on guardians,
administrators or attorneys for an adult that may, or may not, also import
obligations
of confidentiality.
Guardianship Act
Guardianship and Administration Act 1993
The duty does not,
however, apply to a guardian or administrator
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1993
This seems a surprising omission
particularly given that there is no alternative provision in that Act that
specifically requires
guardians and administrators to maintain the
confidentiality of information gained in the course of carrying out their
under the legislation.
Guardianship and
Management of Property Act 1991
(ACT) s 66D(1);
Public Advocate Act
(ACT) s 16;
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
Guardianship and Administration Act 1986
s14(1), sch 3 cl 3(b);
Guardianship and Administration Act 1990
State Administrative Tribunal Act 2004
see s 68(1) of the
Dependent Adults Act
RSA 2000 c D–11 (Alberta)
which applies to the Public Guardian and the Public Trustee; s 58(1) of the
Guardianship and Trusteeship Act
SNWT 1994 c 29 (Northwest Territories)
which applies to guardians and trustees; and s 32(1) of the
Guardianship Act
RSBC 1996 c 6 (Supplement) (British Columbia) which applies
to decision makers, guardians and monitors.
Powers of Attorney
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1990
State Administrative
Tribunal Act 2004
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
Guardianship and
Management of Property Act 1991
(ACT) s 66D(1): ‘a person who is or
has been’ a member of the Tribunal, or the registrar or a deputy registrar
Tribunal, or authorised to exercise a function or power under this Act in
relation to the Tribunal.
Public Advocate Act
(ACT) s 16(1). The Public Advocate’s functions include acting as
a guardian or manager when appointed by the Tribunal and
exercising the
functions of that office under the
Guardianship and Management of Property
Public Advocate Act 2005
(ACT) s 10(h), (j). See
Guardianship and Management of Property Act 1991
Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
‘any person who is or
has been’ a member of the Tribunal, a registrar or other member of staff
of the Tribunal, or a
person acting under the authority of the Tribunal.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1986
(Vic) s 14(1), sch 3 cl 3(b).
State Administrative
Tribunal Act 2004
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal
Note, these duties imposed in relation to
‘secondary disclosure’ are discussed further at para
Guardianship Act
and sch 3 cl 3(b) of the
Guardianship and Administration Act 1986
(Vic) which imposes a duty on
the Public Advocate not to divulge ‘information received or obtained under
this Act’. Also
see s 32(1) of the
Guardianship Act
1996 c 6 (Supplement) (British Columbia) which applies to any ‘information
provided under this Act, obtained in exercising
authority as a decision maker,
guardian or monitor’.
Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
Note also that the duty
does not apply to anything said or done at a hearing of the Tribunal (other than
one that is held in private)
or to any decision or order, or reasons for a
decision or order, of the Tribunal:
Victorian Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Act 1998
Accounts and
Records of Attorneys and Guardians O Reg 100/96
(Ontario) which provides
that attorneys and guardians must not, except in certain circumstances, disclose
any information contained
in the accounts and financial and personal records
required to be kept in respect of the incapable person.
Guardianship and
Management of Property Act 1991
(ACT) s 66D(1). Similar wording is adopted
in s 16 of the
Public Advocate Act 2005
(ACT) which applies to the Public
Advocate and his or her staff in the exercise of that office’s functions,
including those
functions under the
Guardianship and Management of Property
(ACT). Also see
State Administrative
Tribunal Act 2004
(WA) which prohibits members, staff and others acting with
the authority of the Tribunal from disclosing or recording ‘information
in connection with this Act or an enabling Act’.
Also see s 68(1) of the
Dependent Adults Act
RSA 2000 c D–11 (Alberta) and s 58(1) of the
Guardianship and Trusteeship Act
SNWT 1994 c 29 (Northwest Territories)
which apply to information that ‘deals with the personal history or
records of’
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1993
a person in respect of whom
proceedings under the Act have been taken;
Guardianship and Administration
a represented person, proposed represented person,
or a person to whom
(consent to medical and dental treatment) applies;
Guardianship and Administration Act 1990
a represented
person or a person in respect of whom an application is made.
Guardianship Act
Guardianship and Administration Act 1993
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
Guardianship and Administration Act 1990
Guardianship
and Administration Act 1986
(Vic) s 14(1), sch 3 cl 3(b). Also see s 68(1)
Dependent Adults Act
RSA 2000 c D–11 (Alberta); s 58(1) of
Guardianship and Trusteeship Act
SNWT 1994 c 29 (Northwest
Territories); and s 32(1) of the
Guardianship Act
RSBC 1996 c 6
(Supplement) (British Columbia) which prohibit disclosure of information.
Guardianship and
Management of Property Act 1991
(ACT) s 66D(2);
Public Advocate Act
(ACT) s 16(2);
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act
State Administrative Tribunal Act 2004
Powers of Attorney
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
State Administrative
Tribunal Act 2004
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
(Vic) contains the
primary duty imposed on the Tribunal in relation to not disclosing or recording
personal information.
Guardianship and
Management of Property Act 1991
(ACT) s 66D(2): ‘in relation to the
exercise of a function or power, as a person to whom this section applies, under
or another Act’;
Public Advocate Act 2005
16(3)(b): the prohibition does not apply if the record is made or the
information is divulged ‘in relation to the exercise
of a function …
under this Act or another territory law’;
Guardianship Act 1987
‘in connection with the administration or execution of
Guardianship and Administration Act 1993
‘if authorised or required to do so by law or by his or her
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
‘by a person authorised in writing either generally or in a
particular case by the President’;
Victorian Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Act 1998
s 34(3)(b):
‘in connection with the
performance of functions under this Act or an enabling enactment’;
Guardianship and Administration Act 1990
s 113(1)(a):
course of duty’;
State Administrative Tribunal Act 2004
s 157(3)(b):
‘in connection with the performance of functions under
this Act or an enabling Act’.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1990
s 113(1)(b):
the duty does not apply to
information the person ‘is authorised or required to divulge by this Act
or any other law’;
Guardianship and Administration Act 1993
s 80(2)(a):
the duty does not prevent a person from ‘divulging
information if authorised or required to do so by law or by his or her
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
‘Subsection (1) does not prevent the disclosure of information as required
or permitted by any law if, in the case of information
relating to the personal
affairs of another person, that other person has given consent in
Guardianship and Management of Property Act 1991
66D(4): a person is not required to divulge information or produce a document to
a court ‘unless it is necessary to
do so for this Act or another
Public Advocate Act 2005
(ACT) s 16(3)(a): the duty does not
apply if the record is made or the information is divulged ‘under this Act
or another territory
Guardianship Act 1987
‘with other lawful excuse’;
Guardianship and Administration Act
(Vic) s14(1), sch 3 cl 3(b): the Public Advocate must not divulge
information ‘except in accordance with this Act’.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1990
s 113(1)(b).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1993
s 80(2)(a).
Powers of Attorney
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
s 249(3)(d).
Guardianship Act
Guardianship and Management of Property Act 1991
(ACT) s 66D(3);
Public Advocate Act 2005
(ACT) s 16(4). Also see
Guardianship and Administration Act 1990
applies to persons performing functions under that Act and in relation to
personal information of a represented or proposed
represented person.
Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
s 34(3)(a).
s 157(3)(a)
State Administrative Tribunal Act 2004
(WA) which applies to the
Tribunal, its members, staff and others acting with its authority and in
relation to information about
the affairs of any person.
Powers of Attorney
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
s 249(3)(e).
Powers of Attorney
(definition of ‘confidential
information’);
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(definition of ‘confidential information’). See para
Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
State Administrative
Tribunal Act 2004
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1990
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
s 86(1)(a).
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
(Tas) which provides that
‘[n]othing in this section prohibits the Board from publishing notices of
hearings or other notices
that may be necessary in the interests of justice or
for the proper administration of this Act’.
Guardianship Act
Powers of Attorney
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
s 249(3)(c).
Guardianship and
Management of Property Act 1991
(ACT) s 66D(4);
Public Advocate Act 2005
Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
State Administrative
Tribunal Act 2004
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
s 86(1)(b).
Dependent Adults Act
RSA 2000 c D–11 (Alberta) s 68(1)(c): ‘where in the opinion of
the Public Guardian or the Public Trustee, as the case
may be, it is in the best
interests of the dependent adult to disclose the file, document or
information’; and
Guardianship and Trusteeship Act
SNWT 1994 c 29
(Northwest Territories) s 58(1)(b): ‘where, in the opinion of the guardian
or trustee, as the case may be, it
is in the best interest of the represented
Powers of Attorney
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
s 249(3)(f).
The Adult Guardian
equivalents in Victoria, South Australia, Western Australia, the Australian
Capital Territory, and Tasmania are
each conferred with investigatory functions
and/or powers:
Guardianship and Administration Act 1986
Guardianship and Administration Act 1993
Guardianship and Administration Act 1990
Public Advocate
s 11(1)(c);
Guardianship and Administration Act
Note that in New South Wales, the Public Guardian is not
conferred with investigatory functions or powers: see
Guardianship Act 1987
Guardianship and
Management of Property Act 1991
(ACT) s 66D(2);
Public Advocate Act
(ACT) s 16(3)(b);
Guardianship Act 1987
Guardianship and Administration Act 1993
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
Guardianship
and Administration Act 1990
s 113(1)(a)
State Administrative
Tribunal Act 2004
s 157(3)(b).
Note also that in
Western Australia, the Public Advocate is also expressly permitted to ‘do
all things necessary or convenient
to be done for or in connection with the
performance of his functions’:
Guardianship and Administration Act
This may include the release of otherwise confidential
information about an investigation in certain circumstances. See also para
Public Advocate Act
(ACT) s 16. See para
The Public Advocate may
investigate complaints and allegations about the actions of a guardian, a
manager, or an attorney for an
Public Advocate Act 2005
The Public Guardian has
power to investigate complaints and allegations concerning the actions of a
guardian, an administrator or
a person acting under an enduring power of
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
s 86(1)(b).
Guardianship and
Management of Property Act 1991
(ACT) s 66D;
Public Advocate Act 2005
(ACT) s 16;
Guardianship Act 1987
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1993
Guardianship and Administration Act
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
Guardianship and Administration Act 1990
State Administrative Tribunal Act 2004
For example, some people
may gain information about an adult through the ordinary course of their
relationship with the adult; they
might be family members, friends, carers, or
service providers. Other people, such as Tribunal members and members of the
may gain particular information about an adult through their involvement
in a Tribunal proceeding or attendance at a Tribunal hearing.
Others, such as
the Public Advocate or the Adult Guardian, may gain certain information about an
adult through the course of performing
a function or exercising a power under
the guardianship legislation. Some people may gain information in more than one
capacities.
The Tribunal may issue a
warrant authorising the Adult Guardian to enter a place and remove an adult if
it is satisfied there are
reasonable grounds for suspecting an immediate risk of
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
Guardian may ask a police officer to help in the exercise of its powers under a
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
s 149(2)(b).
Adult Guardian may also require an occupier of a place to help in the exercise
of its powers under a warrant:
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Any person who performs
a function or exercises a power for a matter for an adult under the legislation
must apply the General Principles:
Guardianship and Administration Act
Section 11(3)
Guardianship and Administration
(Qld) also provides that ‘[t]he community is encouraged to
apply and promote the general principles’.
Information Standard 42
Information Privacy, issued under
Financial Management Standard 1997
http://www.governmentict.qld.gov.au//02_infostand/standards.htm
July 2006. Note also that Queensland Police Service personnel are prohibited
from disclosing personal information other
than in performance of their duties:
Police Service Administration Act 1990
A government, its
departments and agencies can be held liable for breaching an equitable
obligation of confidence:
Smith Kline & French Laboratories (Australia)
Ltd v Department of Community Services
[1989] FCA 384
(1990) 22 FCR 73
A-G (UK) v Heinemann Publishers Australia Pty Ltd
(1987) 10 NSWLR 86
(McHugh J).
See para 3.7 in Chapter
3 (Guardianship and confidentiality).
See JG Fleming,
Law of Torts
(9th ed, 1998) 665: ‘The mere fact of living in the
crowded society of today exposes everyone to annoying contacts with others,
of which must be borne as the price of social existence’. Also see C
Doyle and M Bagaric,
(2005) 184: ‘Human
perceptions and social conventions mean that it is not possible or easy to
conceal some types of information’;
and Australian Law Reform Commission,
, Report No 22 (1983) Vol 1, [53].
For example, it may be
an express term of a contract with a service provider that particular
information gained in the course of
the contractual relationship must not be
disclosed to any third party: RP Meagher, WMC Gummow and JRF Lehane,
Doctrines and Remedies
(3rd ed, 1992) [4103]; L Clarke (ed)
Confidentiality and the Law
(1990) 66; D Butler and S Rodrick,
Australian Media Law
(2nd ed, 2004) [6.100]. Alternatively, the nature
of a contractual relationship, such as one between patient and doctor, may be
such as to found an implied contractual term of secrecy: RP Meagher, WMC Gummow
and JRF Lehane,
Equity Doctrines and Remedies
(3rd ed, 1992) [4103]; M
Warby et al, ‘Privacy and Confidentiality’ in M Tugendhat and I
Christie (eds)
The Law of Privacy and the Media
(2002) 195, [6.08],
RP Meagher, WMC Gummow
and JRF Lehane,
Equity Doctrines and Remedies
(3rd ed, 1992) [4105]. See
para 3.12–3.14 in Chapter 3 (Guardianship and confidentiality).
M Warby et al,
‘Privacy and Confidentiality’ in M Tugendhat and I Christie (eds)
The Law of Privacy and the Media
(2002) 195, [6.07].
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Information Standard 42
Information Privacy, issued under
Financial Management Standard 1997
http://www.governmentict.qld.gov.au//02_infostand/standards.htm
at 24 July 2006. Note also that while statutory bodies administered by the
Minister for Health are subject to Information Standard
42, the Queensland
Department of Health is instead subject to the Information Standard 42A
Information Privacy for the Queensland
Department of Health,
http://www.governmentict.qld.gov.au//02_infostand/standards.htm
at 24 July 2006. Note that the Information Standard 42 also applies to the
Office of the Adult Guardian, the Office of the Public
Advocate, and staff of
the community visitor program but does not apply to the Tribunal to the extent
of its judicial and quasi-judicial
functions: Information Standard 42
Information Privacy, 4.
The National Privacy
Principles of the
(Cth) apply to all private health
service providers, and to private sector organisations with an annual turnover
of more than $3
(Cth) ss 16, 16A(2), 6C(1)
definition of ‘organisation’. The National Privacy Principles must
also be complied with
by some small businesses (with an annual turnover of $3
million or less) such as those that disclose personal information about another
individual to anyone else for a benefit, service or advantage: see
(Cth) s 6D(4)(c)–(e). The National Privacy Principles
provide, in part, that personal information must not be used or disclosed
purpose other than the purpose for which it was collected except in certain
circumstances:
(Cth) sch 3, s 2.
Powers of Attorney
(definition of ‘confidential
information’);
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(definition of ‘confidential information’).
Re Williams and
Registrar of the Federal Court of Australia
[1985] AATA 226
(1985) 8 ALD 219
, 221 (Beaumont
Colakovski v Australian Telecommunications Corporation
[1991] FCA 152
(1991) 29 FCR
, 435 (Lockhart J);
Director of Public Prosecutions (Vic) v Smith
[1991] VicRp 6
[1991] VR 63
, 69 (Kaye, Fullagar and Ormiston JJ). See also, for example,
Freedom of Information Act 1991
(SA) which provides that
personal affairs of a person includes that person’s financial records,
criminal records, marital or
other personal relationships, employment records,
and personal qualities or attributes.
Department of
Social Security v Dyrenfurth
[1988] FCA 148
(1988) 80 ALR 533
, 539 (Sweeny, Keely and Ryan
That information in a
single document can contain personal information about more than one person is
acknowledged in the context
of freedom of information legislation where such
information is referred to as ‘mixed personal information’
Collie and Deputy Commissioner of Taxation
[1997] AATA 713
(1997) 45 ALD 556
, 565 (Deputy
President SA Forgie);
Richardson and Commissioner of Taxation
[2004] AATA 367
, 503 (Deputy President SA Forgie).
Powers of Attorney
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
s 249(4)(b).
This is consistent with the definition of ‘personal
information’ adopted by much of the freedom of information and privacy
legislation and standards in Australia as information about a person whose
identity is apparent or can reasonably be ascertained:
Freedom of Information
Personal Information Protection Act 1998
; Information Standard 42
Information Privacy (Qld), 7;
Information Privacy Act 2000
PCO21 Information Privacy Principles Instruction, Cabinet Administrative
Instruction No 1 of 1989 (SA) s 3;
Freedom of Information Act 1992
Information Act
Personal Information Protection
Powers of Attorney
(definition of ‘confidential
information’);
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(definition of ‘confidential information’).
Powers of Attorney
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
s 249(4)(a).
Mallam P, Dawson S and
Moriarty J,
Media and Internet Law and Practice
(revised ed, 2005)
[12.1850]; RP Meagher, WMC Gummow and JRF Lehane,
Equity Doctrines and
(3rd ed, 1992) [4112].
In the context of a
provision that prohibits publication of ‘any particulars likely to lead to
the identification of a person
against whom a sexual assault is alleged to have
been committed’, the term ‘publish’ has been construed as
‘to make public, to make generally known, to disseminate to the
public at large’:
Hinch v Director of Public Prosecutions
[1996] VICSC 1
This construction was adopted to prevent ‘disclosures made in
confidence’ being caught by the legislation, including,
for example, the
absurdity of a parent being unable to tell their spouse of an assault upon their
Hinch v Director of Public Prosecutions
[1996] VICSC 1
[1996] 1 VR 683
(Phillips JA and McDonald AJA).
The public domain
exception to the equitable obligation of confidence is such that
‘information only ceases to be confidential
when it is known to a
substantial number of people’ and will remain confidential even if it is
shared on a consensual basis
with a limited number of friends and acquaintances:
M Warby et al, ‘Privacy and Confidentiality’ in M Tugendhat and
Christie (eds)
The Law of Privacy and the Media
(2002) 195, [6.93],
[6.95], citing
Stephens v Avery
[1988] Ch 449
, 454–5, 554–5;
[2001] 1 WLR 2341.
In the family law
context, the term ‘disseminates to the public’ has been interpreted
as meaning ‘widespread communication
with the aim of reaching a wide
audience’ and so would not include communications ‘between persons
who can demonstrate
an interest beyond that of an ordinary member of the
Re Edelsten; Donnelly v Edelsten
(1988) 80 ALR 704
Hinchcliffe v Commissioner of Police of the Australian Federal Police
[2001] FCA 1747
(2001) 118 FCR 308
Re W: Publication Application
(1997) 21 Fam LR 788
809 (Fogarty and Baker JJ). By contrast, for the law of defamation, a
‘publication’ is any communication or conveyance
of the information
to a third party, so that information may be published even if it is disclosed
to one person:
Encyclopaedic Australian Legal Dictionary
or cause to be published’;
Pullman v Walter Hill & Co
[1890] UKLawRpKQB 193
This might be contrasted
with information such as trade secrets, for which further protection from
disclosure is not warranted because
the value of the information is lost once it
becomes public: M Warby et al, ‘Privacy and Confidentiality’ in M
and I Christie (eds)
The Law of Privacy and the Media
195, [6.93], citing
A‑G v Times Newspapers Ltd
[2001] EWCA 97
[2001] 1 WLR
See the discussion of
this in the context of equitable breach of confidence cases in D Butler and S
Australian Media Law
(2nd ed, 2004) [6.60].
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
See para 7.3–7.5 in Chapter 7
(Publication of Tribunal proceedings).
Powers of Attorney
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
See, for example,
Ianella v French
[1968] HCA 14
(1968) 119 CLR 84
, 95 (Barwick J):
The word intention itself obscures a difficulty. Thus it is said on some
occasions to be satisfied by mere volition to do the specific
act in question.
But in truth, in my opinion, the word contains in its connotation elements of
See, for example,
[1990] VicRp 55
[1990] VR 641
, 643 (Young CJ, Crockett and Nathan JJ), citing
[1985] HCA 22
(1985) 156 CLR 464 (Gibbs
CJ, Wilson, Brennan, Deane and Dawson JJ).
Powers of Attorney
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
See, for example, the
Information Privacy Principles and National Privacy Principles contained in
(Cth) and the Information Privacy Principles
contained in the Information Standard 42 Information Privacy, issued under
Financial Management Standard 1997
http://www.governmentict.qld.gov.au//02_infostand/ standards.htm
July 2006. See n
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, Report No 22 (1983) Vol 1, [572]–[579],
[1031], Vol 2, [1222].
Ibid [575].
Powers of Attorney
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
Powers of Attorney
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
s 249(3)(e).
Re Collie and Deputy
Commissioner of Taxation
[1997] AATA 713
(1997) 45 ALD 556
, 565 (Deputy President SA
Richardson and Commissioner of Taxation
[2004] AATA 367
[2004] 81 ALD 486
(Deputy President SA Forgie).
Richardson and
Commissioner of Taxation
[2004] AATA 367
[2004] 81 ALD 486
, 503 (Deputy President SA
Powers of Attorney
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
s 249(3)(a)
Section 130
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(Qld) provides that the Tribunal
may order a person to give information or material to the Tribunal and that a
person must comply
with such an order unless the person has a reasonable excuse.
That section overrides any legislative or common law restriction on
of the information:
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
Section 183 of the
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(Qld) provides that the Adult
Guardian may require a person to give information to the Adult Guardian and that
a person must comply
with such a requirement unless the person has a reasonable
excuse. That section overrides any legislative or common law restriction
disclosure of the information:
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(Qld) s 183(5).
Powers of Attorney
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
Note that in relation to the appointment of guardians, the
Tribunal will make limited rather than plenary appointments if possible
appointments can only be made to the extent that the adult’s needs are not
being met in relation to a matter:
Guardianship and Administration Act
Powers of Attorney
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
Note that in relation to the appointment of administrators, the
Tribunal will make limited rather than plenary appointments if possible
appointments can only be made to the extent that the adult’s needs that
not being met in relation to a matter:
Guardianship and Administration Act
Powers of Attorney
ss 35(1)(c)
(1). Note that an attorney appointed under an
advance health directive has power only in the event the adult’s
directions about
the health matter prove inadequate:
Powers of Attorney Act
Powers of Attorney
sch 3, sch 2
(definition of ‘health
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(definition of ‘health matter’).
Powers of Attorney
sch 3, sch 2
(definition of ‘financial
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(definition of ‘financial matter’).
Note that the while the
words ‘relating to’ must be read in context, they ‘do not
ordinarily require a direct
or immediate connection’:
Re Dingjan; Ex
parte Wagner
[1995] HCA 16
(1995) 183 CLR 323
, 363 (Gaudron J);
Oceanic Life Ltd v
Chief Commissioner of Stamps
[1999] NSWCA 416
(1999) 154 FLR 129
, 143 (Fitzgerald JA). See
DC Pearce and RS Geddes,
Statutory Interpretation in Australia
2001) [12.7].
Powers of Attorney
(Qld) s 76, sch 1
Guardianship and Administration Act
Powers of Attorney
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
s 249(3)(f).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
s 86(1)(b).
Powers of Attorney
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
s 249(3)(f).
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(Qld), the Tribunal may
permit the publication of information about Tribunal proceedings or the
disclosure of the identity of a person
involved in Tribunal proceedings if it is
satisfied it is in the public interest. This section is considered in Chapter 7
(Publication
of Tribunal proceedings).
See also para
A person must not
contravene a confidentiality order unless the person has a reasonable excuse:
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
A person must
not, without reasonable excuse, publish information about a proceeding, or
disclose the identity of a person involved
in a proceeding, unless the Tribunal
has, by order, permitted the publication or disclosure:
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Queensland Law Reform
Commission,
Assisted and Substituted Decisions: Decision-making by and for
people with a decision-making disability,
Report 49 (1996) Vol 1, 414.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
s 250(3)(b).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
s 250(3)(a).
An ‘entity’ includes
a ‘person’ (which includes an individual and a corporation) and an
unincorporated body:
Acts Interpretation Act 1954
(definitions of ‘entity’ and ‘person’).
R v Hamilton
[1930] NSWStRp 21
(1930) 30 SR (NSW) 277
Russell v Russell
(1976) 134 CLR 495
, 520 (Gibbs
WB Lane and S Young,
Administrative Law in Queensland
(2001) 57–8. See para
3.34–3.36 in Chapter 3 (Guardianship and confidentiality).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
(Qld) s 195(1). See ch 8
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(Qld) in relation the Adult
Guardian’s other protective powers.
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(Qld) in relation the Adult
Guardian’s investigative powers.
See para 3.52–3.61
in Chapter 3 (Guardianship and confidentiality).
in Chapter 3 (Guardianship and
confidentiality). Note also, for example, General Principle 11 which provides
that ‘[a]n adult’s
right to confidentiality of information about the
adult must be recognised and taken into account’:
Powers of Attorney
(Qld) s 76, sch 1
Guardianship and Administration Act
See para 3.56 in Chapter
3 (Guardianship and confidentiality). There may also be privacy-based reasons,
independent of the nature
of the guardianship system, that favour a duty of
confidentiality. One of the policies underpinning such duties generally is the
notion that a person who receives confidential information due to that
person’s special position should not disclose that information
the fulfilment of the responsibilities of that position.
in Chapter 3 (Guardianship and
confidentiality).
Note, for example, that
in the context of health information, the prevailing view is that a person
should be able to access information
less is more: should health information always be disclosed to the individual
concerned?’
(2006) 14(6)
Australian Health Law Bulletin
See the detailed
discussion of these issues at para
Guardianship Act
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act
Guardianship and Administration Act 1986
(Vic) s14(1), sch 3 cl 3(b);
Guardianship and Administration Act 1993
Guardianship and Administration Act 1990
Administrative Tribunal Act 2004
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Public Advocate Act 2005
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
also be argued that there is a specific exception that applies only to the
Public Advocate in Victoria:
Guardianship and Administration Act 1986
(Vic) s 14(2), sch 3 cl 3(b). That arises, however, because that duty of
confidentiality is only imposed on the Public Advocate:
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1986
(Vic) s 14(2), sch 3 cl 3(b). In any event, that
exception is the same as one of the general exceptions considered earlier: it
disclosures ‘in accordance with [the] Act’.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Any power to make such a
decision, because it is based in legislation, would also override any duties of
confidentiality imposed
by the general law or by the Queensland
Government’s information privacy principles: see para
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
As at July 2006. The
Reference Group is chaired by the Honourable Justice Roslyn Atkinson,
Chairperson, Queensland Law Reform Commission.
Justice Lyons ceased
being President of the Guardianship and Administration Tribunal upon her
appointment to the Supreme Court of
Queensland on 10 July 2006.
Michelle Howard is
currently Queensland’s Public Advocate. Her submission was made in a
private capacity, prior to her appointment
to this position.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Guardianship
and Administration Act 2000
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
(Qld) ss 173, 174(1), 176.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
(Qld) s 174(2).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Powers of Attorney
Powers of Attorney
Powers of Attorney
Powers of Attorney
Powers of Attorney
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
(Qld) sch 1
Powers of Attorney
sch 3 (definition of ‘capacity’);
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(definition of ‘capacity’).
Powers of Attorney
sch 3 (definition of ‘impaired capacity’);
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(definition of ‘impaired capacity’).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
(Qld) s 223(1).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
(Qld) s 222;
Guardianship and Administration
Regulation 2000
(Qld) s 8 sch 2.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
(Qld) s 224.
Powers of Attorney
Powers of Attorney
Powers of Attorney
Powers of Attorney
Powers of Attorney
Powers of Attorney
Powers of Attorney
Powers of Attorney
Powers of Attorney
sch 3, sch 2
(definition of ‘financial
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(definition of ‘financial matter’).
Powers of Attorney
Guardianship and Administration Act
(Qld) sch 1
Powers of Attorney
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Powers of Attorney
(Qld) sch 1
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(Qld) sch 1
More than eleven issues are included in this list because
some of the General Principles include a number of elements.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Powers of Attorney
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
Powers of Attorney
(Qld) sch 1
Guardianship and Administration
(Qld) sch 1
Powers of Attorney
sch 3, sch 2
(definition of ‘health
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(definition of ‘health matter’).
Powers of Attorney
sch 3, sch 2
(definition of ‘health
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(definition of ‘health care’).
Powers of Attorney
sch 3, sch 2
(definition of ‘personal
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(definition of ‘personal matter’).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Public Trustee Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
s 14(1)(b)(ii).
Powers of Attorney
sch 3, sch 2
(definition of ‘special health
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(definition of ‘special health care’).
Powers of Attorney
sch 3, sch 2
(definition of ‘special personal
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(Qld) s sch 4,
(definition of ‘special personal matter’).
Powers of Attorney
Powers of Attorney
Powers of Attorney
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (2.23 MB)
PDF format (1.21 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter